Crisis and Covenant; Jewish Thought after the Holocaust
משבר וברית; מחשבה יהודית מודרנית ופוסט מודרנית
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Crisis_and_Covenant;_Jewish_Thought_after_the_Holocaust
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Crisis and Covenant, Maggid Books, 2023
-https://korenpub.com/products/crisis-and-covenant

Crisis and Covenant; Jewish Thought after the Holocaust

Publisher's Preface

Rabbi Lord Jonathan Sacks <i>zt”l</i> possessed and shared profound learning, moral depth, and sheer eloquence, expressed in his many published works. These made him a leading religious figure not only within contemporary Judaism but among people of all faiths (or none). Each meeting and conversation became a <i>shiur</i>, a lesson in how to look at the world and how to experience our relationship with the Creator.
It is a great privilege for us, paraphrasing the talmudic adage, “to return the crown to its former glory” by presenting these new editions of Rabbi Sacks’ earliest publications. The earlier volumes were written by Rabbi Sacks as a professor of philosophy, as a thinker, rabbinic leader, and Principal of Jews’ College, and are truly masterworks of exposition of contemporary Jewish thought. The later volumes represent Rabbi Sacks’ thinking as he became Chief Rabbi, set out his perception of the challenges facing his community of Anglo-Jewry at that time, and articulated his vision for the path ahead. All of these works certainly stand on their own merit today and are as relevant now as they were when first written.
We wish to take this opportunity to express our appreciation to Becky and Avi Katz for their critical support of and partnership in this project. Becky and Avi are longtime communal leaders and supporters of Jewish education in North America and Israel, and on behalf of all of us at Koren, together with those who will cherish this new opportunity to be inspired by Rabbi Sacks’ writings, thank you.
We wish to add our thanks to our colleagues at Koren who have worked on this series: Ita Olesker, Tani Bayer, Aryeh Grossman, and Rabbi Reuven Ziegler. The proofreading team included Debbie Ismailoff, Ruth Pepperman, Esther Shafier, and Nechama Unterman, and Marc Sherman updated the indexes of the volumes. We extend deep gratitude to our friends at The Rabbi Sacks Legacy for their continued partnership, together with Lady Elaine Sacks and the rest of the Sacks family for their continued support for our work.
May Rabbi Sacks’ memory and Torah continue to be a blessing for future generations.
Matthew Miller
Koren Jerusalem

General Editor's Introduction, First Edition

The visit of Jonathan Sacks to the Department of Comparative Religion at Manchester University to deliver the Sherman Lectures in 1989 is vividly remembered, by all who were involved, as a time of particular pleasure and stimulation. These lectures were enjoyed by academics and the public alike, a point evidenced by the fact that although the audience had been large from the beginning, it grew as the series progressed.
This book is an extension of those lectures. It is not simply a survey of modern Jewish thought, but an important contribution to it. The field it encompasses is vast, treating traditional authorities and philosophers, such as Spinoza, and modern history, not least the Holocaust which was, as he points out, as significant a moment as any in the last 2,000 years of Jewish history. He considers the concept of biblical authority in the light of modern thought; the impact on Jewish philosophy of diaspora thinking, notably in America; of modernity; of secularism, and the creation of the State of Israel. His own religious position is not cloaked, but the great diversity of beliefs and philosophies is considered with empathy, understanding and insight. It is an analysis both profound and readable. What it highlights is the variety and vigour of recent Jewish philosophies. But, as the author also shows, it is a diversity of thoughts deeply rooted in Jewish history and traditions, even though affected by the turbulent period of history from the 1940s onwards. While taking full account of modern history, thought, and social influences, he argues that the great philosophies which he analyses preceded the Holocaust and were not created by it, as others have said. What emerges above all is the power and vitality of modern Jewish thought.
Subsequent to delivering the Sherman lectures at Manchester, Jonathan Sacks gave the prestigious Reith Lectures on the BBC, and was then appointed Chief Rabbi in London. The qualities which led to those invitations are evident in this volume: the scholar able to communicate his profound understanding, and the man of faith, able to comprehend the problem that modernity poses for Jewish identity, yet strong in his own sense of being the inheritor of a historical covenant conscious of both the universalism and the particularism inherent in Jewish belief. This book represents an erudite balancing of classical thought and the challenges of contemporary life. The Department of Comparative Religion at Manchester is honoured to have been host to such a lecturer, privileged to be associated with the publication and grateful, as always, to the Sherman Trusts whose endowment facilitated both the lectures and the book.
John R. Hinnells
Professor of Comparative Religion
Manchester University

Introduction

This book had its origins in the 1989 Sherman Lectures given at Manchester University’s Department of Comparative Religion. In it I analyse the often bewildering diversity of post-Holocaust Jewish thought on the central terms of Judaic existence: the problem of suffering, the meaning of redemption, the nature of exile, the concept of a covenantal people, the character of Jewish law, the ideas of revelation, tradition and interpretation, and the understanding of providence in relation to covenantal history. This cluster of concepts forms the basis of modern as well as traditional theological reflection on the meaning, substance and direction of Jewish life.
But as will quickly become clear, the second half of the twentieth century has given these subjects direct, even epic, existential relevance. The questions posed by modern Jewish thought do not arise in metaphysical abstraction. The problem of suffering is raised by the Holocaust. The concept of redemption is tested against the modern State of Israel. The meaning of exile is challenged by the contemporary European and American diaspora. Rarely has Jewish thought had such urgent dialogue with Jewish existence.
The present study is not a personal statement. It is a thematic survey of Jewish thought over the past half-century, one of the most traumatic and transfigurative periods in the annals of one of the world’s most ancient peoples. Such a survey, I believe, is important. Studies of modern Jewish thought hitherto have tended to concentrate on figures of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, to the neglect of the present. In addition they have largely focused on non-Orthodox thinkers, thus obscuring the intense inner dialectic within Orthodoxy itself. Moreover the Holocaust and the State of Israel have changed the direction of Jewish concern. The context of Jewish thought today is not what it was a century ago. Then, thinkers were largely engaged with the question of how to translate a religion of revelation into the Kantian language of rationalism and universalism. Now they ask more direct questions about Jewry as a particular, covenantal people whose recent history has had an almost biblical quality. In the midst of a secular age, the prophetic themes of collective suffering and providence, exodus and homecoming, have for Jews become immediately real.
I have attempted to give the broadest possible picture of contemporary Jewish thought. I have thus set forth, among others, views with which I profoundly disagree. In some cases I have subjected them to a critique, but not in all. In general, I have tried to avoid apologetics and special pleading. One of the undeniable features of modern Jewry has been its deep fragmentation, unprecedented since second Temple times. From the first to the late eighteenth centuries, Jews were subject to internal differences, inevitable in a living tradition sustained by a dispersed people. But one could still speak of a single tradition. For beneath the differences was underlying agreement on the fundamentals of Jewish faith and on Jewish law as the constitution of a holy people. Today that agreement is ostensibly absent. A portrait of the state of Jewish thought that did not do justice to its radical conflicts would be altogether misleading.
On each topic I have set recent Jewish reflection against a dual background, the biblical and rabbinic tradition on the one hand, the sociological realities of contemporary Jewry on the other. In this way I have tried to give full weight to the intense drama of the collision between tradition and modernity, and to focus on what I see as the central theological challenge of Jewish life: the continuation of the covenant through the discontinuities of time.
The time I spent in Manchester while delivering the Sherman Lectures was a delight. The members of the University Department of Comparative Religion were warm and welcoming, astute and challenging. The lecture audiences were wonderfully receptive. And the Manchester Jewish community, at events organised to coincide with my visit, was a model of hospitality. My thanks go to Professor John Hinnells, Head of the Department, for extending the invitation to deliver the lectures; to Dr Philip Alexander for acting most graciously as my host; to Professor A. O. Dyson, Dr Alan Unterman and Mr L. S. Cousins of the University faculty; and to Sir Sidney Hamburger on behalf of the Manchester Jewish community. I owe to each of them warm memories of intellectual stimulus and, above all, friendship.
Thanks, too, are due to Dayan Isaac Berger, Dayan Berel Berkovits, Rabbi Ivan Binstock, Dayan Chanoch Ehrentreu and Mr Bobby Hill, who read the text in manuscript and alerted me to several infelicities of expression and construction. The thoughts expressed in the book and the errors that remain are, of course, my own.
J. S.
-1992

Chapter 1; Themes of Jewish Modernity

<big><strong><i>Themes of Jewish Modernity</i></strong></big>
“The Jewish people today,” writes Daniel Elazar, “are in the process of millennial change, the kind of change that has not taken place since the triumph of Pharisaic Judaism eighteen hundred years ago, or the emergence of the diaspora nine hundred years before that.”<sup class="footnote-marker">1</sup><i class="footnote">Daniel Elazar, <i>People and Polity</i> (Detroit, MI: Wayne State University Press, 1989), 475.</i>  This book is about the responses of Jewish thought to that change. The situation of Jews had been transformed. How has this affected the relationship between Jews and Judaism?
At the core of Jewish faith is the idea of covenant, the mutual commitment between God and the people Israel. But the covenant embodies a specific tension. On the one hand, it is immune to history. Its text, the Torah, and the way of life it commands, are divine, eternal, immutable, unchanging. On the other hand, the covenant is realised <i>in</i> history. Indeed, as Yosef Yerushalmi notes, “the fathers of meaning in history were the Jews.”<sup class="footnote-marker">2</sup><i class="footnote">Yosef Hayim Yerushalmi, <i>Zakhor: Jewish History and Jewish Memory</i>, 2nd ed. (New York: Schocken, 1989), 8.</i> For the Bible, events in time are neither cyclical nor random but the working out, in human society under the sovereignty of God, of destiny, justice and redemption. The twelfth-century poet and philosopher Judah Halevi drew attention to the fact that the Ten Commandments begin with a statement not of metaphysics but of sacred history: not “I am the Lord who created heaven and earth” but “I am the Lord who brought you out of Egypt.”<sup class="footnote-marker">3</sup><i class="footnote">Judah Halevi, <i>Kuzari</i>, 1:25.</i> Judaism is thus a metahistorical and historical faith, peculiarly poised between timelessness and time.
For many centuries, between the destruction of the second Temple in 70 CE and the beginnings of Jewish emancipation in Europe, the sense of timelessness prevailed. To be sure, Jews were subject to recurrent persecutions, expulsions and wanderings. But during the whole of that period, their condition was essentially unchanged. They were a holy people, meaning a people set apart. They were a nation in exile, dispersed and without power. History – in the sense of the chronicles of kings, empires, wars and revolutions – was made by others. Jews were suspended between memory and hope, memory of the biblical past, hope of the messianic redemption. Not accidentally, observers spoke of the “eternal Jew.”
Modernity, however, thrust Jews into the vortex of time. By any standards, the metamorphoses within Jewry in the past two centuries have been monumental. In 1840, some 90 percent of Jews lived in Europe. Today barely 20 percent do so. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, most Jews still belonged to the enclosed, semi-autonomous environments in which they had lived since their dispersion. Today they are fully part of their larger societies. For 1,800 years they had defined their existence in terms of religion. Today, Jews as a group are measurably more secular than Catholics and Protestants.<sup class="footnote-marker">4</sup><i class="footnote">Surveys of religious attitudes in America since the 1950s have consistently shown Jews less likely to attribute importance to religion in their lives than have Catholics and Protestants. For example, in a national telephone survey undertaken by the <i>Los Angeles Times</i> in 1988, in answer to the question “Which qualities do you consider most important to your Jewish identity?” only 17 percent replied “religious observance”; 59 percent answered, “a commitment to social equality.” See Seymour Martin Lipset (ed.), <i>American Pluralism and the Jewish Community</i> (New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction, 1990), 20.</i> Throughout their history they had organised their lives by the edicts of Jewish law. Today perhaps as many as four Jews in five see themselves as Jews without reference to the commands and constraints of religious law.<sup class="footnote-marker">5</sup><i class="footnote">Elazar, <i>People and Polity</i>, 153.</i>
One example highlights the extent of the transformation. Since the days of Ezra – in a sense, since the time of Abraham – Jews had fought against intermarriage. The integrity of the family was Judaism’s vehicle of continuity. That sensibility endured to the twentieth century. To “marry out” was to have left the faith and deserted one’s people. In America in 1920, for example, the intermarriage rate was estimated at no more than 1 percent.<sup class="footnote-marker">6</sup><i class="footnote">Samuel Heilman, “The Jewish Family Today: An Overview,” in Jonathan Sacks (ed.), <i>Tradition and Transition</i> (London: Jews’ College Publications, 1986), 186.</i> But an American‒Jewish survey published in 1991 revealed that more than 50 percent of young married Jews had chosen a non-Jewish spouse.<sup class="footnote-marker">7</sup><i class="footnote">Council of Jewish Federations 1991 National Jewish Population Study, reported in <i>Newsweek</i>, 22 July 1991, 54–55.</i>
These transformations, intellectual, social and geographical, would in themselves compel the most profound reconsideration of the nature of Jewish existence since the destruction of the second Temple. But to them must be added two events of surpassing magnitude: the Holocaust, in which two-thirds of European Jewry perished, and the birth, in 1948, of the State of Israel, marking as it did the return of Jews to the land of the Bible. Between them they raised the most acute questions of Jewish theology: the suffering of the innocent, the nature of redemption and the signs and contours of the messianic age. Above all, they raised the question of the role of God in history. For here were events which it was not easy to assimilate into the paradigm of timelessness. Jews had, so it seemed, re-entered time.
This, then, has been more than mere transformation. What lies before us is a collision between an unchanging covenant and epoch-making change. What happens to metahistorical Judaism when Jews find themselves, after millennial stasis, caught up in the currents and whirlpools of time? What conflicts, resistances, accommodations and integrations are set in motion? Judaism is the religion of a particular people. For this reason, historical and social developments in Jewry are closely connected with Jewish theology, both as effect and cause. There is an inextricable connection between Jewish life and Jewish thought. After the massive dislocations of modern Jewish history, what remains of the timeless connecting thread of Judaism, the covenant between an eternal God and a “holy nation”?
<b>From secularisation to emancipation</b><br>Our subject is post-Holocaust Jewish thought. But to understand it, we must begin by setting it in context. The story begins a century and a half earlier, with the first encounters between Judaism and a new social reality.
Virtually every theorist of modernisation since the Enlightenment had predicted the eclipse of religion from the civilised world. <i>Gemeinschaft</i> was giving way to <i>gesellschaft</i>, the small traditional community to urban anonymity. Science was replacing theology as the means of explaining the world. Rational bureaucracy was supplanting traditional authority. The calculation of consequences was replacing the ethics of obligation. Objects no longer had an essence but a function, and persons no longer an identity but a set of roles.
The name given to this Copernican shift was secularisation, meaning the displacement of religion to the margins of society. It signified a transfer of power from the Church to the neutral state on the one hand, the choosing individual on the other. It heralded, too, a revolution in consciousness, beginning with the intellectuals of Enlightenment and eventually reaching all strata of society. Through it, divine command was transformed into personal autonomy. Meanings once held to be external truths came to be seen as internal, subjective constructs. The concept of a single overarching reality, a “common universe of meanings,”<sup class="footnote-marker">8</sup><i class="footnote">Peter Berger, <i>The Sacred Canopy</i> (New York: Doubleday, 1967), 133.</i> was gradually replaced by a pluralism of cultures and lifestyles. Revelation was naturalised into history. Tradition itself was disintegrating. Individuals turned towards the future, not the past, for inspiration. The idea of personal identity as something given by birth was on the wane. In its place came a sense of self as something fluid, revisable, consciously chosen.
Jews – at least the Jews of Europe – were thrust precipitately into this process. They were, in John Murray Cuddihy’s phrase, “latecomers to modernity.”<sup class="footnote-marker">9</sup><i class="footnote">John Murray Cuddihy, <i>The Ordeal of Civility</i> (Boston, MA: Beacon Press, 1987), 165.</i> From the destruction of the second Temple to the late eighteenth century, Jews had lived in dispersion, often as minorities in Christian or Islamic cultures. The period of wanderings and powerlessness was often a tragic history punctuated by persecutions, expulsions, inquisitions and pogroms. But Jews and Judaism survived.
That survival not infrequently evoked the wonder of observers. Nietzsche, one of Judaism’s severest critics, was struck by the sheer obstinacy of its endurance. “The Jews” he wrote, “are the most remarkable nation of world history because, faced with the question of being or not being, they preferred, with a perfectly uncanny conviction, being at any price.”<sup class="footnote-marker">10</sup><i class="footnote">Nietzsche, <i>Twilight of the Idols and The Anti-Christ</i>, translated by R. J. Hollingdale (London: Penguin, 1968), 134.</i> Nicholas Berdyaev wrote that
<span class="poetry indentAll">I remember how the materialist interpretation of history, when I attempted in my youth to verify it by applying it to the destinies of peoples, broke down in the case of the Jews, where destiny seemed absolutely inexplicable from the materialistic standpoint… The survival of the Jews, their resistance to destruction, their endurance under absolutely peculiar conditions and the fateful role played by them in history; all these point to the peculiar and mysterious foundations of their destiny.<sup class="footnote-marker">11</sup><i class="footnote">Nicholas Berdyaev, <i>The Meaning of History</i>, quoted in Isidore Twersky, “Survival, Normalcy, Modernity,” in Moshe Davis (ed.), <i>Zionism in Transition</i> (New York: Arno, 1980), 349.</i></span>
Religious Jews, myself included, would see that survival as evidence of the covenantal dimension of history. For Jews traditionally saw themselves as having been constituted as a people by the covenant at Sinai in which God and the children of Israel pledged themselves to one another, the latter to live a life in accordance with the Torah, the former to protect the people in their land and save them from extinction in exile. The eternity of God meant the eternity of the covenant which in turn meant the eternity of the people Israel. But precisely because at the heart of Judaism is a <i>relationship</i>, Jewish history can be understood from two perspectives, natural or supernatural, depending on whether we focus on one or the other partner to the covenant.
Seen historically and naturally, Jewish survival during the long centuries of exile depended on a delicate balance of internal and external forces. Internally Jews were held together by the shared discipline of <i>halakhah</i>, Jewish law. Halakhah served to create a community of action. Wherever they were, Jews rested and celebrated in the same ways on the same days. They prayed at the same times using largely the same words. They ate and refrained from eating the same foods. They studied the same canonical texts. Halakhah gave concrete shape – a shape that hardly varied through time and place – to the life of a holy community.
But halakhah was also a barrier against the thing Jews feared most, namely assimilation, their disappearance as a distinctive people. It had a powerful sociological dimension. The dietary laws prevented extensive social interaction with the surrounding peoples. The prohibition of work on the Sabbath stood in the way of complete integration into the local economy. The distinctive Jewish legal system, which adjudicated disputes and matters of personal status, led Jews to seek and usually acquire a measure of self-government. There were extensive safeguards against intermarriage. There were pressures against residential dispersion. Jews were, in the words of that paradigm of diaspora existence, the book of Esther, “a certain people, dispersed and scattered among the other peoples…whose laws are different from those of all other people.”<sup class="footnote-marker">12</sup><i class="footnote">Esther 3:8.</i> Jews preserved the halakhah. But halakhah also preserved the Jews.
Jewish law was itself only part of a wider vision which helped Jews understand their situation and endure it. Since the destruction of the second Temple, they were in exile because of their sins. But the divine presence was with them, even in their suffering, and would eventually lead them to return to their land. This too prevented Jews from staking their identity on a particular environment or culture. It allowed them to keep a mental distance from their immediate circumstance, which they understood as merely temporary. It gave them hope that their history had meaning. It might have tangled, even tortuous, diversions but it was leading towards a known destination. Besides which, as Judah Halevi noted in the twelfth century, their very sufferings confirmed the covenant and its promised consolation. Had not Amos said, “You only have I chosen of all the families of the earth; therefore I will punish you for all your sins”?<sup class="footnote-marker">13</sup><i class="footnote">Amos 3:2.</i> The inquisitions, expulsions and pogroms with which medieval Jewish history was punctuated were themselves evidence of the covenantal nature of fate.
To others, the Jewish insistence on chosenness was a sign of the obstinacy of this strange people. But external pressures only served to reinforce it. Jews were confined within particular occupations. They had little access to the main avenues of political power or cultural life. At times they were forced to wear distinctive clothing, at others to live in enclosed locations. They were subjected to discriminatory legislation. They were often regarded, in Max Weber’s phrase, as a pariah people. Their residential rights were subject to arbitrary review and curtailment. It was, at times, an unenviable fate. But it precisely and repeatedly confirmed Jewish self-understanding. Here was a people in exile awaiting redemption. Reality matched theology.
Spinoza, the grandfather of Jewish secularism, was the first to see the symbiotic relationship between an inner sense of chosenness and the outward experience of hostility. The survival of Jews in dispersion, he argued, was fully comprehensible since “they so separated themselves from every other nation as to draw down upon themselves universal hate… That they have been preserved in great measure by gentile hatred, experience demonstrates.”<sup class="footnote-marker">14</sup><i class="footnote">Spinoza, <i>A Theologico-Political Treatise</i>, translated by R. H. M. Elwes (New York: Dover, 1951), 55.</i> That mutual distance between Jews and their neighbours, however interpreted, was sustained throughout the Middle Ages.
All of this was radically transformed by the process known as emancipation. Starting with the French Revolution in 1789, Jews were invited to become equal citizens of the modern secular state. The course of this development varied from country to country throughout Europe. In some it occurred naturally and gradually, in others it occasioned fierce debates and resistances. But it shattered the delicate ecological balance which had been at the heart of Jewish existence for centuries and it was to have consequences that have lasted to the present day.
<b>Emancipation and its consequences</b><br>To Jews the benefits of emancipation were obvious. It augured entry into the professions, universities, the political process and the full range of social, cultural and civic life. It ended the Jew’s status as an outsider. But to some at least, the threat was equally apparent. It meant a possibly fateful compromise of Jewish identity. Jews would no longer simply be Jews, members of a dispersed but covenantal people. They would be Englishmen, Germans or Italians of the Jewish persuasion. Their language, education, culture, occupation and place of residence would no longer be distinctively Jewish. The first impact of secularisation on Jews was less intellectual than sociological. What space existed in the modern state for the structures and solidarities of collective Jewish life? Could there be social integration without assimilation and shortly thereafter the complete disappearance of that “certain people”?
The sudden change in the social situation of the Jew occasioned, throughout the nineteenth century, a deep internal debate about the terms and meaning of Jewish existence in the modern world. The old certainties, set forth in the Bible and refined by almost two millennia of rabbinic Judaism, were shaken. A single century gave birth to more dissension on how to define Jewish identity than the whole of the preceding seventeen centuries combined.
There were those who, following in the footsteps of Spinoza, saw the whole Jewish destiny as reaching to its end. Heinrich Heine once complained that Judaism was not a religion but a misfortune. Those who felt like him now availed themselves of the opportunity to convert, assimilate or otherwise lose themselves in the anonymity of a growingly universalist and secular culture. Nor was this a solely passive process. A number of thinkers, themselves of Jewish birth or background, constructed new maps of reality in which the hold of religion over identity was to be overcome. Marx and Freud are perhaps the most famous examples. Such ex- or alienated Jews were not merely the beneficiaries but also among the active architects of the idea of a neutral, secular space in which the Jewish‒Gentile dialectic would pass into ancient history.
There were others who believed that a Jewish religious identity could continue. But it would have to make substantial accommodations to new social realities. The most striking example of this was the radical Reform movement in Germany of the 1840s. Much of Jewish law, argued Samuel Holdheim, again following Spinoza, was predicated on the idea of Jews as a separate nation. That made sense so long as they were a sovereign people in their own land. It even had a certain logic in the diaspora hitherto. But it made no sense now that Jews were seeking to be integrated into their host societies. All laws that served to keep Jews a people apart were now to be foregone, among them the dietary laws, the prohibition of work on the Sabbath and rabbinic jurisdiction over divorce. In particular, the Jewish hope for a return to Zion had been superseded. The messianic age was nothing other than the era of universal brotherhood and tolerance that was about to dawn in Europe. A similar position was later adopted by Reform Judaism in America.
Few went so far, for it was hard to see how anything substantive could remain of Jewish life beyond an abstract commitment to “prophetic” ideals. Nonetheless a series of religious movements arose, most pronouncedly in Germany and America, that either abandoned or modified the demands of Jewish law – among them Liberal, Conservative and Reconstructionist Judaisms. In its place as the definitive mark of Jewishness would come “ethical monotheism” a broadly conceived traditionalism or a sense of group solidarity and of Judaism as an “evolving civilisation.” This was a significant development because for the first time in many centuries Jews were declining halakhah without declining a Jewish identity. Jewish law contained no room for denominations, but they had entered Jewish life.
More radical still was the development, later in the nineteenth century and especially in Eastern Europe, of secular approaches to Jewish existence. The phrase “secular Jew” is not a contradiction in terms. Judaism is a religion, but Jews are a people. And there were therefore those who saw that even while the hold of religion was weakening, Jews could continue as an identifiable group through the bonds of language or culture or ethnicity or political activity. Some favoured Yiddish culture. Others revived the Hebrew language and in it created new literary genres. Yet others found Jewish expression in revolutionary politics. Some, like Simon Dubnow, argued for Jewish autonomy within the framework of the Russian empire.
Undoubtedly, though, the most significant outcome of this approach was the birth, in the second half of the nineteenth century, of secular Zionism. Its first prophet was Moses Hess, who believed that no other solution could be found to the tensions of emancipation than Jewish self-emancipation. In Europe they were caught between the twin catastrophes of assimilation and antisemitism. Only in their own land could they reconstitute themselves as a nation and there resume their natural development.
<b>Orthodoxy</b><br>Each of these was a momentous break with the classic terms of Jewish life. But Jews remained who were determined to hold fast to traditional Jewish faith, law and practice. Early in the nineteenth century they became known by their opponents as “Orthodox” Jews.<sup class="footnote-marker">15</sup><i class="footnote">The earliest recorded use of the term “Orthodoxy” occurred in 1807, in the course of the debates surrounding Napoleon’s proposals for Jewish emancipation in France.</i> They too faced the same problems, but believed that they must be solved within the non-negotiable parameters of the Torah, the constitution of the holy people since the days of Moses. Within Orthodoxy itself, however, there were at least four approaches to the dilemmas of modernity.
One was segregation. The ghetto walls had been breached, but Jews could still enclose themselves as far as possible within a total religious environment and minimise their contact with secular culture. The Chassidic movement, a mystical and pietist tendency in Eastern Europe, had already developed a strong network of communities in the second half of the eighteenth century. Its intense inner life proved to be a remarkably strong defence against the incursions of secularism. Other Central and East European traditionalists found an almost equally powerful stronghold in the <i>yeshiva</i>, the traditional seminary for rabbinic study. This now became not merely an educational institution but a countercultural fortress in which a cadre of Jewish leaders could be trained who would lead the fight against secular values.
Segregation was a necessary survival strategy in countries where modernity confronted Jews as an onslaught against religion. There were other countries, most notably England, France and Italy, where the process was less traumatic. Here Jews were able to negotiate their entry into society while remaining organised primarily as a religious group, and by making merely cosmetic adjustments to the spirit of the age. In these countries Orthodoxy became the establishment rather than an embattled minority. Jews remained associated with it for reasons of sentiment or tradition and it became the vehicle of their social aspirations. In Germany and America, however, where the Reform presence was strong, a third kind of Orthodoxy emerged. Here there was a need to formulate a self-conscious defence of tradition while at the same time affirming at least some of the values of emancipation and the open society. This was known at various times as neo- , “modern” or more recently “centrist” Orthodoxy, and it was distinguished by its attempts to create an intellectual synthesis between Torah and secular culture. This was an “elite” rather than a “folk” Judaism, and the degree of self-consciousness it imposed on its adherents meant that it could never become a mass movement. But it was from this group that the most searching philosophic encounters between Judaism and modernity emerged.
A fourth group appeared in Eastern Europe towards the end of the nineteenth century. Like the secular Zionists they believed that there was no future for Jews in Europe. They saw the force of Hess’s dilemma. Jews were caught between the honey and the sting of assimilation and antisemitism. Jewish life would have to be reconvened on the stage of the biblical land of Israel. The diaspora was at an end. Those who thought thus were religious Zionists, and they were of two broad kinds. Some, like Rabbis Samuel Mohilewer and Isaac Reines, believed that the ingathering of exiles was a practical necessity. Jewish lives were at risk after the Russian pogroms of the 1880s, and what was needed was a place of refuge. Others, most notably Rabbi Abraham Isaac Kook, saw Zionism in a theological perspective. The end of exile meant the beginning of redemption. The upheavals of the nineteenth century were the travails, the “birth pangs” of the messianic age.
<b>Antisemitism</b><br>Thus a relatively coherent understanding of the Jewish vocation came to be drastically fragmented. Meanwhile, however, another phenomenon was gaining momentum. The Enlightenment and the political transformations it heralded promised an era of rationality and tolerance. Old animosities and prejudices would be cured. At the very outset, however, it became clear that change would have a darker side. In 1789, while the French Assembly deliberated on whether to grant citizenship rights to Jews, anti-Jewish rioting broke out in Alsace. Wherever proposals for Jewish enfranchisement were publicly debated, reservations were heard. The long centuries of Christian and Islamic hostility to Jews still exerted their influence.
But slowly it became clear that if prejudice persisted, a change was nonetheless taking place. Hitherto, opposition to Jews had carried with it a religious rationale. Jews were disliked for what they believed and did. As society became secularised and many Jews themselves deserted their faith, this no longer sufficed to account for the feelings many Europeans still entertained. A new basis was found in the racial theories which had gathered ground in France and Germany throughout the nineteenth century. According to these, the character of individuals was determined by their racial origin. Racial traits were genetically transmitted and the features of particular races were immutably fixed. Changes in environment and education were powerless to affect the given: people were what their race had made them. On this new theoretical foundation, religious anti-Judaism metamorphosed into racial antisemitism. Jews were to be hated not for what they believed or did but for what they were.
Already in 1862 Moses Hess was writing of the inevitable failure of emancipation. “The Germans hate the religion of the Jews less than their race. Neither ‘radical’ reform…nor baptism, neither education nor emancipation completely unlocks for the German Jew the portals of social life.”<sup class="footnote-marker">16</sup><i class="footnote">Moses Hess, <i>Rome and Jerusalem</i>, translated by Maurice Bloom (New York: Philosophical Library), 25–26.</i> By the 1870s racial antisemitism was beginning to enter German political life. A wave of pogroms hit Russian Jewry in 1881, eventually sending some two million Jews into flight from Eastern Europe. In 1882, an assimilated Russian Jew, Leon Pinsker, wrote that “Judeophobia is a psychic aberration. As a psychic aberration, it is hereditary; as a disease transmitted for two thousand years, it is incurable.” He added, “For the living, the Jew is a dead man.”<sup class="footnote-marker">17</sup><i class="footnote">Leon Pinsker, “Auto-Emancipation,” in Arthur Hertzberg (ed.), <i>The Zionist Idea</i> (New York: Atheneum, 1981), 185, 188.</i> Pinsker was now convinced that there was no future for Jews in any country but their own. In 1894, another assimilated Jew, Theodor Herzl, was himself radicalised by the antisemitism he discovered in France at the time of the Dreyfus affair. Two years later he wrote, “In vain are we loyal patriots…in vain do we strive to enhance the fame of our native lands in the arts and sciences, or her wealth by trade and commerce. In our native lands where we have lived for centuries we are still decried as aliens.”<sup class="footnote-marker">18</sup><i class="footnote">Herzl, “The Jewish State,” in Hertzberg, <i>The Zionist Idea</i>, 209.</i> Jews had become “the Jewish question.” Throughout wide swathes of Europe their existence had become an irritant verging on the intolerable.
Nor was this wholly unrelated to the intellectual currents of the time. As early as the 1760s Voltaire, France’s most powerful advocate of free thought and religious liberty, could write of the Jews, “In short, we find in them only an ignorant and barbarous people, who have long united the most sordid avarice with the most detestable superstition and the most invincible hatred for every people by whom they are tolerated and enriched.” In a generous afterthought he added, “Still, we ought not to burn them.”<sup class="footnote-marker">19</sup><i class="footnote">Cited in Paul Mendes-Flohr and Jehuda Reinharz (eds.), <i>The Jew in the Modern World</i> (New York: Oxford University Press), 252–53.</i> Sharply critical caricatures of Judaism are to be found in the writings of Kant, Schleiermacher, Hegel and Nietzsche. Richard Wagner spoke of the “instinctive repugnance against the Jew’s prime essence” and called for “emancipation from the yoke of Judaism.”<sup class="footnote-marker">20</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 268–71.</i> Against nineteenth-century conceptions of the modern state and its single culture, Jews represented a distinctive subgroup, a “nation within a nation.” Against the universalism of Kantian thought, Jews stood out in their inescapable particularism. Against Hegel’s evolutionary view of history, Jews remained firmly tied to a faith which long preceded Christianity. Jews failed to fit the intellectual categories of late eighteenth- and nineteenth-century thought. There was no space for them on the conceptual map.
Thinkers from Voltaire to Marx to Nietzsche had already anticipated a world free of Judaism. In 1833 Friedrich von Holzschuher speculated on a world free of Jews. They might, he mused, be relocated on the moon. But “the total extermination of Jewry would be incomparably easier.” A competition might be held to find ways in which the “total massacre” of Jews could be used for productive purposes. Their bodies might be turned into tallow candles or used to improve the soil.<sup class="footnote-marker">21</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 261–62.</i> Little more than a century later, the thought had become deed. The Nazi Final Solution harnessed the massive machine of the modern secular state to the project of a <i>Judenrein</i> universe. Jewry was to come to an end. By the time it was halted, one in three of the Jews of the world had died.
<b>Jewish postmodernity</b><br>Jews, latecomers to modernity, were among the first citizens of postmodernity. From Moses Mendelssohn in the 1780s they had been the most ardent devotees of Enlightenment, rationality and universalism. From Spinoza onwards they had held a disproportionate place among secularism’s avant-garde. Having suffered for centuries from religious persecution, they saw the solution to “the Jewish problem” in terms of a world without religion altogether. There is a driven, almost religious quality to the energies brought by Marx and Freud to the economic or psychoanalytical liberation of man from God. The vision of an enlightened Europe seemed to many Jews, both secular and religious, the portent of a messianic age.
The Holocaust shattered those dreams. The change in Jewish consciousness since then represents a turning point in the history of the covenantal people no less significant than emancipation a century and a half before. Indeed for many Jews the past half-century has been as fraught with significance as any period since the destruction of the second Temple, the event with which an almost 2,000-year story of exile and dispersion began.
A recent survey of American attitudes concluded that
<span class="poetry indentAll">There is a widespread feeling that the promise of the modern era is slipping away from us. A movement of enlightenment and liberation that was to have freed us from superstition and tyranny has led in the twentieth century to a world in which ideological fanaticism and political oppression have reached extremes unknown in previous history. Science, which was to have unlocked the bounties of nature, has given us the power to destroy all life on the earth. Progress, modernity’s master idea, seems less compelling when it appears that it may be progress into the abyss.<sup class="footnote-marker">22</sup><i class="footnote">Robert Bellah, Richard Madsen, William Sullivan, Ann Swidler and Steven Tipton, <i>Habits of the Heart</i> (London: Hutchinson, 1988), 277.</i></span>
Jews experienced this disillusionment in a uniquely tragic event. In the Holocaust, they encountered the abyss. After it – or after its enormity had fully entered Jewish consciousness – Jews found themselves thrust into the postmodern situation, aware of the ambiguities of science and civilisation and the fragility of rationalism.
The postmodern Jew has had to question what the American Reform Pittsburgh Platform of 1885 called “the modern era of universal culture of heart and intellect.” From the late eighteenth century in one way or another Jews had been engaged in a <i>flight from particularism</i>. For Moses Mendelssohn, the first Jewish theoretician of enlightenment, the foundational truths of God and morality were discoverable by reason and applied to everyone everywhere. Revelation merely disclosed the local legislation by which Jews were bound to live out these truths in their individual way. The great movements of rebellion against rabbinic Judaism – Reform and secular Zionism – were each in their way attempts to “normalise” the Jewish situation, the former by pruning away rituals that set Jews apart, the latter by turning Jews into Hebrews, Canaanites or Israelis, a nation like any other.
But Auschwitz testified to what Emil Fackenheim terms “the Jewish singled-out condition.”<sup class="footnote-marker">23</sup><i class="footnote">Emil Fackenheim, <i>The Jewish Return into History</i> (New York: Schocken, 1978), 21.</i> It represented an assault on all Jews, assimilated and traditionalist, secular and religious, self-hating and self-affirming. Small wonder then that even highly secular Jews today, with little or no connection to the Jewish religious heritage, see themselves inescapably as Jews, for they would have been so regarded by the Final Solution. “Can I deny,” asks the writer Frederic Raphael, “that I am defined more by history than by creed, more by circumstance than by decision?” The prophet Ezekiel had once envisaged such an outcome. “You say, ‘We want to be like the nations, like the peoples of the world…’ But what you have in mind will never happen…” <sup class="footnote-marker">24</sup><i class="footnote">Ezekiel 20:32.</i> For many, the Holocaust stands as a refutation of assimilation as a coherent Jewish strategy. There is, among Jews today, a new particularism, partly the product of the resurgent ethnicity of the 1960s, but at least in part the result of a determination not to yield to the verdict of Auschwitz, that merely to exist as a Jew is a crime.
Jewish postmodernity is also marked by a new moral vocabulary. Ever since the failure of the Bar Kochba rebellion against Roman rule in the second century CE, Jews had been politically quietist. To “take arms against a sea of troubles and by opposing end them” was impossible. There was no choice but to “suffer the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune.” Dispersed and disenfranchised, they necessarily espoused an ethic of passivity. The central virtues of rabbinic Judaism were trust, the rule of law, the “ways of peace” and where necessary martyrdom, the ultimate expression of “sanctifying the name” of God. The sages’ definition of “might” was self-restraint. The rabbinic tradition is for the most part ahistorical and apolitical. Its highest value is peace and what Gershom Scholem called “a life lived in deferment” – a daily waiting for the Messiah to arrive.
We can date almost to the moment the transformation of Jewish consciousness from the passive to the active mode. It occurred in the Warsaw ghetto in April 1943. Jews within had decided on a policy of armed resistance. The question was, should religious Jews join the struggle or instead go to their deaths with perfect faith as martyrs? A religious leader in the ghetto, Rabbi Yitzchak Nissenbaum, made a momentous speech to his followers. “This is a time for <i>kiddush ha-chayyim</i>, the sanctification of life, and not for <i>kiddush ha-Shem</i>, the holiness of martyrdom. Previously the Jew’s enemy sought his soul and the Jew sanctified his body in martyrdom. Now the oppressor demands the Jew’s body, and the Jew is obliged therefore to defend it, to preserve his life.”<sup class="footnote-marker">25</sup><i class="footnote">Quoted in Shaul Esh, “The Dignity of the Destroyed,” in Yisrael Gutman and Livia Rothkirchen (eds.), <i>The Catastrophe of European Jewry</i> ( Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1976), 355.</i>
When the alternatives are conversion or death, death is a form of religious resistance. But when death itself is decreed, a tenacious defence of life is the only possible defiance of evil. Several Jewish thinkers, including Emil Fackenheim and Irving Greenberg, have concluded that a responsible embrace of power is the only viable future for the people of the covenant. The “suffering servant” paradigm of Isaiah is no longer adequate to a post-Holocaust world.
These developments find expression in a single concrete reality: the State of Israel. Proclaimed in 1948, it represents for many Jews the “Jewish return into history” and the vindication of the covenantal promise that one day Jews would return to their land. Rarely has a sequence of events lent itself more naturally to theological interpretation. The central drama of the Mosaic books is the threefold sequence of enslavement in Egypt, exodus, and revelation at Sinai. Twentieth-century Jewish history has had its own enslavement and attempted genocide and its own exodus and entry into the land. The successive migrations of Jews to Israel from Eastern Europe, North Africa and the Arab lands of the Middle East and most recently from Ethiopia and Russia have held, even for secular Israelis, a biblical resonance as the names of the various evacuation programmes testify: Operation Magic Carpet (which airlifted the Jews of Yemen, as they put it, “on eagles’ wings”), Operation Ezra and Nehemiah (the Jews of Iraq), Operations Moses and Solomon (the black Jews of Ethiopia) and Operation Exodus (the Jews of Russia).
The State of Israel has in itself transformed the terms of Jewish life and brought to the forefront a series of theological questions that had lain dormant or disattended since the end of the biblical period. What is the relationship between divine providence and human action in the interpretation of history? Are the days marking the birth of the state in 1948 and the reunification of Jerusalem in 1967 secular events or religious holidays? What is the proper relationship between religion and state? Are the debates and conflicts which animate Israeli life the contemporary equivalents of the old clashes between kings, priests and prophets? Above all, what place does recent Jewish history occupy on the biblical and rabbinic continuum of exile and redemption? Are the birth and wars of the state part of the prelude to messianic time?
The existence of the State of Israel has underlined the postmodern situation of the Jew. It has served as a worldwide focus of Jewish peoplehood and thus deepened the new particularism. The shift it has marked from passivity to the active shaping of history has encouraged Jews in the diaspora to adopt a more activist stance of their own. Its political isolation and the anti-Zionism which has grown since 1967 have increased the sense twentieth-century Jews have of being alone in a hostile world. Its mere existence has been the most potent symbol of a Jewish determination not to yield to the trauma of the Holocaust but to continue to reaffirm life.
Inevitably, too, the existence of Israel has meant a searching self-examination on the part of diaspora Jewry. Twice a year, at the supreme moments of the Jewish calendar, Jews had prayed, “Next year in Jerusalem.” What does that prayer mean when a Jewish Jerusalem is only an aeroplane flight away? Does Israel negate the rationale of the diaspora? What does <i>galut</i>, “exile,” mean in a contemporary context? Most Jews continue to live outside Israel. The largest Jewish population in the world is not there but in the United States. This too is a fact that calls for theological interpretation. Moreover the health and viability of diaspora Jewish communities is a fiercely contended issue. In the past half-century there has been intense activity on the part of Jewish communities in America, Britain, Australia and elsewhere in building synagogues and schools, the key institutions of a Jewish community. But a question remains. To paraphrase Stevie Smith: Is the diaspora waving or drowning?
For alongside the epic historical events that have shaped modern Jewry have gone the social trends with which we began. Until the 1960s, most sociologists predicted the progressive marginalisation and eclipse of religion. The processes that go under the names of secularisation and individualism have taken their toll of Judaism no less – and in some respects more – than of other religions. In the diaspora, Jews have experienced high rates of intermarriage, a less than replacement level of births, and a rising level of divorce. These trends have significance not only for Jewish morality but also for Jewish continuity. Israel for its part, despite the close entanglement of religion and politics, remains a secular state with a secular majority among its Jewish population.
<b>Jews and Judaism</b><br>These then have been some of the leading themes of Jewish modernity and postmodernity. They bring out a salient feature of any deliberation on Jews and Judaism. The present work is a study of Jewish thought. But no analysis of Jewish thought, least of all one written in the late twentieth century, can be theological or philosophical alone. Applied to Judaism, the word “religion” is an abstraction and an infelicitous one. Even the words “Judaism” and “Orthodoxy” are neologisms. It is not clear that Torah – the traditional and authoritative way of life of Jews – fits into these conceptual categories without distortion and remainder.
Torah itself – by which we mean the Pentateuch and the biblical and rabbinic literature seen as commentaries to it – is not simply a text or set of documents from which doctrines can be derived, but a relational category. It is, for Jews, the constitution of the covenant binding God and a particular people in an eternal and highly charged relationship. Its words spell out the way of life which that people undertake as “a kingdom of priests and a holy people.”<sup class="footnote-marker">26</sup><i class="footnote">Exodus 19:6.</i> They articulate, too, a way of interpreting history as the record of that people’s response to the covenant through time. History, for Torah, is neither random nor predetermined. It is not meaningless but it is not prescripted either. It is the story of the relationship between God and Abraham’s extended family. Its categories are those of fidelity and faithlessness, exile and return, attempted flight and perpetual reminders that the covenant, once undertaken, cannot be rescinded.
Election and holiness are not, for Torah, abstract categories that can be described in theology without reference to time, place and empirical reality. They are embodied, concretely, in the communities and societies that Jews create and the choices they make as they chart their destiny through time. Necessarily then, and especially in periods of seismic change, Jewish thought is responsive to history, sociology and demography. The contemporary philosopher Michael Wyschogrod gives this proposition its most forcible expression when he says that “God appears in history as the God of [the people] Israel and there can therefore be no thought about God that is not also thought about Israel.”<sup class="footnote-marker">27</sup><i class="footnote">Michael Wyschogrod, <i>The Body of Faith</i> (Minneapolis, MN: Seabury, 175).</i> That Jews choose to marry other Jews, identify as Jews and have and raise Jewish children is a fact no less significant for the future of the covenant than theological reflection on the principles of the Jewish faith. Nor are these two kinds of fact unconnected.
In the succeeding chapters we follow the routes mapped out by recent Jewish thinkers as they reflect on the meanings of exile and redemption, alienation and return, the messianic age, the particularity of Jewish existence and the universality of its God, the concept of a covenantal people at a time of cultural and intellectual fragmentation, Jewish law as the constitution of a holy community, and the interpretation of sacred texts in a secular age. These are, for Jews, timeless questions but they have received different answers at different times. They form part of the mandate of Torah in each generation: to delineate a Jewish destiny in faithful response to a covenant enacted long ago at Sinai, and to discern where the pillar of fire is leading us through the wildernesses of time toward the beckoning vision of redemption.
The route I have chosen to take is as follows. It begins in the next chapter with the Holocaust, not the event itself but subsequent Jewish reflection on it. The Final Solution raised in the most fateful way the most basic questions of Jewish existence: the presence of God in history, the theological significance of Jewish survival and the “singled-out” quality of Jewish life in the modern world.
In the next chapter we turn to the second shaping event in recent Jewish history: the creation of the State of Israel. This, as we have seen, raises fundamental questions of covenantal history. Is the return of Jews to their biblical land part of a messianic process? Where does it belong in the theological categories of exile and redemption? Does secular history have a religious meaning and can a state brought into being through the political process be seen as part of a divine plan?
From Israel, we turn in Chapter 4 to the contemporary diaspora. Can Jewish identity be sustained in an open society? What, indeed, does Jewish identity mean for contemporary Jews? Here we encounter fierce debates on the interpretation of Jewish identity and status: What is a Jew, who is a Jew and how is Jewishness to be measured? These debates are further evidence of the interconnectedness of Jewish law, theology, sociology and demography.
By this stage the reader will have become aware of an acute tension in post-Holocaust Jewish life: between the strong sense of Jewish peoplehood that emerged in the wake of the Holocaust and the State of Israel and the fierce divisions as to what the substantive content of that peoplehood is. Chapter 5 examines the attempts of several contemporary Jewish thinkers to provide theological content to the idea of the Jewish people as a “single entity standing before God.”
Prior to modernity, the bond that constituted Jews as a people was <i>halakhah</i>, Jewish law. How has halakhah been affected by the secularisation of Jewish life and by the reconstitution of Jewish national existence in Israel? This is the question addressed in Chapter 6.
In Chapter 7 we turn to a yet more fundamental concept, one that provides not only Jewish law but the whole of traditional Jewish thought with its authority: the Bible, specifically the Pentateuch, as revelation. Here we consider the idea of “Torah from Heaven,” the principle of Jewish faith which has come under the most sustained assault in modernity. How has Orthodoxy defended it, and how have other tendencies in Jewish life reconceptualised revelation?
The importance of the idea of “Torah from Heaven” and its collision with Enlightenment scholarship leads us, in Chapter 8, to a broader enquiry into the nature of the relationship between revelation and time and the reciprocal interplay, in Judaism, between the interpretation of texts and of history. In particular, I argue the centrality of <i>midrash</i> or interpretation to Jewish consciousness.
In the final chapter I attempt a summation of the central drama of modern Jewish thought, the collision between Jewish singularity and the universalism of Enlightenment culture.
Jewry, as we noted at the outset, has experienced modernity in a uniquely dramatic and tragic way. Subject, like other peoples, to secularisation, it discovered that the thesis had a brutal denouement. What began as a prediction that Jews would cease to exist as Jews culminated in a policy that Jews should cease to exist <i>tout court.</i> The timeless, eternal people came face to face with the decree of time and the angel of death. The affirmation of Jewish life after the Holocaust is itself testimony that the covenant survives and that the voice of God continues to be heard, however obliquely and obscurely, by the contemporary heirs of those who stood at Sinai.

Chapter 2; The Valley of the Shadow

<big><strong><i>The Valley of the Shadow</i></strong></big>
Judaism has its silences, Elie Wiesel once said, but we don’t speak about them. After the Holocaust, the <i>Shoah</i>, there was one of the great silences of Jewish history.
A third of world Jewry had gone up in flames. Entire worlds – the bustling Jewish townships of Eastern Europe, the talmudic academies, the courts of the Jewish mystics, the Yiddish-speaking masses, the urbane Jews of Germany, the Jews of Poland who had lived among their Gentile neighbours for 800 years, the legendary synagogues and houses of study – all were erased. A guard at Auschwitz, testifying at the Nuremburg trial, explained that at the height of the genocide, when the camp was turning 10,000 Jews a day into ashes, children were thrown into the furnaces alive. When the destruction was over, a pillar of cloud marked the place where Europe’s Jews had once been; and there was a silence that consumed all words.
More had died in the Final Solution than Jews. It was as if the image of God that is man had died also. We know in retrospect that Jews – both victims and survivors – simply could not believe what was happening. Since the Enlightenment they had come to have faith that a new order was in the making. The age-old teachings of contempt for the chosen-or-rejected people were at an end, they believed, and in their place would come a rational utopia.
It is hard in retrospect to imagine that sense of almost religious wonder which German Jews felt for the country of Goethe, Beethoven and Immanuel Kant. That Christian anti-Judaism might mutate into the monster of racial antisemitism; that a Vatican might be silent as the covenantal people went to its crucifixion; that chamber music might be played over the cries of burning children; that the rational utopia might be <i>Judenrein</i>: these, for the enlightened Jews of Europe, were the ultimately unthinkable thoughts. Since the early nineteenth century, humanity had seemed to many Jews a safer bet than God; and it was that faith that was murdered in the camps. Where was man at Auschwitz?
But where, too, was God? That He was present seemed a blasphemy; that He was absent, even more so. How could He have been there, punishing the righteous and the children for sins, their own or someone else’s? But how could He <i>not</i> have been there, when, from the valley of the shadow of death, they called out to Him?
Jewish faith sees God in history. But here was a definitive, almost terminal, moment in Jewish history, and where was God’s hand and His saving, outstretched arm? It seemed as if the Shoah must have, yet could not have, religious meaning.
Wiesel has written of that time: “Never shall I forget those moments which murdered my God and my soul and turned my dreams to dust. Never shall I forget these things, even if I am condemned to live as long as God Himself.” But to whom could one speak of these things so much larger than man, if not to God? It was a crisis of faith without precedent in the annals of belief. If God existed, how was Auschwitz possible? But if God did not exist, how was humanity after Auschwitz credible?
<b>Covenant and refutation</b><br>There is a line of theological reasoning which argues that a single moment of innocent suffering is as inexplicable as attempted genocide. Abraham, faced with the proposed destruction of the cities of the plain, had prayed, “Far be it from You to do such a thing, to bring death upon the innocent as well as the guilty, so that innocent and guilty fare alike. Far be it from You! Shall not the Judge of all the earth deal justly?”<sup class="footnote-marker">1</sup><i class="footnote">Genesis 18:25.</i> Abraham began his famous dialogue with the possibility that there might be fifty innocent individuals; he stopped short at ten. But logic would pursue the argument further. The death of one child is much a crisis for religious belief as the Shoah.
That is true. But it is to miss an essential feature of Jewish belief. There is theology, but beyond that there is covenant, the bond between God and a singular people. The Torah – the Hebrew Bible – reveals a single universal God who created the world and sits in judgement over the whole of human history. But with Abraham and the exodus and the revelation at Sinai, God chooses to associate His name with the fate of a particular extended family: the seed of Abraham, the children of Israel, the Jewish people. It is through them that His presence would be peculiarly manifest. Their way of life would set them apart as a holy nation. Their history would seem to be more than the morally indifferent play of cause and effect. It would read as a succession of commentaries to the covenant. Its deliverances and exiles, sufferings and salvations, its sheer improbable persistence, would invite the adjective “miraculous.” The people of Israel would, in its own existence, bear testimony to the existence of God.
So the eternity of God is mirrored in the eternity of the Jewish people. The frightening sequence of curses at the end of the book of Leviticus ends with the verse, “Yet in spite of this, when they are in the land of their enemies, I will not reject or abhor them so as to destroy them completely, breaking My covenant with them.”<sup class="footnote-marker">2</sup><i class="footnote">Leviticus 26:44.</i> The prophet Jeremiah declared, “This is what the Lord says, He who appoints the sun to shine by day, who decrees the moon and the stars to shine by night, who stirs up the sea so that its waves roar – the Lord Almighty is His name: ‘Only if these decrees vanish from My sight,’ declares the Lord, ‘will the descendants of Israel ever cease to be a nation before Me.’”<sup class="footnote-marker">3</sup><i class="footnote">Jeremiah 31:35–36.</i>
The faith of Israel cannot be summarised in a set of theological statements which might be true whatever happened in space and time. It is peculiarly tied to the physical existence of the people of Israel. Theological propositions normally resist falsification. They are ways of interpreting events; hence they are not given to refutation by events. But the central premiss of Judaism carries with it the risk of refutation. If there were no Jews, Judaism would have proven to be false. The survival of the Jewish people is the promise on which the entire covenant rests. An early rabbinic commentary put the point audaciously: “‘You are My witnesses, says the Lord, and I am God’ (Isaiah 43:12) – that is, if you are My witnesses, I am God, and if you are not My witnesses, I am, as it were, not God.”<sup class="footnote-marker">4</sup><i class="footnote"><i>Midrash Tehillim to</i> Psalms 123:1.</i>
Jews had faced inquisitions and pogroms before. They had even, in the book of Esther, known what it was to be condemned by Haman’s decision “to destroy, kill and annihilate all Jews – young and old, women and children – on a single day.”<sup class="footnote-marker">5</sup><i class="footnote">Esther 3:13.</i> But redemption had always come, or if not redemption, refuge. In the Holocaust there was neither. Jews came face to face with a systematic programme of extinction.
The demonic character of the Final Solution was not missed by Jewish thinkers. George Steiner has traced the intellectual progression from Nietzsche’s “death of God” to the planned death of the people of God.<sup class="footnote-marker">6</sup><i class="footnote">George Steiner, <i>In Bluebeard’s Castle</i> (London: Faber and Faber, 1971), 29–48.</i> Josef Mengele, the doctor of Auschwitz, openly joked that he had replaced God as the judge of “who shall live and who shall die.” Franz Stangl, the Treblinka Kommandant, insisted that pious Jews be made to spit on Torah scrolls, and that when they ran out of spittle more should be supplied by spitting into their mouths. In the ghettoes and camps, Jewish sabbaths and festivals were singled out for special actions of cruelty and extermination.
Emil Fackenheim has argued convincingly that the Holocaust eclipses all previous trials of faith.
<span class="poetry indentAll">The children of Auschwitz were tortured and murdered, not because of their faith nor despite their faith nor for reasons unrelated to the Jewish faith. The Nazis, though racists, did not murder Jews for their “race” but for the Jewish faith of their great-grandparents… At some time in the mid-nineteenth century, European Jews, like Abraham of old, brought a child sacrifice; but unlike Abraham they did not know what they were doing – and there was no reprieve. It is as if Satan himself had plotted for four thousand years to destroy the covenant between God and Israel, and had at last found the way.<sup class="footnote-marker">7</sup><i class="footnote">Emil Fackenheim, <i>The Jewish Return into History</i> (New York: Schocken, 1978), 47.</i></span>
The Shoah, then, did not simply raise six million times over the traditional question of theodicy: Why do the innocent suffer? It raised the ultimate question of Jewish existence. The covenant had promised that though individuals might be lost, the people as a whole would eternally survive. A <i>Judenrein</i> universe, a world free of Jews, would have refuted the ground of all Jewish hope from the days of Abraham. Not only the present and future, but the Jewish past too would have died.
So, for many years after the Shoah, the silence outweighed words. The questions were too painful to ask. It was as if, like Lot’s wife, turning back to look on the destruction would turn one to stone.
<b>The search for explanation</b><br>Nonetheless there were, even while the events were taking place, attempts to find theological meaning. Rabbi Elchanan Wasserman, one of the greatest representatives of the Eastern European yeshiva world, published a pamphlet setting forth the traditionalist response to catastrophe. Its title, “The Footsteps of the Messiah,” indicated its theme.<sup class="footnote-marker">8</sup><i class="footnote">Reprinted in Rabbi Elchanan Wasserman, <i>Kovetz Maamarim</i> (Jerusalem: E. S. Wassermann, 1963), 106–39.</i> Jews were being punished for their sins. In the wake of the Enlightenment they had abandoned their holy destiny and pursued false gods. They had lost faith in providence and were turning instead to secular salvations: socialism, nationalism and Zionism. A momentous day of judgement was approaching, a period the talmudic sages had described as the “footsteps” or “birth pangs” of the Messiah. An early rabbinic teaching had portrayed this as a time when “insolence will increase, respect will diminish…the wisdom of the sages will decay, sin-fearing men will be despised and truth will be concealed.”<sup class="footnote-marker">9</sup><i class="footnote">Mishnah, <i>Sotah</i> 9:15.</i> All these descriptions applied to the present. The suffering of Jews was a call from God to return to faith, the commandments and Torah study.
Rabbi Wasserman remained true to his belief. Arrested by the Nazis in 1941, he went to his death with these words, addressed to those who were to be shot with him:
<span class="poetry indentAll">It seems that in Heaven we are regarded as righteous, for we are being asked to atone with our bodies for the sins of Israel. We must immediately repent, for the time is short… We must bear in mind that in truth we are among those who “sanctify God’s name” [the rabbinic description of martyrdom]. Let us go [to our deaths] with heads held high, and let us not, God forbid, have any improper thoughts, for an improper thought invalidates a sacrifice… The fire which will burn our bodies will be the fire that restores the Jewish people.<sup class="footnote-marker">10</sup><i class="footnote">Reported by Rabbi Efraim Oshry, in Mordecai Eliav (ed.), <i>Ani Maamin</i> (Jerusalem: Mossad Harav Kook, 1988), 26–27.</i></span>
But the traditional categories of punishment, sin, sacrifice and atonement came under increasing strain as the full implications of the Final Solution began to dawn on Jews. One writer reports a searing debate that took place in a synagogue in the ghetto on the eve of Yom Kippur, the Day of Atonement. As the cantor pronounced the blessing, “Who has kept us alive, and sustained us and brought us to this time,” a pious Jew began to cry, “Lies, lies, it’s all lies.” A lapsed Jew, a former yeshiva student who had become an atheist, stood up and replied, “Jews, you know that I was a blasphemer, a mocker of Israel, a lost soul. And I tell you, yes, there is a God in Heaven. Here we have seen fulfilled the words of the prophets and their curses, all of which have fallen on us.” He opened the Torah and read: “And it shall come to pass if you will not hearken to the voice of the Lord your God, to take care to fulfil all His commandments and His statutes which I command you this day, that all these curses shall come upon you and overtake you.”<sup class="footnote-marker">11</sup><i class="footnote">Deuteronomy 28:15.</i> But the pious Jew replied, “My teachers, you have heard that God destroys His people because of their sins. Isn’t it foolish to believe that? If this were a punishment from heaven because of our sins, why did all the rabbis, the pure and holy righteous ones who were full of Torah and good deeds, why did they die?”<sup class="footnote-marker">12</sup><i class="footnote">Cited in Bernard Maza, <i>With Fury Poured Out</i> (Hoboken, NJ: Ktav, 1986), 3–4.</i>
It was not only that divine punishment failed to explain the deaths of the innocent, the children and the righteous. It also pointed in contradictory directions. For <i>which</i> sins was a generation being afflicted? The late Rabbi Joel Teitelbaum, leader of the Chassidic community of Satmar and himself a survivor of Bergen Belsen, declared that the Holocaust was a punishment for Jewish political activism. The Jewish people had, according to the Talmud, taken an oath to wait patiently in exile until God Himself redeemed them. But secular Zionism had broken this promise by forcing the course of Jewish history and bringing a premature ingathering to the holy land. The Shoah was a punishment for Zionism.<sup class="footnote-marker">13</sup><i class="footnote">R. Joel Teitelbaum, <i>Vayo’el Moshe (</i>New York: Jerusalem Publishing Co., 1959); <i>Al ha-Ge’ulah ve-al ha-Temurah</i> (New York: Jerusalem Publishing Co., 1967).</i>
An Israeli thinker, Menachem Hartom, pursued the same logic to its opposite conclusion. Throughout its history, he argued, the Jewish people had regarded exile as punishment, as not-being-at-home. That is, until emancipation. Then, for the first time, Jews argued that Europe was where they belonged. Some abandoned the hope for a return to Israel; others deferred it to a metaphysical end of days. For the first time Jews ceased to be Zionists. For this they suffered a devastating retribution. Germany, the country more than any other that Jews had worshipped, became the avenger. The Shoah was a punishment for anti-Zionism.<sup class="footnote-marker">14</sup><i class="footnote">Menachem Immanuel Hartom, “Hirhurim al ha-Shoah,” <i>De’ot</i> 18 (Winter 5720/1961), 28–31.</i>
Worse than this contradiction was the fact that traditional theodicy could be used, in Christian hands, to justify the concentration camps as punishment of Jews for remaining Jews. In 1948, a mere three years after the Shoah, a German Evangelical Conference met at Darmstadt. It proclaimed that Jewish suffering in the Holocaust was the work of God. It issued a call to Jews to cease their rejection and ongoing crucifixion of Jesus. Genocide was the punishment for deicide.<sup class="footnote-marker">15</sup><i class="footnote">I owe this reference to Irving Greenberg, “Cloud of Smoke, Pillar of Fire: Judaism, Christianity and Modernity after the Holocaust,” in Eva Fleischner (ed.), <i>Auschwitz: Beginning of a new Era?</i> (New York: Ktav, 1977), 13 note 10.</i> Nor was this sentiment restricted to Christians who approved of the Final Solution. The great Christian theologian Karl Barth, himself an opponent of the Nazi regime, wrote during the Holocaust that the fate of the Jews was testimony to the stark judgement of God. “This,” he wrote, “is how Israel punishes itself for its sectarian self-assertion.”<sup class="footnote-marker">16</sup><i class="footnote">Karl Barth, “The Judgement and the Mercy of God,” in F. E. Talmage (ed.), <i>Disputation and Dialogue</i> (New York: Ktav, 1975), 43.</i>
Such theodicy, as the Christian theologian A. Roy Eckardt has pointed out, inverts the values of God Himself. It fails to comfort the afflicted and afflict the comforted. It comforts the comforted and afflicts the afflicted. Among those who died were 90 percent of East European Jewry, the last surviving strongholds of traditional Jewish piety. The machines of death indifferently consumed sages and saints, those who had devoted their lives to faith. More than a million children were gassed, burned, shot, tortured or buried alive. At some point the religious imagination rebels against adding to the evil of their death the indignity of saying that it was justified.
<b>A broken covenant?</b><br>Was Jewish faith, then, itself fractured by the Holocaust? There were thinkers who did not shrink from drawing this conclusion. Emil Fackenheim has argued that if the Holocaust is unique – and he has strenuously contended that it is – then it resists understanding through traditional categories. Because Judaism embodies a philosophy of history, it cannot make itself immune to “epoch-making events” which confront faith with experiences that it cannot fully assimilate. If we were to incorporate the Shoah into the narrative of Jewish history, as just one more chapter in the chronicle of exiles, destructions, inquisitions and pogroms of the past, we would be hiding from the singularity that made this experience like no other. The traditional hermeneutic of Jewish self-understanding is “ruptured.” After Auschwitz we can no longer speak of an unbroken continuity between the Jewish past and present.<sup class="footnote-marker">17</sup><i class="footnote">Emil Fackenheim, <i>To Mend the World</i> (New York: Schocken, 1982). Michael Morgan’s <i>The Jewish Thought of Emil Fackenheim</i> (Detroit, MI: Wayne State University Press, 1987), is a useful anthology of Fackenheim’s writings.</i>
Irving Greenberg has drawn similar but more radical conclusions. May we, he asks, morally give voice to the old certainties of faith? “No statement, theological or otherwise should be made that would not be credible in the presence of the burning children.”<sup class="footnote-marker">18</sup><i class="footnote">Irving Greenberg, “Cloud of Smoke, Pillar of Fire,” 23.</i> Believers and unbelievers alike are caught in a dialectical tension. We can no longer believe in God with a simplicity we once had. But having seen the brutalities of a demonic secularism, we can no longer not believe in God. We are condemned to oscillate between moments when the Redeemer is present, and moments when that vision is obliterated by memories of the blood and burning. Most strikingly, he has suggested that the very terms of the covenant have fundamentally changed. The mission to which God called the Jewish people turned out to be a suicide mission. Morally speaking, Heaven can have no further claims on the covenantal people. “If the Jews keep the covenant after the Holocaust, then it can no longer be for the reason that it is commanded or because it is enforced by reward or punishment.” It has become a voluntary covenant.<sup class="footnote-marker">19</sup><i class="footnote">Irving Greenberg, <i>Voluntary Covenant</i> (New York: National Jewish Resource Center, 1982).</i>
But if faith is ruptured or momentary, why continue to have faith at all? One American Jewish theologian, Richard Rubinstein, drew the ultimate inference. If there is a God of history, he argued, we must see the Shoah as a punishment for sin. But there is no sin that could warrant the deaths of a million children. There can be no vindication of the ways of Providence. Therefore there is no God of history. For Rubinstein, an ancient heresy had been proved true: there is no justice and no judge.<sup class="footnote-marker">20</sup><i class="footnote">Richard L. Rubinstein, <i>After Auschwitz</i> (Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-Merrill, 1966).</i>
Few followed Rubinstein in his abandonment of faith. For even if a backward-looking explanation in terms of sin and punishment failed to do justice to the tragedy, there was another traditional approach, namely to look forward and attempt to understand the Holocaust not in terms of divine punishment but divine <i>purpose</i>. The Holocaust was not the end of the Jewish people. Three years later, a no less epic event took place, the creation of the State of Israel. Emerging from the shadow of death, Jews had returned to the promised land. And was this not precisely what the Torah had foretold? “When all these blessings and curses I have set before you come upon you and you take them to heart wherever the Lord your God disperses you among the nations…then the Lord your God will restore your fortunes and take you back in love. He will bring you together again from all the peoples where the Lord your God has scattered you.”<sup class="footnote-marker">21</sup><i class="footnote">Deuteronomy 30: 1, 3.</i>
The covenant had not been broken: it had been reconfirmed. To be sure, there were many different ways of understanding how. For some, the transition from exile to homecoming recalled the biblical model of the exodus. The twentieth century echoed ancient Egypt. There too there had been threatened genocide followed by redemption. For others it recapitulated the ending of the book of Job. Life had been taken away; now it was restored. These readings emphasised the divine presence in history. Others focused on the human response. The people of Israel had renewed its faith in the covenant by reconstituting its existence as a nation in the land of its beginnings.
The connection between the Holocaust and the State of Israel could be read in many ways, but that there was a connection seemed to many Jews inescapable. Jacob Neusner has spoken about Shoah <i>u-gevurah</i> or “Holocaust and [Israeli] heroism” as the decisive metaphor of contemporary Jewry.<sup class="footnote-marker">22</sup><i class="footnote">See Jacob Neusner, <i>Stranger at Home</i> (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981).</i> This suggests that for the most part Jews have not discovered, in the events of the twentieth century, the meaninglessness of history or the shattering of the covenant. Instead they have found the meaning of the Holocaust in a wider historical context, in a narrative of exile and return.
More recently, others have discerned another narrative. For the Holocaust was followed not just by the return of Jews to the land of Israel but by a revival of religious observance and the study of Torah. Throughout the Jewish world there has been a renaissance of Jewish learning and of  <i>yeshivot</i>, the traditional centres of study. Since the 1960s, too, there has been a movement among the young of <i>teshuvah</i>, journeying back to religious roots. Bernard Maza<sup class="footnote-marker">23</sup><i class="footnote">Bernard Maza, <i>With Fury Poured Out</i> (Hoboken, NJ: Ktav, 1986).</i> has suggested that the Holocaust be understood in this context and that the key biblical paradigm lies in the prophecy of Ezekiel: “You say, ‘We want to be like the nations, like the peoples of the world… But what you have in mind will never happen. As surely as I live, declares the Lord God, I will rule over you with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm and with outpoured wrath.’”<sup class="footnote-marker">24</sup><i class="footnote">Ezekiel 20:32–33.</i>
The Holocaust drew Jews back to their religious destiny as a holy people after the ravages of assimilation. The talmudic sages in a similar vein had argued that the messianic age would be preceded by collective repentance, and if nothing else brought this about, providence would send a “ruler whose decrees will be as harsh as those of Haman” to bring Jews back to God.<sup class="footnote-marker">25</sup><i class="footnote">Babylonian Talmud, <i>Sanhedrin</i> 97b.</i> What joins Maza’s reading to those that trace a connection between the Holocaust and Israel is the insistence that events disclose their meaning only in retrospect. Unlike those who speak of sin and retribution, they attach significance to what followed the Shoah, not what preceded it.
<b>The hiding of the face of God</b><br>These views, ranging from affirmation to qualification or denial, turn upon a relatively straightforward view of the concepts of providence, punishment and divine action in history. However, the biblical and rabbinic literature is more nuanced and complex than these theologies suggest. This fact gave rise in turn to other approaches to the Holocaust.
One strand within rabbinic thought, for example, maintained that the problem of suffering is intrinsically unfathomable from a human perspective. In the mishnaic period, Rabbi Meir had said that Moses’ request to understand the ways of providence was denied by God.<sup class="footnote-marker">26</sup><i class="footnote">Babylonian Talmud, <i>Berakhot</i> 7a.</i> Maimonides argued that the message of the book of Job was that there was an unbridgeable distance between God’s governance of the universe and human understanding.<sup class="footnote-marker">27</sup><i class="footnote">Maimonides, <i>Guide for the Perplexed</i>, 3:23.</i>
This in itself would not amount to an approach to suffering, but to it was added a deep tenacity of faith. A famous talmudic passage tells of how a group of rabbis, witnessing the devastation of Jerusalem and the ruins of the Temple, started to weep. Rabbi Akiva, however, comforted them, saying that the fact that the prophecies of destruction had come true was itself a guarantee that the prophecies of consolation would also come true.<sup class="footnote-marker">28</sup><i class="footnote">Babylonian Talmud, <i>Makkot</i> 24a–b.</i> To have faith in the midst of tragedy is to see it pointing, however obscurely, toward future redemption.
In this way, rabbinic Judaism learned to keep its mourning within bounds. The Talmud recalls a dialogue between R. Joshua and those who, grief-stricken at the destruction of the Temple, refused ever again to enjoy life. He said: “My sons, come and listen to me. Not to mourn at all is impossible, because the blow has fallen. To mourn overmuch is also impossible, because we do not impose a hardship on the community which the majority is unable to bear.”<sup class="footnote-marker">29</sup><i class="footnote">Babylonian Talmud, <i>Bava Batra</i> 60b.</i> We may not deny evil, but neither may we be overpowered by it.
These themes are brought together in Michael Wyschogrod’s penetrating critique of Emil Fackenheim’s Holocaust theology:
<span class="poetry indentAll">The God of Israel is a redeeming God: this is the only message we are authorised to proclaim, however much it may not seem so to the eyes of non-belief. Should the Holocaust cease to be peripheral to the faith of Israel, should it enter the Holy of Holies and become the dominant voice that Israel hears, it could not but be a demonic voice that it would be hearing. There is no salvation to be extracted from the Holocaust, no faltering Judaism can be revived by it, no new reason for the continuation of the Jewish people can be found in it. If there is hope after the Holocaust, it is because to those who believe, the voices of the Prophets speak more loudly than did Hitler, and because the divine promise sweeps over the crematoria and silences the voice of Auschwitz.<sup class="footnote-marker">30</sup><i class="footnote">Michael Wyschogrod, “Faith and the Holocaust,” <i>Judaism</i> 20:3 (Summer 1971), 293–94.</i></span>
A second axis of Jewish thought stressed not the inexplicability of suffering but the centrality of human responsibility and free will. This implied a paradoxical notion of divine power. God, as it were, withdraws from the arena of human action to allow scope for human choice. In giving man the freedom to choose to be good, He necessarily gives him the freedom to do evil. God teaches us what goodness is. But He does not intervene to force us to do one thing or refrain from doing another. As Maimonides put it, God sometimes changes the course of nature, but never of human nature.<sup class="footnote-marker">31</sup><i class="footnote">Maimonides, <i>Guide for the Perplexed</i>, 3:32.</i>
This was no abstract principle. It had tragic implications, and these were reflected in a series of remarkable rabbinic interpretations of scripture in the wake of the Roman destruction of the second Temple. The mishnaic teacher Abba Chanan, for example, paraphrased the verse “Who is a Mighty One like You, O Lord?” (Psalms 89:9) to read, “Who is like You, mighty in self-restraint? For You heard the blasphemy and the insults of that wicked man [Titus], but You kept silent!” In the school of R. Ishmael, the verse “Who is like You, O Lord, among the mighty [<i>elim</i>]?” (Exodus 15:11) was amended to read, “Who is like You, O Lord, among the silent ones [<i>illemim</i>]?”<sup class="footnote-marker">32</sup><i class="footnote"><i>Mekhilta</i> 42b; Babylonian Talmud, <i>Gittin</i> 56b.</i> God sees the suffering of His children and yet remains mute. Divine might consists precisely in a willingness to leave the stage of history to human freedom. Strength is self-restraint, and true power the renunciation of power. But because of this such tragedies as the destruction of the Temple can take place. Human freedom is conferred at a terrible price, but there is no alternative.
Eliezer Berkovits chose this line of approach to the Holocaust. Seen in the religious context of freedom and responsibility, it tells us not about God but about man. <sup class="footnote-marker">33</sup><i class="footnote">Eliezer Berkovits, <i>Faith After the Holocaust</i> (New York: Ktav, 1973); <i>With God in Hell</i> (New York: Sanhedrin Press, 1979).</i> For Berkovits, Auschwitz represented the moral disintegration of Western civilisation. It was the culmination of centuries of theologically inspired hatred of Jews as the bearers of God’s word. It disclosed what had always been present as a possibility: that men might choose ultimate evil. But it also revealed, at the same time, that in the face of ultimate evil individuals might choose ultimate good. Those Jews who went to their deaths “sanctifying the name of God” reached the highest possible religious affirmation. He who faces death because of his faith stands alone with God. “If at this moment he is able to accept his radical abandonment by God as a gift from God that enables him to love his God with all his soul, ‘even when He takes his soul from you,’ he has achieved the highest form of <i>kiddush ha-Shem</i> [sanctification of God’s name].”<sup class="footnote-marker">34</sup><i class="footnote">Berkovits, <i>Faith after the Holocaust</i>, 81.</i>
The Holocaust taught the terrible vulnerability of those who believe that true strength is the renunciation of strength, but at the same time it revealed the awesome power of a faith that could not be murdered by the most systematic assault on it ever undertaken. The Jewish people is the “suffering servant” of God. It is the living witness to God’s presence in history. The attempt to <i>elim</i>inate the people of God was an attempt to eradicate the presence of God from the human situation. The fact that after Auschwitz the Jewish people still lives and can still affirm its faith is the most powerful testimony that God still lives.
Yet another dimension of Jewish thought spoke about the divine withdrawal from history not as a timeless feature of human freedom but as a specific phase in the history of the covenant. The Torah speaks of the “hiding of the face” of God. But it does so in a particular context, namely the <i>exile</i> of Jews from their land. From the opening chapters of Genesis to the closing speeches of Deuteronomy, human transgression is seen in terms of dislocation, moral and physical. Adam and Eve are exiled from Eden. Moses warns that if the children of Israel sin they too will be exiled. This in turn deepens the alienation between man and God, until man experiences God in His absence, not His presence. “Then My anger shall be kindled against them in that day, and I will forsake them and I will hide My face from them, and they shall be devoured, and many evils and troubles shall come upon them, so that they will say in that day: ‘Are not these evils come upon us because our God is not among us?’ And I will surely hide My face in that day…”<sup class="footnote-marker">35</sup><i class="footnote">Deuteronomy 31:17–18.</i>
Seen in this light, divine providence is not a timeless concept but part of the narrative of the unfolding of the covenant. When the people Israel is faithful to the divine word it lives securely in its land and experiences the providence of God. At such times one can speak of divine reward and punishment. But when it abandons God it is sent into exile which is not punishment as such but something worse, the <i>withdrawal</i> of providence. God “hides His face.” The moral distinction between these two states of affairs was spelled out by the medieval Jewish philosophers. When God punishes, He punishes only the guilty. But when He withdraws His providence, he “leaves man to chance,” in Maimonides’s phrase. At such times even the innocent may suffer, for tragedy is then the result not of divine but of human action. Exile is the absence of providence.
This had been the fate of the Jewish people. Only when constituted as a nation in their own land were their affairs governed by direct divine reward and punishment. Sent into dispersion with the destruction of the second Temple, Jews were handed over to the mercy or mercilessness of the nations with only this promise to console them: that a remnant would survive, and surviving, return to God and their land.
Traces of such a view are to be found in the writings of Maimonides, Nachmanides, Gersonides and Abarbanel between the twelfth and sixteenth centuries, and they have been tentatively explored in a post-Holocaust context by Rabbis Joseph Soloveitchik and Norman Lamm.<sup class="footnote-marker">36</sup><i class="footnote">R. Soloveitchik’s views are briefly set out in Abraham Besdin, <i>Reflections of the Rav</i> (Jerusalem: World Zionist Organisation, 1979), 37. Norman Lamm’s are contained in his <i>The Face of God: Thoughts on the Holocaust</i> (New York: Yeshiva University Press, 1986).</i> From this perspective the Shoah was not the acting-out of a possibility of evil always latent in the human situation, but a kind of denouement of exile. The subsequent creation of the State of Israel, though not in any way a compensation for or redemption of the Holocaust, nonetheless marked the beginning of the end of that long chapter of Jewish homelessness. With the recreation of Jewish national life, not only Jews, but as it were God Himself, had re-entered history.
Each of these strands in Jewish thought might be described as rationalist. But there were also profoundly mystical traces in the rabbinic literature. According to one talmudic passage, in the wake of the destruction of the Temple, God Himself wept and lamented, “Woe to Me for I have destroyed My house, burned My temple and exiled My children.”<sup class="footnote-marker">37</sup><i class="footnote">Babylonian Talmud, <i>Berakhot</i> 3a.</i> Implicit in the idea of a personal God is the concept of divine pathos. God suffers in the suffering of man. Throughout the prophetic and rabbinic literatures there is a constant tension between God‘s justice and His compassion. Justice may require punishment, but God is with those who are punished and grieves with them. Exile may be decreed, but God’s presence is with His children even in exile.
These sentiments received remarkable expression in mystical writings of Rabbi Kalonymos Shapiro during the Holocaust itself. Imprisoned in the Warsaw ghetto where he died in 1943, Rabbi Shapiro continued to deliver discourses to his disciples which he committed to writing and subsequently buried so that they would not be discovered and destroyed by the Nazis. They were eventually discovered and published under the title <i>Esh Kodesh</i>, “The Fire of Holiness.” In them he develops to the full the idea of divine weeping and pain. Because God is infinite, His sufferings are infinite and threaten to overwhelm the world. Drawing on rabbinic texts, Rabbi Shapiro speaks of a hidden place where God retreats to mourn in secret, for were a single tear of divine weeping to enter the world, evil could no longer exist. “This explains why the world remains standing on its foundation and was not destroyed by God’s cry of suffering over the afflictions of His people…because His great suffering never penetrated the world.” But just this fact of divine pathos means that man is not alone in his afflictions. Through the highest mystical striving, he can commune with God in the secret chamber of weeping. In the midst of evil, God mourns the fate of man and man mourns the fate of God.<sup class="footnote-marker">38</sup><i class="footnote">Nehemiah Polen, “Divine Weeping: Rabbi Kalonymos Shapiro’s Theology of Catastrophe in the Warsaw Ghetto,” <i>Modern Judaism</i> 7:3 (October 1987), 253–70.</i>
These views testify to an important feature of Jewish thought, namely that <i>not all theology of suffering is theodicy</i>, an attempt to explain evil in terms of divine justice or providence. Because Judaism is a religion of morality and history, it has been absorbed by the problem of evil at every stage of its development. The sufferings of the righteous form the leitmotiv of prophetic and rabbinic reflection. But a religious response does not necessarily take the form of an explanation, let alone an explanation that presupposes insight into divine actions and intentions. Wyschogrod, Berkovits, Soloveitchik and Shapiro articulate different aspects of a faith that endures the paradox of a world in which evil is real and inexplicable and yet where God can be discerned and addressed.
The most profound expression of this faith is in the book of Job, where God speaks to a sufferer of pains he has not deserved in the form of questions, not of answers. Underlying these questions is a rejection of the idea that the world was created to yield to the devices and desires of man. Faith is not certainty but the courage to live with and for God in the presence of uncertainty and to hear the voice of God even in the heart of the whirlwind.
One writer on the Holocaust records that in his researches he met a rabbi who had been through the camps and who miraculously seemed unscarred. He could still laugh. “How” he asked him, “could you see what you saw and still have faith? Did you have no questions?” The rabbi replied, “Of course I had questions. But I said to myself: if you ever ask those questions, they are such powerful questions that God will send you a personal invitation to Heaven to give you the answers. And I preferred to be here on earth with the questions than in Heaven with the answers.” That too is theology of a kind, with roots deep in the biblical tradition.
<b>Holocaust and halakhah</b><br>But there was a further Jewish response to suffering, different in kind from those we have considered. It was best expressed by Rabbi Joseph Soloveitchik, who discerned two different stances through which evil could be experienced, one passive, the other active. Man suffers: he is an object to whom things happen. But he also acts: he is a subject through whom things happen. As object, he asks “Why has this happened?” As subject, he asks a quite different question: “What then shall I do?” The two stances generate two views of history, as<i> goral</i> and <i>ye’ud</i>, fate and destiny. The first, in which man-as-object seeks to understand what has happened to him, has its place in Jewish thought as we have seen. But the second, in which man-as-subject seeks to discern how to act, is characteristic of what Soloveitchik sees as the primary mode of Jewish consciousness – <i>halakhah</i> or Jewish law. The halakhic personality refuses to be transformed by tragedy from subject to object. Instead it asks: “What shall the sufferer do to live in the midst of his suffering?”<sup class="footnote-marker">39</sup><i class="footnote">Rabbi Joseph Soloveitchik, “Kol Dodi Dofek,” in <i>Divrei Hagut ve-Ha’arakhah</i> (Jerusalem: World Zionist Organisation, 1981), 9–16.</i>
In this context the most striking literature to have emerged from the Holocaust is not theological but halakhic: the considered rulings of Jewish law given by rabbis in the ghettos and concentration camps in response to never-before-imagined questions.<sup class="footnote-marker">40</sup><i class="footnote">See, for example, Irving J. Rosenbaum, <i>The Holocaust and Halakhah</i>, (New York: Ktav, 1976); Robert Kirschner, <i>Rabbinic Responsa in the Holocaust Era</i> (New York: Schocken, 1985).</i> May a father purchase his son’s escape from the ovens, knowing that the quotas will be met and another child will die in his place? May a Jew in the Kovno ghetto recite the morning benediction, “Blessed are you, O Lord, Who has not made me a slave”? How should one celebrate Passover, the festival of freedom, in a concentration camp?
Over one who uninterruptedly studies God’s word, said the rabbis, even the angel of death can win no victory. Rarely can this proposition have been more poignantly vindicated than among the pious Jews of Auschwitz, Treblinka and Bergen Belsen who discovered that even there the word of God was not silent. It had an awe-inspiring resonance.
One particular example is worthy of attention. On 29 October 1941, 30,000 Jews assembled from the Kovno ghetto to face selection for death. One of those present, Reb Elya, posed a question to a rabbi among the crowd, Rabbi Ephraim Oshry. What is the correct form of blessing to be said on going to one’s death for the sanctification of God? The rabbi considered two possible textual variants and gave his ruling. Reb Elya then went through the crowd teaching others the correct form of the blessing over martyrdom. In the presence of the Gestapo two Jews, disciple and teacher, were able to stand discussing the Talmud, concerned that the moment of death be dedicated to Heaven by the precise words of blessing.<sup class="footnote-marker">41</sup><i class="footnote">Rosenbaum, <i>The Holocaust and Halakhah</i>, 61–8.</i>
Judaism had had its chronicles filled with martyrs before. But death then had held the dignity of choice. In the early Middle Ages Judah Halevi had remarked that throughout the religious persecutions of the past Jews could “escape degradation by a word spoken lightly,” but they refused to do so. What made the Holocaust different was that for the first time Jews had no choice. Yet by insisting on making a blessing over a death that seemed to defy all meaning, Reb Elya was making an ultimate affirmation. There is no point at which evil can turn man from subject to object, no situation which cannot be the occasion of a religious act.
<b>Survival and redemption</b><br>But there is one final theme in Jewish thought whose invisible presence is crucial to an understanding of post-Holocaust Jewish history. In this case, though, let us approach it obliquely through a dialectical encounter between modern theology and an historic moment.
It was in 1967, in the weeks surrounding Israel’s Six-Day War, that an extraordinary transformation took place in Jewish sensibilities. In the anxious weeks before the war, with Israel surrounded and apparently abandoned, facing the threat of being driven into the sea, it seemed as if a second Holocaust was in the making. It was then that the memory of the first, so traumatic for two decades, broke through with terrible force, in the form of an imperative: <i>never again</i>.
Israel’s sudden victory released a flood of messianic emotion. For some it seemed as if the beginning of redemption had arrived. When the mood subsided a deeper sense began to form: that the State of Israel was a powerful Jewish affirmation of life, a determination never again to suffer the role of victim. Virtues which had long been at the heart of Judaism in exile – powerlessness, passivity, martyrdom, trust – had been overthrown. They now seemed, in retrospect, to be unwitting compliance in genocide. A quite new way of speaking about the Holocaust began to emerge.
Its most articulate spokesman was Emil Fackenheim, and he gave the mood of the moment its most famous expression. The Shoah was not to be understood. But it was to be responded to. Auschwitz yielded a command. Fackenheim invoked the traditional concept of the 613 commandments that constituted biblical Judaism. There had now been added a 614th command: “The authentic Jew of today is forbidden to hand Hitler yet another, posthumous victory.”<sup class="footnote-marker">42</sup><i class="footnote">Fackenheim,<i> The Jewish Return into History</i>, 22.</i>
The imperative was Jewish survival as such. He explained: “I confess I used to be highly critical of Jewish philosophies which seemed to advocate no more than survival for  survival’s sake. I have changed my mind. I now believe that in this present, unbelievable age, even a mere collective commitment to Jewish group-survival for its own sake is a momentous response, with the greatest implications.” It was, he said, “a profound, albeit as yet fragmentary, act of faith in an age of crisis to which the response might well have been either flight in total disarray or complete despair.”<sup class="footnote-marker">43</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid.<i>, 21–22.</i></i> Fackenheim spoke to a new Jewish consciousness. There was a sense, shared by many, that the universalist vision that had driven Jews of the nineteenth century to “normalise” the Jewish situation was over. Jews had been singled out by the Final Solution, not for what they did or what they believed but for what they were. Israel itself had become isolated in the Middle East. A biblical phrase first uttered by the prophet Balaam suddenly came to seem an inexorable fate. Israel was “a people that dwells apart, not reckoned among the nations.”<sup class="footnote-marker">44</sup><i class="footnote">Numbers 23:9.</i>
Only after 1967 could this be seen as something other than a tragic fate. The State of Israel’s victory, her determination to survive and the intense involvement of Jews everywhere in her fate, all combined to place Jewish peoplehood and survival at the centre of the religious drama. It was as if, by re-entering history and exercising power, Jews had exorcised the ghosts of powerlessness. Successfully emerging from a second trauma they could at last articulate their thoughts about the first.
But there was a further stage in the dialectic. In the twenty years since Fackenheim’s commandment to survive, it has become clear that not all sectors of the Jewish world have heeded its call. In the Diaspora, Jewish birthrates fell to below-replacement levels. The momentum of assimilation has accelerated. Intermarriage rates have risen. Frustrating Hitler has failed as an effective rationale for Jewish survival.
One group of Jews, though, has obeyed Fackenheim’s command to the letter. They have had children in great numbers. They have rebuilt their lost worlds. They have proved themselves the virtuosi of survival. The irony is that they are a group who would deny the entire basis of Fackenheim’s thought. They are the ultra-religious, for whom piety, not peoplehood, is the dominant value, and to whom secular survival is not Jewish survival at all.
There is a point at which theology has direct bearing on demography. Fackenheim has written poignantly about what it means to have Jewish children after the Holocaust. More than a million children died, not because of who they were but because of who their grandparents were. “Dare we <i>morally</i> raise Jewish children,” asks Fackenheim, “exposing our offspring to a possible second Auschwitz decades or centuries hence? And dare we <i>religiously not</i> raise Jewish children, completing Satan’s work on his behalf?” He adds, “My soul is aghast at this impossible choice, unprecedented in the annals of faith anywhere.”<sup class="footnote-marker">45</sup><i class="footnote">Fackenheim,<i> The Jewish Return into History</i>, 48.</i>
But in this last statement Fackenheim is significantly mistaken. The Talmud records that just such a dilemma was faced by Jews in the second century CE, having experienced the destruction of the Temple, the brutal suppression of the Bar Kochba rebellion and the Hadrianic persecutions. A statement in the name of Rabbi Ishmael reads: “From the day that a government has come to power which issues cruel decrees against us and forbids us to observe the Torah and its commands…we ought by rights to bind ourselves not to marry and beget children, with the result that the seed of Abraham our father [the Jewish people] would come to an end of its own accord.”<sup class="footnote-marker">46</sup><i class="footnote">Babylonian Talmud,<i> Bava Batra</i> 60b.</i> This haunting passage tells us that there were profoundly religious Jews like Rabbi Ishmael who believed that on rational grounds one should not bring Jewish children into a world which had experienced nightmare. But Rabbi Ishmael added that were this to be issued as a ruling it would not be obeyed, for the faith of ordinary Jews transcends logic.
Does this mean that it is an irrational faith? The rabbis implicitly posed the question elsewhere in the form of a projected dialogue between two biblical figures, Amram and his daughter Miriam, at the time of Pharaoh’s decree that every male Israelite child should be cast into the river and drowned.<sup class="footnote-marker">47</sup><i class="footnote">Babylonian Talmud,<i> Sotah</i> 12a.</i> Amram and the other Israelite men, according to rabbinic tradition, thereupon divorced their wives and refused to have children. Amram’s daughter protested. The decision, she said, was worse than Pharaoh’s decree. It condemned both boys and girls. It deprived them of both this world and the next. Amram relented and he and his wife had a son: Moses. The implication is clear. From faith comes redemption. Trust in the future is neither rational nor irrational. Rather it is, in crisis, the critical test of religious courage.
Against the backdrop of falling Jewish marriage and birthrates Orthodox Jews, in particular those of the Chassidic and yeshiva communities, have dedicated themselves after the Holocaust to having large families. This is surely not unrelated to the fact that they, above all, adhere strenuously to the traditional tenets of Jewish faith. They deny absolutely Fackenheim’s claims that the Holocaust is a <i>novum</i> in Jewish history, that it reveals a new 614th command, and that after the Shoah Jews are bidden to survive for survival’s sake. Precisely because the dilemmas raised by the Holocaust are not unprecedented, they invite the classic response of Jewish faith, namely to have trust in the future and to bring it into being.
Again we are reminded of the book of Job. Job, having heard God in the whirlwind, recovers faith, though it is a faith without answers. The book then ends with a concluding chapter in which Job’s fortunes are restored. At the beginning Job’s sons and daughters died. At the end, he has new sons and daughters. To some readers this epilogue had seemed unconvincing, as if Job’s sufferings could be unwritten by a happy ending. To a post-Holocaust generation the epilogue is disclosed in its full profundity. Job has no answers, but he has been lifted beyond his personal tragedy by the knowledge that he can still speak and be spoken to by God. This gives him the strength to go on living and have children after catastrophe.
That is the kind of faith manifest in traditionalist responses to the Holocaust. Rather than engaging in theological reflection on the Holocaust, the survivors of the Chassidic and yeshiva communities of Eastern Europe concentrated on having children to replace a lost generation and rebuilding their shattered townships and institutions in Israel and America, as if to say that death is redeemed only in new life.
The word “redeemed” brings us finally to the concept that has lain just beneath the surface of our discussion: the resurrection of the dead. Early rabbinic Judaism did not formulate principles of Jewish faith. Its energies went into the articulation of law, not dogma. Nonetheless a Mishnah rules that one who denies the resurrection of the dead has no share in the world to come.<sup class="footnote-marker">48</sup><i class="footnote">Mishnah,<i> Sanhedrin 10:1.</i> The Mishnah goes further and rules that one who denies that the resurrection of the dead is <i>derived from the Torah</i> has no share in the world to come.</i> This was, for the rabbis, an indispensable requirement of belief. Necessarily so, for Judaism was predicated on the idea of divine justice, yet the sages lived in a world from which it seemed to be absent. Halakhah rejected the mystical idea that evil, stripped of our veil of ignorance, would turn out to be good in disguise. To be sure, this idea is present in Judaism. But Jewish law rules that though one must pronounce a blessing over evil as well as over good, they are not the same blessing.<sup class="footnote-marker">49</sup><i class="footnote">Mishnah, <i>Berakhot</i> 9:2, 5.</i> The fact of evil could not be denied. If there was justice, it lay in the future. But the existence of divine justice was the faith on which Judaism staked its very being. Therefore if anything was certain, it was that a time would come – in the form of the messianic age or the resurrection of the dead – in which the moral dislocation of the world would be righted. The past would be redeemed.
Whether we speak of the individual birth of Jewish children or the collective rebirth of Israel as a nation, the strongest metaphor to emerge in the wake of the Holocaust is that of resurrection. Rabbi Elchanan Wasserman’s dying words have not ceased to reverberate, that “The fire which burns our bodies will be the fire that restores the Jewish people.” Another rabbi, Yissachar Shlomo Teichtal, shortly before his murder in Auschwitz in 1944, wrote in a similar vein. “Now if we shall arise and ascend to Zion we can yet bring about a <i>tikkun</i> [‘mending,’ restitution] of the souls of the people Israel who were murdered as martyrs since it is on their account that we are being stimulated to return to our ancestral inheritance… Thus we bring about their rebirth.”<sup class="footnote-marker">50</sup><i class="footnote">Quoted in Fackenheim, <i>To Mend the World</i>, 255.</i>
To the biblical paradigms of the “suffering servant” of Isaiah and the book of Job must therefore be added the vision of Ezekiel who witnessed a valley of dry bones and saw them come to life again: “Then he said to me: Son of man, these bones are the whole house of Israel. They say, Our bones are dried up and our hope is gone; we are cut off. Therefore prophesy and say to them, This is what the Lord God says: O my people, I am going to open your graves and bring you up from them; I will bring you back to the land of Israel.”<sup class="footnote-marker">51</sup><i class="footnote">Ezekiel 37:11–12.</i> This too has been part of the Jewish experience after the Holocaust. The messianic age has not come. The past has not been redeemed. The cries of the victims still haunt the Jewish imagination. But a kind of rebirth has taken place, nonetheless, and with it the start of the “mending” of a broken world.
<b>Renewing the covenant</b><br>An analysis of contemporary Jewry and Judaism must begin with the Holocaust because in it, the covenantal people came face to face with the possibility of its own extinction. It took several decades before theologians felt able freely to articulate their thoughts about it. In some circles, silence is still felt to be the best, perhaps the only, response.
The Holocaust reveals to the full the problematic nature of the religious interpretation of history. It has not yielded a single meaning but a vast multiplicity, of which only a narrow range has been touched on here. In the absence of prophecy there are no such things as events which carry with them their own interpretation. And yet Judaism must continue to wrestle with the problem. For one of its primary expressions is narrative: telling the story of the covenantal people through time. Judaism is not simply a faith. It is a faith embodied in a particular people, the way of life it lives and the path it takes through the complex map of history.
Reflection on the Shoah reveals two significant facts about contemporary Jewish existence. The first is the absence of a shared set of Jewish meanings which alone might have allowed the Holocaust to be incorporated into collective Jewish memory. For the religious believer, the Holocaust confirms his faith; for the unbeliever it confirms his lack of faith. For the radical it creates a <i>novum</i> in history; for the traditionalist it recalls earlier catastrophes. For the pietist it testifies to God’s suffering presence in the world; for the secularist it proves His absence. These variant readings have shown no tendency to converge over time.
The fundamental divide is between those who see the Holocaust as an unprecedented event which shatters our previous understanding of the covenant, and those who insist that the covenant survives intact even in the valley of the shadow of death. Those who take the first view see <i>Yom ha-Shoah</i>, Holocaust Memorial Day, as a seminal addition to the Jewish calendar, a turning point in history. Those who take the second see the Holocaust as a new dimension in an ancient grief, such as that expressed on the ninth of Av, the day of mourning for the destruction of the Temples.<sup class="footnote-marker">52</sup><i class="footnote">For a discussion of this controversy, see Irving Greenberg, <i>The Jewish Way</i> (New York: Summit Books, 1988), 314–72.</i>
It is important to understand that the ambiguity of the Holocaust is not a feature of the event itself. It is a feature of the pre-understandings that different thinkers bring to it. For many centuries, from the destruction of the second Temple to the threshold of European emancipation, Jews shared a broad framework of belief that allowed them to understand their present situation, why it had come about and to what it eventually would lead. They were in exile because of their sins, and one day they would return to their land. That shared framework, which experienced stresses from the Spanish expulsion onwards, finally collapsed in the nineteenth century. Those who held to traditional beliefs were now not Jews <i>tout court</i>, but a subsection of the community known to their critics as “Orthodox” Jews. The multiplicity of responses to the Holocaust testifies to the still fragmented nature of Jewish consciousness, which lacks a common language through which a people might reflect on its fate. This preceded the Holocaust itself and has persisted since.
But the second fact is in sharp contradistinction to the first. For the Shoah confronted Jews with an inescapable reminder that though they might not share a common language, they shared a common fate. The Final Solution made no distinctions between Jews. The assimilated half- or quarter-Jew from Vienna or Berlin was cast into the same camp with the pious talmudist from Vilna and the bearded mystic from Berditchev. Jews had different self-definitions. But they were subject to the same other-definition. They might not see themselves, but they were seen by others, as members of the same people.
That fact has significantly shaped post-Holocaust Jewish awareness. The sense of being a people apart and alone, held together in a collective destiny and exercising collective responsibility, has grown. Its focus is the land and state of Israel, symbol and reality of the Jewish determination never again to be homeless, powerless victims. Israel, the land and state, has brought in its wake intractable problems, political, military and ethical; and over these, too, Jews have been divided. But this does not detract from its centrality in Jewish life worldwide. Nor is this a political proposition only. It is in its own right a theological proposition, albeit a controversial one. For the Bible and all subsequent Jewish thought had seen in the return of Jews to their land a new chapter – perhaps the ultimate one – in the covenantal story.
Jewish responses to the Holocaust, then, reveal not only the divisions that still exist in Jewish thought but also a new impetus towards unity: towards a clear and collective sense of peoplehood. For what is striking is that Jews of all kinds, religious and secular, have responded to their threatened destruction with a fierce determination to survive. “I will not die, but I will live,” says the Psalm,<sup class="footnote-marker">53</sup><i class="footnote">Psalms 118:17.</i> and that has been the Jewish response to the journey through the valley of the shadow of death. There may be no common understanding of the Jewish destiny, but there at a common conviction that it must be continued. Faced with its eclipse, the Jewish people has reaffirmed its covenant with history. The story of contemporary Jewry begins with what in retrospect is a not unremarkable fact: that the people Israel lives and still bears witness to the living God.

Chapter 3; Israel; Between Exile and Redemption

<big><strong><i>Israel: Between Exile and Redemption</i></strong></big>
The Holocaust raised in its most acute form the question of the interpretation of suffering. But the founding of the State of Israel in 1948 raised the no less intractable question of the interpretation of redemption. Biblical Judaism is a religion of history, for the covenant expresses itself in the path traced out by the children of Israel as they respond to the divine command, and by the answering response of God. History is the arena in which the fidelity or faithlessness of the covenantal people is rewarded or punished by national security on the one hand, defeat and dispersion on the other.
Ever since the first century CE the contours of that history had been clear. The Jewish people was, as the liturgy declared, in exile because of its sins. It would one day repent and be forgiven and would return to its land. This vision was already present in the concluding chapters of the book of Deuteronomy. Disobedience to the terms of the covenant would bring about catastrophe. The people would lose their national sovereignty. They would go into captivity, and there suffer indescribable horrors. Eventually they would reflect on their situation and conclude, “Have not these disasters come upon us because our God is not with us?”<sup class="footnote-marker">1</sup><i class="footnote">Deuteronomy 31:17.</i> They would return to God and God would return to them. “Then the Lord your God will bring you back from captivity and have compassion on you and gather you again from all the nations where He scattered you. Even if you have been banished to the most distant land under the heavens, from there the Lord your God will gather you and bring you back.”<sup class="footnote-marker">2</sup><i class="footnote">Deuteronomy 30:3–4.</i>
In the context of these expectations, the return of Jews to the land of Israel over the past century and the restoration of sovereignty in the form of the State of Israel called out for theological interpretation. Here surely was the empirical realisation of the biblical promise, cherished for some 1,800 years. The close succession of the Holocaust and the birth of the state seemed to recapitulate the classic terms of covenantal history: threatened extinction and national rebirth, the dark night of exile followed by the dawn of redemption. It was a theme deeply embedded in Jewish consciousness, familiar to Jews from the book of Exodus and the biblical prophecies of exile and return. It was the narrative annually recited on the festival of Passover.
The mass immigrations of Jews seemed to carry self-evident biblical echoes. A boat carrying survivors from the concentration camps to the new land was named the <i>Exodus</i>. When in 1949 the Jews of the Yemen were airlifted to Israel they saw their rescue as the biblical promise that they would be borne back “on eagles’ wings.” The successive waves of arrivals, from Iraq, Ethiopia and the Soviet Union, held an epic, scriptural, providential quality that impressed itself on religious and secular minds alike. This was no ordinary immigration. It was the “ingathering of exiles” for which Jews had prayed daily. It was, or seemed, a sudden return to the language of biblical history. After the Holocaust and the “hiding of the face of God,” it was as if providence had disclosed itself with the force of revelation. It was a religious event in a secular age.
But it is here that the problem lies. In what sense does a historical process constitute a realisation of a religious text? It depends on how we interpret the reality, the text, and the concept of “realisation.” Even prior to these hermeneutic questions, we can frame some of the dimensions of the problem. Firstly, not all Jews have returned to Israel. A majority continues to live in the diaspora, and there are more Jews in the United States than in Israel itself.
Secondly, many of the expectations recorded in the biblical and rabbinic literature have not been fulfilled. The State of Israel has not been accompanied by an era of universal peace and justice. Nor has it heralded the return of Jews to their religious vocation. To the contrary, Israel’s external history has been punctuated by wars, Arab enmity and international condemnation, and since 1967 the escalating military, moral and political problem of the Palestinians. Internally there have been fierce antagonisms between religious and secular Jews, which show no signs of abating. This is not how redemption was envisaged to unfold.
Thirdly, Israel raises in an acute and inescapable form one of the classic theological dilemmas of Judaism – the question of the relationship between divine providence and human history. The state was brought into being politically and defended militarily. Can the acts of man be seen as the acts of God? The problem is made all the more acute by the fact that for many secular Zionists and Israelis the state represents a conscious revolution against religious passivity, standing still and waiting for the salvation of the Lord. Can a rebellion against providence itself be an expression of providence? If not, how can the hand of God be glimpsed in the genesis of the state?
These problems coalesce in a fourth. Classically Judaism understood its history in terms of a polar opposition between exile and redemption. Exile meant geographical dispersion and spiritual alienation. Redemption meant ingathering and the return of Israel to its spiritual vocation as a people devoted to the worship of God: in short, the messianic age. Where, on this map, does Israel stand? Is it exile or redemption? Israel represents the return of Jews to the land in the context of a secular state. Seen from one perspective it is the beginning of redemption; from another, a new form of exile without dispersion. Could it therefore be an intermediate stage? But on just this crucial question Jewish theology was unclear. Is the transition from exile to redemption to take place suddenly or through a succession of stages? Naturally or supernaturally? Through human initiative or at divine behest? Intimations in both directions could be found in Judaism’s texts. Moreover there were several strands in secular Zionism that saw the creation of Israel precisely as a rejection of those texts and their authority over Jewish history.
Thus the State of Israel raises deep questions about Jewish destiny and the covenantal interpretation of history, questions that are unavoidable, for they touch on secular and religious Jews alike, those in Israel and those in the diaspora. Israel stands at the heart of contemporary Jewish self-definition. Yet what Israel is remains a deeply debated question. To understand it, we must take a slightly wider perspective in this chapter than in others to include some of the reflections that preceded the creation of the state. For it was in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries that the classic terms of the debate were set forth. So central are these issues that the whole course of modern Jewish thought can be understood as an extended midrash – a series of interpretive explorations – on the keywords of covenantal history: exile, redemption and the messianic age.
<b>Defining “home”</b><br>Ironically, the first impact of modernity on the messianic idea was a move away from the traditional concept of a national return to the promised land. In the first half of the nineteenth century, the early Reform congregations in Berlin and Hamburg created new liturgies in which the return to Zion was neutralised and reinterpreted.<sup class="footnote-marker">3</sup><i class="footnote">See, for example, Michael M. Meyer, <i>Response to Modernity: History of the Reform Movement in Judaism</i> (New York: Oxford University Press, 1988), 43–61.</i> The thinking behind these new prayer books was clear. Emancipation heralded a new era in Jewish history. But it was to take place in Europe, not Palestine.
The idea of a return to Zion was proving an embarrassment. It laid Jews open to the charge that they could not be fully loyal citizens of their host countries, for they expected ultimately to leave.<sup class="footnote-marker">4</sup><i class="footnote">See Jacob Katz, <i>Out of the Ghetto</i> (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1973), 80–103.</i> The first Reform thinkers were anxious to insist that Jewish messianic hope had now changed. The prayer for the ingathering of exiles was deleted. The messiah was not a person but an age, and the age itself no longer signified Jewish national restoration but, as a later pronouncement put it, “the establishment of the kingdom of truth, justice and peace among all men.”<sup class="footnote-marker">5</sup><i class="footnote">The passage is taken from the Pittsburgh Platform of 1885.</i>
Nineteenth-century Reform remained steadfast in its rejection of any form of Jewish nationalism. In 1885, the American Reform movement in its Pittsburgh Platform declared that “We consider ourselves no longer a nation, but a religious community, and therefore expect neither a return to Palestine…nor the restoration of any of the laws concerning the Jewish state.” In 1897, Reform rabbis protested against the convening of the first Zionist Congress, insisting again that Jews were a religious not a national group, and that with the destruction of the second Temple history had passed its verdict against the idea of a Jewish national destiny.<sup class="footnote-marker">6</sup><i class="footnote">See Paul Mendes-Flohr and Jehuda Reinharz, <i>The Jew in the Modern World: A Documentary History</i> (New York: Oxford University Press, 1980), 427–28.</i>
These sentiments provoked an immediate condemnation by the Orthodox rabbinate. In 1819, a group of distinguished rabbinical authorities, among them Rabbi Akiva Eger of Posen and Rabbi Moses Sofer of Pressburg, published their responses to the Hamburg liturgical reforms. The denial of the ingathering of exiles and the return to the land was, they argued, tantamount to heresy.<sup class="footnote-marker">7</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 150–55.</i> Nonetheless, Orthodox opposition did not express itself in terms of a positive commitment to what subsequently became known as Zionism. To the contrary: the Jewish return to Israel would be brought about by God, not man, and in the meanwhile Jews  remained bound, in Jeremiah’s words, to “Seek the peace of the city to which I have exiled you.”<sup class="footnote-marker">8</sup><i class="footnote">Jeremiah 29:7.</i> Samson Raphael Hirsch, the great spokesman of Western European Orthodoxy, was forthright in denying messianic activism. We pray, he wrote, for the end of exile, “but actively to accelerate its coming is prohibited to us.” Besides which, “Independent national life in Israel was never the essence or purpose of our existence as a nation, but only a means of fulfilling our spiritual mission.”<sup class="footnote-marker">9</sup><i class="footnote">Samson Raphael Hirsch, <i>The Nineteen Letters on Judaism</i>, translated by Bernard Drachma (New York: Feldheim, 1960), 107–8.</i>
But the first stirrings of a new approach were not long in coming. The nationalist fervour that swept Europe in the 1840s raised the question in some Jewish minds as to why emancipation should not proceed to self-emancipation, to the reconstitution of Jews as a nation in their own land. The first to articulate these thoughts were two Orthodox rabbis, Zvi Hirsch Kalischer and Yehudah Alkalai, effectively the precursors of Zionism.
Both wrote within the rabbinic tradition. But they gave it a distinctively naturalistic interpretation. The messianic age would not come suddenly through divine intervention. It would come gradually, through a process set in motion by human initiative. Kalischer was critical of those who removed the messianic hope from history into metahistory. God, he wrote, “will not send the Messiah from heaven in a twinkling of an eye, to sound the great trumpet for the scattered of Israel and gather them into Jerusalem.” Instead “the Redemption will begin by awakening support among the philanthropists and by gaining the consent of the nations to the gathering of some of the scattered of Israel into the Holy Land.”<sup class="footnote-marker">10</sup><i class="footnote">Arthur Hertzberg, <i>The Zionist Idea (</i>New York: Atheneum, 1980), 111.</i>
The originality of Alkalai and Kalischer lay in the fact that they translated the religious longing for the return to Zion into a practical programme for action. They proposed the creation of agricultural settlements in Palestine, schemes for the purchase of land from the Turks, the revival of Hebrew as a spoken language, and the creation of a network of leadership drawn from distinguished figures in world Jewry who would give the project the necessary political and economic direction. But despite the fact that theirs was a proposal to realise a dream Jews had articulated for some 1,800 years, they found little support among their fellow traditionalists.
<b>Activism and the secularisation of history</b><br>It is important to ask why. For at the heart of Zionism, from its beginnings to the present day, lies a paradox that needs explanation. The Orthodox circles that had been most critical of the German reformers’ abandonment of hope for the return to the land, became over the course of next century the most determined opponents of the Zionist movement. In the opposite direction assimilated western Jewry, which had given rise to anti-Zionism in the first place, was later to provide Zionism with its most successful leaders. Why was it that a movement that had its origins in the Jewish religious tradition quickly became secular, while the great religious spokesmen of Jewry for the most part condemned it as a rebellion against Judaism?
The reasons are complex, but one above all deserves attention. Biblical Judaism was, as we noted, a religion of history. The Pentateuch and the historical and prophetic books of the Bible trace the relationship between God and humanity through the shifting circumstances of national fate. The great covenantal addresses of Moses, Joshua and Ezra are recitations of the history of Israel seen through the eyes of faith. Yet remarkably, after the close of the biblical canon, the Jewish interest in history ceased. Between the first and fifteenth centuries CE there was virtually no historical writing by Jews.<sup class="footnote-marker">11</sup><i class="footnote">See Yosef Hayim Yerushalmi, <i>Zakhor: Jewish History and Jewish Memory</i> (Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press, 1982).</i> The vast literature of the mishnaic and talmudic periods, from the second to the sixth centuries CE, contains little direct historical material. Indeed, early rabbinic thought is marked by an almost wilful rejection of the normal categories of time. Midrash, the rabbinic genre of biblical interpretation, is systematically anachronistic, reading the personalities of the Bible as contemporaries of the sages. Rabbinic Judaism is a turning-away from historical consciousness.
The reason is not hard to seek. Jewish thought about the transition from past to future is dominated by the messianic idea, and messianism is an inherently revolutionary and explosive concept. Jewry had been shaken – had indeed brought disaster on itself – by the ill-conceived revolt against Rome in the first century CE and by the Bar Kochba rebellion in 135 CE. By the end of that period of messianic and apocalyptic politics, the Temple lay in ruins and any hopes for Jewish sovereignty in Israel were at an end. Jerusalem was now a Roman city named Aelia Capitolina; it was ornamented by theatres and temples dedicated to pagan gods; and Jews were barred admission. It was the beginning of the longest exile in Jewish history, and a national disaster without precedent.
From then on the religious literature is marked by a growing tendency to political quietism and accommodation, and a move from historical to metahistorical thought. The marriage of religion, politics and military activism had proved catastrophic. Henceforth Judaism and history would be separate domains. Salvation would come from God, not man. The messianic age, and with it the recovery of Jewish national life, belonged to an indefinite future which would be brought about by repentance and prayer, not military action. Rabban Yochanan ben Zakkai, who witnessed the destruction of the Temple, said: “If there is a plant in your hand when they say to you, ‘Behold the Messiah!’ carry on planting, and only then go out and greet him.”<sup class="footnote-marker">12</sup><i class="footnote"><i>Avot de-Rabbi Natan</i>, version B, chapter 31.</i> Waiting, not acting, became the normative political stance. Speculating on when the end of exile would come was discouraged. The string of false messiahs who punctuated the Jewish Middle Ages only served to reinforce the conviction that human interference with history was uniformly disastrous. Theologically it was a form of presumption known as “forcing the end.”
Clearly this marked a transformation of Jewish consciousness, an internalisation of exile. Many of the biblical narratives operate simultaneously on a natural and supernatural plane. Their world is that of empirical events invested with religious meaning. Only occasionally are the laws of nature suspended. Josephus records a debate between three Jewish groups in the late second Temple period on the relationship between history and Divine Providence. The Sadducees, he writes, believe that events are brought about by man. The Essenes, a pietistic sect, believe that events are determined by God. The Pharisees however maintain that there is an interaction between the two. “It was God’s good pleasure that there should be a fusion and that the will of man with his virtue and vice should be admitted to the council chamber of fate.”<sup class="footnote-marker">13</sup><i class="footnote">Josephus, <i>Antiquities</i>, 18,1,3.</i> The Pharisaic view allowed for human initiative in the shaping of history without denying the presence of the Divine. But while Pharisaism became the normative voice of Judaism, its political and military activism – dramatised by the Jerusalem Talmud in the person of R. Akiva, supporter of the Bar Kochba rebellion<sup class="footnote-marker">14</sup><i class="footnote">Jerusalem Talmud, <i>Ta’anit</i> 4:7.</i> – came to be seen as ill-advised, self-destructive and ultimately impious.
Thus Orthodoxy by the nineteenth century had been heir to a deeply embedded tradition of passivism. Thinkers as different as Moses Mendelssohn and Rabbi Abraham Isaac Kook noted that the long exile had resulted in a spiritualisation of Jewry to the point where concerted action to change their fate seemed impossible. Memories of the trauma created by the pseudo-Messiah Shabbetai Zevi in the seventeenth century were still present, and these added to the fear of any development that hinted at messianic politics. Instead the doctrine that seemed most cogent was the one that cautioned faith and trust, piety and prayer, and a decision to see the course of history as one of the “mysteries of the Almighty.”
The terms of exile had been set out in a talmudic passage in the tractate of <i>Ketubot</i>,<sup class="footnote-marker">15</sup><i class="footnote">Babylonian Talmud, <i>Ketubot</i> 111a.</i> according to which God had imposed three oaths on Israel and the nations. The people of Israel had promised not to rebel against the nations to which they had been exiled, nor to go back to the land of Israel “by a wall” (collectively and by force). In return the nations promised not to oppress Israel “too much.” Exile was thus something which could and should be endured until Heaven itself intervened to bring it to an end. This source was later to become a key text in the Orthodox battle against Zionism.
Kalischer and Alkalai had no difficulty in bringing biblical citations to show that the return to Zion could begin naturally and gradually though human initiative. But they were arguing against a major thrust of rabbinic thought, honed during the centuries, against collective Jewish activism of any kind. Thus a certain measure of secularisation was necessary before their vision could inspire a viable movement. It came in due course from a series of highly assimilated Jewish intellectuals, most notably Moses Hess, Leon Pinsker and Theodor Herzl.
<b>The birth of secular Zionism</b><br>The career of Hess, the first secular Zionist, was characteristic of the members of this group, and illustrates another irony of modern Jewish history. In the 1840s Hess had been a colleague of Karl Marx, a socialist who believed that nothing remained of the Jewish mission and that Jews should now assimilate. But in 1862 he published <i>Rome and Jerusalem</i>, one of the first and most powerful arguments for Jewish national revival.
In the intervening years he had become convinced that the assimilation of Jews into Europe was impossible. What stood in its way was antisemitism. Until then many Jews and Gentiles alike had argued that antagonism toward Jews was caused by their differentness. Once they were acculturated and had passed through what John Murray Cuddihy has called “the ordeal of civility,” hatred would evaporate. Hess was one of the first to realise that it was not so. By the 1860s significant numbers of Jews had undergone the courtship ritual with German culture, only to find their gestures unreciprocated. They had assimilated, converted or reformed their religion. But they were still regarded with distaste as Jews. Hess concluded that the class struggle was secondary: the race struggle was primary. His prescience here was extraordinary. Germany had already decided, he argued, that there could be no integration of Semitic and Aryan cultures. Individual emancipation of the Jews of Europe was therefore doomed to failure. The only solution was the collective emancipation of Jews in the land of Israel.
Ironically, then, it was the from the ranks of the most secularised Jews that the most effective call for Jewish nationalism came. It was they who felt most keenly the failure of conscious assimilation and they who were most radicalised by the encounter with racial (and hence inescapable) antisemitism. Leon Pinsker went through a similar conversion to Hess’s in the wake of the Russian pogroms of the 1880s, as did Theodor Herzl in the course of the Dreyfus affair in France in the 1890s. To be sure, they realised that to have any hold on the masses of Jewry, Zionism would have to be rooted in Jewish tradition and gain the support of the still religious public of East European Jewry. But throughout the last decade of the nineteenth century and the first of the twentieth, the leadership of the movement was increasingly dominated by the secularists. And despite Herzl’s efforts to keep it strictly confined to the political arena, leaving religion untouched, the more radical strand of cultural Zionism eventually came to the fore.
The leader of this group, Ahad Ha-Am, argued that the revolution implicit in Zionism could only come about if it were accompanied by a complete re-education of Jewish sensibilities. The central problem to which Zionism must attend, he insisted, was not the condition of Jews but of Judaism itself. Judaism must be reformulated to provide a viable national culture in a post-religious age. Ahad Ha-Am was himself conservative, anxious to preserve as much as possible of Jewish tradition by transmuting it from religion into culture, with national spirit taking the place of the commanding voice of God. But he was succeeded by more revolutionary minds. Micha Berdichevski, for example, argued that what was needed was a total rebellion against rabbinic values. The culture of the sword must replace the culture of the book. Jacob Klatzkin maintained that the hold of religion was now over and no attempt to revitalise it would succeed. Zionism could not be a framework for the realisation of Jewish values. Instead it was a declaration that henceforth a free national life was the only value. More utopian thinkers such as Nahman Syrkin, Ber Borochov and A. D. Gordon saw Zionism in Marxist or socialist terms.
<b>Religious responses</b><br>Inexorably, then, the movement which had been prefigured by Alkalai and Kalischer’s deeply religious longings was taking a pronouncedly secular, even anti-religious turn. What then were the responses of the Orthodox rabbinate? Even in the early years, between the 1860s and 1880s, when most Zionists were Orthodox Jews, most Orthodox authorities were anti-Zionist. The movement seemed to them a presumptuous form of “forcing the end.” From the 1890s onwards two more urgent considerations came to the fore. Firstly, the movement was now predominantly led by non-religious Jews, and religious principle militated against co-operation with heretics. Secondly, as it shifted from narrow political to broader cultural aims, it threatened to undermine the whole traditional basis of Jewish identity. To be a Jew, in the past, meant to be bound by Jewish law. Now, secular Zionists were suggesting, it meant being a member of a nation. A political, geographical or ethnic definition of Jewishness was supplanting the religious foundation of the past. As a number of rabbis accurately foresaw, this was a more fundamental onslaught against tradition than the Reform movement in Germany. That had been reform; this was revolution.
But Orthodox opposition to Zionism could not be unanimous, for two equally pressing reasons, one practical, the other theological. Practically, the plight of Eastern European Jewry could not be ignored. Exposed to pogroms, they needed a refuge. And theologically, the Zionist dream remained at bottom a religious one. The great rabbinic leaders of the recent past, among them the Vilna Gaon, R. Moses Sofer and several Chassidic luminaries, had advocated settlement of the Holy Land. Should this be ignored because it was now being propounded by secularists? One could go further. The fact that even assimilated Jews had been drawn into Zionism might be taken as a sign that Heaven itself was announcing the return. The signals were deeply conflicting, and Orthodoxy was divided into four broad patterns of response.
The first was a sharp rejection of Zionism and all that it represented. In 1900 a collection of rabbinic reactions was published under the title <i>Or la-Yesharim</i> (“Light for the Upright”). It was an impressive marshalling of forces against the movement, bringing together as it did both sides of East European Orthodoxy, Mitnagdim and Chassidim alike. The most systematic denunciation was given by the then leader of the Lubavitch Chassidim, R. Shalom Baer Schneersohn. The Zionists were, he argued, more threatening than previous generations of rebels against tradition. They at least knew that they were sinning, so there was a hope that one day they might repent. But the Zionists, by making nationalism a substitute for Torah, were redefining the terms of Judaism. There was therefore no hope that they would repent. This redefinition – the substitution of “culture” for religion – was essential to Zionism, Herzl’s disclaimers notwithstanding. Religious belief allowed Jews to come to terms with exile. It was an atonement for sins, to be ended only at the will of God. But Zionism needed to create a determination among Jews to end their exile, so it was forced to subvert religious belief. Zionism could not be religiously neutral. Acutely, Rabbi Schneersohn laid bare the secularising implications of Jewish nationalism and political activity.<sup class="footnote-marker">16</sup><i class="footnote">See Ehud Luz, <i>Parallels Meet</i> (Philadelphia, PA: Jewish Publication Society, 1988), 203–26.</i>
It was a view shared by almost all the major rabbinical figures of Eastern Europe. Rabbi Chaim Soloveitchik of Brisk called Zionism “a public sin,” and Rabbi Zadok ha-Cohen of Lublin termed it “the work of Satan.” Rabbi Meir Simcha ha-Cohen of Dvinsk declared that “the Zionist vision is driving Israel to destruction, Heaven forbid.” The saintly Rabbi Israel Meir ha-Cohen invoked the talmudic passage of the three oaths to remind his followers that the Jewish fate was to remain in exile until redeemed by God.<sup class="footnote-marker">17</sup><i class="footnote">For a collection of these and similar statements, see I. Domb, <i>The Transformation</i> (London: Hamadfis, 1958), 179–244.</i>
Not all those who saw the dangers of secular Zionism could be termed anti-Zionists. There were those who saw the importance of settlement in Palestine, both as a refuge from persecution and as a less assimilatory environment than Europe. They refused at all costs, however, to work alongside the secularists. And they rejected their interpretation of Jewish destiny and identity. Judaism was a religion, not a nationalism. Nor was there any religious significance to a Jewish state as such. It was the land, not the state, of Israel that was holy. Characteristic of this group, though of a later period, was Isaac Breuer (1883–1946), grandson of Samson Raphael Hirsch.<sup class="footnote-marker">18</sup><i class="footnote">For an English anthology of Breuer’s writings, see Isaac Breuer, <i>Concepts of Judaism</i>, edited by Jacob Levinger (Jerusalem: Israel Universities Press, 1974). For a recent study of Breuer’s thought see Alan Mittelman, <i>Between Kant and Kabbalah</i> (Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1990).</i> Breuer contrasted Zionism with what he called “Torah nationalism.” The former asserted the sovereignty of the nation, the latter the sovereignty of God. This was the second response, perhaps best termed non-Zionism.
Despite these differences, non- and anti-Zionists made common cause, coming together in 1912 to form Agudat Yisrael, an organisation designed to counter the impact of the Zionist movement. It was a significant moment, for it brought together for the first time West and East European Orthodoxy, widely different in their religious and cultural stances. Agudat Yisrael powerfully symbolised the threat Orthodoxy perceived in the profound change Zionism was bringing about in the conception of Jewish identity.
In the meanwhile, those Orthodox Jews who supported the Zionist enterprise determined on a new approach. Chief among them in the crucial decade of the 1890s were R. Samuel Mohilewer and R. Isaac Reines. Theirs was a quite different kind of religious Zionism from that articulated a generation earlier by Alkalai and Kalischer. That had been messianic; theirs was to be pragmatic. A sharp distinction was to be made between Zionism, which required human action in the immediate present, and divine redemption, which required human trust and belonged to a supernatural future. Zionism was to be stripped of all messianic resonances. It was concerned instead with providing a solution to a pressing practical problem, antisemitism and the persecution of Jews, particularly in Eastern Europe. It was a fulfilment of the command to save life. It had religious, but not messianic significance.
Mohilewer, and especially Reines, thus hoped to sidestep both objections voiced by the traditionalist rabbis, that Zionism was a secularisation of the messianic idea, and that in any case it was forbidden to work with the non-religious. In answer to the first, Reines insisted that the traditional idea of redemption had no connection with the practical task of providing a refuge for endangered Jews. So far did he distinguish between the two that he supported Herzl’s proposal in 1903 to settle Jews in Uganda, a plan inconceivable to those who saw an essential connection between Zionism and the biblical promise of return. In answer to the second, both men argued that when it came to saving life, religious differences were of no account. As R. Mohilewer put it in his letter to the first Zionist Congress, “Our attitude toward those among us who do not observe the religious precepts must be, as it were, as if fire had taken hold of our homes, imperilling our persons and our property. Under such circumstances would we not receive anyone gladly and with love who, though irreligious in our eyes, came to rescue us?”<sup class="footnote-marker">19</sup><i class="footnote">Hertzberg, <i>The Zionist Idea</i>, 402.</i>
To be sure, Reines and Mohilewer both believed that the physical return of Jews to their homeland would lead to a spiritual return to their religion. Judaism was in danger in the diaspora precisely because it was a minority faith in the midst of a secularising culture. Once Jews formed an autonomous society, it would be possible to restore religion to the centre of public life. In the meanwhile, despite its secularist tendency, it was necessary to act as part of the framework of organised Zionism, hoping to influence it from within. In 1902, Reines formed a movement, Mizrachi, whose aim was eventually summarised in the formula, “The land of Israel for the people of Israel according to the Torah of Israel.”
The third response, then, was a pragmatic and non-messianic religious Zionism. But the ingathering of exiles to the biblical land could hardly avoid a messianic interpretation, and it found its most powerful exponent in Rabbi Abraham Isaac Kook (1865–1935), the first Chief Rabbi of pre-state Israel.<sup class="footnote-marker">20</sup><i class="footnote">For a collection of R. Kook’s writings in English, see <i>Abraham Isaac Kook</i>, translated by Ben Zion Bokser (London: SPCK, 1979).</i>  Rabbi Kook was a mystic, and was thus able to draw on the rich vocabulary of Jewish mysticism to explain the apparent paradox of a redemptive process brought about by non-religious Jews. Appearance and reality are, for the mystic, two quite different things.
The disintegration of traditional Jewish life in Europe was, for R. Kook, a clear sign that exile was coming to an end. Exile means dislocation and detachment. All existence is infused with the presence of God, and His unity pulses through all creation. Secularism is possible only when we consider subjects and objects as things in themselves, unrelated to the totality of life. Exile as detachment is thus a cosmic phenomenon, as is its opposite, redemption. In concrete terms, exile had brought about a split between the spiritual and physical aspects of Jewish life. It had contracted Judaism into an excessively narrow spiritual domain and had robbed it of its natural connection with a land, a language and a culture. The secular Zionists, in revolt against religion, were in fact expressing an urge to recover the lost dimensions of Judaism. In a global perspective their rebellion was a necessary prelude to redemption. For once Jews returned to Israel, the synthesis between the physical and the spiritual would be reinstated, and the now secular forms of politics, art and science would be transmuted into dimensions of the sacred. Secular Zionism was thus a transient phenomenon. “Secular,” for Rabbi Kook, meant “not yet holy.”
Rabbi Kook was the most profound advocate of messianic Zionism. But it is precisely here, in the religious interpretation of history, that ambiguities become most acute. One of the key terms in his analysis is <i>ikveta de-meshicha</i>, “the footsteps of the messiah.” The phrase refers to the period of turmoil prior to the end of days. Rabbi Kook used it to give a positive interpretation of the work of the secular nationalists. They were driven, he said, by a love of the Jewish people and were engaged in the holy task of settling the land. The very fact that atheists were unwittingly fulfilling the will of God was itself a sign of the divine presence beneath the surface of Zionism. But the same term <i>ikveta de-meshicha</i> was used by a number of anti-Zionists, most notably Rabbi Elchanan Wasserman, to argue that Zionism was a force of evil. Prior to the end of days there would be a final confrontation between good and evil. Zionism would be shown to be an idolatrous falsehood. Redemption can only come from God, not man. The same concept applied to the same historical situation could yield diametrically opposed conclusions, depending on whether one gave an evolutionary or apocalyptic interpretation to pre-messianic time.
<b>The contemporary debate</b><br>The debate about the place of Israel – land, state and nation – was a seminal one, for it brought into sharp focus almost all the major themes in the Jewish encounter with modernity. Did Jews constitute a religious or a national group? Were the transformations of modernity yet another trial of exile or the beginning of the process of redemption? What exactly was the messianic age? Were emancipation and enlightenment a signal that Jews should stay in Europe or that they should leave? Was Zionism the work of God or Satan? Was secularisation a threat to Judaism or the recovery of a lost dimension of its collective life? Was history made by God or man or both? Were religious and non-religious Jews part of a shared enterprise, or opposed forces in a war of cultures? These questions went to the very heart of the Jewish destiny in the modern world, yet conflicting answers emerged, often from within the same textual tradition. The midrashic quest – the search for contemporary meaning in the canonical texts – which formed the intellectual dynamic of rabbinic Judaism, continued unabated into modernity. With this difference: that it now generated deep religious, political and cultural divisions as different groups enacted their variant readings in new forms of Jewish society.
The parameters of the debate were largely fixed by the early twentieth century, which is why we have focused thus far on controversies that preceded the state itself. The contemporary argument is no less fierce, and is made all the more acute in that it now takes place within the institutions and frameworks of an existing state. The lines of division are broadly speaking what they were a century ago, but the fissures have, if anything, deepened.
At one extreme, represented by Neturei Karta (“Guardians of the City”), is a small but intense group of anti-Zionists who continue the argument that secular nationalism is a form of idolatry, deeply corrupting of the Jewish vocation. The most articulate exponent of this view was Rabbi Joel Teitelbaum (1888–1981), leader of the Satmar Chassidim. As we saw in the last chapter, Rabbi Teitelbaum maintained that Zionism had been responsible for the Holocaust. Jews had broken their oath to wait patiently in exile, and as a result the nations had broken theirs, not to oppress Israel too much. The State of Israel was a demonic creation. Its government is secular and therefore has no religious significance. Religious Zionists compound the offence by seeing in Israel the beginning of redemption. This is a false messianism as dangerous as that of Shabbetai Zevi in the seventeenth century. Israel’s military and political activism constitute a flouting of the necessary religious posture of quietism and trust. Besides which, exile has a divine purpose which Zionism seeks prematurely to end. “By virtue of the exile of Israel among the nations, the glory of God will fill the earth.” The proof of these assertions is that the existence of the state has not, as Zionists predicted, ended hostility toward Jews. It has increased it. The wars Israel has had to fight are evidence of divine displeasure. “If the [Zionists] would only give up their state and government, they would undoubtedly remove thereby the wrath of God and all of these hardships would vanish.”<sup class="footnote-marker">21</sup><i class="footnote">See Alan Nadler, “Piety and Politics: The Case of the Satmar Rebbe,” <i>Judaism</i> 31:2 (Spring 1982), 135–52.</i>
Ironically, these Chassidic views find an echo in the writings of some Jewish secularists who take a diametrically opposed view of the relation between Jewish and religious identity. George Steiner, for example, has argued that the Jewish vocation is to remain in permanent exile until a metaphysical end of days. The Jewish homeland is the text, not a geographical territory. To be sure, the Bible speaks of a homecoming, but “not <i>now</i>, not necessarily in secular time.” Jews are destined to be “a pilgrim tribe housed not in place but in time, not rooted but millennially equipped with legs.” Israel, for Steiner, represents a betrayal of the classic values of Judaism: a distrust of nationalism and the value of the state, and a reflection of the military ethic of power.<sup class="footnote-marker">22</sup><i class="footnote">George Steiner, “Our Homeland, the Text,” <i>Salmagundi</i> (Winter/Spring 1985), 4–25.</i> Steiner’s views, despite their secularism, have a striking similarity to those of Rabbi Teitelbaum.
At the opposite extreme is the philosophy of Gush Emunim, a group inspired by Rabbi Abraham Kook and more particularly by his son, Rabbi Zvi Yehudah. Kook’s view that Zionism was part of a messianic process was predicated on the assumption that there would be a gradual symbiosis of the religious and secular elements of its culture and population. That has not happened, but something else did. The 1967 Six-Day War brought back within Israel’s domain the territories of Judea and Samaria. Above all it brought about the reunification of Jerusalem. To those who had been educated in the vision of the two Kooks, father and son, these seemed to be confirmations of <i>atchalta de-ge’ulah</i>, the onset of the redemptive process. Accordingly, Gush Emunim focused on land, settlement and “the commandment of conquest” as more cogent axes of the biblical vision than peace and religious return. As agents of the divine purpose in history, the instrumentalities of the state are endowed with holiness. This is a religious nationalism inspired by messianic politics.
<b>Non-messianic religious Zionism</b><br>Both extremes take the messianic perspective as determinative.<sup class="footnote-marker">23</sup><i class="footnote">See Menachem Kellner, “Messianic Postures in Israel Today,” <i>Modern Judaism</i> 6:2 (May 1986), 197–210; Chaim Waxman, “Messianism, Zionism and the State of Israel,” <i>Modern Judaism</i> 7:2 (May 1987), 175–92; Shubert Spero, “Does Traditional Jewish Messianism Imply Inevitability?,” <i>Modern Judaism</i> 8:3 (October 1988), 271–86.</i> Their view is that the State of Israel represents a massive transformation in the terms of Jewish life, and no change so radical can resist categorisation within the either/or of exile and redemption. For the anti-Zionists a humanly-inspired, secular and partial return cannot be redemption. Therefore it must be a new and deeper dimension of exile. For the messianic Zionists, a return cannot be exile. Therefore it is redemption, and its imperfect character is more apparent and temporary than lasting and real. The difficulty of charting a position between these two extremes is the classic dilemma of moderate religious Zionism. It is a formidable difficulty, for it requires reintroducing a historical perspective within the metahistorical framework of rabbinic thought. Can a religious expression be found for the recovery of Jewish sovereignty, without denying its significance altogether, but without at the same time lifting it to the plane of “the end of days”?
One attempt to do so was given by the influential Orthodox thinker, Rabbi Joseph Soloveitchik, in an essay entitled <i>Kol Dodi Dofek</i> (“The Sound of My Lover Knocking”).<sup class="footnote-marker">24</sup><i class="footnote">R. Joseph Soloveitchik, <i>Divrei Hagut ve-Ha’arakhah</i> (Jerusalem: World Zionist Organisation, 1981), 9–56.</i> The transition from Holocaust to national sovereignty was, for Rabbi Soloveitchik, a divine summons to respond to history. History is not the bearer of unambiguous messages. Instead, like the relationship between lover and beloved in the Song of Songs, it is a series of intimations that may or may not be recognised and reciprocated. God knocks on the door of human consciousness, and all depends on whether we rush to admit Him, or delay and find that the moment has passed.
The Holocaust, followed by the creation of the state, was such a moment. It posed for Jews the question of whether they would see the sequence of events as incidents of external fate or as a divine call to inward renewal. Rabbi Soloveitchik implicitly suggested that the messianic character of modern Jewish history depended on how Jews responded to it. Covenantal history is not made by acts of God alone. It is made by the interaction of God and man. At present, Jews were linked in what he called a “covenant of fate.” They had not yet been reunited in a “covenant of destiny.” The State of Israel therefore still lacked religious significance until Jews had internalised its religious imperative, a call to renew the covenant of destiny. “As a secular-historical entity that is not animated by any covenantal goal, the State does not excite me.”<sup class="footnote-marker">25</sup><i class="footnote">R. Joseph Soloveitchik, <i>In Aloneness, In Togetherness</i> (Hebrew), (Jerusalem: Orot, 1974), 430.</i> In biblical language, it was Exodus without Sinai. It was an event in secular history that had not yet penetrated to religious consciousness, and would not do so until it became the context of religious revival.
Two significant thinkers influenced by Rabbi Soloveitchik, his son-in-law Aharon Lichtenstein and the more radical David Hartman, have explored the religious possibilities of a non-messianic state. For Lichtenstein, the creation of a Jewish society as such has intrinsic significance. Judaism rejects the idea of religion as a purely private relationship between the individual and God, the “flight of the alone to the Alone.” A “spiritually oriented society” is “an indispensable condition for the fulfillment of the individual Jew.” Society is the vehicle of “personal and collective beatitude.” Israel therefore represents a necessary recovery of Judaism’s public domain.<sup class="footnote-marker">26</sup><i class="footnote">Aharon Lichtenstein, “Religion and State: The Case for Interaction,” in <i>Arguments and Doctrines</i>, edited by Arthur A. Cohen (New York: Harper and Row, 1970), 421–50.</i>
This too is the thrust of Hartman’s argument. Judaism, he argues, contains both a “covenant of intimacy” and a “covenant of social and political action.” It contains commands which link the individual to God, and others which bid him to build social, economic and political structures that bring the divine presence into the societal sphere. In the diaspora this second aspect is necessarily attenuated. To live outside Israel is to live in a predominantly non-Jewish society, one in which the public culture and its institutions are governed by other norms. Israel “expands the possible range of halakhic involvement in human affairs beyond the circumscribed borders of home and synagogue to the public domain.”<sup class="footnote-marker">27</sup><i class="footnote">David Hartman, “The Challenge of Modern Israel to Traditional Judaism,” <i>Modern Judaism</i> 7:3 (October 1987), 229–52; <i>Conflicting Visions</i> (New York: Schocken, 1990).</i>
These formulations, though, are difficult to translate into the reality of the contemporary state, which remains predominantly secular in orientation. When Judaism enters the public domain it is often in the form of sectarian politics or angry clashes with Israeli secularists. Evidence of Lichtenstein’s “collective beatitude” or Hartman’s expansion of halakhic involvement are hard to find. There is thus a certain logic to the controversial position maintained for close to half a century by the Israeli thinker Yeshayahu Leibowitz.<sup class="footnote-marker">28</sup><i class="footnote">Leibowitz’s major essays are collected in <i>Judaism, the Jewish People and the State of Israel</i> (Hebrew) (Jerusalem: Schocken, 1976); <i>Faith, History and Values</i> (Hebrew) (Jerusalem: Hebrew University Press, 1982).</i> Leibowitz denies any religious significance to the state. Israel constitutes a single negative proposition: that Jews have refused to carry on being ruled by Gentiles. Beyond that it signifies nothing. The state as such, like all states, is an intrinsically secular entity and of instrumental value only. Leibowitz has been an untiring advocate of the formal separation of religion and state and has argued that their association leads to a variety of offences. It corrupts the religious establishment; it encourages the development of pseudo-messianism; and it results in the religious worship of military force, the very opposite of traditional Jewish values.
Leibowitz’s position, though, illustrates one dilemma of the religious encounter with the state. For, as he was one of the first to argue, a state of Israel <i>does</i> make a crucial difference to Judaism: not from the perspective of divine involvement in history, but from that of human responsibility for shaping a society. Jewish law had developed under conditions of exile. Thus it never had to contend with problems of maintaining an economy, a political system and a defence force. It now had to do so, and this meant new halakhic legislation. The religious establishment, according to Leibowitz, could not be relied on to rise to the challenge. It was imprisoned in exilic modes of thought. Besides which, it was a captive of the state. Leibowitz believed such change would occur naturally and <i>de facto</i>. But this has not happened. To the religious, Leibowitz seemed to be advocating reform of exactly the kind that Orthodoxy rejected. To the secular, he seemed to be suggesting rule by religious law of exactly the kind that they had come to Israel to avoid.
The gradualist position, argued variously by Soloveitchik, Lichtenstein, Hartman and Leibowitz, depends on Israel becoming the context of some form of religious renaissance. In a sense it has, but mainly within the communities of the non- and anti-Zionists and the religious nationalists. Israel, in other words, has not resisted the sectarianising thrust of modernity, in which religion retains a powerful force over sub-communities but fails to provide an overarching framework of shared values. This has lent a certain power to non-Zionist Orthodoxy, represented by majority of the yeshiva community and by political parties such as Agudat Yisrael.<sup class="footnote-marker">29</sup><i class="footnote">For the tensions and paradoxes this has created, see Aviezer Ravitzky, “Exile in the Holy Land: The Dilemma of Haredi Jewry,” in Peter Medding (ed.), <i>Israel: State and Society, 1948–1988 [Studies in Contemporary Jewry, V]</i> (New York: Oxford University Press, 1989), 89–125.</i>
These circles continue the line established by the Central and East European opponents of secular Zionism at the turn of the century. Only a messianic state could have religious significance. The present secular state clearly falls outside this definition. It follows that Israel is still “exile,” spiritually if not geographically or politically. Statehood has changed the context but not the substance of the religious struggle, namely preserving fidelity to Torah in an age of non-belief.
Religious non-Zionists tend to take a less optimistic view of the thrust of modern Jewish history than do religious Zionists. While the latter focus on Israel’s role in enhancing a sense of peoplehood and return even among non-religious Jews, the former note its effect in secularising Jewish existence.<sup class="footnote-marker">30</sup><i class="footnote">See for example, Amnon Levi, “The Haredi Press and Secular Society,” in <i>Religious and Secular: Conflict and Accommodation between Jews in Israel</i>, edited by Charles Liebman (Jerusalem: Keter, 1990), 21–44.</i> Undeniably, both are valid perceptions. But as Israel’s internal conflicts have continued, it has been easier to see the interplay between religion and society in terms of confrontation rather than synthesis. This is the non-Zionist position, and it has emerged with considerable force – ideological, demographic and political – in recent years.
Orthodox attitudes to Israel, then, have shown no tendency to converge over time. This applies not only to large philosophical questions but also to fundamental issues of Jewish law as they apply to the state. Four examples epitomise the problem. The first concerns religious expressions of the fact of statehood. Israel’s Chief Rabbinate formulated a prayer for the state which describes it as <i>reshit tzemichat geulatenu</i>, the “first flowering of our redemption,” an important theological claim which sets contemporary Israel at least at the beginning of a messianic process. It also recognises <i>Yom ha-Atzmaut</i>, Israel’s Independence Day, as a religious festival marked by special prayers, thus seeing it as a phenomenon of the divine involvement in history. Neither of these institutions is recognised in non- and anti-Zionist religious circles.<sup class="footnote-marker">31</sup><i class="footnote">See, for example, Menachem Kasher, <i>Ha-Tekufah ha-Gedolah (</i>Jerusalem: Torah Shelemah Institute, 1968); Bernard Kasper, “Reshit Zemichat Geulatenu,” in Jonathan Sacks (ed.), <i>Tradition and Transition</i> (London: Jews’ College Publications, 1986), 107–16.</i>
The second concerns the source of authority of secular legislation in the state. At least three views have been taken. The first sees laws passed by the Knesset, Israel’s parliament, as having the same status as those legislated by a non-Jewish government. They are to be obeyed under the rule of <i>dina de-malkhuta dina</i>, “the law of the land is law.” On this view, there is no difference between Israel and elsewhere or between a Jewish and a non-Jewish legislature. Since both are secular, neither has religious significance; their authority derives from other sources. The second sees the Knesset as a continuation of Jewish powers of self-government in exile. It has the status, in Jewish law, of <i>bnei ha-ir</i>, the “members of a town,” who have the power, based on mutual agreement, to create and impose local legislation (<i>takkanot ha-kahal</i>). On this view, Israel is a recovery of the limited powers of autonomy Jews held from the collapse of monarchy to the beginning of emancipation. The third sees Israel’s parliament as functionally equivalent to biblical <i>malkhut</i>, “monarchy,” which has authority in matters of national security and welfare. On this view, Israel is a more fundamental development in Jewish life, a return perhaps to the order established by the early Hasmonean kings.<sup class="footnote-marker">32</sup><i class="footnote">See Mark Washofsky, “Halakhah and Political Theory: A Study in Jewish Legal Response to Modernity,” <i>Modern Judaism</i> 9:3 (October 1989), 289–310; Gerald Blidstein, “The State of Israel in  Halakhic Thought,” in Schubert Spero and Yitzchak Pessin (eds.), <i>Religious Zionism After Forty Years of Statehood</i> (Jerusalem: World Zionist Organisation, 1989), 254–76.</i>
The third debate concerns the proper means of advancing the Judaic character of Israeli society. One school seeks to do so through legislation passed by the Knesset. Judaism is, after all, a religion of law, and laws are meant to be enforced. Another school of thought, however, argues against this. To be sure, Judaism is a religion of law and recognises the necessity of coercion. But this principle cannot be directly applied to the modern State of Israel. A secular legislature is an inappropriate vehicle for religious law. Moreover, the coercion of individuals presupposes consent on the part of the majority, and this is lacking in present-day Israel, composed as it is of a largely non-religious public. The enforcement of religion would not advance its standing among the general public but instead create a wave of anti-religious protest. In Jewish law, the rightness or wrongness of actions is not judged by their consequences; but the use of sanctions is. An attempt to enforce Jewish law by Knesset legislation which would create widespread resentment and bring religion into disrespect is therefore not to be undertaken. More fundamentally, freedom of the individual is itself a Judaic value to be set against the equal but conflicting value of enforced obedience. Advocates of this second approach argue for a disengagement of religious groups from the party political process and instead propose education rather than legislation as the route to a more religious society.<sup class="footnote-marker">33</sup><i class="footnote">See Nachum Rabinovitch, “The Torah Way,” in Spero and Pessin (eds.), <i>Religious Zionism After Forty Years of Statehood</i>, 277–308.</i>
The fourth issue concerns the religious dimension of a possible political settlement between Israel and its Arab neighbours, the question of “land for peace.” Here, one side sees Israel’s expanded borders, the result of the 1967 and 1973 wars, as a fulfilment of the biblical command to conquer and settle the land. The territories, as part of “biblical” Israel, are non-negotiable. Others, attaching no sanctity to land as such, see the pursuit of peace as taking priority over the retention of territory. Between these there is a variety of intermediary positions, some holding that the ceding of land is intrinsically harmful to security and thus forbidden; others, that Jewish law must in such a case be instructed by military and political assessments of particular proposals; some arguing that Israel’s present position <i>vis-à-vis</i> the Palestinians is morally and spiritually untenable; others, that Jewish law is built on the principle of reciprocity and that Israel may not make a unilateral gesture to those who deny its right to exist.<sup class="footnote-marker">34</sup><i class="footnote">See, for example, Immanuel Jakobovits, <i>Territory for Peace?</i> (London: Office of the Chief Rabbi, 1990).</i>
These unresolved arguments reveal the extent to which Israel has raised profound dilemmas for religious thought at all levels, from the most broadly metaphysical to the most concretely political.
<b>Secularists in a quandary</b><br>But the problem of reconciling reality and vision continues to perplex secular no less than religious Zionists. The utopian scenarios of Syrkin, Borochov and A. D. Gordon have not unfolded. Into its fifth decade of statehood, Israel has moved beyond the dreams of a Marxist or socialist experiment into the less ideological territory of technology and suburbanisation. Individual rather than collective beatitude marks this new phase, and secular Zionists have been disturbed on the one hand by the failure of Israel to reach a <i>modus vivendi</i> with its Arab neighbours, and on the other by the search of young Israelis for personal meaning in a return to religious roots. What then is left of secularism in an ideological vision rather than a sociological fact?
Some, like the writer A. B. Yehoshua, continue to stress the minimalist vision of Jacob Klatzkin. Israel represents no more than the negation of the diaspora. Life in exile, for Yehoshua, is an untenable option for two reasons. Firstly, it is unviable. The Holocaust proved that. It constitutes “the final decisive proof of the failure of diaspora existence.” Secondly, it is psychologically or spiritually self-deceptive. Jews cling to exile, he argues, out of a passion to be set apart, different, “chosen.” But this desire is pathological and can only be maintained by the “neurotic” solution of always living on the brink of danger. Jews are different, but so too are every other people. In principle, there is no such thing as a unique differentness. Israel allows Jews to live a normal existence without constant fear of benign or malign extinction, through assimilation or antisemitism.<sup class="footnote-marker">35</sup><i class="footnote">A.B. Yehoshua, <i>Between Right and Right</i> (New York: Doubleday, 1981).</i>
A similar view is held by the novelist Amos Oz. Israel for him is the context of a new expression of Judaism as an open-ended civilisation evolving in ways that cannot be constrained in advance by Jewish law or any prescription of Jewish theology. “A living civilisation is a drama of struggle between interpretations, outside influences and emphases, an unrelenting struggle over what is the wheat and what is the chaff, rebellion for the sake of innovation, dismantling for the purpose of reassembling differently.”<sup class="footnote-marker">36</sup><i class="footnote">Amos Oz, <i>In the Land of Israel</i> (London: Fontana, 1983), 137.</i> This is strongly reminiscent of Klatzkin’s insistence that “In longing for our land we do not desire to create there a base for the spiritual values of Judaism. To regain our land is for us an end in itself – the attaining of a free national life.”<sup class="footnote-marker">37</sup><i class="footnote">Hertzberg, <i>The Zionist Idea</i>, 319.</i>
But this fails to address one of the central questions posed by a pluralistic culture, namely, what holds such a culture together? Pluralism can thrive to the extent that there are core values held in common which mark out a shared conception of the public good. When there are no such values, pluralism tends to fragment society into a series of conflicting ghettos, each of which seeks to bring its vision to bear on others. The result is a cultural equivalent of Hobbes’s “state of nature,” a war of all against all. Such a realisation lay behind the agreement between Ben Gurion and the religious parties prior to Israel’s independence, that certain public aspects of the state would bear a religious character. The Jewish Sabbath would be the official day of rest. Public transport would not run on that day. Jewish dietary laws would be maintained in state institutions. The government would maintain a religious school system alongside the secular one, and matters of personal status would be determined by religious courts. This, the so-called “status quo,” has continued to govern Israel’s public life, giving it at least a minimal content to its character as a Jewish state.
Some secularists, most notably the philosopher Eliezer Schweid, have pursued the argument further along lines indicated by Ahad Ha-Am. For the “status quo” concerns only law, not the culture that underlies it. Israel, Schweid argues, can develop a national culture only by appropriating the values of Jewish tradition. Without a distinctive culture, Israel cannot inspire commitment among its population. It would then simply be one place among others where Jews might live. Secularism had failed in Israel because it had attempted the impossible, to create a form of Jewish identity with all religious forms edited out. A religious‒humanist synthesis must be developed in which the law of the land grew out of the classic rabbinic sources, and culture was nourished by a deep grounding in the religious texts. Schweid’s proposal is the point at which secularism comes closest to the kind of religious liberalism espoused by David Hartman.<sup class="footnote-marker">38</sup><i class="footnote">See Eliezer Schweid, <i>Israel at the Crossroads</i> (Philadelphia, PA: Jewish Publication Society, 1973); <i>Judaism and the Solitary Jew</i> (Hebrew) (Tel Aviv: Am Oved, 1975); <i>Judaism and Secular Culture</i> (Hebrew) (Tel Aviv: Kibbutz Hame’uchad, 1981); <i>The Land of Israel: National Home or Land of Destiny</i> (London and Toronto: Associated University Presses, 1985).</i>
<b>An interpretive debate</b><br>In a very real sense, then, Israel – state, land and society – embodies the contemporary argument about the nature of Jewish destiny in the modern world. This surfaces in all aspects of public life: the status of the Knesset, Israel’s legislative assembly; the conflict between religious legislation and individual liberty; the way in which Israelis perceive their personal identity and their place in Jewish history; and the values brought to bear on the peace process and the Palestinians. It produces strange alliances and unpredictable confrontations. There are those – radical secularists and religious extremists – who view the argument in sharply dualistic terms as a genuine war of cultures. There are others – secular traditionalists and religious moderates – who search for common ground and a new synthesis.
Traced to its fundamentals, the debate about Israel reveals the incendiary potential of the messianic idea in Judaism. Reinterpreted, it lay behind both the Reform rejection, and the secular embrace, of Jewish nationalism. In its traditional form it led some religious thinkers to see Zionism as the beginning of redemption and others as its most formidable obstacle. It could lead in the direction of passivity or intense political activity. With the return to Zion, arguments that had raged at the time of the second Temple and had been dormant for 2,000 years began again, almost as if without interruption. Was covenantal history made by man, by God or by both? Was the messianic age natural or supernatural? Would it emerge incrementally or suddenly, by human initiative or divine intervention?
As with the Holocaust, Israel encapsulates the central paradox of contemporary Jewish consciousness. On the one hand, it testifies to deep and intractable divisions in Jewish thought. Among religious Jews there are messianic Zionists and messianic anti-Zionists, pragmatic Zionists and pragmatic non-Zionists. Among secular Jews there are some who see Israel as a revolution in Jewish life, others as a restoration of biblical existence, some who see it as the normalisation of Jewry and others who hold out for it utopian expectations. Among both secular and religious, there are those who deny all value to Israel and those who deny all value to the diaspora. No variant is without its passionate protagonists.
On the other hand the existence of Israel has been the most powerful unifying agent in post-Holocaust Jewish life. Few Jews worldwide do not feel involved in its fate and responsible for its support. It has transformed the condition of Jewish existence. Hebrew has been reborn as a living language. The Jewish people has been reconstituted as a political nation. For the first time since the days of the Hasmonean kings there is Jewish sovereignty, a Jewish landscape, a Jewish home.
The explanation of this paradox is that the different views of Israel are not disparate and disconnected. Instead they are variations on a single set of themes: exile and redemption, the roles of God and man in history, and the relationship between the Jewish present and past. They are commentaries to a single set of texts: the biblical narrative of the Exodus and its prophetic and rabbinic projections on to a messianic future. They are, we have suggested, part of Jewry’s ongoing midrash on its destiny, its construction of a present through an interpretive dialectic with its past. The argument shows no signs of abating.
But on one point most Zionists agreed. The Jewish destiny lay in the land of Israel. The diaspora was nearing its end. An almost 2,000 year-long chapter in Jewish history was reaching closure. Has that prediction proved true?

Chapter 4; Diaspora Debates

<big><strong><i>Diaspora Debates</i></strong></big>
“Now that the mission of the wandering Jew is completed, he must discard the knapsack and cease to be an accomplice in his own destruction.” Such was the judgement of Arthur Koestler in 1949, writing in the wake of the Holocaust and the founding of the State of Israel.<sup class="footnote-marker">1</sup><i class="footnote">Arthur Koestler, <i>Promise and Fulfillment: Palestine 1917–1949</i> (London: Macmillan, 1949), 335.</i>
Koestler’s analysis was stark. To be a Jew was to be a member of a nation and to have longed, for 1,800 years, for the return of that nation to its land. So long as Jews existed in the diaspora they were an anomaly. They were <i>in</i> but not <i>of</i> their surroundings. Here lay the root of the “Jewish problem” and of antisemitism. There was only one possible solution, and with the birth of Israel it had become actual. Jews must return to their land. If they chose – like Koestler himself – not to return, then they must assimilate and cast off, once and for all, any claim to a separate identity.
Since the proclamation of the state, “the attitude of Jews who are unwilling to go there, yet insist on remaining a community in some way apart from their fellow citizens, has become an untenable anachronism.” Koestler himself had been a supporter of Zionism, seeing in Israel a “haven for the homeless in the teeth of prejudice, violence and political treachery.” But now that the goal of the movement had been achieved, he and others who had worked for its realisation “are at last free to do what they could not do before: to wish it good luck and go their own way, with an occasional friendly glance back and a helpful gesture.” Koestler remained firm in his convictions. There was, he wrote in 1976, a single choice facing Jews: “emigration to Israel, or gradual assimilation to their host nations.”<sup class="footnote-marker">2</sup><i class="footnote">Arthur Koestler, <i>The Thirteenth Tribe: The Khazar Empire and Its Heritage</i> (London: Pan, 1977).</i>
Koestler summed up the dilemma of the Jew since the beginning of European emancipation. Judaism was a religion, but Jews were a people. Because of this, Judaism was a religion unlike any other and Jews were a people unlike any other. They were a people constituted by a religion, and their religion was a covenant with a particular people. Neither definition was translatable into the terms of the modern European secular nation‒state. In the language of post-Enlightenment political thought, a religion was the private creed of individuals and a nation was a territorial‒political entity. If Jews were a religious group, they could not be a nation. And if they were a nation, they had no place in Europe. This was the tragic choice, formulated in the wake of the French Revolution in 1789, which reached its demonic climax in the Final Solution: the vision of a <i>Judenrein</i> Europe.
Friends and enemies, liberals and conservatives, agreed on this fundamental axiom about the Jews: that their only point of entry into European society lay through assimilation and thus their disappearance as a distinctive people. The disagreement lay in whether they believed this to be possible or not. Liberals thought it was, and as a result they encouraged emancipation. Conservatives thought it was not, and they therefore opposed it. The liberal argument won the day. But Jews did not assimilate. They acculturated and became, with astonishing speed, masters of European literature, philosophy and science. They maintained the lowest of public profiles as Jews. In some cases, especially among the social and intellectual avant-garde, they converted to Christianity. But they remained, in the eyes of others, a people apart.
Jean-Paul Sartre’s book, <i>Réflexions sur la Question Juive</i>, is in this respect a classic text. Written in 1946, in the aftermath of the Holocaust, it is an analysis of and a protest against antisemitism. The anti-Semite is, <i>par excellence</i>, an inauthentic being, one who projects his guilts upon others. “If the Jew did not exist, the antisemite would invent him.”<sup class="footnote-marker">3</sup><i class="footnote">Jean-Paul Sartre, <i>Anti-Semite and Jew</i>, translated by George Becker, (New York: Schocken, 1965), 13.</i> Antisemitism is an evil which must be eliminated. “Not one Frenchman will be free so long as the Jews do not enjoy the fullness of their rights.”<sup class="footnote-marker">4</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 153.</i> What is more, Jews must have the courage to affirm their identity. “Jewish authenticity consists in choosing oneself as Jew – that is, in realising one’s Jewish condition.”<sup class="footnote-marker">5</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 136.</i>
But in the course of this salutary diagnosis Sartre comes to a remarkable conclusion. Jews possess nothing that makes them Jews. They have no land and no history. They have neither shared interests nor shared beliefs. The only thing they have in common and that makes them distinctive is antisemitism. This is Sartre’s paradox: that it is not Jews who create antisemitism but antisemitism which creates Jews. It follows that if antisemitism is eliminated, so too will be Jewry. It is wrong, says Sartre, forcibly to assimilate Jews. It would be inhumane, and so long as there is antisemitism, it will not work. Nonetheless, the authentic Jew “is not opposed to assimilation any more than the class-conscious worker is opposed to the liquidation of classes… The authentic Jew simply renounces <i>for himself</i> an assimilation that is today impossible; he awaits the radical liquidation of antisemitism for his sons.”<sup class="footnote-marker">6</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 150.</i> In a world free of prejudice, in other words, there would be no more Jews.
This was not simply a view held by others about Jews. It was deeply internalised by Jews themselves and by none more so than by the early Zionists. In the modern world, they argued, only a national identity was a viable one. In the diaspora Jews lacked a national identity, and therefore they would not survive as a people. Religion had served to keep Jews as a people apart for some 1,800 years. But it could do so no longer. Its hold was weakening under the impact of Enlightenment and social change. The only question was whether the process was malevolent or benign. Would Jews disappear through persecution or assimilation? That they would disappear was inevitable. Only by reconstituting themselves as a nation in their land would Jews secure their continuity. The diaspora had run its course. It was at an end.
No one put the case more forcibly than Jacob Klatzkin. The end of the ghetto, he wrote, meant the end of Judaism. “<i>Galut</i> [Diaspora] Jewry cannot survive and all our efforts to keep it alive can have only a temporary success.” Besides which, diaspora Judaism was no longer worthy of survival. Jews might remain who wished to assimilate but who, because of antisemitism, found themselves unable to do so. But their connections with any Jewish belief or practice would be tenuous. They would find themselves branded as Jews without any answering commitment from within. They would be “rent and broken human beings…diseased by ambivalence, consumed by contradictions, and spent by relentless inner conflict.”<sup class="footnote-marker">7</sup><i class="footnote">Arthur Hertzberg, <i>The Zionist Idea</i> (New York: Atheneum, 1980), 323–24.</i>
Klatzkin was a secularist who had broken away from the religious tradition in which he had been raised. But the most visionary of the religious Zionists, Rabbi Abraham Kook, concurred. Diaspora Jewry, he wrote, is “disintegrating at an alarming rate, and there is no hope for it unless it replants itself by the wellspring of real life…which can be found only in Eretz Israel.” The long exile had been intended to purge Jews of the excessive materialism they had shown during their national existence. But the process had gone too far. Judaism had now become over-spiritualised. It had lost contact with life. The rebellion of East European youth against the Judaism of the ghetto was all too understandable. All that was now left in the diaspora was “the shadow of a vision.”<sup class="footnote-marker">8</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 429.</i>
The Holocaust confirmed these dark forebodings. The birth of Israel as a state fulfilled Zionism’s highest hopes. The central premiss of the Zionist argument – <i>shelilat ha-golah</i>, negation of the diaspora – seemed to have been proven unequivocally true by the course of history. How has that argument fared in the past four decades?
<b>New diaspora, old problems</b><br>In 1840 some 90 percent of world Jewry was situated in Europe. By 1982 that figure had become little more than 20 percent. In 1840 only 1 percent of world Jewry lived in America, North and South. By 1982 America was where half of Jewry lived.<sup class="footnote-marker">9</sup><i class="footnote">Daniel Elazar, <i>People and Polity</i> (Detroit, MI: Wayne State University Press, 1989), 33.</i> Today’s diaspora is a new phenomenon, no longer European but American. Some three million Jews had fled to America from Eastern Europe in the wake of the Russian pogroms during the years 1880 to 1920. The Holocaust destroyed most of the remaining centres of European Jewish life. The postwar diaspora is not the one Klatzkin and Kook knew. New York and Los Angeles have taken over from Berlin and Vienna. Lakewood and Boston have replaced Volozhyn and Berditchev as centres of Torah. Jewry over the past century has been marked by vast migrations and dislocations. The question at the forefront of Jewish consciousness has been: Would the new diaspora reproduce the patterns of the old?
The answer seemed to be yes. The warnings were signalled by a series of demographic and sociological studies charting trends in the world’s largest Jewish community, that of the United States. The story they told was a disturbing one, along three axes. The first was mixed marriage. During the 1920s the rate had been estimated as no more than one percent. By the 1950s it had risen to between 10 and 15 percent. During the 1960s it rose sharply again. Precise figures were hard to determine, for the rates varied between one city and another. In large centres where Jews were residentially concentrated and community life was more intense, the figures were lower. In more dispersed areas, they were higher. But estimates converged on the figure of one in three.<sup class="footnote-marker">10</sup><i class="footnote">Samuel Heilman, “The Jewish Family Today,” in <i>Tradition and Transition</i>, edited by Jonathan Sacks (London: Jews’ College Publications), 179–208; Sergio DellaPergola and Uziel O. Schmeltz, “Demographic Transformations of American Jewry: Marriage and Mixed Marriage in the 1980s,” in <i>Studies in Contemporary Jewry, Volume V</i>, edited by Peter Medding (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989), 169–200.</i> By 1991 it was revised upward again to one in two.<sup class="footnote-marker">11</sup><i class="footnote"><i>New York Times</i>, May 1991.</i>
Since the days of Ezra and before, intermarriage has been the critical index of the disintegration of Jews as a distinctive group. Judaism is not a private faith of individuals. It is embodied in communities, above all in the family. The survival of Judaism depends on the decision of Jews to marry other Jews and raise their children as Jews. The high mixed marriage rates of American Jewry suggested to sociologists no less than to rabbis that its survival was becoming increasingly tenuous. The traditional barriers against intermarriage were collapsing. The 1975 Boston survey revealed that while four in ten Jews above the age of sixty held negative views about it, only one in twenty of 18–29 year olds did so.<sup class="footnote-marker">12</sup><i class="footnote">Calvin Goldscheider, <i>Jewish Continuity and Change</i> (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1986), 19.</i> It was becoming accepted as a normal feature of Jewish life.
The corresponding figures for British Jewry are unavailable. But a report by the Research Unit of the Board of Deputies in 1989 concluded that “The combined evidence of numbers of synagogue marriages, age at marriage and the marital status of those marrying suggests that as many as two thirds of young single Jews of marriageable age are not marrying in a synagogue.”<sup class="footnote-marker">13</sup><i class="footnote">Board of Deputies Research Unit, press release, 18 June 1989.</i> It is not clear whether the missing two-thirds are forming mixed marriages, marrying other Jews but without a religious ceremony, delaying marriage, or simply not marrying at all. At any event the figure suggests that the Anglo-Jewish experience mirrors that of American Jewry.
The rate of formation of Jewish marriages was one cause for concern. The second was the stability of those marriages themselves. Divorce has always been possible in Jewish law and carries no religious stigma. Nonetheless, in the past it took place against a general backdrop of family stability. Nor was this accidental. Jewish law goes to great extremes to preserve the integrity of marriage through a cluster of provisions ranging from modesty in dress, the regulation of sexual life and the separation of the sexes at public gatherings. Two themes dominate the biblical literature: sexual fidelity, seen as a close counterpart to religious fidelity, and the family as the vehicle of handing on the Jewish tradition. Maimonides, referring to biblical Israel, called the family “the foundation of the state,”<sup class="footnote-marker">14</sup><i class="footnote">Maimonides, <i>Guide for the Perplexed</i>, 3:41.</i> and among the medieval philosophers, Gersonides, Abarbanel and Joseph Albo all pointed out the inner connection between the strength of the Jewish family and the transmissibility of the values of the Jewish past.<sup class="footnote-marker">15</sup><i class="footnote">Gersonides, <i>Commentary</i> to Exodus 20:12; Abarbanel, <i>Commentary ad loc.</i>; Albo, <i>Ikkarim</i>, III, p. 26.</i> The relationship was reciprocal. Jewish tradition protected the family, and the family preserved the tradition. A rapid acceleration of rates of divorce could thus be expected to be both a symptom and a further cause of collapse in the structures of Jewish life.
It has occurred. A recent American survey covering the years 1982–1987 showed that one in five Jewish marriages ended in divorce.<sup class="footnote-marker">16</sup><i class="footnote">Barry Kosmin, Nava Lerer and Egon Mayer, <i>Intermariage, Divorce and Remarriage among American Jews, 1982–1987</i> (North American Jewish Data Bank, 1989).</i> A British survey arrived at the figure of one in six.<sup class="footnote-marker">17</sup><i class="footnote">Stanley Waterman and B. Kosmin, <i>British Jewry in the Eighties</i>, (London: Board of Deputies, 1986), 14.</i> These remain below the national averages in both countries, but they remain alarmingly high by traditional Jewish standards. The phenomenon poses great problems for the Jewish community. There is the question of divorce itself. Jewish law requires the consent of both husband and wife before a religious divorce can be granted. A legal remedy exists in the case of husbands, but despite various proposals none has yet found general acceptance in the case of wives whose husbands refuse to grant consent. This gives rise to the agonising tragedy of the <i>agunah</i>, the woman unable to remarry. Then there is the question of institutional adjustment. Can the synagogue, the locus of Jewish life in the diaspora, move from its traditional family orientation to provide a sense of belonging to the increasing numbers of divorced and single-parent families? Above all, there is the question of continuity. Can Jewish identity be transmitted in the fragile, provisional and temporary structures of the contemporary family?
The third area of concern was the declining birthrate. Industrialisation, secularisation and affluence are powerful agents of birth control. Jews, whose birthrates had generally been higher than those of the surrounding populations in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, have been deeply affected by these trends. Throughout the twentieth century American‒Jewish fertility as measured by family size has been below that of the national average. At one stage in the 1970s it dropped to 1.2 children per family, well below replacement level.<sup class="footnote-marker">18</sup><i class="footnote">Heilman, “The Jewish Family Today,” 193.</i> It has since recovered somewhat, but the overall demographic decline continues. The same is true of British Jewry, which has seen its estimated population shrink from 450,000 in the 1950s to some 330,000 today. The picture is repeated in most other diaspora communities.
Because Judaism is the religion of a people, demography is inseparable from theology. The first command recorded in the Torah is “Be fruitful and multiply.” The patriarchal promise, reiterated throughout the book of Genesis, is of a covenantal family that would be as many as the stars of the sky, the dust of the earth and the sand of the seashore. Yet the Bible records a continuing tension between the promise and the reality. Moses declares, “The Lord did not set His affection on you and choose you because you were more numerous than other peoples, for you are the fewest of all peoples.”<sup class="footnote-marker">19</sup><i class="footnote">Deuteronomy 7:7.</i> The prophets speak repeatedly of a mere “remnant” that will return. The covenantal people lives continually on the brink of its own extinction, seeming to survive only by a series of miracles. How many Jews there are is a matter of religious as well as ethnic consequence.
The theological dimension of demography was, as we saw in our chapter on the Holocaust, taken up by contemporary thinkers like Emil Fackenheim and Irving Greenberg.<sup class="footnote-marker">20</sup><i class="footnote">Emil Fackenheim, “The People Israel Lives: How My Mind Has Changed,” in <i>The Jewish Return Into History</i> (New York: Schocken, 1978), 43–57; Irving Greenberg, “Cloud of Smoke, Pillar of Fire: Judaism, Christianity and Modernity after the Holocaust,” in Eva Fleischner (ed.), <i>Auschwitz: Beginning of a New Era?</i> (Hoboken, NJ: Ktav, 1977), 7–56.</i> To have Jewish children in a world in which Auschwitz is possible is, for them, an ultimate affirmation of faith. Jewish survival is the post-Holocaust imperative. Clearly, then, the failure of Jews in the diaspora to respond to this imperative calls for explanation, whether theologically as a loss of faith, or sociologically as testimony to the continuing effect of secularisation on Jewish life.
The initial indications, then, were that the new diaspora was recapitulating the patterns of the old. To be sure, America was not Europe. In Europe Jews had had to contend with the powerful prejudices of a church‒state culture. In America, a less traditional society with a marked separation of church and state, the battle was in some respects won from the outset. Here it was not so much public pressure to assimilate that was causing the erosion of Jewish values and institutions. It was the disintegrative force of modernity itself: social and geographic mobility, the weakening of ethnic ties across the generations, the marginalisation of religious practice in a highly secular society and the damage done to the family by the individuation and autonomy of modern consciousness. Jews, having felt excluded for so long from the cultural mainstream, embraced modernity’s openness with a passion unsurpassed by other ethnic and religious groups. They were measurably more secularised than Protestants and Catholics. The damage done to the fabric of Jewish life was the obverse side of the opportunities America offered. American integration inevitably brought Jewish disintegration.
But this was precisely the argument of <i>shelilat ha-golah</i>, negation of the diaspora, translated from pre-war Europe to contemporary America. And so indeed several American Jewish analysts concluded. In 1956, Ben Halpern wrote: “There is a sifting going on in the Jewish world. Broken Jewish communities, or Jewish communities still breaking up, are dividing, as in a centrifuge, into a stream moving to Israel to combine as a new community and immobile individuals who stay behind to face a Jewish future that has become acutely questionable.”<sup class="footnote-marker">21</sup><i class="footnote">Ben Halpern, <i>The American Jew: A Zionist Analysis</i>, 2nd edition (New York: Schocken, 1983), 125.</i> In 1973 Charles Liebman, in his <i>The Ambivalent American Jew</i>, concurred. “The American Jew is torn between two sets of values those of integration and acceptance into American society and those of Jewish group survival. These values appear to me to be incompatible.”<sup class="footnote-marker">22</sup><i class="footnote">Charles Liebman, <i>The Ambivalent American Jew</i> (Philadelphia, PA: Jewish Publication Society, 1973), vii.</i> In 1981 Arthur Hertzberg arrived at the same conclusion. “In the Diaspora we have taught effectively all the substitutes for the older religion, and the erosion in all the diasporas continues unabated… There is an answer to the question: Is Jewish continuity safe in the open society? The answer is: No.”<sup class="footnote-marker">23</sup><i class="footnote">Arthur Hertzberg, “The Emancipation: A Reassessment After Two Centuries,” <i>Modern Judaism</i> 1:1 (May 1981), 46–53.</i>
The case was echoed from Israel itself. In 1977 Hillel Halkin, in his <i>Letters to an American Jewish Friend</i>, wrote:
<span class="poetry indentAll">In countries where the secular state assumes a liberal, democratic character and antisemitism is institutionally fought or discouraged, assimilation must run rampant, for the Jewish community, stripped of all regulatory or coercive powers and unable to sustain its traditional religious culture or to offer any meaningful substitute in its stead, cannot possibly compete for the allegiance of its members with the lures of society at large.<sup class="footnote-marker">24</sup><i class="footnote">Hillel Halkin, <i>Letters to an American Jewish Friend</i> (Philadelphia, PA: Jewish Publication Society, 1977).</i></span>
The diaspora was suffering from acute senilic decline and the future of Jewish history lay entirely with the young state of Israel. His view was taken up and restated a year later by Harold Fisch in <i>The Zionist Revolution</i>: “The Jews of the Diaspora are in the position of having carried the burden to this point; and it is with an unconscious sigh of relief that they have discharged it and placed it on younger shoulders.”<sup class="footnote-marker">25</sup><i class="footnote">Harold Fisch, <i>The Zionist Revolution</i> (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1978), 104.</i>
Koestler and Klatzkin were therefore correct and so was Sartre. Once the ghetto walls had been breached, only antisemitism preserved Jewish identity in the diaspora. Minority status placed Jews in an impossible dilemma. They were threatened physically by persecution and spiritually by the absence of persecution. The Holocaust had killed Jews by hatred. The open society would kill Judaism by kindness. It was a lucid <i>reductio ad absurdum</i> of life outside Israel.
<b>Revival or assimilation?</b><br>However, since the mid-1980s a counter-argument has mounted with considerable force. The debate was initiated by Charles Silberman’s book <i>A Certain People</i>, published in 1985,<sup class="footnote-marker">26</sup><i class="footnote">Charles Silberman, <i>A Certain People: American Jews and Their Lives Today</i> (New York: Summit Books, 1985).</i> and was reinforced by a group of sociologists, among them Calvin Goldscheider and Steven M. Cohen.<sup class="footnote-marker">27</sup><i class="footnote">Steven M. Cohen, <i>American Modernity and Jewish Identity</i> (London: Tavistock, 1983); <i>American Assimilation or Jewish Revival?</i> (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1988); Calvin Goldscheider, <i>Jewish Continuity and Change</i> (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1986); <i>The American Jewish Community</i> (Atlanta, GA: Scholars Press, 1986); Calvin Goldscheider and Alan Zuckerman, <i>The Transformation of the Jews</i> (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1984).</i> To understand how unusual the counter-argument is, we must recall how overwhelmingly pessimistic the prognosis for Jewish survival had been over the past two centuries. Silberman offered the rarest of all attitudes to the diaspora Jewish future: optimism. Judaism was not threatened by the open society. To the contrary, it was liberated by it.
Jews, argued Silberman, had prospered in America. To be sure, they had initially encountered forms of antisemitism which had impeded their entry into some areas of employment and which had led, among the second generation, to a widespread abandonment of Judaism and a conscious embrace of Americanisation. But times had changed. Jews were now thoroughly at home in America and were able to be more self-confident in their Jewishness. This had led to a greater openness to tradition and to a more active and high-profile Jewish community. Antisemitism too had declined, so that young Jews could now accept their identity without embarrassment or shame. The significant fact was that Jews had overwhelmingly chosen to remain identified as Jews. America <i>was</i> different. “American Jews now live in a freer, more open society than that of any diaspora community in which Jews have ever lived before.”<sup class="footnote-marker">28</sup><i class="footnote">Silberman, <i>A Certain People</i>, 23.</i>
Behind these conclusions lay a series of arguments, some relating to modernisation in general, others relating to the definition of Jewish life, that amounted to a substantive revisionist case. The first was that ethnic identities have turned out to be more tenacious than earlier sociologists had predicted. The process of modernisation, it was once believed, would spell the end of distinctive subcultures. Ethnic and religious minorities would be unable to sustain themselves as their members became progressively integrated into a national culture. It has not happened that way, and since the 1960s the theory has had to be revised. Nathan Glazer and Daniel Moynihan were among the first to note that the melting pot had not eliminated ethnic loyalties.<sup class="footnote-marker">29</sup><i class="footnote">Nathan Glazer and Daniel P. Moynihan, <i>Beyond the Melting Pot</i>,<i> (</i>Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1970).</i> Peter Berger, among others, has noted that the state has now become too remote from the individual to provide the basis of identity.<sup class="footnote-marker">30</sup><i class="footnote">Peter L. Berger, <i>Facing Up to Modernity</i> (London: Penguin, 1979).</i> Perhaps, too, the very success of immigrant groups in establishing themselves as part of society has enabled them to transform that society into more pluralistic forms. Whatever the theoretical frame, the phenomenon itself is undeniable. Minority religious and ethnic identities have been resurgent since the 1960s.
This deeply affected the American Jewish community. The civil rights movement, in which many Jews were involved, led some to apply the lessons they learned from their encounter with American blacks to themselves. If black was beautiful, perhaps Jewishness might be as well. The interest in rediscovering “roots” had its effect on Jews too, and led to a significant number of <i>baalei</i> <i>teshuvah</i>, religious returnees.<sup class="footnote-marker">31</sup><i class="footnote">See M. Herbert Danzger, <i>Returning to Tradition: The Contemporary Revival of Orthodox Judaism</i> (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1989).</i> The alternative lifestyles explored by the student counter-culture of the 1960s had their Jewish echo in the <i>chavurah</i> movement, the flowering of small community groups in which Jewish rituals were explored in fresh ways. The ground was thus prepared for the radicalisation of American Jewish consciousness that took place around the time of Israel’s Six-Day War in 1967. There was a sense, borne of Israel’s isolation and reflections on the Holocaust, that Jews were cast into a singular fate. This new particularism led in turn to a renaissance of Jewish cultural, academic and philanthropic activity. In short, America’s newfound ethnic pluralism created the cultural space in which a more affirmative, particularist approach to Jewish identity was possible.
The second argument, stressed particularly by Goldscheider, was that the rapid educational and occupational strides made by American Jews did not necessarily entail group disintegration. Hitherto it had been assumed that upward mobility on the part of an ethnic group was associated with its assimilation. Goldscheider argued that this had not happened for the simple reason that Jews had remained distinctive in their upward mobility. They were more likely than other ethnic and religious groups in America to have had a college education and to be employed in the professions, management and academic life. The result was that if neither religion nor shared values held them together, social, economic and cultural forces still did. “A detailed examination of family, marriage, childbearing, social class, residence, occupation and education among Jews and non-Jews leads to the unmistakable conclusion that Jews are different.”<sup class="footnote-marker">32</sup><i class="footnote">Goldscheider, <i>Jewish Continuity and Change</i>, 171.</i>
Most controversial was the argument over the interpretation of intermarriage. Silberman, Goldscheider and Cohen argued that it does not represent the threat to Jewish continuity previously assumed. Jews are now assimilating but they are not assimilationist. They are not acting out a conscious decision to leave the community. Accordingly intermarriage, which had always been seen as a decisive exit from Judaism, is now no longer so. The outmarried neither see themselves nor are seen by others as having left the fold. They retain Jewish links through friends, residential and occupational associations and to some degree institutional affiliation. Silberman drew the simple mathematical inference. “If half the children of intermarriages are raised as Jews, there will be no net reduction in the number of Jews, no matter how high the intermarriage rate is.”<sup class="footnote-marker">33</sup><i class="footnote">Silberman, <i>A Certain People</i>, 303.</i>
But the new optimism is not built solely on sociological observation. It is predicated on a particular form of sociological interpretation. Silberman and Goldscheider have been described as <i>transformationists</i>, and the term accurately describes their approach to the description of the contemporary Jewish community. The optimists do not deny the progressive attenuation of the links between Jews and Judaism. Goldscheider has written of “ineffective, inadequate and unsuccessful Jewish education, pervasive ignorance…decline in temple and synagogue participation.”<sup class="footnote-marker">34</sup><i class="footnote">Goldscheider and Zuckerman, <i>The Transformation of the Jews</i>, 186–87.</i> Religious observance, Jewish knowledge and synagogue affiliation are waning among the majority of American Jews. Judged by traditional indices, the Jewish community is failing to sustain itself.
But these indices, the transformationists argue, embody a mistaken view of Jewish identity. There is no essence of Jewishness specifiable in advance, certainly not one determined by the religious criteria of Judaism. Instead in America – and to some extent in other diaspora communities also – Jewish identity persists, but it is sustained and is to be measured by relatively loose associations: Jewish friends, common attitudes – in particular, support for the State of Israel – and an occasional religiosity manifested on major festivals and life cycle events. The substantive point made by the optimists is that contemporary urban and suburban culture <i>elim</i>inates neither religion nor ethnicity. Instead it leads to a subtle dialectic of accommodation and resistance, to new modes of Jewish expression and association, and to the revival, after an initial period of adjustment, of distinctive patterns of group behaviour.
Their interpretive point, however, is that change is not to be seen as decline. Instead it is to be seen as transformation. As Jews change, so too does what counts as Jewishness. At one time this might have been adherence to Jewish law. At another it may have been membership of a synagogue. At present it may be no more than working, socialising and living in close proximity to other Jews. For Goldscheider, “The strength of the Jewish community reflects the number and intensity of in-group interactions. The more the bases of interaction and the greater its intensity, the more cohesive is the community.”<sup class="footnote-marker">35</sup><i class="footnote">Goldscheider, <i>Jewish Continuity and Change</i>, 1.</i> So long, therefore, as Jews regularly meet and mix, it makes no difference what the content and context of these meetings are. Continuity persists through change.
Most controversially, it follows from this definition that children of mixed marriages will be regarded as Jews so long as they continue to see themselves as Jews and interact with other Jews. This conflicts radically with the halakhic criterion of Jewish status, according to which one is a Jew only if one was born to a Jewish mother or had undergone conversion. Goldscheider is insistent on this point. “The definition of the Jewishness of the family in terms of biology (or halakhah) is becoming less important for most American Jews than it was in the past and less relevant to Jewish communal continuity than how people define themselves behaviourally, communally and culturally, and how the community defines them.”<sup class="footnote-marker">36</sup><i class="footnote">Goldscheider, <i>The American Jewish Community</i>, 19.</i>
The transformationists’ case has been strongly challenged at two different levels. Firstly, on the substantive issue of the demographic strength of American Jewry, Sergio DellaPergola and Uziel Schmelz dissent.<sup class="footnote-marker">37</sup><i class="footnote">DellaPergola and Schmeltz, “Demographic Transformations of American Jewry,” 169–200. See also Goldscheider’s rejoinder and DellaPergola and Schmeltz’s reply, ibid., 201–14.</i> The argument that the American‒Jewish community is in the throes of a revival and that therefore America does not reproduce the patterns of other diaspora communities is refuted by the evidence. A close examination of recent demographic data, they maintain, reveals a picture of reduced and delayed marriages, low fertility, increasing divorce, growing incidence of out-marriage, a relatively low proportion of children of mixed marriages raised as Jews, and a greater outflow from than inflow to the Jewish community. Regardless of any argument from transformation, these signal a diminishing community.
More broadly, Charles Liebman has taken issue with the interpretive assumptions of transformationism. Jewishness, he argues, has an essential connection with Judaism. Not all expressions of Jewish group solidarity are equally significant. “Attending synagogue and eating in Chinese restaurants are both activities that bring Jews into greater propinquity. But I do not believe that they have the same implications for the strength of Jewish life.” The difference between the transformationists and those like himself whom he labels “traditionalists” is not whether Judaism can survive in the diaspora, but “whether there is an essential Jewish (Judaic) quality against which American Jewish life can be measured.” If the answer is yes, then it follows that “there is a point where Judaism or Jewishness might so transform itself that it can no longer be called Judaism.”<sup class="footnote-marker">38</sup><i class="footnote">Charles Liebman, <i>Deceptive Images: Toward a Redefinition of American Judaism</i> (New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Books, 1988), 61–73.</i>
Liebman detects continuing signs of Jewish erosion in America: the growth of mixed marriage, the cursory character of Jewish education, low rates of synagogue affiliation, and the amorphous character of Jewish culture. These, he argues, are to be seen as signs of assimilation. But the transformations in American Jewry mean that the concept of assimilation itself now has to be reassessed. In the past it referred to the individual. It meant a decision to cease identifying as a Jew. That form of behaviour is, for a variety of reasons, less prevalent today. Instead, Liebman argues, assimilation should be seen as a collective phenomenon. It is “a process of attenuation of ties between American Jews and the Jewish tradition and/or between American Jews as a collective body and the collective body of Jews outside the United States.”<sup class="footnote-marker">39</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 82.</i>
The heart of the dilemma is this. It is possible to identify a particular form of American Jewishness which is sufficiently different from other modes of American ethnicity to warrant the inference that Jewishness persists. But at the same time this may be so different from the way Jews in the past or Jews outside America have lived that it is inaccurate to call it “Jewishness.” Instead it should be called “American‒Jewishness.” The cogency of Liebman’s argument lies in the fact that the word “Jew” necessarily involves reference to a people and a past, not simply to a section of that people and to the present. Not every sign of American‒Jewish vitality is necessarily a sign of Jewish vitality per se. Liebman here recapitulates the argument of early theorists, among them Will Herberg,<sup class="footnote-marker">40</sup><i class="footnote">Will Herberg, <i>Protestant, Catholic, Jew</i> (New York: Anchor Books, 1960).</i> who saw the postwar American religious revival as a sign not of the sanctification of society but of the secularisation of religion.
<b>Secular and sacred</b><br>Behind every sociology there is a theology. And the debate between transformationists and traditionalists is the latest manifestation of two fundamental debates about the meaning of Jewish destiny. The first is the question: What is it to be a Jew? The second is the question: What is the meaning of exile, <i>galut</i>, in contemporary Jewish life?
The first relates to the much more general question of the relationship between religion and society. Emile Durkheim was among the first to ask the question, not of the meaning or transcendental authority of religious systems, but of their function. His suggestion that religion served to create and preserve group solidarity opened the way to a Copernican shift in the understanding of Judaism. Two thinkers in particular – Ahad Ha-Am in Russia and Mordecai Kaplan in America – were deeply influenced by this idea. Ahad Ha-Am put it most famously in his remark that “More than the Jews have preserved the Sabbath, the Sabbath has preserved the Jews.” Instead of seeing religion as the way in which society served God, they saw it as the way in which God served society. Judaism might be translated into the sensibilities of a secular age if the word God were deleted and in its place were written, the Jewish people.
Thus for Ahad Ha-Am Judaism was the expression of the national spirit of the Jews, while for Mordecai Kaplan it was their evolving civilisation. Both edited out the concept of a transcendent God. And though Ahad Ha-Am was a cultural Zionist while Kaplan was primarily concerned with Jewish life in America, they shared a broadly similar view of the future relationship between Israel and the diaspora. Israel would constitute a revolution in the history of Judaism, allowing it to be seen less as a religion than as a national culture, and this would in turn revitalise the diaspora which would be sustained on the bases of ethnicity and a secularised form of Judaism.
Their inversion of the relationship between religion and society meant that, necessarily, Judaism would undergo unpredictable transformations. For Judaism now followed rather than dictated social developments in Jewish life. It would become a sacred legitimation of secular change. To be sure, Ahad Ha-Am believed that there were normative values within the Jewish tradition. But once the decision has been taken to see religion as a function of society rather than vice versa, that position is hard to sustain. The sociological perspective of transformationism is closely related to this view of Judaism, which collapses the distinction between what Jews do and what they ought to do.
This process is best observed in the phenomenon described by Jonathan Woocher in America, Charles Liebman and Eliezer Don-Yehiya in Israel, as civil religion.<sup class="footnote-marker">41</sup><i class="footnote">Jonathan Woocher, <i>Sacred Survival: The Civil Religion of American Jews</i> (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1986); Charles Liebman and Eliezer Don-Yehiya, <i>Civil Religion in Israel</i> (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1983).</i> The term, coined by Robert Bellah, refers to the appropriation of religious symbolism by secular agencies. In American Jewish life, especially since Israel’s 1967 war, the most powerful of these agencies have been the Jewish Federations, involved in philanthropic, welfare and political endeavours on behalf of the American‒Jewish community and Israel. As Woocher has demonstrated, the Federations have developed a rhetoric which amounts to a religious system in its own right. Its central theme is the historical drama of the Holocaust and the State of Israel seen as a transition from death to rebirth. Its tenets are the unity of the Jewish people, mutual responsibility, Jewish survival in a threatening world, the centrality of Israel to Jewish existence worldwide, the enduring values of Jewish tradition, philanthropy and social justice, and Americanness as a virtue.
The civil religion of American Jews is not Judaism. It focuses on public occasions rather than private life. Its forum is not the synagogue but fund-raising dinners, missions to Israel, and the aspects and occasions of secular Jewish organisational life. Its existence testifies to one of the central paradoxes running through this book: to the fact that contemporary Jews feel a strong sense of belonging to a people and its history but without a personal commitment to the religious laws and traditions that constituted it as a people and gave specific shape to its history. Civil Judaism is the latest manifestation of the process of which Ahad Ha-Am and Kaplan were the theoreticians: a religion with the Jewish people rather than God at its centre.
To a large extent also, American Reform and Reconstructionist Judaisms have followed a similar trajectory, though they remain recognisably religious institutions. Their positions have in effect been legitimations of attitudes and behaviours independently arrived at by American Jews in their dialectic between integration and survival. The most notorious instance of this was the Reform rabbinate’s decision in 1983 to adopt patrilineality as well as matrilineality as prima facie grounds for Jewish status. Thus a child of either a Jewish mother or father could be declared Jewish without conversion, on the basis of “appropriate and timely public and formal acts of identification with the Jewish faith and people.” This, along with the willingness of most American Reform rabbis to officiate at mixed marriages, amounted to a religious legitimation of a sociological reality: intermarriage as a fact of modern Jewish life.
It did more. For the first time it introduced into Judaism the idea that – independently of conversion – there can be <i>Jews by choice</i>. Peter Berger has noted that one of the essential features of modern consciousness is its replacement of fate by choice, and has reminded us that literal meaning of the word <i>haeresis</i> is “choice.” “In a very real sense, every religious community in the pluralistic situation becomes a ‘heresy,’ with all the social and psychological tenuousness that the term suggests.”<sup class="footnote-marker">42</sup><i class="footnote">Peter L. Berger, <i>A Rumour of Angels</i> (London: Allen Lane, 1970), 62.</i> This applies with particular poignancy to the situation of Judaism in a secular society. Central to traditional Judaism are three implicit axioms: that one is born a Jew, that the claims of Jewish identity take precedence over all others and that without requiring any further assent one is bound by Jewish law. The terms of Jewishness are thus written in the language of fate, not choice. By contrast, the leading exponent of American Reform Judaism, Eugene Borowitz, argues that autonomy is the central value in contemporary Jewish life.<sup class="footnote-marker">43</sup><i class="footnote">Eugene Borowitz, <i>Choices in Modern Jewish Thought</i> (New York: Behrman House, 1983), 243–72.</i> Tradition and modernity are here in radical conflict. Once Judaism is defined by personal choice and becomes a role rather than an identity, the way is open to the possibility, and by now in America the reality, of individuals who see themselves as both Jews and Christians and practise selective rituals of both religions.
The sharpest critiques of the secularisation not of Jews but of Judaism have come from two Orthodox thinkers. Yeshayahu Leibowitz and Rabbi Joseph Soloveitchik. Leibowitz has polemicised tirelessly against what he sees as the various idolatries of modern Jewish life. One of these is the shift from heteronomy to autonomy, from a God- to a humanity-centred Judaism. Judaism, he reminds us, is a set of commands, not a system of ethics. Commands are our way of serving God. They are not directed to societal or personal needs. Admittedly, Jewish thinkers from the early rabbinic period onwards have sought “reasons for the commands.” But these, Leibowitz argues, are theological constructs, not facts of religious faith. We pray not as an expression of the spirit but because we are commanded to pray. The paradigm of faith is the biblical story of the binding of Isaac. Here Abraham submits, simply and completely, to the divine command. There are no reasons for this command, nor did it serve any human purpose. Faith means submission to the will of God, concretised in the halakhic system.<sup class="footnote-marker">44</sup><i class="footnote">Yeshayahu Leibowitz, <i>Yahadut, Am Yehudi u-Medinat Yisrael</i> (Jerusalem: Schocken, 1979); <i>Emunah, Historiah ve-Arakhim</i> (Jerusalem: Akadamon, 1982). For a summation of these views in English, see Yeshayahu Leibowitz, “Commandments,” in Arthur A. Cohen and Paul Mendes-Flohr, <i>Contemporary Jewish Religious Thought</i> (New York: Scribner’s, 1987), 67–80.</i>
Peter Berger has described how modernity “subjectivises” religion in a double sense. First, “religion becomes increasingly a matter of free subjective choice.” Second, “religious ‘realities’ are increasingly ‘translated’ from a frame of reference of facticities external to the individual consciousness to a frame of reference that locates them <i>within</i> consciousness.”<sup class="footnote-marker">45</sup><i class="footnote">Peter Berger, <i>The Sacred Canopy</i> (New York: Doubleday, 1967), 166.</i> The first subjectivisation – the kind that characterises Reform Judaism in America – would be resisted by all Orthodox thinkers. Normative Jewish conduct is not determined by personal choice. The second is what Leibowitz is concerned to challenge. A subtle secularisation takes place when Jewish law is left intact but interpreted as a means to personal fulfilment or social cohesiveness. Against Durkheim and the appropriation of his theories for religious ends, Leibowitz writes that “There is an absolute opposition between service to God through the Torah and its commands and the service of ‘the God in the heart’ or ‘the conscience’ of humanistic religion, which ultimately can be nothing but service to man.”<sup class="footnote-marker">46</sup><i class="footnote">Leibowitz, “Commandments,” 73.</i> This turns God from an end to a means and is nothing short of idolatry.
Rabbi Soloveitchik’s argument is contained in a searching and subtle essay, “The Lonely Man of Faith.”<sup class="footnote-marker">47</sup><i class="footnote">Joseph B. Soloveitchik, “The Lonely Man of Faith,” <i>Tradition</i> 7:2 (Summer 1965), 5–67.</i> Starting with the two accounts of the creation of man in Genesis chapters 1 and 2, Soloveitchik describes two typologies of human existence which he calls <i>majestic</i> and <i>covenantal</i> man. Majestic man, made in God’s image and commanded to subdue the world and have dominion over the animals, is inquisitive and manipulative, the author of science and technology. Covenantal man, made from the dust of the earth and commanded to “serve and guard” the garden, is passive and receptive, a being of wonder and relationship. Soloveitchik does not describe them as such, but we recognise here an idealisation of the secular and conventionally religious personalities.
In the past, Soloveitchik argues, the two types coexisted within the personality of the Jew. Action as well as passivity, the pursuit of knowledge as well as awe before the unknowable, were both parts of the religious life. The Jew saw himself as God’s creation, but he was also, as the sages put it, “a partner of the Holy One, blessed be He, in the work of creation.” Within this tension, Jews lived. In the twentieth century, however, the balance had dramatically shifted. Hitherto the secular had been contained within the sacred. Now it was threatening to infiltrate the sacred and reduce it to the secular. The danger to religion lay not in atheism but in its own translation into cultural, psychological and aesthetic terms. Modern man turns to religion for happiness; to a place of worship for an uplifting experience; to faith for therapy and peace of mind. Against this, “the man of faith must bring to the attention of the man of culture the <i>kerygma</i> of original faith in all its singularity and pristine purity in spite of the incompatibility of this message with the fundamental credo of a utilitarian society.”<sup class="footnote-marker">48</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 62–63.</i>
Here then is one central dilemma of Judaism in an age in which the majority of Jews have undergone advanced secularisation. Is secularity to be embraced, at the cost of the abandonment of much of Jewish law and the loss of the idea of a transcendent and commanding God? Or is it to be resisted, at the cost of parting company with most Jews? Reform, Reconstructionist and Civil Judaisms take the first route, Orthodoxy the second. As we have seen, the argument over the sociology of the contemporary diaspora turns upon a similar question: Is what Jews do, or what tradition says they ought to do, to be taken as normative? Does social reality determine our idea of Judaism, or does Judaism determine our interpretation of society?
<b>Diaspora or exile?</b><br>But equally at stake in the argument between traditionalists and transformationists is another and less frequently articulated question. Just as the existence of the State of Israel posed the problem of the meaning of redemption, so the persistence of the diaspora raises the problem of the meaning of exile. The very word “diaspora” is a neutralisation of the theological charge contained in the word <i>galut</i>, exile. A diaspora is a dispersion; an exile is a punishment, a dislocation, an unnatural state of being. How far does the word <i>galut</i> apply to the contemporary American experience?
Israeli thinkers tend to agree on two propositions: that the diaspora is <i>galut</i>, and that <i>galut</i> is at an end.<sup class="footnote-marker">49</sup><i class="footnote">See Arnold Eisen’s important study,<i> Galut: Modern Jewish Reflection on Homelessness and Homecoming</i> (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1986).</i> Diaspora Jewish survival is threatened equally by the existence and absence of antisemitism. The one leads to persecution, the other to assimilation. What is more, a full Jewish life is impossible outside Israel. Only in Israel is Judaism part of the public domain. Only there is it part of a national culture. Only there can a Jew live free of the ambivalences and equivocations of minority existence. This argument, driven home by such thinkers as Nathan Rotenstreich and Eliezer Schweid, lies beneath the surface of the traditionalists’ critique of the transformationists. American Jewry is not healthy but sick in both quantitative and qualitative terms. One of the symptoms of its sickness is that it fails to recognise its own malaise. Gershom Scholem put it bluntly, citing the Hasidic aphorism that “The greatest exile is to not realise that one is in exile.”<sup class="footnote-marker">50</sup><i class="footnote">Cited in ibid., 148.</i> This was the condition of American Jewry.
American Jewry, for its part, had long lived with a definition of Zionism that did not entail negation of the diaspora. Louis Brandeis, one of the most distinguished figures of American Jewish history had, in 1915, established the classic terms of American Zionism. It did not involve dual loyalties. To the contrary, “loyalty to America demands…that each American Jew becomes a Zionist.”<sup class="footnote-marker">51</sup><i class="footnote">Arthur Hertzberg (ed.), <i>The Zionist Idea</i> (New York: Atheneum, 1981), 520.</i> American support for a refuge from persecution and a place of Jewish national renaissance fell perfectly within the terms of its concern for social justice and the brotherhood of man. Brandeis’s Zionism was political only, but Solomon Schechter and Mordecai Kaplan looked to the land of Israel to provide spiritual and cultural regeneration to world Jewry as a whole. Far from displacing the diaspora, Israel would revitalise it.
Since the creation of the state the paradoxes of American Zionism have multiplied. Certainly since 1967, Israel has been at the heart of American Jewish self-definition. Israel, observers have noted, has become <i>the</i> religion of American Jews. At the same time, American‒Jewish aliyah – emigration to Israel – is low and falling.<sup class="footnote-marker">52</sup><i class="footnote">See Chaim Waxman, <i>American Aliya</i> (Detroit, MI: Wayne State University Press, 1989).</i> The “Lakeville” study, a survey of attitudes in a representative Jewish community completed just prior to the Six-Day War, found that while 91 percent of Jews interviewed favoured financial support of Israel, only 1 percent considered living there or encouraging their children to do so. Charles Liebman has suggested that to American Jews, Israel is “home” in the sense that Eastern Europe was to an earlier generation: a place by which one defines oneself precisely by not living there.<sup class="footnote-marker">53</sup><i class="footnote">Liebman, <i>The Ambivalent American Jew</i>, 106.</i>
The Six-Day War led to a further contradiction, both sides of which were embraced by American Jews. Israel’s victory enhanced its image as the triumphant affirmation of Jewish survival. But its isolation prior to the war dramatised Israel as the embodiment of the perennial Jewish condition of vulnerability. On the one hand, Israel is seen as needing the support of the diaspora; on the other it is viewed as a symbol of the independence of the Jewish spirit.
American Jews, for their part, are deeply disinclined to see their situation as one of <i>galut</i>. If exile is defined politically as persecution, disenfranchisement and insecurity, they can point to their own freedom, integration and social prominence. If it is defined spiritually as the alienation of man from God, it exists in secular Israel no less than in secular America. If it is defined as homelessness, then the very existence of Israel lifts the category of <i>galut</i> from Jews both in Israel and outside. Home, said Mordecai Kaplan, quoting Robert Frost, “is the place where, when you go there, they have to take you in.” In this sense, Israel is home not only to its own inhabitants but to Jews everywhere. But if America is not <i>galut</i>, where then lies the unique significance of Israel for American Jews?
These inner tensions have deepened in the past two decades. Many Israelis have emigrated to America: they outnumber the Americans who have chosen to live in Israel.<sup class="footnote-marker">54</sup><i class="footnote">For a study of Israelis in America, see Moshe Shokeid, <i>Children of Circumstances</i> (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1988).</i> Their existence at once refutes and confirms an American Zionism which sees Israel as a place to which one goes, not leaves, but which sees America as a uniquely benign environment for Jews. The same perplexity has been created by the desire of many Russian Jewish emigrants to live in America rather than Israel. Which of the two is the land of refuge? The Yom Kippur War of 1973, the Lebanon campaign of 1982 and the Palestinian <i>Intifada</i> raised questions about Israel as the place where Jews can live without fear. Publicised conflicts between secular and religious raised questions about Israel as the locus of Jewish personal freedom. At the same time American Jews are aware that without Israel, their own Jewish life would lack focus and security. The relationship between the two Jewries is one of intense sibling rivalry.
No one has been more forceful is exposing these ambivalences than the American scholar Jacob Neusner.<sup class="footnote-marker">55</sup><i class="footnote">The argument is developed through Neusner’s books <i>Stranger at Home</i> (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1981); <i>The Jewish War Against the Jews</i> (New York: Ktav, 1984); <i>Israel in America</i> (Boston, MA: Beacon Press, 1985); <i>Who, What and Where Is Israel</i> (Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 1989).</i> Zionism solved a critical problem for American Jews. It allowed a reconstruction of Jewish identity in the face of the disintegration of the religious base of Jewish peoplehood. Jews in America felt that they were different from other Americans and linked to other Jews throughout the world. But they could not articulate how and why. Zionism provided the answer. Jews were united in their concern for the land. For modern American Jews the transition from Holocaust to Israel is not just history but mythology. It explains who Jews are and why. They are the people who experienced <i>shoah</i> <i>u-gevurah</i>, Holocaust and heroism, threat and survival, destruction and redemption. But the answer, right for Israelis, is wrong for American Jews. It explains what it is to be a Jew in terms of events that happened to someone else, somewhere else. American Jews did not live through the Holocaust. They choose not to live in Israel. Therefore the story by which they explain the Jewish condition is a vicarious one, and fails to provide meaning to and for themselves.
Israel does not negate the diaspora, because Judaism is a matter of holy lives as well as holy places. <i>Galut</i> cannot be reduced to a spatial or political category. Exile means “alienation, disintegration, inner strife.” In that sense American Jews are in <i>galut</i>, alienated as they are from their own traditions. But that is not a <i>galut</i> that can be eliminated by geographical relocation, a trip across the ocean. Israel solves the problem of Jewish national existence, but not the problem of Jewish spiritual existence. “The Jewish people is my homeland. Wherever Jews live, there I am at home. And Zionism is the highest expression of the Jewish people’s will to endure. I am a Zionist because I am a Jew.”<sup class="footnote-marker">56</sup><i class="footnote">Neusner, <i>Stranger at Home</i>, 135.</i>
<b>From Jews to the Jewish people</b><br>The contradictions in contemporary diaspora self-understanding are, to some extent, a mirror image of the dilemmas traced in the previous chapter about Israel itself. Is Israel exile transported to the holy land, or the beginning of redemption? To this argument the diaspora has added other dimensions of its own. Does “homelessness” describe the experience of Jews in America? Most Jews, by staying there, implicitly answer in the negative. Even those who would say yes might argue, like George Steiner, that the Jewish destiny is precisely to lack a home. The theological problem posed by the modern state of Israel and the diaspora is that Judaism did not contemplate the possibility of a non-messianic national rebirth. That there might be a return by some, but not the majority, of Jews to the land; that Jews might feel themselves at home in the diaspora even while recognising the centrality of Israel; that return to the promised land might be geographical and political but not spiritual; that Israelis themselves, having come, might leave; that Israel might not end, but simply transform, hostility towards Jews – these were scenarios unanticipated in covenantal history.
The theme of exile and return is written too deeply into Jewish consciousness for it to be easily subverted. Every major figure in the Pentateuch – Adam, Cain, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses and the Israelites – experiences exile. The story of the covenant begins with the command of God to Abraham to leave his land, his birthplace and his father’s house. The festival of Passover is an enactment of exodus. The festival of Tabernacles involves living for eight days in a temporary dwelling. The tantalising question for Jews in a century of unprecedented exoduses and ingatherings is how to feel at home in the land of Israel and homeless in the diaspora, when the one is surrounded by enemies and wars and the other seems marked by freedom and security. Arthur Koestler, in the essay with which we began this chapter, wrote that “if the mystic yearning for the return to Palestine is eliminated from the Jewish faith, its very foundations and essence will have gone.”<sup class="footnote-marker">57</sup><i class="footnote">Koestler, <i>Promise and Fulfillment</i>, 332.</i> That is the proposition which today’s diaspora simultaneously affirms and denies.
The arguments we have explored thus far press us inexorably to a fundamental question. Most Jews have been profoundly affected by the Holocaust and the State of Israel. They have been the definitive events of modern Jewish history, moments of such consequence for the meaning of covenantal destiny that no Jew can evade coming to terms with them and their implications. But they have led, as we have seen, in two opposite directions.
On the one hand they have yielded a bewildering irreducible variety of interpretations. The Holocaust refuted and confirmed Jewish faith. Israel was the beginning of or a fateful diversion from redemption. Israel at once negates and revitalises the diaspora. Outside Israel, Jews are assimilating or, to the contrary, merely evolving. The conclusion to which these conflicts point is unmistakable. There is no present consensus on the nature of Jewish destiny.
On the other hand, the history of the Holocaust and the State of Israel have convinced many, perhaps most, Jews that there is a single and indivisible Jewish destiny. The Holocaust threatened Jews as Jews without distinction. Israel’s unfolding drama suggested to those there and in the diaspora that its fate concerned all Jews, the diaspora included. The strongest sense to have emerged in Jewish life in the past half-century has been of a people linked by the bonds of a common history and responsibility. Hence Neusner’s remark that “The Jewish people is my homeland.”
But can these two phenomena coexist? How can there be a single people so divided as to what constitutes this people and its singularity? We are driven to a central question of post-Holocaust Jewish thought. For how can there be a people defined by a land which embraces also those who choose not to live in that land? How can there be a people defined by a faith and way of life which most of its members do not share? How can there be a people shaped by a recent history who are utterly divided in their understanding of that history? Is there still a Jewish people and if so, in what sense?

Chapter 5; In Search of the Jewish People

<big><strong><i>In Search of the Jewish People</i></strong></big>
In the tenth century, Saadia Gaon – the greatest polymath of the geonic period – wrote a simple but memorable sentence: “Our people, the children of Israel, is a people only in virtue of <i>torateha,</i> its religious laws.”<sup class="footnote-marker">1</sup><i class="footnote">Saadia Gaon, <i>Emunot ve-Deot</i>, 3:7. English version, Saadia Gaon, <i>The Book of Beliefs and Opinions</i>, translated by Samuel Rosenblatt (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1948), 158.</i> This, for Saadia, was self-evident. The whole of the biblical literature pointed to it. So did the thrust of rabbinic thought. It was one of the few indisputable axioms of Judaism.
For Saadia, it provided the answer to an important question: How can we be certain that the laws of Judaism are binding for all time and not subject to abrogation? Christians, for example, had argued that the covenant with Israel had been repealed. It had been superseded by a new dispensation: a new covenant and a new Israel. How do we know that this is not so? After citing the various biblical verses that spoke of the Torah’s laws as applying “throughout their generations” and thus forming “an everlasting covenant,” Saadia adds a further proof. God had promised through Jeremiah<sup class="footnote-marker">2</sup><i class="footnote">Jeremiah 31:35–36.</i> that the Jewish people would be eternal. But “our people, the children of Israel, is a people only in virtue of its religious laws.” Therefore those laws must themselves be eternal.
Saadia thus mentions the equation between peoplehood and law merely as an aside on his way to proving another point. It was too obvious to need stating in its own right. But in retrospect it has taken on a different significance. For it answered another question, not formulated in Saadia’s day but asked often since the end of the eighteenth century. In what sense were and are Jews a people?
Throughout the long period of exile between the fall of the second Temple and the threshold of Jewish modernity – between the years 70 and 1770 – we find no expression of doubt that Jews did indeed belong to a people; indeed to a nation. But it was a nation of a most unusual kind. Jews were scattered throughout the civilised world. They were united by neither land nor (except for liturgical purposes) language. They had no overarching political or communal organisations. They had adapted to many different local cultures. Since conversion to Judaism was a theoretical possibility and a historical actuality, they were not a single race. How then did they constitute a nation?
Saadia’s answer is the classic statement of tradition. Jews were a nation in virtue of their religious laws, or more broadly, the Torah. Precisely because all Jews everywhere were bound by the same legal system – set forth in the Torah and oral tradition – one could speak of them as a <i>nation in exile</i> rather than as a geographically dispersed group of believers of the same religious faith. Jews were more than a faith community. They were a people. For the revelation at Sinai constituted them as a people and provided the laws that governed it both in its land and in dispersion. The Torah, of course, did more than promulgate laws. It provided the theological and historical context of those laws. Jews had been a nation, forged out of the shared ancestry of the patriarchs and the collective experience of Egyptian exile and exodus. They had a land – the land of Israel – to which Abraham, Moses and the wilderness generation had travelled. In that land they had lived, and to it they would one day return. Their history was not a mere chronicle of happenings but a dialogue between God and people, interpreted by the prophets. In short, no disjunction was possible between history and theology or between Jews as a people and Judaism as a religion.
This was no mere abstraction. Throughout most of those seventeen centuries, it mirrored the historical experience of Jews. The semi-autonomous <i>kehillot</i>, Jewish communities, of the Middle Ages had the power to enforce religious law and to fine or excommunicate offenders. Jewish law governed most of Jewish life, domestic and public. To be sure, Jews had contact, commercial and cultural, with their non-Jewish neighbours. But it was limited. Christian and Islamic societies saw Jews as a people apart, and so Jews saw themselves. Sociology, theology and law came together to reinforce traditional Jewish self-definition. To be a member of the Jewish community was to be politically, culturally and behaviourally distinct. Ethnos and ethos merged. The ethnic and religious dimensions of Jewish existence were inseparable. To leave one’s people was to abandon one’s religion. To abandon one’s religion was to leave one’s people.
There were, of course, grey areas. Was a Jew who had converted to Christianity or Islam still a Jew? Yes and no. As far as the laws of marriage and divorce were concerned, most authorities said yes. As far as the laws of inheritance and the taking of interest were concerned, most said no.<sup class="footnote-marker">3</sup><i class="footnote">See Gerald Blidstein, “Who Is Not a Jew? – The Medieval Discussion,” <i>Israel Law Review</i> 11 (1976), 369–90; Aharon Lichtenstein, “Brother Daniel and the Jewish Fraternity,” <i>Judaism</i> 12:3 (Summer 1963), 260–80.</i> More perplexing still were those <i>conversos</i> or Marranos who had converted through coercion or political or economic pressure, but who remained secretly loyal to Judaism. Had they, or more especially their descendants, forfeited their status as Jews? Opinions were divided.<sup class="footnote-marker">4</sup><i class="footnote">See <i>Encyclopaedia Talmudit</i>, 2, 63–65, “<i>Anusim</i>.”</i> But these were problems at the margins. The heartlands of Jewish life remained defined by Saadia’s conjunction of peoplehood and law.
<b>The end of the Jewish people?</b><br>It was subsequent to emancipation that the problem arose, for three reasons. Firstly, emancipation meant the disbanding of Jewish ecclesiastical power. In one country after another Jewish communities gave up the right to excommunicate recalcitrant members. Without significant argument or resistance, the Jewish community became a voluntary association. Modernity for Judaism meant the end of substantive powers of religious coercion. Secondly, secularisation and the effective, if not always formal, separation of religion and state meant that for the first time in many centuries a Jew might leave the Jewish community without having to become, religiously, anything else. Benjamin Disraeli is reputed, on being asked whether he was a Jew or a Christian, to have taken out a Christian Bible and opened it at the blank page between the Old Testament and the New. “I,” he said, “am that blank page.” It symbolised the new neutral space between being a Jew and converting to Christianity. Thirdly, it was only in the modern period that a significant range of alternative Jewish identities – cultural, political or religious – opened up.
This third phenomenon was a direct consequence of the other two. External and internal forces played their part. There were Jews who, faced with the prospect of an open society, still wished to maintain Jewish continuity while at the same time arguing that Jewish law was now socially and intellectually dysfunctional. There were others who, having tried to assimilate into Gentile society, found their way blocked by an old-new antisemitism. Throughout Europe and America they proposed new formulae for Jewish identity. Religious liberals founded Reform, Conservative and Reconstructionist Judaisms, religious systems which proposed revolutionary or evolutionary changes in Jewish law. Jewish socialists, Bundists and others, found Jewish expression in political activity. Yiddishists and the pioneers of a new Hebrew literature, found it in culture. Some, like the historian Simon Dubnow, argued for Jewish autonomy in Eastern Europe. The secular Zionists insisted that an autonomous Jewish society could now only be built in the land of Israel, and that nationalism was the necessary vehicle of Jewish identity in the modern age. Each of these developments was possible because of the secular disjunction between religion and other facets of identity, and because the Jewish community as a self-governing entity with coercive ecclesiastical powers no longer existed. The link between Jewishness and Judaism, people and law, had been broken.
In the 1950s, Martin Buber drew the harsh conclusion that in the traditional sense the Jewish people no longer existed. <i>Knesset Yisrael</i>, “the congregation of Israel,” the covenantal people as a single entity before God, no longer referred to any coherently describable group. There were still Jews, but since the Enlightenment, they had become too fragmented to be described as a people. There was too much disagreement between them on fundamentals.<sup class="footnote-marker">5</sup><i class="footnote">See Michael Wyschogrod, <i>The Body of Faith: Judaism as Corporeal Election</i> (Minneapolis, MN: Seabury Press, 1983), 239.</i> In 1967 the French sociologist Georges Friedmann published a book with the arresting title, <i>The End of the Jewish People?</i><sup class="footnote-marker">6</sup><i class="footnote">Georges Friedmann, <i>The End of the Jewish People?</i> (London: Hutchinson, 1967).</i> It argued that Israel and the diaspora were drifting apart and each, in its way, was enacting the end of the Jewish destiny. Israel was too secularised to be called a Jewish state. The diaspora was too little threatened by antisemitism to prevent the widespread disappearance of Jews into their local environments. The choice lay between collective assimilation in the one and individual assimilation in the other. It was the last of a long line of obituaries for the covenantal people.
<b>The new Sadducees</b><br>By one of those ironies in which Jewish history is rich, no sooner was the book published than its central contentions were proved false. As we have had cause to note before, 1967 was the turning point for Jewish consciousness in the modern era. The Arab threat of the destruction of the State of Israel evoked long-suppressed memories of the Holocaust. Worldwide, Jews were determined to resist: in Israel, by fighting; outside Israel, by political and financial support. The crisis revealed Jews to themselves. Israel and the Jewish diaspora were indeed a single people, linked by the bonds of shared memory and collective responsibility. Their multiple and divergent destinies evaporated in the face of external threat.
It was a seminal moment and ever since, the idea of “one people” has been a powerful force in folk imagination. As we have seen, the diaspora has taken Israel as its focus. Israeli society, for its part, has begun to establish connections between itself and the history and present reality of diaspora Jewry. The Holocaust, for example, had long been regarded by Israelis as the shameful closing chapter of exilic Judaism. It now began to be seen as part of an ongoing Jewish isolation which persisted even into the relations between contemporary Israel, the Arab world and the United Nations.<sup class="footnote-marker">7</sup><i class="footnote">See Charles Liebman and Eliezer Don-Yehiya, <i>Civil Religion in Israel</i>, (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1983), 123–66.</i> A new museum, <i>Bet Hatefutsot</i> (“The House of the Diaspora”) was opened on the outskirts of Tel Aviv, allowing Israelis to re-establish connections with their past. Israeli novelists turned from their preconception with the new Israeli, the sabra, to searching explorations of their historical roots.<sup class="footnote-marker">8</sup><i class="footnote">See Amnon Rubinstein, <i>The Zionist Dream Revisited</i> (New York Schocken, 1984), 127–55.</i> In a major and still ongoing cultural transformation, secular Zionists have had their confidence shaken in the idea that Israel is a radical break with the exilic past. Religious voices began to be heard with a confidence and authority they had never before held in the state.
American Jews, meanwhile, adopted “We are One” as their campaigning platform. Israel’s isolation prior to the Six-Day War convinced many Jews that the diaspora was her only unconditional ally. American Jewry’s secularisation mean that, as its thoughts turned from integration to survival, an Israel-centred ethnicity seemed the most viable axis of its own future development. Once the centre of gravity of diaspora life moves from the synagogue to more secular organisations, a sense of Jewish unity can emerge which seems to transcend the fierce divisions between religious denominations. But as Jonathan Woocher has noted, this is a unity that cannot be explored too closely, for any effort to invest it with religious content would expose its inner contradictions. Concepts like unity, chosenness, tradition and destiny, resonant with religious meaning, are left undefined, for it is precisely over the interpretation of these terms that Jews have been divided for the past two centuries. The resulting belief system, which Woocher terms civil Judaism, is therefore a “religion without theology.”<sup class="footnote-marker">9</sup><i class="footnote">Jonathan Woocher, <i>Sacred Survival</i> (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press), 63–103.</i>
And here lies the problem. For what has emerged over the past quarter-century is a fateful evolution in the idea of the Jewish people, a development unprecedented since the contours of rabbinic Judaism were determined in the first century CE. Perhaps the most suggestive analysis of what has occurred is that offered by the political theorist, Daniel Elazar.<sup class="footnote-marker">10</sup><i class="footnote">Daniel Elazar, <i>People and Polity</i> (Detroit, MI: Wayne State University Press, 1989).</i> Elazar reminds us of the divisions that existed in Jewish life in the Second Commonwealth period. There were Pharisees, Sadducees and Essenes. The Essenes were pietists who lived in small collectivist communities. The Sadducees were Jews whose Jewishness was primarily expressed through the institutions of the state: monarchy, the priesthood and the Temple. The Pharisees, by contrast, emphasised Jewish law as the sanctification of personal as well as public spheres, and valued a life of study as the progressive internalisation of its norms. With the destruction of the second Temple, Pharisaism quickly became the dominant pattern of Jewish existence, and there were few serious contenders for its primacy. Pharisaism became rabbinic Judaism, which in turn became Judaism <i>tout court</i>.
Elazar suggests that what has happened has been the re-emergence after almost 2,000 years of a neo-Sadducean Judaism. “Today’s Sadducees include Israeli Zionists [and] diaspora Jews who seek to be Jewish through identification with the Jewish people as a corporate entity, its history, culture and tradition, but without necessarily accepting the authority or centrality of halakhah in defining their Jewishness.” They are “firmly committed to the Jewish people, either as a whole or as it exists in Israel, seeing in the expression of peoplehood or nationhood what can be termed a religious obligation, though often in the sense of a civil religion.”<sup class="footnote-marker">11</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 162.</i>
To understand how striking a development this is, let us recall how unpredictable it was according to the three dominant views of Jewish existence that emerged in the nineteenth century. The first was Orthodoxy, the continuation of the classic terms of rabbinic Judaism into the modern age. For Orthodoxy, Saadia’s definition remained normative. There could be no Jewish people without Jewish law. This was precisely why it regarded the other two developments – Reform Judaism and secular Zionism – as fundamentally threatening to Jewish existence. They were, it argued, more dangerous to Judaism than Christianity. The Jew who converted to Christianity at least knew that he was abandoning his people. The Jew who chose Reform or secular Zionism believed that he was still part of his people. But a Jewish people that defined itself without reference to Jewish law was a contradiction in terms. The laws set forth in the Torah were the constitution of the covenant. And without the covenant there was no Jewish people. The present reality – a majority of Jews worldwide who see themselves as bound to a people but not to its laws – neither was nor could have been contemplated by Orthodoxy.
Nor could it have been foreseen by radical Reform as it reached expression in Germany in the 1840s and America in the 1880s. For this had evolved specifically as an attempt to present Judaism as a religion with all elements of peoplehood removed. The aspects of Judaism to which radical Reformers objected – the dietary laws, circumcision, Jewish as opposed to civil divorce, the prohibition of work on the Sabbath and the hope, expressed in the liturgy, for a return to Zion – were precisely those which served to keep Jews a people apart. These must now be abandoned, the radicals argued, for Jews had now become “integral elements of other peoples and states.”<sup class="footnote-marker">12</sup><i class="footnote">The words are those of the radical reformer, Samuel Holdheim. See Gil Graff, <i>Separation of Church and State</i> (Birmingham, AL: University of Alabama Press, 1985), 122.</i> Radical Reform objected to all expressions of ethnicity and proposed a highly universalised interpretation of Judaism. What has emerged is precisely the opposite: peoplehood without religion in place of religion without peoplehood.
This had been secular Zionism’s contention all along: that nationalism would replace religion as the bond of Jewish life. Nonetheless it too has been confounded by the turn of events. For secular Zionists tended to assume two things that have not occurred, the eclipse of the diaspora and the “normalisation” of Jewish life in Israel. The events of 1967 and their aftermath have refuted both predictions. Jewish life in the diaspora has been resurgent and Israel has become internationally isolated, recapitulating on a national scale what had been the Jewish experience in exile. Far from becoming “normalised,” Israelis since 1967 have found their situation best expressed in the biblical phrase “a people that dwells alone.”<sup class="footnote-marker">13</sup><i class="footnote">Numbers 23:9. The phrase was particularly associated with the late Yaacov Herzog. See Yaacov Herzog, <i>A People that Dwells Alone</i> (New York: Sanhedrin Press, 1975).</i> A secular peoplehood embracing both Israel and the diaspora was therefore the one thing that Orthodox, Reform and secular Zionist thinkers were agreed in believing to be impossible. It has come to pass. This, then, is the theological dilemma. Can an account be given of the late twentieth-century survival and revival of the Jewish people which does justice to its religious significance without overlooking the secularity and palpable diversity of its members? Saadia’s definition conflicts with what most Jews perceive to be their present reality: a Jewish people unconstituted by Jewish law. Can any other definition of Jewish peoplehood be found? Four contemporary thinkers stand out by the boldness of their approach to this question: Emil Fackenheim, Irving Greenberg, Michael Wyschogrod and Rabbi Joseph Soloveitchik.
<b>Emil Fackenheim</b><br>Emil Fackenheim is a thinker of great subtlety and depth, primarily concerned with the relationship between Judaism and philosophy in a post-Holocaust age. But he is best known for his thoughts on the Holocaust itself and its implications for Judaism. We recall his remark that Auschwitz had addressed an imperative to those Jews who lived after it, a “614th commandment” over and above the 613 commands of the Torah: “the authentic Jew of today is forbidden to hand Hitler yet another posthumous victory.”<sup class="footnote-marker">14</sup><i class="footnote">Emil Fackenheim, <i>The Jewish Return into History</i> (New York: Schocken, 1978), 22.</i> This is the command of Jewish survival as such. Hitler had made it a crime to be a Jew. Therefore simply existing as a Jew became an act of defiance against the force of evil.
Fackenheim goes further and directly addresses the question of Jewish peoplehood. Once again the Holocaust is the starting point of his reflections. The effect of the emancipation was to make many Jews wish to “normalise” the Jewish condition. In Israel they would become a nation like all others. Outside Israel they would become citizens like all others. After Auschwitz a full-blooded desire for normalisation has become impossible. Jews were singled out, not for what they believed or did, but for what they were. The authentic Jew, reflecting on this, must accept his “singled-out” condition.
This “command” addresses all Jews regardless of their faith or lack of it. The ovens of Auschwitz made no distinction between religious and secular, assimilated or segregated, Orthodox or heterodox Jews. If the Holocaust has altered the terms of Jewish existence, as Fackenheim has argued it has, we would expect him to argue that the past divisions within Jewry fade into insignificance in the present. And so indeed he does. But how can this be so? The abyss separating religious and secular Jews is surely no less profound now than it was in the early part of the century.
Fackenheim’s answer is this. In the past, the Jewish believer heard both the <i>Metzaveh</i> and the <i>mitzvah,</i> the Commander and the command. The Jewish unbeliever heard neither. But now, even the unbeliever hears the command; and even the believer fails to hear the Commander. God is in eclipse. We cannot use traditional theological categories like “punishment for sins” in relation to the Holocaust. There is no way of understanding how God was present at Auschwitz. This is what Fackenheim means by saying that the believer no longer hears the Commander. And yet, though there was no <i>redeeming</i> presence at Auschwitz, there was nonetheless a <i>commanding</i> presence. The Jewish secularist no less than the believer hears the command that “above all this must never happen again.” He testifies to it by his commitment to Jewish survival. That commitment cannot be justified as the product of reason. For it addresses him not as man in the abstract but as Jew in full particularity. It comes to him as “an abrupt and absolute given, revealed in the midst of total catastrophe.”<sup class="footnote-marker">15</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 23.</i> This is what Fackenheim means by saying that even the unbeliever hears the command.
The old dichotomies between Orthodox and heterodox, believer and unbeliever, therefore fall away in the light of this shared and transfiguring experience:
<span class="poetry indentAll">Once there was a sharp, perhaps ultimate dichotomy between “religious” and “secular” Jews. It exists no longer. After Auschwitz, the religious Jew still witnesses to God in history, albeit in ways that may be revolutionary. And the “secular” Jew has become a witness as well – against Satan if not to God. His mere commitment to Jewish survival without further grounds is a testimony; indeed Jewish survival after Auschwitz is neither “mere” nor without grounds… For this commitment is <i>ipso facto</i> testimony that there can be, must be, shall be, no second Auschwitz anywhere; on this testimony and this faith the secular Jew no less than the religious Jew stakes his own life, the lives of his children, and the lives of his children’s children. A secular holiness, side by side with religious, is becoming manifest in contemporary Jewish existence.<sup class="footnote-marker">16</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 53–54.</i></span>
The State of Israel lies at the very centre of these reflections. It represents that which has decisively changed in Jewish consciousness. Israel, if not the end of <i>galut</i>, is the end of <i>galut</i> Judaism, which Fackenheim defines as “the faith by which the Jew, while lamenting the exile is able to bear it in patience and confidence; he can bear it, for it is meaningful.”<sup class="footnote-marker">17</sup><i class="footnote"><i>The Jewish Thought of Emil Fackenheim: A Reader</i>, edited by Michael L. Morgan (Detroit, MI: Wayne State University Press, 1987), 301.</i> This faith, applied to the Holocaust, is no longer tenable. Instead Israel symbolises the Jewish determination no longer to suffer evil but actively to resist it. Thus for Fackenheim, though the state and the majority of its population are secular, there is something intrinsically sacred in both. Israel is a real, if fragmentary <i>tikkun</i>, a “mending” of the “rupture” caused by Auschwitz.<sup class="footnote-marker">18</sup><i class="footnote">Emil Fackenheim, <i>To Mend the World</i> (New York: Schocken, 1982).</i> Fackenheim uses the kabbalistic term <i>tikkun</i> to attach religious significance to ways in which evil can be partially redeemed by becoming the springboard for a new affirmation of the good.
Undoubtedly Fackenheim has touched on a deep chord in contemporary Jewish sensibility. His statement that the Holocaust yielded the command “Never again” precisely defined the popular mood, articulating, as one reviewer noted, “the sentiments…of Jewish shoe salesmen, accountants, policemen, cab drivers, secretaries.”<sup class="footnote-marker">19</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 299.</i> But there is a central problem in his writings in so far as they touch on the subject of peoplehood. The intellectual strategy Fackenheim adopts is that of <i>inclusivism</i>, an approach taken by some Christian writers like Paul Tillich and Karl Rahner to suggest that one who thinks of himself as a non-believer may, without knowing it, actually be a believer. Inclusivism has a significant place in traditional Jewish thought. But it always encounters this problem: that it imputes beliefs or intentions to individuals against their own self-description. It speaks of others as they would not speak of themselves. In Fackenheim’s case inclusivism runs in both directions: the religious Jew is held to believe less than he claims, and the secular Jew more. The religious Jew believes less, because traditional faith has been “ruptured” by the Holocaust. The secular Jew believes more, because post-Holocaust Jewish survival is itself a testimony of faith. Thus religious and secular Jews have more in common than they imagine.
As a description of contemporary Jewry, this is untenable.<sup class="footnote-marker">20</sup><i class="footnote">A critique along similar lines is to be found in Steven Katz, <i>Post-Holocaust Dialogues</i> (New York: New York University Press, 1985), 205–47.</i> As we saw in an earlier chapter, Orthodox thinkers have charted many different responses to the Holocaust, but they have one thing in common. They refuse to admit to a “rupture” in traditional faith. Whether the Shoah was, as R. Joel Teitelbaum argued, a punishment for sins, or as others argued, a “hiding of the face of God” or a result of the space left by God for human free will, they approach it in the language of earlier Jewish responses to suffering. Some draw their imagery from the book of Ezekiel, others from Job, others from Lamentations. These are significant differences. But more significant is the fact on which they do not differ: that Auschwitz has eclipsed neither the command nor the Commander. Fackenheim makes a move that no Orthodox thinker would follow in implying that a <i>novum</i> in Jewish history is a <i>novum</i> in Jewish spirituality. That pious Jews went to their deaths in Auschwitz reciting the words “I believe with perfect faith” is itself a datum with which Jewish theology must come to terms.
Secular Jews for their part have responded with equal consistency. The Shoah, they have argued, was a human catastrophe to which there must be a human response. It was possible because Jews had no capacity to defend themselves and because they had nowhere else to go. The State of Israel represents the necessary acquisition of home and power after the terrible consequences of homelessness and powerlessness. But these are secular imperatives with no religious undertones. There has been, in other words, no theological convergence between religious and secular Jews of the kind that Fackenheim’s thought leads us to expect. The attempt to find unifying substance and significance in Jewish survival as such remains problematic. For there is too little agreement on what that survival means and demands.
<b>Irving Greenberg</b><br>Perhaps the closest modern Jewish thought has come to a full expression of what Daniel Elazar calls neo-Sadduceanism is to be found in the writings of the American thinker Irving Greenberg.<sup class="footnote-marker">21</sup><i class="footnote">Greenberg’s argument is set out in three papers published by the National Jewish Resource Center, New York: <i>On the Third Era in Jewish History: Power and Politics</i> (1980);<i> The Third Great Cycle in Jewish History</i> (1981); and <i>Voluntary Covenant</i> (1982). See also his <i>The Jewish Way</i> (New York: Summit Books, 1988).</i> Greenberg’s thought bears a close resemblance to that of Fackenheim, but it is set against a larger historical backdrop. Instead of invoking images of catastrophe and rupture, Greenberg argues that the Holocaust and Israel have initiated a historical development in Judaism comparable to that which occurred at the time of the destruction of the second Temple. That event marked the transition from biblical to rabbinic Judaism. The last half-century has witnessed the birth of a new phase in the unfolding of the covenant: the third great era in Judaism.
The two transitions have a similar pattern. If we compare biblical and rabbinic Judaism, Greenberg argues, we find a distinct theological transformation. For the rabbis, the presence of God was more concealed than for the prophets, but it was more widely experienced. Sages took the place of visionaries; the synagogue replaced the Temple; argument and interpretation succeeded prophecy. The divine presence, as it were, became more secularised, which is to say, more opaque but also more diffused. The divine retreat from history meant that human action became more significant, human responsibility for the covenant became greater, and man became, as the sages put it, “a partner in the work of creation.” Through the extension of education and ritual, ordinary life was suffused with religious meaning.
The second era was initiated by a tragedy, the destruction of the Temple, and so was the third, by the destruction of European Jewry. As a result, God has become more hidden still. “We are entering,” says Greenberg, “a period of silence in theology,”<sup class="footnote-marker">22</sup><i class="footnote">Greenberg, <i>The Third Great Cycle in Jewish History</i>, 16.</i> for any attempt to use traditional categories like divine providence or punishment in understanding the Holocaust is a blasphemy against the innocent victims. The third era is to the second as the second was to the first: a move towards greater human responsibility and a more universal if more concealed divine presence. For Greenberg as for Fackenheim, the State of Israel is the decisive model of the new “secular” holiness. “The revelation of Israel is a call to secularity; the religious enterprise must focus on the mundane.”<sup class="footnote-marker">23</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 17.</i>
A new constellation is emerging, of a new Jewish situation (power), a new theology (secularity and the God of silence), new institutions (in Israel, the Knesset and the Israeli Defence Forces; in America, fundraising and politically activist organisations) and new leadership (politicians, Jewish academics and lay-leaders). The key to this configuration is an emphasis on human initiative, on taking the Jewish destiny into one’s own hands. Although the new mood is seen in its purest form in Israel, it has affected the Diaspora as well. Jewish communities in America and elsewhere are more politically active than in the past, a sure sign of the end of the exilic mentality. The clearest symptom of the transformation of values is the fact that the noblest concept of the second era – martyrdom – is no longer tenable. The virtues of the new Jewish age are active, not passive.
Which brings us to Greenberg’s most controversial claim. The covenant, he says, was <i>broken</i> by the Holocaust. If Judaism testifies to the infinite value of human life, the concentration camps were the ultimate devaluation of human life. More specifically, the covenant which had promised redemption instead became a mute witness to destruction. Greenberg quotes Elie Wiesel’s remark that during the Shoah the Jewish mission had become a “suicide mission.” Such a sacrifice cannot be morally commanded. The Jewish vocation had led to a fate too dangerous and cruel to bear. “Morally speaking, then, God can have no claims on the Jews by dint of the covenant.”<sup class="footnote-marker">24</sup><i class="footnote">Greenberg, <i>Voluntary Covenant</i>, 15.</i>
Jews today who identify do so <i>voluntarily</i>, knowing how much they risk by so doing. “In the age of voluntary covenant, every person who steps forward to live as a Jew can be compared to a convert.”<sup class="footnote-marker">25</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 21.</i> One who comes to convert to Judaism, says the Talmud, is told that the Jews are driven, tormented and persecuted.<sup class="footnote-marker">26</sup><i class="footnote">Babylonian Talmud, <i>Yevamot</i> 47a.</i> Conversion means a willingness – despite everything – to identify with such a people. Every Jew today, says Greenberg, is in such a position. Whoever chooses to remain Jewish has voluntarily renewed the covenant.
A voluntary covenant differs from a covenant imposed from above in that it is inherently pluralistic. The various Jewish groups now active, each in its different way, testify to a fundamental choice to carry on the Jewish enterprise. In the silence of Heaven, we hear only the varied voices of Jews, and we have no authoritative criterion to choose between them. The two things we cannot aspire to after Auschwitz are theological certainty and exclusiveness. Jewish existence <i>as such</i> has become imperative and holy: not one particular mode of existence as against others. We no longer have access to authoritative standards of what is a correct covenantal response.
Greenberg’s thought, then, is an attempt to translate Judaism into a language of secularity. Unlike Fackenheim, who uses the strategy of inclusivism to suggest a kinship between religious and secular Jews, Greenberg takes his stand on the principle of <i>pluralism</i>. But pluralism in the sense in which he intends it – conferring equal validity to religious and secular modes of Jewishness – is unprecedented in Jewish tradition, and to vindicate his claim Greenberg is forced to very radical theology indeed. His views have a close affinity with contemporary Reform Judaism in placing choice at the heart of the religious system. His argument is that we are each free to choose our way of being Jewish, since we no longer hear the divine voice and the claims of the past are, after Auschwitz, silenced. It is difficult to see, in this scheme, what sense could be given to the central term of Judaism, <i>commandment</i>; or indeed what is left of the covenant itself. For the covenant meant this if it meant anything: that a Jew is <i>born into</i> a destiny with associated obligations, the terms of which reach back to Sinai. Judaism, that is to say, is experienced as given, not chosen.
To establish the centrality of choice, Greenberg must argue, as he does, that the covenant is broken. But having gone this far, it is difficult to see why it should be voluntarily taken up again. Unlike Fackenheim, Greenberg offers no convincing explanation of the significance of Jewish survival. To be sure, he is aware of the problem. At one point, he suggests that “the Jewish people was so in love with the dream of redemption that it volunteered to carry on its mission.”<sup class="footnote-marker">27</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 17.</i> At another he writes that “One may opt out by refusing to live as a visible Jew, by trying to escape the fate of a Jew.”<sup class="footnote-marker">28</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 22.</i> The language of these two sentences suggests that Greenberg is reluctant to carry the idea of voluntary covenant to its conclusion. The first invokes the religious idea of redemption, still apparently intact after the Holocaust. The second is a Sartrean appeal to the “fate” of the Jew which it is inauthentic to try to escape. Greenberg’s use of these ideas, at odds with the central thrust of his argument, gives us early warning of the difficulties of importing pluralism into Judaism.
Greenberg’s significance lies in the fact that, more than any other thinker, he has responded to the shifting centre of gravity of Jewish life. His thought is a conscious attempt to formulate a “post denominational” Judaism, and explicitly reflects the fact that the symbols and contexts of Jewish life have changed. The focus of Jewish experience is no longer the synagogue but, in Israel, the state, and in America, the philanthropic organisation. The public expression of belongingness has replaced the private experience of commandedness. Greenberg notes that this transformation must radically alter our idea of what constitutes religious behaviour. “Every act of social justice, every humane or productive factory, every sport contest in community centres, every act of human socialising and dignity will become a secularised halakhah as Jewish religious insight deepens and the sacred dimensions of the profane are uncovered.”<sup class="footnote-marker">29</sup><i class="footnote">Greenberg, <i>The Third Great Cycle in Jewish History</i>, 22–23.</i> This is precisely what sociologists call civil religion, and Elazar, neo-Sadducean Judaism.
<b>Michael Wyschogrod</b><br>An altogether different approach is taken by Michael Wyschogrod. In 1983 Wyschogrod published one of the very few systematic attempts this century to offer a full-scale theology of Jewish existence, and a most fascinating and unusual one it is. The title gives a pr<i>elim</i>inary indication of the book’s central theme. It is called <i>The Body of Faith: Judaism as Corporeal Election</i>.<sup class="footnote-marker">30</sup><i class="footnote">See note 5.</i>
One of the most perplexing concepts for Jews in modernity has been that of <i>the chosen people</i>. The theme of the election of Israel is central to the Bible. It was a definitive component of Jewish consciousness throughout the rabbinic period also, emphasised repeatedly in the liturgy. To be sure, throughout the Middle Ages the situation of Jews hardly accorded with what might be expected of God’s “special treasure,” and Christian theologians made much of the fact. But Jews were unmoved. Judah Halevi reminded them of Amos’s famous prophecy, “You only have I chosen of all the families of the earth; therefore I will punish you for all your sins.”<sup class="footnote-marker">31</sup><i class="footnote">Amos 3:2.</i> Israel among the nations, said Halevi, was like the heart among the other limbs of the body. It was more sensitive; therefore it suffered most.<sup class="footnote-marker">32</sup><i class="footnote">Judah Halevi, <i>Kuzari</i> 2:36–44.</i> Jewish suffering only reinforced the sense of special destiny.
It was in the modern period that the idea was first called into question. Spinoza was the first iconoclast. Chosenness, he argued, did not signify that Jews had any singular endowments, that they were specially favoured by God, or that they had more than their share of miracles. It referred to nothing more than “temporal physical happiness and freedom, in other words, autonomous government, and to the manner and means by which they obtained it.”<sup class="footnote-marker">33</sup><i class="footnote">Spinoza, <i>A Theologico-Political Treatise</i>, translated by R. H. M. Elwes, (New York: Dover, 1951), 48.</i> It followed that with the loss of national autonomy in the first century CE, the Jews had ceased to be chosen.
Spinoza’s <i>Tractatus Theologico-Politicus</i> was published in 1670, and caused a scandal in both Jewish and Christian circles. Spinoza had already, fourteen years before, been excommunicated by the Jewish community. It was more than a century and a half before his views came to be reconsidered in radical Jewish circles and eventually had a significant influence on both Reform Judaism and secular Zionism. The problem was this. Jewish chosenness had its “plausibility strucure” in a social context in which Jews were a people apart. That is precisely what both reformers and secular Zionists did not wish to be. Each sought “normalization,” whether as citizens among citizens or as a nation among nations.
In 1844, the Reform congregation in Berlin published a prayer book which eliminated references to chosenness. Its authors explained that “the concept of tribal holiness and of a special vocation arising from this has become entirely foreign to us.” Instead they urged “true humanity and brotherly love.”<sup class="footnote-marker">34</sup><i class="footnote">Quoted in Arnold Eisen, <i>The Chosen People in America: A Study in Jewish Religious Ideology</i> (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1983), 19.</i> From then on in Reform circles chosenness was reinterpreted as mission, and mission in turn universalised to relatively contentless ethical ideals. Arnold Eisen has devoted a book-length study to the ways in which the idea of the chosen people was neutralised in twentieth-century American-Jewish thought.<sup class="footnote-marker">35</sup><i class="footnote">See previous note.</i> Mordecai Kaplan, the most radical but most folk-oriented of American rabbis, categorically rejected it. For him the idea was theologically unsound and socially dysfunctional. Instead he called on Jews to “live with a sense of vocation or calling without involving ourselves in any of the invidious distinctions implied in the doctrine of election.”<sup class="footnote-marker">36</sup><i class="footnote">Eisen, <i>The Chosen People in America</i>, 81.</i> In contemporary Israel meanwhile, A. B. Yehoshua has argued that “the demand to be different, singular, unique, set apart from the family of nations” is a neurosis of <i>galut</i>, to be cured by Zionism.<sup class="footnote-marker">37</sup><i class="footnote">A.B. Yehoshua, <i>Between Right and Right</i> (New York: Doubleday, 1981), 21–74.</i> Once one is a majority, the sense of differentness disappears.
In reinstating the idea of election, Wyschogrod was thus confronting directly the ambivalence of modern Jewish thought. A brief survey cannot do justice to his subtle and far-reaching work. But it is clear that to reach a full-blooded particularism he was bound to have to reject the classic terms of Jewish philosophy as represented by Moses Maimonides, and to turn directly to the Bible. “Maimonides’ demythologisation of the concept of God,” he writes, “is unbiblical and ultimately dangerous to Jewish faith.” Philosophy searches for the universal. But the God of Israel “enters space by dwelling in the Tabernacle and the Temple in Jerusalem.”<sup class="footnote-marker">38</sup><i class="footnote">Wyschogrod, <i>The Body of Faith</i>, xiv–xv.</i> He lives in particularities, among them a particular people.
To understand the mystery of Israel we must rescue the idea of God from depersonalisation and incorporeality. God, in the Torah, is a person; He has loves; He expresses emotions; He dwells in holy places; He chooses a particular people. Here is the crux. Two things had made Jewish thinkers underemphasise this cluster of ideas. The first, in the Middle Ages, was Christianity. Jews had been scandalised by the idea of incarnation and had, in reaction, gone to the opposite extreme of stressing the abstract spirituality of God. The second, in the modern period, was assimilation. Jews had sought a theology that would legitimate their striving for normalisation. They found it in the universalistic ideas of the Enlightenment, which they retrospectively attributed to the prophets and the sages. “Ethics,” writes Wyschogrod, “is the Judaism of the assimilated.”<sup class="footnote-marker">39</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 181.</i>
But this is to rob Judaism of its essential foundation, the idea of a chosen people. Here is how Wyschogrod summarises his belief:
<span class="poetry indentAll">The election of the people of Israel as the people of God constitutes the sanctification of a natural family. God could have chosen a spiritual criterion: the election of all those who have faith or who obey God’s commandments. The liberal mind would find such an election far more congenial. But God did not choose this path. He chose the seed of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. There are, of course, religious and ethical demands made of the elect. When they do not live up to those demands, they are punished. But the essential belonging to the people of election is derived from descent from the Patriarchs. The election of Israel is therefore a corporeal election. One result of this is that a Jew cannot resign his election. Were election based on faith or ethics, a change in belief or conduct would terminate the election and the responsibilities connected with it. But because the election of Israel is of the flesh, a Jew remains in the service of God no matter what he believes or does. The Jewish body as well as the Jewish soul is therefore holy.<sup class="footnote-marker">40</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., xv.</i></span>
In the book’s closing sentences he puts the proposition more strikingly. “Salvation is of the Jews because the flesh of Israel is the abode of the divine presence in the world. It is the carnal anchor that God has sunk into the soil of creation.”<sup class="footnote-marker">41</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 256.</i> This is language altogether unprecedented in Jewish philosophy, an exotic synthesis of influences which include Judah Halevi, Karl Barth and Martin Heidegger. It stands in an obvious dialectical relationship to Christian theology. The intellectual underpinnings of the analysis are important in their own right but will not concern us here. What follows, however, is that Wyschogrod can directly confront the question of how there can be Jewish peoplehood at a time of profound conflicts of belief. Jews are united not theologically, ideologically or culturally but <i>ontologically</i>: in their very being. They are members of a family. They are chosen. They are a holy people. This applies even when they rebel against the terms of the covenant. Wyschogrod takes with ultimate seriousness the rabbinic dictum with which he prefaces the book: “Even though they [the Jews] are unclean, the Divine Presence is among them.”<sup class="footnote-marker">42</sup><i class="footnote"><i>Sifra</i> to Leviticus 16:16.</i>
Wyschogrod spells out the implications of this sentence for the contemporary Jewish situation.
<span class="poetry indentAll">God appears in history as the God of Israel and there can therefore be no thought about God that is not also thought about Israel. And if a large portion of the Israel of our day no longer thinks about God, this fact, too, must find its way into the Jewish thought of our day… Each one of us as a Jew is a replica of the consciousness of the whole people. If we are believers, somewhere in us also lurks the nonbelief of our nonbelieving brethren, and if we are non-believers, the belief of the believers is also in us. It is to this complex and fragmented consciousness that the Jewish thought of our time must speak.<sup class="footnote-marker">43</sup><i class="footnote">Wsychogrod, <i>The Body of Faith</i>, 175.</i></span>
The Holocaust plays no part in Wyschogrod’s argument. Necessarily so, for as a traditionalist thinker he is bound to reject any suggestion that history can alter the terms of the covenant. Elsewhere he has written penetrating critiques of the Holocaust theology of Fackenheim and Greenberg.<sup class="footnote-marker">44</sup><i class="footnote">Michael Wyschogrod, “Faith and the Holocaust,” <i>Judaism</i> 20:3 (Summer 1971), 286–94; “Auschwitz: Beginning of a New Era?,” <i>Tradition</i> 16:5 (Fall 1977), 63–78.</i> The Shoah is a crisis for faith, but the promise of redemption survives. “Faith has always clung to a trust that was not warranted by the standards of plausibility and the givens of the observable world… Fundamentally, God is a redeemer. His anger is fleeting. Once it passes, His love which had never gone out of existence but only out of sight reasserts itself and the reality of redemption returns.”<sup class="footnote-marker">45</sup><i class="footnote">Wyschogrod, “Auschwitz: Beginning of a New Era?,” 70–71, 75.</i> Nonetheless, <i>The Body of Faith</i> is a post-Holocaust work and could not have been written earlier. We are reminded of R. Isaac Nissenbaum’s speech at the start of uprising in the Warsaw ghetto. Previously the enemies of the Jew had sought his soul: now they sought his body. Like Fackenheim and Greenberg, Wyschogrod is haunted by the theological resonance of the sheer physical survival of post-Holocaust Jewry. Unlike them, however, he is determined to place this fact in a traditional religious framework. Where Fackenheim has recourse to inclusivism and Greenberg, pluralism, Wyschogrod turns towards mysticism.
<i>The Body of Faith</i> has not had the attention it deserves, for it is an idiosyncratic work that stands outside the main currents of modern Jewish thought. But it is a book that will challenge liberal and Orthodox Jews alike. Liberals will be disturbed by its fierce particularism and anti-rationalism. Orthodoxy will be troubled by its insistence that peoplehood takes precedence over halakhah. “Separated from the Jewish people, nothing is Judaism,” Wyschogrod insists. “If anything, it is the Jewish people that is Judaism.”<sup class="footnote-marker">46</sup><i class="footnote">Wyschogrod, <i>The Body of Faith</i>, 174.</i> To be sure, the early rabbinic literature had speculated on which of the two terms of the covenant took priority: Torah or the people of Israel. But the halakhic as against the mystical tradition had seen holiness not as a predicate of objects and persons but of acts and intentions. A Jew was holy not in what he was but in what he did. Hence Saadia’s insistence that Jewish law constituted the Jewish people. It did not merely <i>regulate</i> a people whose defining characteristics lay elsewhere. Wyschogrod writes within the halakhic tradition, but argues that peoplehood is religiously prior to that tradition. It was left, therefore, to the fourth of our thinkers, Rabbi Joseph Soloveitchik, to articulate the most that could be salvaged of modern Jewish peoplehood within the terms Saadia had laid down.
<b>The two covenants</b><br>Rabbi Soloveitchik’s great essay on the themes of Holocaust, Israel and Jewish peoplehood is <i>Kol Dodi Dofek</i> (“The Sound of My Lover Knocking”), written in 1956.<sup class="footnote-marker">47</sup><i class="footnote">R. Joseph Soloveitchik, <i>Divrei Hagut ve-Ha’arakhah</i> (Jerusalem: World Zionist Organisation, 1981), 9–56.</i> As we saw in an earlier chapter, Soloveitchik draws a distinction between two modes of existence, those of <i>goral</i> and <i>ye’ud</i>, fate and destiny. Those who experience <i>goral</i> live as a passive object of other people’s actions. They see their personal history as a series of things that happen to them. When they search for religious meaning in suffering, they ask, “Why has this happened to me?” This is a question which has no definitive answer. It presupposes a totality of perspectives which human beings cannot attain. Those who live at the level of <i>ye’ud</i>, however, see themselves as active subjects. When they search for religious meaning in suffering they ask, “To what does this summon me?” Suffering brings man to religious crisis out of which comes repentance and a determination to right wrongs. This is the halakhic approach to the problem of evil. Halakhic man asks not “Why did this happen?” but “What then shall I do?” Suffering is the last warning which Divine providence gives humanity. Like the beloved in the Song of Songs, we hear the lover knocking at the door. Our task is to respond without delay or we will find, like the beloved, that the moment has passed and the lover has gone.
Soloveitchik does not speak directly about the Holocaust, which he regards as <i>hester panim</i>, “the hiding of the face” of God. Instead he speaks about the State of Israel, whose birth and early years are an intimation of the Divine presence in history. He enumerates several aspects of this period which might be heard as “the sound of my lover knocking.” First, the United Nations vote which brought Israel into being united Russia and America, otherwise enemies. Second, Israel’s War of Independence recalled earlier miracles of Jewish history: “the many were delivered into the hands of the few.” Third, the Christian indictment of the Jews – that they would remain homeless until they converted – had been refuted. Fourth, Israel had awoken Jewish consciousness in the hearts of assimilating Jewish youth. Fifth, the era in which Jewish lives were at the mercy of others had ended. Sixth, Jewish wandering was over. Jews could now find refuge in the land of their ancestors. These events were pregnant with religious implications.
But the analysis should not be misunderstood. There is no unambiguous Divine meaning in history. Covenant involves relationship. Providence sends signs which may be recognised and responded to or ignored. The entire sequence of events to which Soloveitchik refers could be seen as mere incidents in secular time. They could be fate or destiny, happenings or beckonings, depending on how Jews interpreted and reacted to them. What, then, had been the Jewish response? Here Soloveitchik prefaces his answer with a further, and important, conceptual development.
Judaism, he argues, recognises two covenants: a <i>brit goral</i> and a <i>brit ye’ud</i>, one of fate and another of destiny. The covenant of fate is biblically represented by the exodus. The covenant of destiny was enacted at Sinai. The same distinction in modes of being which applies to the individual applies also to the life of the people. The exodus was experienced as fate. Without choice on their part, the Israelites were enslaved in Egypt and brought out by God to freedom. But the covenant at Sinai involved the consent of the Israelites and summoned them to a life of choice and dedication, to an active shaping of their history in response to the divine command. These are the two dimensions of Jewish peoplehood. Soloveitchik refers to them respectively as <i>am</i> (“people”) and <i>goi</i> (“nation”). An <i>am</i> is a people formed by a shared history and fate. A <i>goi</i> is a nation joined by a common purpose and vision. By way of illustration, Soloveitchik relates the distinction to the two processes which a convert must undergo before admission to Jewry, circumcision and immersion in a <i>mikvah</i>, the ritual bath. Circumcision symbolises that the convert has become a child of Abraham, a member of a people with a particular past and future. But immersion represents the assumption of Israel’s spiritual purpose, the acceptance of the commandments.
The implication was clear. The Holocaust and the State of Israel had led secular and non-Orthodox Jews to a renewal of the covenant of fate. The <i>brit goral</i> expresses the solidarity of a people that perennially finds itself alone in the world. It has four dimensions. First, individual Jews find themselves unable to escape the fate of their people. Mordecai’s words to Queen Esther still hold true: “Do not think that because you are in the king’s house, you alone of all the Jews will escape.”<sup class="footnote-marker">48</sup><i class="footnote">Esther 4:13.</i> Second, collective fate leads to collective consciousness. When one Jew suffers, all Jews feel pain. This leads in turn to a third dimension, collective responsibility. All Jews, said the sages, are sureties for one another. The fourth dimension follows: collective action. Jews were commanded to help one another through acts of charity, welfare and rescue. Historically they had always done so. The biblical commands which set out these obligations are couched in the language of brotherhood. Jews act out of a sense of kinship born of the covenant of fate. But now came the crucial qualification. Modern Jewish history had led to a renewal of the <i>brit goral</i> but not of the <i>brit ye’ud</i>. There had been no <i>religious</i> reaffirmation of the covenant. The former now summoned Jews to the latter. In the Holocaust and the State of Israel, Jewry had undergone another exodus but not yet another Sinai.
Rabbi Soloveitchik speaks for and from the rabbinic tradition. His analysis is, however, both audacious and characteristically modern. Neither the biblical nor rabbinic literature speak of the exodus as a separate covenant in its own right. The concepts of <i>brit goral</i> and <i>brit ye’ud</i> are original to Soloveitchik. They are strongly reminiscent of a distinction proposed, for similar reasons, by the equally daring Rabbi Abraham Kook. Kook saw religious significance in the work of secular Zionists. They had a love for their people. They were leading the return. They were settling the land and building a nation. Nonetheless they rejected Judaism and the religious interpretation of Jewish destiny. Religious Jews, for their part, were sustaining the tradition and leading lives of great spirituality. But they were not devoted to the Jewish people as a whole and its national rebirth. Kook therefore distinguished between <i>nefesh</i> and <i>ru’ach</i>, two words meaning “spirit.” The secularists had a more highly developed <i>nefesh</i>, a national and practical spirit, while the religious had a more perfect <i>ru’ach</i>, a personal and God-centred sensibility.<sup class="footnote-marker">49</sup><i class="footnote">R. Abraham Isaac Kook, <i>Chazon ha-Ge’ulah</i> (Brooklyn: n.p., 1974), 139.</i>
What led both men to these conceptual innovations was the phenomenon which has concerned us throughout this chapter. Rabbinic tradition from the days of the Mishnah to the nineteenth century had to deal with only two kinds of deviation: the sinner and the apostate. The sinner broke Jewish law; the apostate rejected it. The apostate, by placing himself outside Jewish law placed himself outside the Jewish people. How far and final that departure was, varied. But it was a departure: of this no one had doubts. The revolution begun by Reform Judaism on the one hand, secular Zionism on the other, and culminating in the new Sadduceanism, had no precedent. For the first time tradition was confronted by Jews who saw themselves as Jews, identified with their people, contributed to its welfare either by sharing in the building of Israeli society or, in the diaspora, by philanthropic support, and yet who rejected Jewish law as the basis of their self-definition. They broke Saadia’s rule which had been the self-evident basis of Jewish identity for 1,800 years, that there is no Jewish peoplehood without Jewish law. How then were such neo-Sadducean Jews to be seen? One option, taken <i>de facto</i> by several strands of Orthodoxy, was to see them as in effect non-Jews. They were Jewish Gentiles, or they were Israelis, not Jews. They were “other,” not “brother.” The response of Rabbis Kook and Soloveitchik was therefore far from being the only one available. It represented a maximal inclusivism within the parameters of tradition. It drew the boundaries of peoplehood as widely as possible. It searched for a way of regarding the neo-Sadduceans as within rather than outside the Jewish community.
But a contrast between Soloveitchik and Fackenheim, Greenberg and Wyschogrod immediately reveals the vast gap between even the most liberal exponent of the halakhic tradition and the viewpoints outside. Each of these other three thinkers focuses almost exclusively on what Soloveitchik would term the covenant of fate. For Fackenheim the <i>brit goral</i> is announced in the “commanding voice of Auschwitz.” For Greenberg it is enacted in the new dispensations of power, activism and secularity. For Wyschogrod it is discovered in the biblical election, understood as a state of being rather than of doing. For R. Soloveitchik these three analyses exclude half of Judaism: <i>brit ye’ud</i>, the covenant of destiny. At most they amount to <i>am</i>, not <i>goi kadosh</i>: a people rather than a holy nation. The recovery of a sense of Jewish peoplehood in the last half-century therefore remains at best a partial and as yet deeply flawed achievement. Jews, secular and religious, in Israel and outside, have re-established a kinship which competing ideological visions in the nineteenth century had driven underground. But they have not yet renewed the shared religious destiny that alone in the past gave it substance and sense.
It is hard to avoid R. Soloveitchik’s conclusion that it has been external fate rather than internal vision that has been the most powerful force for Jewish unity in modern times. In the great covenantal speeches of Moses, Joshua and Ezra, history and destiny merged. Memories of a shared past led to commitment to a shared future. That perception lay behind the rabbinic understanding of the “counting of the omer,” the counting of the forty-nine days between Pesach and Shavuot, the festivals respectively of exodus and Sinai. The two were linked. Fate and purpose, Jewish identity and Jewish law, people and holy nation, were inseparable. At the present juncture in Jewish history, they are separated. That, from a religious perspective, is the tragedy and the challenge.

Chapter 6; Halakhah and Modernity

<big><strong><i>Halakhah and Modernity</i></strong></big>
When, in the tenth century, Saadia Gaon said that Jews constituted a people only in virtue of their religious laws, he was stating a proposition that would have been universally accepted until modern times. Commandments, laws, statutes and judgements formed the basis of the Sinaitic covenant, turning the Israelites from a loose confederation of slaves into a nation dedicated to the service of God. The law – God’s will translated into the constitution of a sacred society – was Israel’s singular glory. It is, says Moses, “your wisdom and understanding in the eyes of the nations, who will hear these decrees and say, ‘Surely this great nation is a wise and understanding people.’”<sup class="footnote-marker">1</sup><i class="footnote">Deuteronomy 4:6.</i> The commandments were, for biblical theology, the test by which Israel’s future history would be determined. If the laws were obeyed, Israel would find prosperity and peace in its land. If they were neglected, blessings would be replaced by curses and the people would eventually suffer exile.
With the destruction of the second Temple in 70 CE and the collapse of other bases of Jewish life – land, state, language, prophecy, monarchy and priesthood – the law came to occupy an even more central place. As Jews faced dispersion it was the law that united them into a shared way of life, providing them with a common framework of behaviour. It preserved them against assimilation into other cultures, marking them as a people apart. More than this, it was the one continuing basis of identity and hope. “From the day the Temple was destroyed,” said the rabbis, “the Holy One, blessed be He, has nothing in the world but the four cubits of Jewish law alone.”<sup class="footnote-marker">2</sup><i class="footnote">Babylonian Talmud, <i>Berakhot</i> 8a.</i> Though the Temple lay in ruins and the people faced dispersion, God had not revoked His covenant. The commandments were still in force. If Jews remained faithful to them, then sooner or later they must be redeemed. Torah – covenant as law – was the single remaining point of contact between the Jewish people and God.
In the centuries surrounding the fall of Jerusalem prodigious energies went into the articulation of halakhah, the word used by the rabbis to describe Judaism’s legal traditions, decisions and debates. Between the first and sixth centuries CE a vast legal literature emerged culminating in the Mishnah, a compendium of rabbinic law, and the Jerusalem and Babylonian Talmuds, extensive discussions and elaborations of the Mishnah. Halakhah covered all areas of life from ritual aspects of prayer, the holy days, purity and sacrifice, to agriculture, civil and criminal legislation and family law. Its sources were essentially twofold. There was the Written Law in the form of the Mosaic books, and the Oral Law: traditions, interpretations and rules of inference which supplemented the written text. Both carried the authority of revelation. Beyond that was rabbinic law itself, the new decrees and enactments legislated by the sages to protect the observance of the biblical commands.
To be sure, the rabbis were concerned with other matters as well, with the interpretation of biblical narrative, theology, ethics and folklore, all loosely grouped under the heading of <i>aggadah</i>. But it was halakhah that called for definition and decision. In <i>aggadah</i>, a freer spirit prevailed. When the rabbis discussed the meaning of history, theology or human existence, the arguments ranged widely and needed no conclusion. it was when they discussed law that they invoked strict rules of inference and interpretation. For it was halakhah – Jewish law applied to the civil, criminal and ritual domains – that carried the main burden of religious existence. It was here that authoritative decisions were called for, for it was through the vehicle of law that Jews translated holiness from the poetry of religious imagination into the prose of everyday life.
There is therefore considerable force to Yeshayahu Leibowitz‘s argument that halakhah constitutes the single axis of Jewish continuity from biblical to modern times.<sup class="footnote-marker">3</sup><i class="footnote">Yeshayahu Leibowitz, <i>Yahadut, Am Yisrael u-Medinat Yisrael</i> (Jerusalem: Schocken, 1979).</i> That is not to say that Judaism did not embrace much else besides. But no other area through the centuries displays consensus, consistency and distinctiveness. In matters of theological speculation, for example, there were often sharp disagreements. Biblical interpretation, too, varied widely through the ages. Even the <i>reasons</i> for the commandments reflect the circumstances and religious orientation of their authors rather than any normative body of thought. Only the commands themselves and their detailed elaboration – in short, the halakhah – represent an unbroken continuity and identity over time. If we are to speak not of Judaisms in the plural but of Judaism in the singular then it must be the halakhah to which we refer.
<b>The flight from halakhah</b><br>The collapse of halakhah was therefore a fateful development in the terms of Jewish existence. As so often elsewhere it was Spinoza who, in the seventeenth century, was the precursor of much that was to follow. In the <i>Tractatus Theologico-Politicus</i> he argued that biblical law was clearly intended as the political constitution of a religious state. It was, and only made sense as, the law of the Israelites in their own land. Once the Jewish state had ceased to exist – as it had by the end of the first century – the law was no longer applicable. With the destruction of the second Temple, halakhah was null and void. The Jewish covenant was at an end.
No one could follow Spinoza and remain a Jew, for the whole thrust of his work argued the dissolution of Judaism. Indeed the first Jewish philosopher of emancipation, Moses Mendelssohn, turned Spinoza’s contention on its head and insisted that Judaism remained in existence precisely because it was revealed legislation. Religious truth was accessible to reason and could therefore be arrived at without reference to any particular revelation or tradition. What was disclosed at Sinai was not truth but law. And to this law Jews remained bound. To be sure, those commandments which depended on the Temple or the land of Israel could no longer be fulfilled. But all others “must, as far as we can see, be observed strictly according to the words of the law until it shall please the Most High to set our conscience at rest and to make their abrogation known in a clear voice and in a public manner.”<sup class="footnote-marker">4</sup><i class="footnote">Moses Mendelssohn, <i>Jerusalem</i>, translated by Allan Arkush (Waltham, MA: Brandeis University Press, 1983), 134.</i>
But already in this sentence we detect a decisive shift in mood. For some 2,000 years Jews had declared daily in their prayers that the Torah and its commandments are “our life and the length of our days.” By the time we reach Mendelssohn the laws have become, in his words, a “burden” made “irksome” by the mood of the times. They remain in force merely because they have not formally been repealed. There is no hint in Mendelssohn’s writings of the rabbinic sense that the law is a delight, the source (as the rabbis put it) of everlasting life. The deconstruction of halakhah could not be far distant.
By the mid-nineteenth century Samuel Holdheim, the most radical of the German Reformers, was arguing in terms drawn from Spinoza that much of Jewish law was now inoperative. The earliest advocates of Reform had sought to justify their liturgical and ritual innovations by reference to rabbinic sources. By 1848 more radical departures were being sought, and these called for a systematic restatement of the basis of Jewish obligation. Holdheim argued that major sections of Jewish law had had as their purpose the welding of Jews into a nation. Now that emancipation for the first time offered Jews the chance of becoming “integral elements of other peoples and states,” such laws were no longer relevant and had become dysfunctional. This revolutionary position was taken up by American Reform in the Pittsburgh statement of 1885, which declared that “We recognise in the Mosaic legislation a system of training the Jewish people for its mission during its national life in Palestine, and today we accept as binding only its moral laws, and maintain only such ceremonies as elevate and sanctify our lives, but reject all such as are not adapted to the views and habits of modern civilisation.” Judaism, for Reform, had become not law but ethics.
The history of Jewish thought between the mid-nineteenth and the mid-twentieth centuries could in fact be summarised as the search for a Jewish identity independent of halakhah. Reform Judaism located it in theology and ethics. Secular Zionism found it in nationalism of various ideological hues. A range of thinkers, some Zionist, some firmly rooted in the diaspora, sought it in culture, language, literature or political principle, while in the 1920s Mordecai Kaplan offered a formula for the reconstruction of Jewish life as the “evolving religious civilisation” of the Jewish people.
Even the most cautious departure from tradition, known in America as Conservative Judaism, undertook a reconceptualisation of Jewish law. Its founding spirits, Zechariah Frankel in Germany and Solomon Schechter in America, preferred to see halakhah not as revealed law but as tradition sanctified by history. Schechter, in a famous formulation, describe Jewish legal authority as resting in “a living body” which was “not represented by any section of the nation, or any corporate priesthood, or rabbihood, but by the collective conscience of Catholic Israel as embodied in the Universal Synagogue.”<sup class="footnote-marker">5</sup><i class="footnote">Solomon Schechter, <i>Studies in Judaism</i>, Introduction, 15.</i> Jewish law, in other words, was determined not by what rabbis said but by what Jews did. Law, on this conception, became a species of custom and was therefore open to natural evolution. It was determined less by text, precedent and argumentation than by sociology. Frankel and Schechter were able to speak in these terms because the constituencies they represented were still traditional. It was not until Conservative congregations became significantly less religiously observant that the inadequacy of the formulation became apparent.
With the benefit of hindsight we can see why the study and practice of halakhah, the mainstay of Jewish existence for two millennia, should have disintegrated so rapidly. It had been a discipline of difference in the ages in which Jews and their neighbours had been content to live apart. Now throughout the new nation‒states of Europe the imperative was integration. The dietary laws, sabbaths and festivals and the rabbinic courts of law which administered Jewish marriage and divorce all seemed to run counter to the mood of the nineteenth century. They signalled separateness and exclusivity at a time when Jews wished to indicate their willingness to merge into the larger society. Besides which, the idea of religion or morality as <i>law</i>, legislated by a commanding God, was contrary to the idea of personal autonomy as set out by a distinguished line of philosophers from Immanuel Kant to Hegel and Nietzsche. Law occupies a space which modern secular societies have not been inclined to grant religion. A faith which has law at its centre sees religion as part of community. Nineteenth-century liberalism, by contrast, saw religion as a matter of private life, and thus emphasised individual conscience over collective command. The idea of halakhah went against the intellectual, social and political spirit of the age.
Jewry still bears the legacy of that period. Daniel Elazar sums up the present situation as one in which “Perhaps 80 percent of world Jewry today no longer see themselves bound by halakhah, however much they may or may not see themselves as ‘religious’ or ‘good Jews’ and however much they may preserve in their lives Jewish tradition and mores.”<sup class="footnote-marker">6</sup><i class="footnote">Daniel Elazar, <i>People and Polity</i> (Detroit, MI: Wayne State University Press, 1989), 153.</i> Nonetheless and surprisingly there has been a considerable surge of interest in Jewish law in the past half-century, and not only within Orthodoxy, the one group not to have abandoned the classic conception of halakhah, but within Reform and Conservative Judaism as well.
<b>A renewed engagement</b><br>One reason, undoubtedly, was the sheer intellectual interest generated by the most commanding figure of postwar Orthodox thought, Rabbi Joseph Soloveitchik. Heir to one of the great halakhic dynasties of modern times – his grandfather, Rabbi Chaim Soloveitchik, had been the most brilliant exponent of the analytic school of talmudic study – Soloveitchik himself had studied philosophy at the University of Berlin and obtained a doctorate in neo-Kantian epistemology and metaphysics. In 1941 he took over his father’s position as instructor in Talmud at Yeshiva University in New York, and in that role he brought to American Jewry an unprecedented combination of East and West, secular and Jewish scholarship. No figure in the history of modern Orthodoxy has rivalled his Maimonidean mastery of two cultures, and it was to halakhah that he devoted his greatest philosophical endeavours.
Significantly his first – and for twenty years almost his only – published work was entitled <i>Ish ha-Halakhah</i>, “Halakhic Man” or “The Halakhic Personality.”<sup class="footnote-marker">7</sup><i class="footnote">Joseph B. Soloveitchik, <i>Halakhic Man</i>, translated by Lawrence Kaplan (Philadelphia, PA: Jewish Publication Society, 1983).</i> It was a dazzling phenomenological study of the personality dedicated to seeing the world through the perspective of halakhah. <i>Ish ha-Halakhah</i> lent existential drama and philosophical resonance to what had until then been seen as a dry and juristic discipline. For the first time, halakhah was set forth not just as law but as a complete conceptual orientation, giving rise to a distinctive religious persona. Soloveitchik had mapped the conflicts, creativity and will to freedom of the modern Jew onto the ancient territory of Jewish law.
He went further. Soloveitchik’s repeated claim in his lectures and in his early but only recently published work, <i>The Halakhic Mind</i>,<sup class="footnote-marker">8</sup><i class="footnote">Joseph B. Soloveitchik, <i>The Halakhic Mind</i> (New York: Seth Press, 1986).</i> was that Judaism had one unique heritage from which every authentic expression must flow and in reference to which every proposition must be validated: the halakhah itself. It was, as it were, the objective datum out of which Jewish philosophy must be constructed. No one in the history of Jewish thought had advocated this position before. Certainly it had long been part of the task of Jewish philosophy to provide “reasons for the commandments.” Maimonides has done so. In the nineteenth century Samson Raphael Hirsch had developed a systematic ethical symbolism through which the commands could be interpreted. But no one hitherto had placed halakhah so firmly at the heart of Jewish thought. Soloveitchik’s success in marrying talmudic analysis with philosophical existentialism restored halakhah to the Jewish intellectual agenda.
A second impetus, from a quite different direction, was the crisis of legitimacy experienced by both the Reform and Conservative movements in America in the wake of the 1960s. Religious liberalism began increasingly to seem void of content as campus theologians subscribed to the “death of God” and the “moral revolution.” Reform thinkers drew back from the ethical universalism of a century before, which offered little by way of distinctiveness to Jewish life. They began, too, to question the pursuit of individual autonomy when it served as a warrant for moral anarchy and narcissism. Figures like Solomon Freehof and Walter Jacob introduced into American Reform their own version of <i>responsa</i>, quasi-halakhic rulings on specific questions. True, however, to the principles of American Reform, the decisions were offered as “guidance not governance.”<sup class="footnote-marker">9</sup><i class="footnote">Solomon Freehof, <i>Reform Responsa</i>, 22. See also Walter Jacob, <i>Contemporary American Reform Responsa</i> (New York: Central Conference of American Rabbis, 1987).</i> In a marked turn from its earlier stance, the American Reform Rabbinate affirmed in 1976 that “Judaism emphasises action rather than creed as the primary expression of a religious life.”<sup class="footnote-marker">10</sup><i class="footnote">For analysis of this affirmation, see Eugene Borowitz, <i>Reform Judaism Today</i> (New York: Behrman House, 1983).</i> This was not a commitment to halakhah, but it was at least a partial re-engagement with it.
In Conservative Judaism the dynamic was somewhat different. By the mid-1970s, Solomon Schechter’s principle that halakhic authority lay in what Jews did had become woefully inadequate to the needs of the movement. In most American Conservative congregations there was a sharp decline in religious practice. One could no longer base the laws of the Sabbath, for example, on “the collective conscience of Catholic Israel as embodied in the Universal Synagogue” without jettisoning most of their provisions. There was much soul-searching within the movement as to the ideology and logic of the various innovations adopted by synagogues, mostly on a piecemeal basis. One issue in particular galvanised Conservative thinkers into formulating a principled approach to halakhah. This was the question of the ordination of women as rabbis. Here was a controversy that divided the movement. It represented a sharp departure from precedent. History and sociology alone could not dictate an answer. The question was not what Jews did but what they ought to do. Eventually in 1984 the Jewish Theological Seminary of America gave its approval to women rabbis.<sup class="footnote-marker">11</sup><i class="footnote">For the views that lay behind this decision, see Simon Greenberg (ed.), <i>The Ordination of Women as Rabbis</i> (New York: Jewish Theological Seminary, 1988).</i> The debate set in motion a process of reflection on what a Conservative halakhah might be and gave rise in due course to a series of works on the subject.<sup class="footnote-marker">12</sup><i class="footnote">See especially Louis Jacobs, <i>A Tree of Life</i> (Oxford: Littman Library of Jewish Civilisation, 1984); Joel Roth, <i>The Halakhic Process: A Systemic Analysis</i> (New York: Jewish Theological Seminary, 1986); Elliot Dorff and Arthur Rosett, <i>A Living Tree</i> (Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1988).</i>
To these factors must be added a third. Contemporary society has raised a series of moral dilemmas in the field of medical, business and environmental ethics. The Vietnam War raised, for many Americans, the questions of conscientious objection and civil disobedience. Until the 1970s, the secular academic discipline of ethics had been absorbed in abstract enquiries into the nature of moral language and argument. Practical questions were held to be outside its concern. Since then, however, practical ethics has become a major academic field in its own right. This is precisely the strength of halakhah: the application of rules to concrete moral dilemmas. Since the earliest days of rabbinic Judaism, there had been ongoing debate on issues such as abortion and euthanasia, profits and prices, the preservation of the environment and the morality of war, and there was a large literature available with which to confront these subjects. Halakhah, which had seemed irrelevant to the interests of many Jews outside Orthodoxy, recovered its place as the primary Jewish resource with which to provide answers to the pressing ethical questions of contemporary life.
<b>The context of halakhah</b><br>But the recovery of interest in Jewish law has gone hand in hand with a set of quandaries that constitute the fundamental problematic of halakhah in the modern world. In the past two centuries the entire <i>sitz-im-leben</i> of halakhah has changed. Since the beginnings of emancipation Jewish law has lacked coercive sanctions. If it has been observed, it has been so voluntarily. Hitherto Jewish communities had held a modicum of self-governing power. Breaches could be punished and regulations enforced by fines or, ultimately, excommunication. These sanctions vanished in the wake of social change in the nineteenth century. Jews were free to act as they chose. Many of them chose not to be bound by Jewish law, or if they obeyed it, they did so selectively. Halakhah was traditionally understood as the constitution of the Jewish people. That was the first dilemma: How should halakhah be interpreted and applied if the majority of Jews no longer considered themselves bound by it?
The second was this. Having acculturated to the West, European and American Jews found themselves subject to influences and attitudes whose source lay outside Judaism. Some provisions of Jewish law were no longer readily understandable in terms of these attitudes. Could and should halakhah adapt in such a way as to acknowledge the changing moral environment in which Jews live? Is it legitimately subject to influences from the outside?
The third was that since 1948 there has been a Jewish state in the land of Israel. For the first time in almost 2,000 years the possibility existed of Jewish law becoming, within a sovereign state, the law of the land. But a significant minority of Israeli Jews consider themselves to be secular, and a majority declare themselves to be “traditional” without fully subscribing to the commandments. Is it appropriate to enact halakhah through the instrumentality of a secular legislature? Is observance of Jewish law something that should be encouraged voluntarily through influence and education or enforced coercively through government, the courts and a police force? Can halakhah be applied to the needs and conditions of a modern state?
These dilemmas form the core of the recent argument about the nature of halakhah and its responsiveness to new circumstances. They can be summarised in a single question. The situation of halakhah has changed. Can halakhah itself change?
The question touches on fundamentals. At the core of Jewish law are the commands and prohibitions set forth in the Mosaic books. Having been given by God, they can be repealed only by God. Having been accepted by the Israelites as the terms of the covenant, they can be abandoned by Jews only at the cost of forsaking the covenant. To these propositions must be added two others. The first is that only the revelation granted to Moses had the force of divine legislative authority. Subsequent prophets were not authorised to make permanent changes in the law.<sup class="footnote-marker">13</sup><i class="footnote">Maimonides, <i>Mishneh Torah</i>, <i>Yesodei ha-Torah</i>, chapter 9.</i> The second relates to halakhic interpretation. The concept of an Oral Law, of equal authority with the Written Law, implies that the Torah cannot be legitimately interpreted without reference to tradition.<sup class="footnote-marker">14</sup><i class="footnote">Maimonides, <i>Mishneh Torah</i>, <i>Mamrim</i>, chapters 1–3.</i>
These principles are central to Judaism and were the cause of three of the great schisms in Jewish history. The Sadducees and later the Karaites denied the binding force of the oral tradition. The early Christians, Paul in particular, denied that the commandments could not be revoked. He argued that they had been and that a new covenant was now in force. The rabbis for their part held firmly to their view of the immutability of the law and traditions revealed at Sinai. The law is eternal because the covenant is eternal. On that faith, Jewish destiny depends.
Torah does not change. But in one sense, halakhah <i>does</i> change. For halakhah is the application of Torah to specific circumstance, and circumstances change. What then are the parameters within which the law is given to adjustment? This is Maimonides’s classic formulation:
<span class="poetry indentAll">God knew that the judgements of the Law will always require an extension in some cases and curtailment in others, according to place, event and circumstance. He therefore forbade adding to or subtracting from the Law…but at the same time gave permission to the sages – the Great Sanhedrin – of every generation to make fences around the judgements of the Law for their protection…and similarly they have the power temporarily to dispense with some religious act prescribed in the Law or to allow that which is forbidden if exceptional events and circumstances require it… By this method the Law will remain permanently the same but yet will admit at all times and under all circumstances of such temporary modifications as are indispensable.<sup class="footnote-marker">15</sup><i class="footnote">Maimonides, <i>Guide for the Perplexed</i>, 3:41.</i></span>
So halakhah can and does change, but always to preserve the essential integrity of biblical law. We should note however that Maimonides makes a distinction that substantially tilts the balance of halakhah in the direction of conservatism. A protective decree or enactment created by the sages – a “fence around the law” – is permanent whereas a suspension of the law is always only temporary.<sup class="footnote-marker">16</sup><i class="footnote">Maimonides, <i>Mishneh Torah</i>, <i>Mamrim</i> 2:2–3.</i> Rabbinic law, that is to say, has an inbuilt bias toward greater stringency over time.
This is compounded by the issue of juridical authority, hinted at in Maimonides’s reference to the Great Sanhedrin. This supreme court had considerable powers to create new law. But as its jurisdiction grew more circumscribed under Roman rule and as the centre of Jewish life shifted to Babylon, Jewry was left without a central authority. According to Maimonides, after the closure of the Babylonian Talmud no one had the power to legislate for all Israel.<sup class="footnote-marker">17</sup><i class="footnote">Maimonides, <i>Mishneh Torah</i>, Introduction.</i> At most a court was able to issue rulings for its own immediate locality, although some post-talmudic rulings gained widespread acceptance. The power to create new law had lapsed. The rebirth of the State of Israel led some thinkers, most notably Rabbi Judah Leib Maimon, to advocate the reconstitution of the Sanhedrin.<sup class="footnote-marker">18</sup><i class="footnote">J. L. Maimon, <i>Chiddush Sanhedrin bi-Medinatenu ha-Mechudeshet</i>, (Jerusalem: Mossad Harav Kook, 1951).</i> But this would have required broad support among Israel’s religious leaders, and it was not forthcoming.
We would be wrong to conclude that there is no scope for development in Jewish law. For what cannot be achieved through legislation can sometimes be achieved through interpretation. A new problem is rarely so exactly like others in the past that precedent dictates an unequivocal answer to a halakhic query. Since there are differences in the details and circumstances, it can be argued that the extant rules do not apply to the present case. Halakhic authorities are constantly called upon to adjudicate new questions and, as we will see in due course, there have been areas in which significant changes have occurred in Jewish law in the twentieth century.
But it would certainly be wrong to see change as a <i>value</i> in Jewish law. To the contrary, the central underlying proposition of the halakhah is that it articulates, within the limits of human understanding, the will of God as set forth in the Torah. Rabbinic tradition sees all valid Jewish law as inherent in the original revelation at Sinai. It is uncovered rather than made. Neither a prophet nor a sage has the authority to alter the terms of the covenant. The rabbis were emphatic in seeing their interpretations and decisions as strictly continuous with biblical precedent. As the third-century teacher Rabbi Joshua ben Levi put it, “Bible, Mishnah, Talmud and <i>Haggadah</i>, even what a senior disciple is due to teach in the presence of his master, were already stated to Moses at Sinai.”<sup class="footnote-marker">19</sup><i class="footnote">Ecclesiastes Rabbah 1; see also Jerusalem Talmud <i>Peah</i> 2:6; Leviticus Rabbah 22:1; Exodus Rabbah 47:1.</i> Procedurally, therefore, any new ruling must be rendered consistent with the antecedent sources. Any departure from precedent must be temporary, justified by emergency conditions and undertaken with the express purpose of safeguarding Jewish law as a whole. Developments within the halakhic system are thus <i>homeostatic</i> rather than <i>evolutionary</i>. They are undertaken to restore equilibrium rather than to transform. Halakhah is the application of an unchanging Torah to a changing world. <i>Halakhah changes so that the Torah should not change</i>.
Behind this proposition lies a distinctive conception of revelation, time and the course of Jewish history. Jewish law cannot be understood in positivist terms as simply the record of what rabbis and judges ruled. It is part of a larger theological system. Revelation discloses a moral order which is intimately connected with the history of Israel. Obedience to divine law creates harmony between the people and its land. Sin creates dislocation which leads to exile which begets repentance, return and harmony restored. Time is not for Judaism, as it was for other ancient civilisations, cyclical repetition or a meaningless sequence of events; nor is it evolution. Instead human history is a series of deviations from an essential and permanent moral order which will eventually be restored. The end of history is already implicit in its beginning. The changelessness of Jewish law is therefore not an accidental feature of rabbinic jurisprudence but is central to biblical theology. As Franz Rosenzweig, one of the most perceptive of twentieth-century Jewish thinkers, put it, “While the peoples of the world live in a cycle of revolutions in which their law sheds its old skin over and over, here the Law is supreme, a law that can be forsaken but never changed.”<sup class="footnote-marker">20</sup><i class="footnote">Franz Rosenzweig, <i>The Star of Redemption</i>, translated by William Hallo (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1971), 303–4.</i>
The recent arguments about the nature, obligatoriness and mutability of halakhah are thus not merely technical and procedural. They are reflections of a deeper, indeed fundamental, debate about the nature of Judaism. Can the idea of an eternal covenant be sustained in an age in which Jewry has undergone revolutionary transformations? To this question, the various groupings in Jewry give markedly different answers.<sup class="footnote-marker">21</sup><i class="footnote">For a representative survey of views, see <i>Judaism</i> 29:1 (Winter 1980). The issue contains Orthodox, Conservative and Reform views on “Halakhah, Authority and the Future of Judaism.”</i>
<b>Non-Orthodox attitudes to halakhah</b><br>Jewish secularists are for the most part convinced that the <i>concept</i> of halakhah has been superseded. There is no normative code of Jewish conduct. Judaism is what Jews do, not what they ought to do. This view is shared by secular Zionists like Amos Oz and A. B. Yehoshua, diaspora intellectuals like George Steiner, Reconstructionist thinkers following in the wake of Mordecai Kaplan and “transformationist” sociologists like Calvin Goldscheider. To be sure, there are profound differences between their conceptions of Jewish identity, but they are agreed on this, that the idea of Jewry as a holy people constituted by a covenant of commands has been shattered by Enlightenment and secularisation. There may or may not be a “Jewish ethic.” But if there is, it is born of historical experience or national character, not of divine revelation.
Within the Reform movement there is a range of opinions, from a radical wing that finds no value in halakhah to a more traditionalist view that grants halakhah “a vote but not a veto.” The radical position draws its inspiration from Martin Buber, who believed that revelation cannot by its nature disclose a <i>content</i>, least of all a content in the form of universally valid laws. For Buber, “Man receives, and he receives not a specific ‘content’ but a Presence.”<sup class="footnote-marker">22</sup><i class="footnote">Martin Buber, <i>I and Thou</i> (Edinburgh: T. and T. Clark, 1958), 110.</i> On this view, neither revelation nor the religious life is a matter of law at all.<sup class="footnote-marker">23</sup><i class="footnote">See, for example, Eugene Mihaly, “Halakhah Is Absolute and Passé,”<i> Judaism</i> 29:1 (Winter 1980).</i>
The traditionalist position is summed up by the British Reform leader, Anthony Bayfield. “There should,” he suggests, “always be a presumption in favour of halakhic tradition… Nevertheless, Progressive Judaism believes that individuals must formulate their own patterns of Jewish practice… We recognise the primacy of individual judgement and conscience, but individuals have to recognise that they exist also as part of a community and a tradition.”<sup class="footnote-marker">24</sup><i class="footnote">Anthony Bayfield, “Progressive Judaism: A Collective Theological Essay and Discussion Paper,” <i>Manna 27</i> (Spring 1990).</i> In practice, there is little to distinguish this from American Conservative Judaism, but in principle there is a difference nonetheless. Reform Judaism retains its belief in the Kantian principle of personal autonomy. It is the individual, rather than Sinai, rabbinic tradition or the Jewish community, who must decide on the content of Judaism. The presupposition of halakhah – that independently of our choices there are objective standards of correct conduct – is rejected by Reform even in its traditionalist wing.
Secular and Reform Jews are therefore agreed that far from being changeless, something decisive has changed within Judaism, namely its encounter with Enlightenment philosophy and modern secular culture. In traditional Judaism it was the community that shaped the individual. In modern Judaism, they argue, it is the individual that determines the community. Halakhah then becomes secondary to personal decision. It is a resource rather than a code. A different struggle has taken place within the Conservative movement, which, among its more traditionalist members, has striven to develop a philosophy of change as mandated by the halakhah itself.
There is no single Conservative theory of halakhah, and the best way of approaching its current state of thought is to consider the views of three of its thinkers, Robert Gordis, Louis Jacobs and Joel Roth. Gordis argues for a “dynamic” halakhah on the grounds that Jewish law has a history of development born out of its interaction with new ages and challenges. At each point Judaism accepts some and rejects other aspects of its changing environment and is thus engaged in ongoing reformulation. “Tradition constitutes the thesis, contemporary life is the antithesis, and the resultant of these two factors becomes the new synthesis.” It is impossible to predict in advance how the law will change. Ultimately, “life is the determining factor and from its decision there is no appeal.” Rabbinic law evolves in response to new social conditions, new “ethical insights and attitudes” and the popular will of Jews. As a result “sociology is not extraneous to halakhah – it is an integral element in it.” Jewish law is not something fixed in advance but the product of a continuous interaction between the tradition of the past and the insights of the present.<sup class="footnote-marker">25</sup><i class="footnote">Robert Gordis, “A Dynamic Halakhah: Principles and Procedures of Jewish Law,” <i>Judaism</i> (Summer 1979).</i>
Louis Jacobs argues for what he calls a “non-fundamentalist” halakhah. His contention is that Jewish law must liberate itself from “the basic doctrine upon which the halakhic structure is reared, namely, the infallibility of Scripture in its rabbinic interpretation and the infallibility of the talmudic rabbis as the sole and final arbiters of the halakhah.” What this means in practice is nowhere clearly spelled out in Jacobs’s voluminous writings. There are points at which it is taken to imply ultra-conservatism: that what is at stake is not the substance of Jewish law but the reasoning and authority behind it. There are other points at which amendment or abolition of biblical law is advocated. In the case of the law of the <i>mamzer</i> (the child born of an adulterous or incestuous union, who is forbidden to marry a legitimate Jew), for example, Jacobs states that “a radical change in the law becomes imperative.” If neither the Bible nor any other document can be taken as a normative guide to the divine will, “the ultimate authority for determining which observances are binding upon the faithful Jew is the historical experience of the people of Israel, since, historically perceived, this is ultimately the sanction of the halakhah itself which…originated and developed as a result of Israel’s experiences.”<sup class="footnote-marker">26</sup><i class="footnote">Jacobs, <i>A Tree of Life</i>, 236–48.</i>
Joel Roth, the most sophisticated analyst of the three, prefers not to invoke either Gordis’s ethics or Jacobs’s theology. For him, halakhah is a formal system which confers wide discretionary powers on its interpreters. In particular, he points to the use by halakhists in the past of “extra-legal” facts to justify their decisions, such as changes in the state of scientific knowledge or economic necessity. New sociological realities, he suggests, might enter into the decision-making process on the same basis. So too might newly discovered meanings of biblical verses.<sup class="footnote-marker">27</sup><i class="footnote">Roth, <i>The Halakhic Process</i>.</i> In the argument over the ordination of women, Roth advocated the use of one rule of discretionary power (the principle that “the sages may abrogate a biblical norm”) to circumvent the biblical prohibition against women serving as witnesses in Jewish law. This was used in the Talmud to allow a woman to testify to the death of her husband. Roth argues that it should now be generalised to cover all testimony on the grounds of “the changed status of women in our society generally and the radical change in our conception of the nature of women.”<sup class="footnote-marker">28</sup><i class="footnote">Joel Roth, “On the Ordination of Women as Rabbis,” in Greenberg (ed.), <i>The Ordination of Women as Rabbis</i>, 127–85.</i>
It should be clear that none of these thinkers adopts a Reform position. For each, halakhah bears the meaning of law, or at least norm. Judaism is not simply the decision of individuals. It is a set of rules which have collective authority. Where then lies the difference between Conservative Judaism and Orthodoxy? With Gordis and Jacobs the answer is straightforward. Gordis would allow external influences to play an explicit part in the determination of Jewish law. Against this Jacob Neusner has pointed out that, for the sages of the Mishnah, “the law inexorably and ahistorically unfolds as an expression of its own deep structure of logic,”<sup class="footnote-marker">29</sup><i class="footnote">Jacob Neusner, “Halakhah and History,” <i>Judaism</i> 29:1 (Winter 1980).</i> a view with which Orthodox thinkers would agree. Jacobs bases his view of halakhah on the rejection of several fundamental tenets of rabbinic Judaism, including the divine authorship of the Torah and the authority of the Babylonian Talmud.
Indeed neither of these thinkers offers a criterion for determining the parameters of halakhic change. Gordis invokes sociology, Jacobs appeals to history. But if these views were to be taken seriously then virtually the whole of the halakhah would have to be dismantled since, as we noted earlier, the majority of Jews today no longer regard themselves as bound by it. They would counter this objection by saying that halakhah is not answerable to the majority of Jews but to “the consensus of the concerned” or the majority of “Jews who basically accept the authority of Jewish law.” But it is by no means clear even in America, and certainly worldwide, that this majority is Conservative. Almost certainly it is Orthodox. The fundamental incoherence of Gordis’s and Jacobs’s view of halakhah is its failure to distinguish description from prescription. No description of what Jews do can of itself enlighten us as to what they ought to do. Neither “life” nor “historical experience” determines law, though law must respond to both.
The position of Joel Roth is somewhat different. His is a purely formal argument, and is therefore open to formal objection. The most obvious is that any Conservative innovation based on discretionary powers to set aside established law would almost certainly find itself in a minority position when set against the consensus of halakhic authorities; and the law follows the majority. Roth’s answer to this is subtle. There is, he maintains, a difference between an argument <i>within</i> the halakhic system and an argument <i>about</i> the halakhic system. In the former one must reckon with contrary views; but in the latter one need not. Thus halakhic opinions which ignore contemporary sociology or psychology may simply be disregarded.<sup class="footnote-marker">30</sup><i class="footnote">This seems to me the substance of Roth’s somewhat opaque remarks in <i>The Halakhic Process</i>, 310.</i> Roth’s formal consistency is in effect purchased at the price of ignoring all but Conservative halakhists. It is also not clear that the power granted to the rabbis to set aside biblical law applies post-talmudically, or that it is mandated by considerations such as the changed status of women in society. Indeed, as Roth himself is aware, his position could be taken to justify the abolition of most of Jewish law on the ground of the “radical change” in conceptions of Jewish existence and identity.
The internal contradictions of Conservative halakhah point to the difficulty, even the impossibility, of marrying rabbinic Judaism to an evolutionary view of the history of Jewish law. That is not to say that halakhah does not have its own internal dynamic. Quite clearly it does. We have suggested that the best way of understanding halakhic change is to see it as homeostatic. Halakhah is the application of an eternal Torah to a changing world. It changes in order to preserve laws, institutions and values that do not change so that, in Maimonides’s phrase, “the Law will remain permanently the same but yet will admit at all times and under all circumstances of such temporary modifications as are indispensable.” It follows that at times of social and political upheaval there are strong pressures within the halakhic system itself to protect principles that have become endangered. Change then becomes mandated, though it is restorative rather than evolutionary.
<b>Radical Orthodoxy</b><br>Two radical voices within Orthodoxy have argued the need for systematic halakhic change in the wake of modernity: Eliezer Berkovits and Yeshayahu Leibowitz. Their arguments bring us back to fundamentals. As we saw at the beginning of the chapter, divine law was the constitution of the people of Israel. Its natural context is as the law of a sovereign people in its land. Precisely because of this, there were those who argued that with the Roman conquest and Jewish exile the law was no longer in force. Theologically the claim came from Christianity, secularly from Spinoza. Jews nonetheless insisted that the covenant remained in force. The law still applied even in exile. Thus far the argument for 1,800 years.
But with the birth of the State of Israel the entire basis of Jewish life returned to its biblical context, that of a sovereign people in its own land. A halakhah predicated on a people dispersed and powerless cannot be substantively the same as one grounded in sovereignty and statehood. We defined halakhah as the application of an unchanging Torah to a changing world. Berkovits and Leibowitz would agree with that definition, but would argue that precisely to recapture the original intent of Torah, considerable change is necessary to mirror that which has taken place as a result of the Jewish return to Israel.
Berkovits begins with the proposition that “the classical purpose of halakhah is to shape the Jewish realities of the life of a people.”<sup class="footnote-marker">31</sup><i class="footnote">Eliezer Berkovits, <i>Not in Heaven: The Nature and Function of Halakhah</i> (New York: Ktav, 1983), 85–86. Berkovits’s arguments  are set out more fully in the Hebrew work <i>Ha-Halakhah Kokhah ve-Tafkidah</i> (Jerusalem: Mossad Harav Kook, 1981).</i> Its natural environment is that of a self-governing nation in its land, and its natural form is that of a fluid system of two elements: a fixed Written Torah recorded in the Mosaic books, and a constantly adaptive Oral Torah that adjusts to new situations as they arise. The essence of the Oral Law is that it is not written down. It is situational, directed to specific circumstance. It is the application of universal rules to individual cases. The Oral Torah mediates between the eternity of the divine will and the immediacy of human experience. Its task is to apply the principles of the Written Torah to all elements of national existence, its economics and politics, its social ethos and its culture as well as its narrowly “religious” or ritual domain.
Halakhah is thus seriously dislocated in exile. It can no longer fully govern the experience of Jews, who are now surrounded by a non-Jewish culture and non-Jewish values. The sovereignty of halakhah is confined. The law itself ceases to be the living constitution of a nation and becomes, instead, defensive. Throughout the Middle Ages, Jewish communities retained a measure of autonomy, so that halakhah preserved at least some substance as the code of Jewish self-government. But in modern times, as Jews entered the mainstream of secular society, halakhah was driven almost completely into the private domain of home, synagogue and school and lost its central function of shaping the public domain of Jewish civilisation.
The most overt sign of the dislocation of halakhah is the <i>codification</i> of Jewish law. One of the fundamental rules of early rabbinic Judaism was that the Oral Law may not be committed to writing. Nonetheless, under the emergency conditions that beset the Jewish community in third-century CE Palestine, the rule was suspended and has remained so ever since. The long process of the codification of the Oral Law began, from the Mishnah in the third century to the Babylonian Talmud in the sixth, to Maimonides’s <i>Mishneh Torah</i> in the twelfth, to Joseph Karo’s <i>Shulchan Arukh</i> in the sixteenth. For Berkovits, the very idea of codification “violates the essence” of the Oral Law. Once the Oral Law is fixed in the form of universal rules it loses its “concern with life, the concrete situation in which the Jewish people, the individual and the collective, find themselves at any given time.”<sup class="footnote-marker">32</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 89–93.</i>
The contemporary failure of halakhah to respond to the rights of women and the challenges of statehood and democracy is a symptom of its alienation from life. Jewish law remains frozen in the petrification that took place in the nineteenth century. Its interpreters have failed to understand the significance of the return of Jews to their original and intended condition as a people in their own land. “The Torah is eternal,” Berkovits concludes,
<span class="poetry indentAll">because it has a Word for each generation… One can find the Word that has been waiting for this hour to be revealed only if one faces the challenge of each new situation in the history of the generations of Israel and attempts to deal with it in intellectual and ethical honesty. Alas, those who have authority to impose laws of the Torah…do not search for the Word that was intended for this hour, this generation.<sup class="footnote-marker">33</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 118.</i></span>
Berkovits’s argument is based on a sharp contrast between the Written and the Oral Law, the one universal and unchanging, the other specific and adaptive. A quite different argument, though reaching a similar conclusion, is advanced by Yeshayahu Leibowitz.<sup class="footnote-marker">34</sup><i class="footnote">Yeshayahu Leibowitz, <i>Yahadut, Am Yisrael u-Medinat Yisrael</i>.</i> Leibowitz holds halakhah to be constitutive of Judaism. For him, not only is there no such thing as Jewish ethics, but the very phrase is a contradiction in terms. Ethics is the search for rules of conduct based on reason, while halakhah comprises rules of conduct based on revelation. The two systems have little in common. There is, argues Leibowitz, a great difference between the ethical rule, “You shall love your neighbour as yourself,” and the biblical rule, “You shall love your neighbour as yourself; <i>I am the Lord</i>.” The latter is based not on rational assent but on obedience. Ethics is answerable to the needs of man, but halakhah is the command of God. For Leibowitz the paradigm of halakhic action is Abraham’s willingness to undergo the trial of the binding of Isaac, an act which runs contrary to all ethical feeling. The word of God is a given, an objective datum. The only choice is whether to obey it or not. Since the divine command emanates from beyond the human situation it cannot be judged from within the human situation. It can only be responded to.<sup class="footnote-marker">35</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 13–36.</i>
Given this view of Jewish law, we might conclude that Leibowitz’s position is the very opposite of Berkovits’s, with its insistence on the ethical and situational character of halakhah. Nonetheless, for the past half-century Leibowitz has maintained that the founding of a Jewish state radically alters the shape of halakhah. His reason is simple. Jewish law received its detailed elaboration after the demise of the Jewish kings. It contains provisions for the relationships between man and God and between man and man, but not for the relationship between man and state. To be sure, there is a significant body of rabbinic law dealing with government, the conduct of wars and the maintenance of a social order. It is summarised in the section of Maimonides’s code dealing with “The Laws of Kings and their Wars.” But since it developed at a time when Jews lacked governmental power, it is an ideal and theoretical system rather than one which developed out of the realities of political life.<sup class="footnote-marker">36</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 98–216. For an English summary of these views, Yeshayahu Leibowitz, “The Crisis of Religion in the State of Israel,” <i>Judaism</i> 2:3 (July 1953), 204–14.</i>
To give one example: the apocryphal First Book of Maccabees describes how a group of Jewish rebels were surrounded by Seleucid troops on the Sabbath. Fearful of breaking the Sabbath, they offered no resistance and were massacred. The remaining rebels then formally decided that it was permitted to wage war on the seventh day.<sup class="footnote-marker">37</sup><i class="footnote">I Maccabees 2:31–41. According to rabbinic tradition, however, the permission to wage war on the Sabbath was based on an exegesis of Deuteronomy 20:20. Maimonides notes that Joshua’s campaign against Jericho was waged on the Sabbath. See Babylonian Talmud <i>Shabbat</i> 19a; <i>Mishneh Torah</i>, <i>Shabbat</i> 2:25, <i>Melakhim</i> 6:11.</i> It was just this kind of development in the light of circumstance that had not occurred in the case of the Jewish laws of the state. “Halakhah as it has come down to us accepts the absence of Jewish statehood as axiomatic, or one might even say, as a prior condition for the fulfilment of its prescriptions.”<sup class="footnote-marker">38</sup><i class="footnote">Leibowitz, “The Crisis of Religion,” 206.</i> Jewish law as it developed from the first to the twentieth centuries assumed that social, political, macroeconomic and military decisions lay in non-Jewish hands. Jewish statehood therefore requires a revolutionary development in halakhah.
How can this be squared with Leibowitz’s insistence that halakhah is the word of God, unconditioned by human circumstances and needs? Here Leibowitz makes a fundamental distinction. In the area of private law, governing religious and interpersonal behaviour, halakhah does not change since it speaks to the unchanging realities of the Divine‒human situation. But in public law halakhah does change, since it reflects changing historical situations. How so? The explanation is that there are two kinds of laws: those that <i>create</i> relationships and those that <i>regulate</i> relationships already in existence. Much of Jewish law is of the first kind. The laws of prayer, for example, create the possibility of prayer. We pray because we are commanded, not because we are moved to express religious emotion. But the social laws of the Torah are of the second kind. The Torah did not create ideal social institutions <i>de novo</i>. Instead it took the forms already extant in society and proceeded to regulate them, slowly moving them towards an ideal. Thus the Torah did not create slavery. It found it already in existence and provided laws by which it could be circumscribed and eventually abolished. The religious forms of the Torah were created by the Torah, but the social forms were  merely  regulated by the Torah and reflect independently existing social realities.  It follows that “when objective conditions changed to the point where halakhic laws had lost their significance, they became inoperative.”<sup class="footnote-marker">39</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 210.</i>
The State of Israel represents a social reality never contemplated by the halakhah, namely a pre-messianic state which is neither exile nor yet redemption. It called for new halakhah. But religious authorities had sidestepped the challenge and had thus allowed profound anomalies to arise. Religious Jews recognised the need for essential services to continue on the Sabbath, but instead of reformulating the laws of the Sabbath, they simply allowed non-religious Jews to operate them. They accepted the need for an army, but insisted that women and Torah students be granted exemption from military service. Since the only way Jewish law had treated problems of the state in the past was to assume that such matters were taken care of by non-Jews, religious authorities in Israel had continued the same tradition but had cast secular Jews in the role of Gentiles. Leibowitz soon became convinced a that the necessary changes would not emerge from Judaism’s official interpreters. It would come instead of its own accord, from ordinary committed Jews who believed both in the Torah and the state.
Clearly Leibowitz and Berkovits are no less radical – indeed are more so – than the Conservative thinkers we have considered. They are not representative voices or Orthodoxy, and in some circles would not be considered Orthodox at all. Nonetheless it is worthwhile spelling out the differences between theirs and the Conservative position. Firstly, their argument is not based on a rejection of the divine revelation of the Written Torah, nor on reaching an accommodation with the ethos of the age. Secondly, its context is the renewal of Jewish national life in Israel, not the adjustment of Jews to the Diaspora. Thirdly, their view of halakhah is restorative rather than evolutionary. Leibowitz and Berkovits are impressed by the significance of Jewish statehood for the pulse of halakhah. Each believes that Jewish law has been restored to its original setting, and must therefore recover the character it had in early or even pre-rabbinic times. The task of Jewish law was to regulate all aspects of the life of a holy nation. It lost this role with European emancipation and must now recover it if it is not to become sectarian and ritualistic, concerned with only a minority of Jews and a fragment of Jewish life. Leibowitz and Berkovits demonstrate the dynamic potential of halakhah considered as an autonomous system unfolding through its own norms and values.
<b>Women, study and divorce</b><br>The changes advocated by Leibowitz and Berkovits have not come about. But others have. The most interesting question that remains to be answered is why the halakhah has developed in one way rather than another and in some areas rather than others.
Perhaps the best point of entry is to consider a realm where there has been perceptible change, most markedly in the twentieth century: the place of women in the realm of Torah study. Study of Judaism’s sacred texts is a fundamental religious duty. Rabbinic Judaism laid great emphasis on education and regarded study as a devotional act no less powerful than prayer. The exclusion of women from this duty had significant implications for their place in the religious life. The Mishnah and Talmud had seen study as a religious obligation for males rather than females. Writing in the twelfth century, Maimonides summarised the law thus: women are not commanded to study Torah, though if they do so they receive reward for their voluntary act. A father should not teach his daughter Torah, and if he taught her the Oral Law it was as if he had taught her folly.<sup class="footnote-marker">40</sup><i class="footnote">Maimonides, <i>Mishneh Torah</i>, <i>Talmud Torah</i> 1:13.</i>
There is evidence, however, that Jewish life was more complex than these bare principles suggest. The literature of the mishnaic period, for example, makes reference to women’s presence at lectures given by the sages and to at least one woman, Beruriah, who was a halakhic authority in her own right.<sup class="footnote-marker">41</sup><i class="footnote">See Anne Goldfeld, “Women as Sources of Torah in the Rabbinic Tradition” in Elizabeth Koltun (ed.), <i>The Jewish Woman: New Perspectives</i> (New York: Schocken), 257–71.</i> In the Middle Ages, a Christian contemporary of Maimonides could write, “A Jew, however poor, if he has ten sons, will put them all to letters, not for gain as the Christians do, but for the understanding of God’s law – and not only his sons but his daughters too.”<sup class="footnote-marker">42</sup><i class="footnote">Quoted in Paul Johnson, <i>A History of the Jews</i> (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1987), 193. See also the essays of Judith Wegner, Judith Baskin, Renée Levine Melammed, Howard Adelman and Chava Weissler in Judith Baskin (ed.), <i>Jewish Women in Historical Perspective</i>, (Detroit, MI: Wayne State University Press, 1991).</i> In the course of time, efforts were made to reconcile principle with practice. In the thirteenth century, the Sefer Chassidim noted that the exemption of women from study must exclude the laws pertaining to them, for if they were not taught the law, how could they observe it?<sup class="footnote-marker">43</sup><i class="footnote">Sefer Chassidim, 313.</i> In the late sixteenth century, Rabbi Joshua Falk argued that since Maimonides’s ruling only applied to a girl being taught by her father, it was permitted for her to study by herself.<sup class="footnote-marker">44</sup><i class="footnote"><i>Perishah to Tur, Yoreh Deah</i> 246:15.</i>
Most radically, a foremost twentieth-century halakhic authority, Rabbi Israel Meir ha-Cohen, suggested that the talmudic rulings referred to specific circumstances which no longer obtained. They presupposed an environment where “ancestral traditions were strong,” in which girls learned about Judaism not through formal instruction but simply by observing what was done at home. Nowadays two things had changed. Firstly, Jewish families were in disarray. Some were estranged from religion. Others were separated by the massive migrations from Eastern Europe. Secondly, Jewish girls were receiving a secular education which, if it were not balanced by a Jewish education, would lead them to forsake Judaism altogether. In this new environment it was not forbidden, but on the contrary a religious duty, to give girls Jewish instruction.<sup class="footnote-marker">45</sup><i class="footnote">R. Israel Meir ha-Cohen (<i>Chafetz Chaim</i>),<i> Likutei Halakhot</i> to <i>Sotah</i> 21.</i> The ruling was acted on, and within Eastern Europe a network of Jewish day schools for girls, <i>Beis Yaakov</i>, was created by Sarah Schenirer, herself a member of the ultra-Orthodox group of Belzer Chassidim.<sup class="footnote-marker">46</sup><i class="footnote">See Deborah Weissman, “Bais Yaakov: A Historical Model for Jewish Feminists,” in Koltun (ed.), <i>The Jewish Woman: New Perspectives</i>, 139–48.</i>
What logic underlay this ruling? Maimonides, writing about the Rabbis’ power to introduce new enactments, added that it may be exercised “to strengthen religion and create a fence so that people will not transgress the Torah’s commands.” They may even temporarily suspend biblical law as emergency measure, “to bring the masses back to religion or save them from being corrupted.” He gave an analogy. “Just as a physician may amputate a man’s hand or foot to save his life, so the court may occasionally instruct people to disobey some of the commandments so that the commandments as a whole may be preserved.”<sup class="footnote-marker">47</sup><i class="footnote"><i>Mishneh Torah</i>, <i>Mamrim</i> 2:4.</i> The same rationale lies behind Rabbi Israel Meir’s reversal of the rule against teaching Torah to girls. If it were not done, he wrote, “they might turn away completely from the way of God and transgress all the fundamentals of religion.”
Halakhah responds to preserve the integrity of Torah as the religious constitution of the Jewish people. At times this mandates change, as in the case of women’s education. At other times it counsels resistance to change. In modern times in particular, when most change in Jewish life has been in the direction of abandonment of tradition, many halakhists have seen it as their duty to oppose even technically permissible developments on the grounds that change as such weakens the structure of religious authority.
There are times, too, when there can be legitimate disagreement as to what counts as preserving the integrity of Torah. Modern conditions have, for example, greatly weakened the position of women in relation to the Jewish laws of divorce. The sanctions courts once had to compel a husband to grant his wife a divorce have greatly diminished with the loss, in the diaspora, of Jewish self-governing powers. How Jewish law responds to this dilemma will depend on how rabbis understand the fundamental thrust of the halakhah. If its purpose is to safeguard the rights of women in marriage, they will advocate new proposals to make it easier for a wife to secure a divorce.<sup class="footnote-marker">48</sup><i class="footnote">For two recent proposals, both involving a pre-nuptial contract, see “The Device of the ‘Sages of Spain’ as a Solution to the Problem of the Modern-Day <i>Agunah</i>,” in J. David Bleich, <i>Contemporary Halakhic Problems III</i> (New York: Ktav, 1989), 329–43, and Shlomo Riskin, <i>Women and Jewish Divorce</i> (Hoboken, NJ: Ktav, 1989). A history of such attempts is contained in A. Freiman, <i>Seder Kiddushin ve-Nissuin</i>, (Jerusalem: Mossad Harav Kook, 1964), 385–97.</i> If it is to protect the sanctity and stability of marriage, they will oppose such innovations. The religious integrity of women and the covenantal character of marriage are both leading themes in biblical and rabbinic thought. It is no surprise, therefore, that halakhic voices have been heard in both directions, advocating and resisting change. Since marriage laws have global consequences, broad consensus is necessary for any change to be effective, and since it is presently unavailable, moves to ameliorate the position of women have thus far been frustrated.
<b>Covenantal constitution</b><br>Halakhah is the constitution of the covenant, the code of a “holy nation.” The fate of this proposition has formed the drama and dialectic of halakhah in the modern world. As we have seen, significant sections of Jewry, almost certainly a majority, would no longer define Jewish existence in these terms. Halakhah might represent for them a past phase in Jewish life, no longer applicable or necessary in our time. Or it might retain a lingering relevance as custom canonised by time, a personal resource to be selectively appropriated, or a communal convention to be adapted, when necessary, to the mood of the age. Thus secularised, halakhah is cut adrift from its theological moorings. It ceases to be the code binding Jews to God through the structured sanctification of private and public life. It becomes a personal enrichment, an embellishment of ethnicity, an instrument of group survival or a cultural phenomenon. But it no longer is what it was for the sages who defined halakhah as “the word of God.”<sup class="footnote-marker">49</sup><i class="footnote">Babylonian Talmud, <i>Shabbat</i> 138b.</i> Nor is it a shared code shaping Jews universally into a community of action.
Faced with the growing rift between Torah and Israel, Jewish law and the Jewish people, some Orthodox thinkers like Eliezer Berkovits and Yeshayahu Leibowitz proposed radical adaptations of the halakhah. Their argument was an inversion of Spinoza’s. Spinoza had said that since halakhah was the law of a sovereign nation, now that Jews were in exile it had expired. Berkovits and Leibowitz argue that since Israel has become again a sovereign nation, halakhah has been reborn. Their shared premiss is that the weight Judaism places on law as its primary expression means that for it, religion is a matter of the public as well as the private domain. The Sabbath, for example, is not a day of leisure in which individuals personally decide what they will do to relax. It is a day of collective rest enjoined on everyone, “the common property of all.”<sup class="footnote-marker">50</sup><i class="footnote">A fine analysis of this point is contained in Michael Walzer, <i>Spheres of Justice</i> (Oxford: Blackwell, 1983), 184–96.</i> That is why the Sabbath is not an idea, a value or a principle but a halakhic institution governed by an intricate and ever-ramifying network of laws. The shift in twentieth-century society from holy time to leisure time, from public rest to private recreation, signals the predicament of halakhic consciousness in a world of liberal individualism. Only in the context of a Jewish state could halakhah recover its role as the architecture of a public culture.
What Berkovits and Leibowitz advocate has not happened, partly because Israel is a secular state and partly because the religious groups within it are not united. Instead, in an arrangement agreed shortly before Israel’s independence, halakhah governs certain selected areas of public life. Saturday is the national day of rest. The dietary laws are observed in government institutions. Religious courts have jurisdiction over marriage and divorce, and the state supports autonomous religious schools. This, the so-called status quo agreement preserves a delicate balance between religious and secular forces and between several sharply opposed conceptions of Israel as a Jewish state.
Modernity, then, has dramatically changed the situation of halakhah in fact, if not in principle. In sociological terms it has ceased to be the constitution of all Jews and become, instead, the voluntary commitment of some: those who grant the biblical‒rabbinic tradition its classic authority. In some areas, particularly those concerning private choices like medical ethics, it has continued to develop. In others, notably those requiring universal consensus like personal status, marriage and divorce, development has been arrested. The reason is straightforward. Neither side of the divide has an interest in change. Those who accept the authority of halakhah abide by its decisions. Those who do not, do not turn to it for solutions to the problems of modernity. The advocates of halakhic change are inevitably in a minority. If, as observers have noted, halakhah has been less flexible in recent times than hitherto, this has less to do with any curtailment in the scope of rabbinic authority than it has with the social setting of the law. No longer the code of all Jews, it has become the code of a minority whose values are endangered by secularisation.
The fate of halakhah is central to the fate of Jewry as a covenantal people and a holy nation. But underlying its modern vicissitudes is a more fundamental issue still: the question of religious authority in a secular age. Halakhah addressed Jews as the command of God. It did so because it was predicated on a text which itself carried supreme authority: the Torah as the unmediated word of God. What then has been the fate of this belief?

Chapter 7; Judaism and Its Texts

<big><strong><i>Judaism and Its Texts</i></strong></big>
If we seek to know Judaism’s ultimate values, we can do no better than to consider its scenes of martyrdom. What the rabbis were prepared to die for tells us eloquently what they sought to live for. In one talmudic passage<sup class="footnote-marker">1</sup><i class="footnote">Babylonian Talmud, <i>Avodah Zarah</i> 18a.</i> a rabbi, Jose ben Kisma, is lying ill. Jose is known elsewhere to have declared that “Were you to give me all the silver and gold and precious stones and pearls in the world I would not live anywhere but in a place of Torah.”<sup class="footnote-marker">2</sup><i class="footnote">Mishnah, <i>Avot</i> 6:9.</i> Nonetheless, his visitor gives him cause for concern. By his bedside is Rabbi Chanina ben Teradyon who has been defying the Roman decree against teaching Torah in public. Jose warns him that he is risking his life. Besides which, he is flouting history. If God has allowed the Romans to destroy the Temple, then He has for the moment given them sway. Chanina refuses all such calculations. He says, “Heaven will show mercy.” It is the simple reply of a man of faith. But Jose is not convinced. “I,” he says, “am telling you plain facts and you reply, ‘Heaven will show mercy’! I will be surprised if they do not burn you and the Torah scroll with fire.”
The Talmud narrates the sequel. Rabbi Jose ben Kisma dies and is buried with honour. Roman dignitaries attend the funeral and deliver speeches in his praise. Returning from the graveyard they discover Rabbi Chanina teaching Torah in public. They seize him, wrap him in the Torah scroll, place bundles of wood around him and set fire to them. Not content to burn the rabbi and his Torah, they place tufts of wool soaked in water over his heart, so that he will die slowly. His daughter, witnessing the scene, is overcome with grief. Chanina consoles her: “If I alone were being burned, it would have been hard to bear. But now that I am being burned along with the Torah scroll, He who will have regard to the plight of the Torah will have regard also for my plight.” Chanina’s disciples too are present. They ask the dying master what he sees. Chanina replies: “I see the parchment [of the Torah] burning, but the letters are flying upward.”
The Torah – as divine word, as teaching to be taught, even as physical object, a parchment scroll – is Judaism’s holy of holies and its love of loves. Its letters are immortal even when its teachers and texts are burned. Prudence and theology can dictate caution at times of religious persecution. This is the case presented by Rabbi Jose ben Kisma, and it is rational and halakhically normative. There are cases when Judaism demands martyrdom rather than transgression, but none when what is at stake is not an act but an omission, discretion rather than transgression. But Chanina will not listen to such arguments. He may have believed that religious love transcends reason, or that this was a time when defiance was a necessary gesture of faith. Or he may have felt, with another rabbinic martyr, Akiva, that life without the study and teaching of Torah was inconceivable.<sup class="footnote-marker">3</sup><i class="footnote">Babylonian Talmud, <i>Berakhot</i> 61b.</i> But the passage reveals not just <i>a</i>, but <i>the</i>, central Jewish value: Torah as the foundation of Jewish existence.
For Judaism God is to be found not in a person or a place but in words, the words of the Mosaic books, Torah in its narrow sense. Neither Moses, the greatest of the prophets, nor Sinai, the place of revelation, have intrinsic sanctity. They were the vehicles of revelation, not its embodiment. That description belongs to Torah alone. Maimonides went further. The great miracles that accompanied the Israelites during the exodus and the years in the wilderness were not cruxes of revelation. They occurred because they were necessary, not in order to prove that God exists.<sup class="footnote-marker">4</sup><i class="footnote"><i>Mishneh Torah</i>, <i>Yesodei ha-Torah</i> 7:1.</i> Even the greatest of miracles, the creation of the universe, was for Maimonides secondary to Torah. Creation itself could not be proved or disproved. There were alternatives – Maimonides had in mind Aristotle’s theory of the eternity of matter – that were coherent and consistent. We believe in creation, he argued, because we believe in the Torah and in its opening words, “In the beginning, God created…”<sup class="footnote-marker">5</sup><i class="footnote">Maimonides, <i>Guide for the Perplexed</i>, 2:25.</i> Judaism begins not with the power or the presence but with the words of God. God is revealed through language. To seek God does not require the mediation of persons, places or events. It calls for study of the Text, so much so that the Jerusalem Talmud, in a passage of remarkable audacity, presents God as saying, “Would that they would forsake Me and yet occupy themselves in My Torah, for the light it contains will eventually bring them back to Me.”<sup class="footnote-marker">6</sup><i class="footnote">Jerusalem Talmud, <i>Chagigah</i> 1:7.</i> For the sages, Judaism is Torah. The rest is commentary.
In our journey through modern Jewish thought we have reflected on fundamental themes: the meaning of suffering, exile, redemption, peoplehood and Jewish law. But with Torah as revelation we reach the core of Jewish faith. For it was in and through Torah that all else received shape and definition. No challenge could be more fateful for Jewish destiny than an assault on the belief in what the sages called <i>Torah min ha-shamayim</i>, “Torah from Heaven.” This, for Judaism, was the greatest trauma of the Enlightenment. From Spinoza onwards, the Torah came to be seen by biblical scholars as a text to be analysed like any other, a human document, indeed a series of documents composed at different times and embodying different traditions, pieced together by a redactor. At first glance at least, no element of traditional Judaism could survive this order of biblical criticism. For if the Torah were indeed the work of human beings, its laws could not be divine commands, nor could its covenant carry certainty or authority. This was more than the shaking of the foundations. It was their destruction.
Nor could this be an academic issue only. The Koran had called Jews a people of the Book. But within Judaism itself, that is an understatement. Jews were a people only <i>because</i> of the Book. The Torah was the constitution of the covenant that turned them from a heterogeneous collection of tribes into a nation with a particular faith, a distinctive way of life and a historical destiny. The fate of the Book and the fate of the people were inseparable. A Jewish mystical text declares that “God, Israel and the Torah are one,”<sup class="footnote-marker">7</sup><i class="footnote">See Zohar, <i>Acharei Mot</i> 73a.</i> and that is a telling metaphor. As a result, the secularisation of the Book <i>was</i> the secularisation of the people. The fragmentation of the Book <i>was</i> the fragmentation of the people. The two processes are so intimately connected in modern Jewish history that it is difficult to disentangle them and say which was the cause, which the effect. To be sure, only a small part of Jewish thought for the past two centuries has been directly concerned with revelation and the authorship and authority of the Bible. Nonetheless its significance cannot be overestimated, for ultimately it affects every other debate in Jewish life. What then was the traditional view, and how has it fared in modern times?
<b>Tradition and Torah</b><br>In <i>aggadah,</i> the theological dimension of rabbinic teachings, reverence for the Torah knew no bounds. Its words, for the rabbis, were the structure of reality, the architecture of creation. In the beginning, according to a midrash, God looked into the Torah and created the world.<sup class="footnote-marker">8</sup><i class="footnote">Genesis Rabbah 1:1.</i> Without it the heavens and earth could not endure.<sup class="footnote-marker">9</sup><i class="footnote">Babylonian Talmud, <i>Pesachim</i> 68b.</i> “Be careful in your work,” said Rabbi Ishmael to the scribe Rabbi Meir, “for it is the work of God; if you omit a single letter [in the Torah scroll] or write a letter too many, you will destroy the whole world.”<sup class="footnote-marker">10</sup><i class="footnote">Babylonian Talmud, <i>Eiruvin</i> 13a.</i> The Torah, according to Rabbi Simeon ben Lakish, was written in black fire on white fire. It was, for Jewish mystics, not just words and sentences, narratives and laws, but a sequence of esoteric names of God, the code of being.<sup class="footnote-marker">11</sup><i class="footnote">See Nachmanides, Introduction to <i>Commentary to the Torah</i>.</i> Having an infinite Author, it held infinite levels of meaning. This was the reason, according to Rabbi David ibn Abi Zimra [Radbaz], that the Torah scroll is not vocalised. “The scroll of the Torah is not vocalised, because it includes all the senses and all the profound paths. All of these may be expounded in each letter: faces within faces and secrets within secrets. No limits are known to us on this.”<sup class="footnote-marker">12</sup><i class="footnote">Responsa Radbaz, 3:643.</i>
Within halakhah, Jewish law, the Torah (specifically the Pentateuch) was the ultimate source of all authority. Even the prophets had no power to introduce new law except, as with the rabbis, on a temporary or protective basis. After Moses, said the sages, no prophet has the right to innovate. Indeed Maimonides explains that without the Torah there could be no prophetic authority whatsoever. “With regard to every prophet after Moses, we do not believe in him because of the signs he shows…but because of the rule laid down by Moses in the Torah that if a prophet gives a sign, ‘you shall heed him.’”<sup class="footnote-marker">13</sup><i class="footnote"><i>Mishneh Torah</i>, <i>Yesodei ha-Torah</i> 8:2.</i> All laws in Judaism were traceable back to the Sinaitic revelation, for they were explicitly commanded by it or were derived from it by interpretation or were decrees or enactments designed to protect Torah law.
What then were the beliefs that defined the nature of Torah? A Mishnah rules that a Jew who denies that “Torah is from Heaven” forfeits his share in the world to come.<sup class="footnote-marker">14</sup><i class="footnote">Mishnah, <i>Sanhedrin</i> 10:1.</i> This is as near as rabbinic Judaism comes to formulating what Maimonides was later to call a principle of faith, rejection of which constitutes self-exclusion from the community of believers. Maimonides, on the basis of rabbinic  sources, ruled that there were three kinds of “deniers of the Torah”: one who says that the Torah is not “from God,” even if he says that it is all divine except for one verse or word which was written by Moses himself; one who denies the authority of the Oral Law and its interpreters; and one who argues that God has revoked or changed the commandments so that “this Torah, although of divine origin, is now obsolete.”<sup class="footnote-marker">15</sup><i class="footnote"><i>Mishneh Torah</i>, <i>Teshuvah</i> 3:8.</i> These three principles articulated the difference between Judaism and three of its rivals. The first negated Islam’s claim that the text of the Torah, though divine, had been corrupted by the rabbis. The second excluded the Sadducees and Karaites who repudiated Judaism’s oral traditions. The third was directed against the Christian claim that the “old” covenant had been superseded by the new.
The rabbis made a sharp distinction between the Pentateuch and the other books of the Bible. Only the books of Moses were the unmediated word of God. The others, even the prophetic revelations, contained a human element, and as a result “no two prophets prophesied in the same style.”<sup class="footnote-marker">16</sup><i class="footnote">Babylonian Talmud, <i>Sanhedrin</i> 89a.</i> This distinction could be found in the book of Numbers: “When a prophet of the Lord is among you, I reveal myself to him in visions, I speak to him in dreams. But this is not true of my servant Moses… With him I speak face to face, clearly and not in riddles.”<sup class="footnote-marker">17</sup><i class="footnote">Numbers 12:6–8.</i> The rabbis restated it by saying that God appeared to Moses through a clear glass and to the other prophets through a dark glass.<sup class="footnote-marker">18</sup><i class="footnote">Babylonian Talmud, <i>Yevamot</i> 49b.</i> According to Maimonides, Moses was “like a scribe writing from dictation.” The entire Torah “came to him from before God in a manner which is metaphorically called ‘speaking,’ though the real nature of that communication is unknown to everyone except Moses.”<sup class="footnote-marker">19</sup><i class="footnote"><i>Commentary to the Mishnah</i>, Introduction to Sanhedrin chapter 10 (the eighth principle).</i>
<b>Spinoza’s revolution</b><br>The questioning of this entire structure of beliefs was the crucial chapter in the Jewish encounter with modernity, and it remains the fundamental divide between Orthodoxy and other modes of Judaism or Jewishness. It was Spinoza who set it in motion by conceiving of an impersonal God for whom verbal revelation, especially to a particular people rather than to humanity in general, was a philosophical impossibility. This led him to consider the Pentateuch as the product of human authorship, and to ascribe it in its final form not to Moses but to Ezra. His conclusion was that “the Word of God is faulty, mutilated, tampered with, and inconsistent; that we possess it only in fragments and that the original of the covenant which God made with the Jews has been lost.”<sup class="footnote-marker">20</sup><i class="footnote">Spinoza, <i>A Theologico-Political Treatise</i>, translated by R. H. M. Elwes, (New York: Dover, 1951), 165.</i> The history of subsequent biblical scholarship and its evolution through the documentary hypothesis, form criticism and redaction criticism, will not concern us. What is of interest is how Jewish thinkers responded to the formidable challenge it represented.
There were two kinds of issue raised by critical biblical scholarship. The first concerned matters of historical or philological research. Did the events narrated in the Bible accord with what we knew from science, archeology and ancient history? Was the style and substance of the Pentateuch consistent with its having been written in the days of Moses? Did the received text require emendation in the light of other evidence, such as the early translations? These were the overt questions, and they were not different in kind from those faced by Jews prior to Spinoza. From mishnaic times to the medieval exegetes, Jews had reflected on textual variants, apparent contradictions within the Torah and discrepancies between the plain sense of biblical verses and the current state of historical, scientific or philosophical knowledge. In general, the rabbis found no difficulty in harmonising the various conflicts within the framework of traditional belief. The reason was simple. Precisely because God was the author of both the Torah and the world, one could expect to find harmony between them. Reinterpretation might periodically be necessary, but it was possible. Because God was infinite and eternal, His word carried many meanings, not all of them apparent at any one time.
The revolutionary issue was not the problems raised by critical biblical scholarship but the methods it used to solve them. Its unstated axiom was that sacred scriptures were texts like any others. The words of the Bible, whatever else they were, were phenomena of history to be explored by normal criteria of scientific research. Ideas like revelation, miracle and the supernatural had no place in this process. Spinoza’s<i> Tractatus Theologico-Politicus</i> is a seminal document, not so much because it anticipated the conclusions of later scholars but because, in three respects, it transferred the Bible to a new intellectual universe. Firstly Spinoza questioned the ideas of a personal God and verbal revelation. Secondly he insisted on applying to the Bible the procedures of historical and scientific research. Thirdly he rejected the authority of tradition in understanding sacred texts. It is, he said, “in every man’s power to wield the supreme right and authority of free judgement…and to explain and interpret religion for himself.”<sup class="footnote-marker">21</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 119.</i> The displacement of the supernatural by scientific rationality and the primacy of individual judgement over tradition mark the beginnings of an Enlightenment approach to the Bible and to the dethronement of Torah as divine word.
Two examples, both used by Spinoza, illustrate the difference between the traditional and “scientific” understanding of texts. The twelfth-century commentator Ibn Ezra had noted several Pentateuchal passages which seemed to point to a date of composition later than Moses, and described this as a “mystery.”<sup class="footnote-marker">22</sup><i class="footnote">Ibn Ezra, <i>Commentary</i> to Deuteronomy 1:2.</i> The traditional understanding of Ibn Ezra, reaffirmed in the nineteenth century by Samuel David Luzzatto, is that Moses wrote these passages prophetically, anticipating the future. Spinoza’s is that they were written not by Moses but by a later author.<sup class="footnote-marker">23</sup><i class="footnote">Spinoza, <i>A Theologico-Political Treatise</i>, 120–27.</i> A second difference arose out of Maimonides’s position, shared by other medieval Jewish philosophers, that where the plain sense of a biblical text conflicted with a proposition established by reason, this was sufficient to prove that the text should not be understood literally. Maimonides went so far as to say that had Aristotle proved the eternity of the universe, he would have reinterpreted the first chapter of Genesis accordingly. Spinoza rejects this kind of harmonisation. The meaning of the text is to be determined according to the rules of biblical syntax and semantics. The Bible means what it says, not what would render it compatible with later scientific discoveries.<sup class="footnote-marker">24</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 114–19.</i>
What is new, then, in post-Spinozist biblical scholarship is not its questions but its assumptions. Tradition took the divine authorship, and thus the eternity and inerrancy, of the Bible as axiomatic, and this governed scriptural interpretation. Critical scholarship took interpretation as an autonomous discipline, and thus saw texts as products of a given historical situation, no less dated and fallible than any other human document. In principle this revolution might have produced an outcome like the parallel encounter between religion and science. After an initial confrontation each side might have concluded that the two disciplines used different methods to explore different aspects of reality, and a peace treaty might have been concluded between them. That it did not happen in this way suggests that the issue was not an intellectual one only. A larger process had been set in motion. The forces that were reshaping scholarly perceptions of the Bible were also remoulding Jewish perceptions of Judaism.
The interplay between sociology and theology, between how we live and how we understand the way we live, is complex but real nonetheless. In the present instance, the nineteenth century had produced new forms of Jewish living, of which Reform and Conservative Judaism, Zionism and Jewish secularism were the most significant. None of these accorded with the traditional understanding of Torah, yet each claimed at least some measure of continuity with the Jewish past and therefore with the Bible, the formative document of Jewish history. It was biblical scholarship that offered a way of reconciling the two. Initially Jews viewed it with suspicion. Solomon Schechter called “higher” Biblical criticism “higher antisemitism.” But eventually it came to be seen by Jewish thinkers as an important source of legitimation for the break with tradition. In retrospect we can see how several generations of theologians recreated the Bible in their own image. No longer the self-sufficient source of authority, it could be tailored to fit the space available for it within the various ideologies of Jewish life.
<b>Non-Orthodox approaches to revelation</b><br>The new approaches to the Bible, still dominant in non-Orthodox sectors of Jewry, were formed in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The central issue for non-Orthodox theologians was not biblical interpretation as such, but the concept of revelation that lay behind it.
Hermann Cohen, a leading philosopher of early twentieth-century German Jewry, understood revelation as the creative power of human reason, in particular in so far as it disclosed the categorical imperatives of ethics. God, for Cohen, is not a person but an idea, the idea which gives ethics its foundation.<sup class="footnote-marker">25</sup><i class="footnote">Hermann Cohen,<i> Religion of Reason Out of the Sources of Judaism</i>, (New York: Ungar, 1972).</i>
For Solomon Steinheim, an early nineteenth-century thinker, revelation could not be identical with reason, for its essence lay in the fact that it disclosed truth that could not be discovered by man alone. Nonetheless what is divine in the Mosaic revelation is not the Torah’s laws but its theological truths.<sup class="footnote-marker">26</sup><i class="footnote">See Joshua Haberman, <i>Philosopher of Revelation: The Life and Thought of S.L. Steinheim</i> (Philadelphia, PA: Jewish Publication Society, 1990).</i>
Ahad Ha-Am and later Mordecai Kaplan saw revelation as a human phenomenon. What was important for them, however, was not the individual personalities of the prophets but the collective character of the people who had given birth to the Book. Ahad Ha-Am spoke of a national spirit, Kaplan of an evolving civilisation. But for both, the Bible was a revelation not of God but of the Jewish people.<sup class="footnote-marker">27</sup><i class="footnote">See Mordecai Kaplan, <i>Judaism as a Civilization</i> (Philadelphia, PA: Jewish Publication Society, 1981).</i>
With Martin Buber, Jewish thought turned again to the reality of God.<sup class="footnote-marker">28</sup><i class="footnote">See Martin Buber, <i>On the Bible</i> (New York: Schocken, 1982).</i> For Buber there was a crucial difference between our knowledge of God and our knowledge of things, the difference he famously expressed in terms of I-Thou and I-It relationship. Man encounters God as a person, never as an object. For this reason, Buber regarded revelation not as a unique historical event, but as a permanent possibility of the human situation. He was opposed to the idea that revelation disclosed law, for law is universal whereas contact with God is always particular and specific. Indeed, for Buber, revelation has no substantive content at all. In it, “Man receives, and he receives not a specific ‘content’ but a Presence, a Presence as power.”<sup class="footnote-marker">29</sup><i class="footnote">Martin Buber, <i>I and Thou</i> )Edinburgh: T. and T. Clark, 1959), 110.</i> The Bible itself is a human response to a decisive encounter between Israel and God. But its words are the result of that revelation, not the revelation itself.
These were all attempts to preserve for the Bible a continuing relevance for Jewish life. But it was not the Torah of tradition. No longer did it yield commands, a covenant, a substantive code of holy deeds. Instead it revealed for Cohen, ethics, for Steinheim, theology, for Ahad Ha-Am and Kaplan, national character and for Buber, relationship. With hindsight it is striking how the Enlightenment pursuit of scientific rationality brought in its wake not objective religious truth but instead the deconstruction of textuality such that the Bible could be made to yield whatever meaning its interpreters had pre-assigned to it.
The influence of these views is still apparent. Thus, in a synthesis of the approaches of Buber and Hermann Cohen, a recent statement of the British Reform position declares that
<span class="poetry indentAll">The revelation at Sinai and the Hebrew Bible have been the sources from which Judaism has flowed and testify to a unique encounter between God and our ancestors. We do not, however, regard the Torah, the Five Books of Moses, as a document literally handed down by God to Moses but rather as our ancestors’ record of their encounter with God, a document itself revealing a process of inner development.</span>
Its teachings are to be “ever-tested by the ethical insights of each generation” because “revelation is continuous.”<sup class="footnote-marker">30</sup><i class="footnote">Anthony Bayfield, “Progressive Judaism: A Collective Theological Essay and Discussion Paper,” <i>Manna 27</i> (Spring 1990).</i>
The Conservative thinker, Abraham Heschel, developed a more theocentric view of revelation. The prophet experiences the divine pathos, God’s concern for man. There is a profound difference between prophetic and philosophical knowledge, between relationship and objectivity. God, for the prophets, “is encountered not as a universal, general, pure Being but always in a particular mode of being, as personal God to a person man, in a specific pathos that comes with a demand in a concrete situation.”<sup class="footnote-marker">31</sup><i class="footnote">Abraham Heschel, <i>The Prophets</i> (Philadelphia, PA: Jewish Publication Society, 1962), 486.</i> Nonetheless, in his three-volume work on the concept of <i>Torah min ha-shamayim</i>,<sup class="footnote-marker">32</sup><i class="footnote">Abraham Heschel, <i>Theology of Ancient Judaism</i> [Hebrew], volumes 1–2 (London: Soncino, 1965); volume 3 (Jerusalem: Jewish Theological Seminary, 1990). Heschel’s own views are stated most clearly in the third volume, published posthumously, 1–22.</i> Heschel intimated that a historical and critical approach to the Pentateuch was consistent with one strand within rabbinic Judaism. There were, he argued, two axes of thought in Judaism, which he traced to the mishnaic period and to the schools of Rabbi Akiva and Rabbi Ishmael. The former was mystical, stressing the supernatural. The latter was rational, emphasising that “the Torah speaks in the language of man.” Evidently Heschel believed that modern scholarship was compatible with the stance of Rabbi Ishmael, perhaps taking only the Ten Commandments as the direct, unmediated word of God.
The most powerful exponent of the Ahad Ha-Am tradition was not a biblical scholar but Israel’s first prime minister, David Ben Gurion. For Ben Gurion the Bible was Israel’s national literature, produced at a time when it had belonged to the arena of politics and power. The return to Israel was nothing less than a return to biblical Judaism after the apolitical, ahistorical spiritualisation of exile. Ben Gurion encouraged what became an Israeli fascination with archeology through which a new nation discovered its links with the biblical past. The discovery of the Dead Sea Scrolls at the same time as the United Nations vote to bring the State of Israel into existence symbolised the drama of a past reborn. It was as if the Jewish people, like the scrolls, had lain inert for 2,000 years and had now emerged into sunlight and the open air. Ben Gurion epitomised an important feature of the nascent Israeli consciousness, the fact that a culture could be profoundly secular and biblical at the same time.<sup class="footnote-marker">33</sup><i class="footnote">See Charles Liebman and Eliezer Don-Yehiya, <i>Civil Religion in Israel</i>,<i> (</i>Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1983), 81–122.</i>
A different but equally radical dialectic is present in the work of the late Gershom Scholem. Scholem, a historian of mysticism, argued that the Jewish mystical tradition had been the subterranean channel through which mythology had re-entered Judaism, rescuing it from the arid abstractions of philosophy. It had been able to do so without breaking away from Judaism (except in the Sabbatean and Frankist heresies) through its doctrine of the infinite meaningfulness of the divine word. It was thus able to read back its cosmologies into the biblical text. Building on a mystical commentary, Scholem suggests that what the Israelites heard at Sinai was only the first letter of the first of the ten commandments, the <i>aleph</i>, not in itself a sound but the beginning of articulation. The revelation at Sinai was thus “pregnant with infinite meaning, but without specific meaning.” It follows that “every statement on which authority is grounded” is “a human interpretation, however valid and exalted, of something that transcends it.”<sup class="footnote-marker">34</sup><i class="footnote">Gershom Scholem, <i>On the Kabbalah and Its Symbolism</i> (New York: Schocken, 1969), 30–31.</i>
For Scholem, revelation only receives meaning in the constant process of interpretation it receives in a living tradition. It was the infinite fluidity which mysticism gave the divine word that led Scholem to believe that it was the most powerful Judaic resource in a secular age. He believed that “the binding character of the Revelation for a collective has disappeared.”<sup class="footnote-marker">35</sup><i class="footnote">Gershom Scholem, On Jews and Judaism in Crisis (New York, Schocken Books, 1976), 274.</i> Nonetheless, the idea of a tradition unfolding through endless commentary remained valid. Indeed the mystical idea of <i>tzimtzum</i>, whereby God contracts Himself to make space for a finite world, gave paradoxical meaning even to secularisation. In the modern age God had contracted Himself “until nothing of Him remained revealed… But perhaps His last contraction is really revelation? Perhaps the disappearance of God into a point of nothingness has a higher purpose, and only in a world which has been totally emptied of Him will be where His kingdom is revealed.”<sup class="footnote-marker">36</sup><i class="footnote">Quoted in David Biale, <i>Gershom Scholem: Kabbalah and Counter-History</i> (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1982), 153.</i>
These views illustrate the dilemma posed by the loss of biblical authority. For if only parts of the Pentateuch are divine – the Conservative position – how shall we decide which? If conscience is to be our guide, then the answer will vary from one individual to another and from one age to the next. If none of the Pentateuch is divine but merely a human response to a revelatory experience – the Reform position – then Judaism has no authoritative content other than tradition conceived as historical custom. If the Bible is not religious but national literature then its normative force disappears entirely. And in Gershom Scholem’s mystical anarchism, heresy and secularity are consciously embraced so that there is no limit to the directions in which revelation can confer meaning.
The transformation of Torah in Jewish consciousness was both an effect and a cause of the deep social changes that affected modern Jewry. But the revolution was profound and took place with stunning speed. Within a single century, Torah had been historicised, secularised, and fragmented. It had lost its commanding voice. To be sure, the new approaches testified to the continuing power the Bible exercised over the Jewish imagination. None of them was willing to consign it, as Spinoza had done, to antiquity. After the dry rationalism of the nineteenth century, the experiential, existential thrust of Buber and Heschel’s thought gave new life to what Buber called the “encounter” with the text, while Scholem’s researches renewed interest in the creativity of tradition and interpretation. But Torah no longer spoke in a unified voice to a coherent covenantal community. Jews had branched out in divergent directions, each carrying with them a Bible that was, in essence, a different book.
<b>Orthodoxy and revelation</b><br>Clearly these views are incompatible with Orthodoxy. Moses Mendelssohn had argued that Judaism was a religion without dogmas. But historically it was over dogma that Judaism’s great schisms occurred. The new theories of revelation reached all three of Maimonides’s principles. They attributed at least parts of the Pentateuch to human authorship, they denied the authority of rabbinic tradition and they implied that at least some of the commandments had become obsolete. Nor were these doctrines over which there was scope for latitude. At various times there had been differences of interpretation with respect to other principles of the faith: the precise nature of the messianic age, for example, or how far Judaism ruled out anthropomorphic beliefs about God. But Torah as the unmediated word of God stood at the very core of Judaism. None of the new theories accepted this principle. From the point of view of tradition, therefore, all were not merely false but even heretical.
Samson Raphael Hirsch, the great nineteenth-century defender of Orthodoxy, put the point uncompromisingly: “Let us not deceive ourselves. The whole question is simply this. Is the statement ‘And God spoke to Moses saying,’ with which all the laws of the Jewish Bible commence, true or not true?” The question was not merely one of truth but also of authority. By which standard was a Jew to live his life: by God’s command or by the spirit of the age? If belief in the divinity of Torah was genuine, then “This word of God must be our eternal rule superior to all human judgement, the rule to which all our actions must at all times conform; and instead of complaining that it is no longer suitable to the times, our only complaint must be that the times are no longer suitable to it.”<sup class="footnote-marker">37</sup><i class="footnote">Samson Raphael Hirsch, <i>Judaism Eternal</i>, translated by Isidore Grunfeld (London: Soncino, 1959), volume 2, 216.</i>
How then have twentieth-century Orthodox thinkers understood revelation? All by definition accept Maimonides’s three principles as the boundary conditions of Jewish belief. But within these parameters different lines of approach are discernible. One divide lies between <i>monists</i> and <i>pluralists</i>, those who believe in the essential unity of human knowledge and those who see religious knowledge as autonomous and <i>sui generis</i>.
The outstanding example of the first was Rabbi Abraham Kook. For Kook, all of nature, history and civilisation in some way represents a revelation of the will of God. For this reason he is able to accept one of the findings of modern biblical scholarship, namely the parallels between the Bible and other ancient cosmologies and codes, and invert its significance. It is not that the Bible is a human document. Instead, the parallels testify to a religious consciousness already present in man before the giving of the Torah – attested to in the Bible in such figures as Enoch and Shem.<sup class="footnote-marker">38</sup><i class="footnote">Abraham Kook, <i>Eder ha-Yakar</i> (Jerusalem: Mossad Harav Kook, 1985), 42.</i> This consciousness is diffused through other cultures and explains their points of contact with the Hebrew Bible.
Because God is revealed in history as well as in Torah, the <i>authority</i> of Jewish law resides not only in its divine authorship but also in the historical fact of its acceptance by the people of Israel. This certainly applies to the Oral Torah, and in some sense to the Written Torah also.<sup class="footnote-marker">39</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 39.</i> Here Kook turns Ahad Ha-Am’s approach to the Bible on its head. The Torah is, as Ahad Ha-Am said, the national possession of Israel. But it is not its human creation. To the contrary, it was the divine spirit active within the people that led to its natural affinity with, and acceptance of, the Torah as the basis of its collective life.
Because of Kook’s overriding sense of the unity of existence, and hence of knowledge, he was not opposed in principle to the scholarly study of the Bible, and believed that in the course of time it would vindicate the historicity of biblical narrative. There was no conflict between religion and science because the Torah was primarily concerned with the knowledge of God and the sanctification of life, not with astronomy or geology. When the prophets spoke in prescientific paradigms, they used them only as parables and analogies that would be understood by their generation. All knowledge, seen in its proper perspective, advanced mankind in its natural striving toward God. From this, Kook drew one of his most radical conclusions. Even denial of “Torah from Heaven” could be seen, in one sense, as a paradoxical expression of the desire for a more elevated conception of “heaven” than was contained in conventional theologies. Denial already contains within itself the germinating seed of faith.<sup class="footnote-marker">40</sup><i class="footnote">For a scholarly analysis of Rabbi Kook’s views, see Binyamin Ish Shalom, <i>Rabbi Abraham Isaac Kook: Between Rationalism and Mysticism</i> [Hebrew] (Tel Aviv: Am Oved, 1990), 98–115.</i>
The opposite view is taken by Rabbi Joseph Soloveitchik. Soloveitchik makes a tantalising statement at the beginning of his essay, “The Lonely Man of Faith”: “I have not been perplexed by the impossibility of fitting the mystery of revelation into the framework of historical empiricism. Moreover, I have not even been troubled by the theories of Biblical criticism which contradict the very foundations upon which the sanctity and integrity of the Scriptures rest.”<sup class="footnote-marker">41</sup><i class="footnote">Joseph B. Soloveitchik, “The Lonely Man of Faith,” Tradition 7:2 (Summer 1965), 9.</i> The statement is tantalising because nowhere in his writings does Soloveitchik explain the reason for his lack of perplexity. Nonetheless, from what else we know of his thought we can construct the broad outlines of an answer.
The twentieth-century divorce of religion and science allows us to see both in their full distinctiveness. <i>What</i> we know is dependent on <i>why</i> we seek to know. The scientist, the sociologist and the poet each bring their different methodologies to bear on reality and as a result they see it in different ways, through different concepts. There may be a single unified absolute being at the heart of reality, but it is inevitably refracted through the several lenses through which we come to know it. Soloveitchik’s axiom is <i>epistemological pluralism</i>, namely that “the object reveals itself in manifold ways to the subject, and that a certain <i>telos</i> corresponds to each of these ontical manifestations.”<sup class="footnote-marker">42</sup><i class="footnote">Joseph B. Soloveitchik, <i>The Halakhic Mind</i> (New York: Seth Press, 1986), 16.</i>
The modern crisis of religion, of which biblical criticism is a symptom, arises from the misapplication of scientific concepts like time as a sequence of causality to aspects of reality like revelation and faith to which they do not belong.
<span class="poetry indentAll">Covenantal commitment eludes cognitive analysis by the <i>logos…</i> The act of faith is aboriginal, exploding with elemental force as an all-pervading eudaemonic-passional experience… The intellect does not chart the course of the man of faith; its role is an a posteriori one. It attempts, ex post facto, to retrace the footsteps of the man of faith, and even in this modest attempt the intellect is not completely successful.<sup class="footnote-marker">43</sup><i class="footnote">Soloveitchik, “The Lonely Man of Faith,” 60–61.</i></span>
In other words revelation, both at Sinai and in the heart of each believer, resists explanation in terms of prior causes and can therefore not be the subject of scientific or historical research.
The attempt on the part of science to extend its domain to the field of religion is not accidental. Analysing the two accounts of the creation of man in Genesis chapters 1 and 2, Soloveitchik suggests that man is an essentially divided being. He approaches the world “majestically” and “covenantally,” as the master of creation and its servant. On the one hand he seeks knowledge that is quantifiable and usable: he is drawn to <i>mastery</i>. As the second he seeks knowledge that is qualitative and awe-inspiring: he is drawn to <i>mystery</i>. For most of human history these two elements have been in a state of tense equilibrium, but in the modern world the first (the scientific) has gained dominance and sought to impose its rule on the second (the faithful). The crisis for the man of faith is not that the integrity of his vision has been shattered. It has not: it remains intact. It is rather that it has been marginalised in a world in which the only knowledge that counts is that which is “useful.” The question which perplexes Soloveitchik, therefore, is not “How can I believe in revelation?” but “What can a man of faith like myself, living by a doctrine which has no technical potential, by a law which cannot be tested in a laboratory…say to a functional utilitarian society which is <i>saeculum-</i>oriented and whose practical reasons of the mind have long ago supplanted the sensitive reasons of the heart?”<sup class="footnote-marker">44</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 8.</i>
Soloveitchik rejects absolutely the liberal conception of religion as pure subjectivity. To the contrary, religion is a form of objective, quantifiable knowledge with its own concepts, logic and rules. Judaism, with its body of canonical texts and determinate rules in the form of halakhah, represents objectification in the highest degree. Religious experience is a matter of travelling inward from this objective starting point. The fact that the biblical text, for example, contains apparent contradictions is not the result of its having being written by many hands, but rather evidence that it reflects and endorses conflicting dimensions of the human condition with which the religious personality has to struggle in ceaseless dialectic.
<b>History, metaphysics and law</b><br>Beyond monism and pluralism there was the question of the <i>status</i> of the principles of faith as they relate to revelation. Are they true empirically, metaphysically or halakhically? This issue was sensitively explored by Rabbi Chaim Hirschensohn in a long responsum on modern biblical scholarship.<sup class="footnote-marker">45</sup><i class="footnote">Chaim Hirschensohn, Malki ba-Kodesh, Part 2 (St. Louis, MO: Moinester Printing Co., 1921), 215–50.</i>
Hirschensohn pointed to an ambiguity in Maimonides’s formulation of the principle of “Torah from Heaven.” In his <i>Commentary to the Mishnah</i>, Maimonides defined the eighth principle of faith as the belief that “the whole of this Torah found in our hands this day is the Torah that was handed down by Moses and that it is all of divine origin.” Which here is fundamental: that the Torah is divine or that it was handed down by Moses? In his law code, Maimonides defined the corresponding heresy as “he who says that the Torah is not of divine origin, even if he says of one verse or a single word that Moses said it by himself.” A later summary of Maimonides’s principles which found its way into many prayer books, however, reads, “I believe with perfect faith that the entire Torah which we now possess is the same that was given to Moses our teacher, peace be to him.”
Two interpretations of “Torah from Heaven” are therefore possible. The first is metaphysical, laying emphasis on the divine authorship of the Torah. The second is historical, emphasising the role of Moses in transmitting the text. Maimonides’s law code focuses on the first, the prayer book summary on the second. On this basis Hirschensohn drew a distinction between two kinds of bible criticism. One sees the Bible as a human composition. The other, while not denying its divinity, suggests that some passages were transcribed by later hands. The believer must regard both as false, but in different ways. The former is heretical, the latter merely mistaken. Hirschensohn takes Maimonides’s law code as normative for Judaism and therefore sees the metaphysical belief (“Torah from Heaven”) as fundamental while the historical belief (“Torah from Moses”) is true but not a principle of faith.
A similar distinction could be made in the case of textual criticism. The eighth principle insists that the text we have now of the Torah is that which was given to Moses. But is this a factual belief or a halakhic proposition? Hirschensohn points to a talmudic passage which says that there were three Torah scrolls in the Temple court which contained slight textual variants. The correct reading in each case was determined on the principle that “we follow the majority.”<sup class="footnote-marker">46</sup><i class="footnote">Tractate <i>Soferim</i> 6:3.</i> There is, in other words, a theoretical difference between the historically original and the halakhically normative text. To be sure, the possibility should not be pushed too far.<sup class="footnote-marker">47</sup><i class="footnote">See Zvi Yehuda, “Hazon Ish on Textual Criticism and Halakhah,” <i>Tradition</i> 18:2 (Summer 1980), 172–80, and Shnayer Leiman’s rejoinder, <i>Tradition</i> 19:4 (Winter 1981), 301–10.</i> The painstaking care of successive generations of scribes ensured that variant readings were few. The point suggested by Hirschensohn however is that the emendations suggested by critics, as well as being historically tenuous, are also halakhically irrelevant, Judaism having long established for legal purposes its authoritative text of the Bible.
<b>Orthodoxy and biblical criticism</b><br>With these distinctions in mind we can readily understand the three broad lines of Orthodox response to modern biblical scholarship.<sup class="footnote-marker">48</sup><i class="footnote">I have been greatly helped in this section by Shalom Rosenberg, “Cheker ha-Mikra be-Machshavah ha-Yehudit ha-Datit he-Chadashah,” in Uriel Simon (ed.), <i>Ha-Mikra va-Anachnu</i> (Tel Aviv: Dvir, 1979), 86–119.</i> The first is <i>reconciliation</i> between Jewish belief and contemporary scholarship. This had been part of the medieval heritage from Saadia Gaon onwards. During the Middle Ages the challenges had come from Karaism, neo-Aristotelian philosophy and Christian biblical interpretation. Now it came from secular criticism. But the principle seemed essentially the same, namely that the challenge could and should be met on its own ground. This was the view adopted by the great German Orthodox scholar, Rabbi David Zvi Hoffmann. Hoffmann accepted rabbinic beliefs about the Torah as “dogmatic assumptions,” but he was concerned to defend them on scholarly grounds.<sup class="footnote-marker">49</sup><i class="footnote">See Jenny Marmorstein, “David Hoffmann: Defender of the Faith,” <i>Tradition</i> 9:4, 91–101.</i>
In his writings he argued vigorously against the theory that the “Priestly Code” was a separate document, composed after the book of Deuteronomy and indeed after Ezekiel. Martialling textual evidence that conflicted with the documentary hypothesis, Hoffmann argued that Leviticus was an earlier work than Deuteronomy and that Ezekiel was derivative of it rather than the other way around. His own belief, following a talmudic suggestion,<sup class="footnote-marker">50</sup><i class="footnote">Babylonian Talmud, <i>Gittin</i> 60a.</i> was that Moses composed the Torah in a series of scrolls during different revelations, and at the end his life redacted them into a single document. Throughout, Hoffmann was concerned not merely to defend traditional belief in the Written Torah, but also to show that the interpretations given by the Oral Torah were not arbitrary or forced but flowed from nuances in the text itself.<sup class="footnote-marker">51</sup><i class="footnote">David Zvi Hoffmann, <i>Sefer Vayikra</i> (Jerusalem: Mossad Harav Kook, 1972). A similar though more overtly apologetic approach is apparent in the work of the British Chief Rabbi Joseph Herman Hertz. See his Pentateuch and Haftorahs (London: Soncino Press, 1962).</i>
Hoffmann wrote in the first decade of the twentieth century. He was followed by other Jewish biblical scholars, notably Benno Jacob, Yehezkiel Kaufman and Umberto Cassutto, who while not writing within the Orthodox tradition, nonetheless defended the unity and antiquity of the Pentateuch against its critics. More recently, considerable archaeological evidence has come to light supportive of the Bible’s historicity. The discoveries at Mari, Nuzi and Ebla allow us to place the patriarchal narratives in the context of their time, and scholars would now be far more reticent than they once were in subscribing to the main contentions of Julius Wellhausen’s documentary hypothesis. One recent writer summarises the shift in these terms: “Whereas, fifty years ago, any early passage of the Bible was assumed to be mythical or symbolic, the onus of proof has now shifted: increasingly scholars tend to assume that the text contains at least a germ of truth and see it as their business to cultivate it.”<sup class="footnote-marker">52</sup><i class="footnote">Paul Johnson, A History of the Jews (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson), 7.</i> As a result, one contemporary Orthodox writer suggests that “the believing Jew need have no fear of modern Biblical research… For the history of such research is bringing it inexorably toward some rapprochement with the divine Bible, if for no other reason than that all other avenues have failed.”<sup class="footnote-marker">53</sup><i class="footnote">Emanuel Feldman, <i>The Biblical Echo</i> (New York: Ktav, 1986), 103. See also Max Kapustin, “Biblical Criticism: A Traditionalist View,” Tradition 3 (Fall 1960), 25–31; Joseph Grunblatt, “The Great Estrangement: The Rabbi and the Student,” <i>Tradition</i> 7 (Summer 1966), 66–73.</i>
The strength of this approach is that it attempts to preserve a single frame of discourse between religion and critical scholarship. Its weakness is that the two disciplines, even if compatible, are differently motivated. The claims of faith lie beyond the scope of empirical enquiry. For this reason a different strategy recommended itself to a second group of thinkers who sought to emphasise not the <i>connections</i> but the <i>differences</i> between biblical criticism and a religious approach to texts. They do not seek to dismiss out of hand the integrity of the academic study of the Bible as an autonomous discipline, but they question its claim to determine the meaning of the Bible for the community of faith. Three figures are important here: Franz Rosenzweig, Yeshayahu Leibowitz and Mordecai Breuer.
Franz Rosenzweig’s position was not an Orthodox one. But deeply troubled by Martin Buber’s idea of revelation as encounter without content, Rosenzweig wrestled with the question of whether the modern Jew can find his way back to revelation as experienced by Jewish tradition. His view, like Hirschensohn’s, was that two issues which had been brought together by modern thought were in fact separate: the historical one of the development of the biblical text and the theological one of the text <i>as revelation</i>. One might admit that scholarly views were correct on the first point, but that did not necessarily affect the second. In a letter to the orthodox rabbi, Jacob Rosenheim, he made his view clear: “Where we differ from Orthodoxy is in our reluctance to draw from our belief in the holiness or uniqueness of the Torah, and in its character of revelation, any conclusions as to its literary genesis and the philological value of the text as it has come down to us. If all of Wellhausen’s theories were correct…our faith would not be shaken in the least.”<sup class="footnote-marker">54</sup><i class="footnote">Nahum Glatzer, <i>Franz Rosenzweig: His Life and Thought</i> (New York: Schocken, 1970), 158.</i> He is reputed to have said that he was prepared to accept the documentary hypothesis with one proviso, that where Wellhausen postulated a Redactor, he would substitute the word <i>Rabbenu</i> (“our teacher”).
The first distinction suggested by Rosenzweig, then, is between the metaphysical idea of “Torah from Heaven” and the historical assertion of “Torah from Sinai.” But there is another fundamental distinction implicit in his thought. We can best understand his approach as an attempt to understand not the giving but the receiving of the Torah. Though the Torah was given once it is received in every generation. The question was: Can it still be received in the twentieth century, distanced from it as we are by the sophistication of our historical knowledge? Rosenzweig’s answer is that it can, but not in a state of detachment. We “hear” the Torah as revelation only when we are engaged in living it. “One hears differently when one hears in the doing.” There is an experiential difference, in other words, between the secular act of <i>reading a text</i> and the religious act of <i>listening to Torah</i>.<sup class="footnote-marker">55</sup><i class="footnote">Franz Rosenzweig, <i>On Jewish Learning</i>, edited by N. Glatzer (New York: Schocken, 1955).</i>
For Rosenzweig revelation is not a fact of history but of personal encounter. For Yeshayahu Leibowitz it is neither. Instead it is a fact of halakhah.<sup class="footnote-marker">56</sup><i class="footnote">Yeshayahu Leibowitz,<i> Yahadut, Am Yehudi u-Medinat Yisrael</i>, (Jerusalem: Schocken, 1979), 13–37, 337–84.</i> In a controversial analysis, Leibowitz turns the conventional relationship between the Written and Oral Laws on its head. We are accustomed to think of the Written Torah as the basis of Judaism and of the Oral Law as secondary and supplementary to it. The primary datum of Judaism is the Pentateuch, but since this needs explication and application, we are commanded to turn to the Oral Law and its guardians, the rabbis. It is this picture that Leibowitz is determined to reverse.
For him, it is the Oral Law in the form of halakhah which is primary, and the Written Law which is secondary. Why, asks Leibowitz, do we have a canon of scriptures? Only because of the decision of the sages to declare these books and not those, sacred. Just as it is the halakhah which determines that a certain day is holy, so it determines that a certain text is holy. The sanctity of the Torah is not intrinsic, nor can it be inferred from any property of the text considered in itself. Polemically, Leibowitz argues that as a work of poetry, the Bible is inferior to Shakespeare; as philosophy, it does not rival Plato or Kant. Nor is it a work of ethics, for ethics concerns the duties of man to man while the Bible concerns the duties of man to God. The only distinctiveness of the Bible is as “the words of the living God.” But this in turn raises the question, how do we know that it represents the words of God? The answer is that halakhah has so determined. The religion of Israel was not created by the Torah; rather, the Torah is one of the institutions of the religion of Israel. The Oral Law is therefore logically prior to the Written Law, or as Leibowitz expresses it: “the halakhah of the Oral Law derives its authority from ‘the words of the living God’ in Scripture, but determines what is the content, meaning and significance of the Written Law.”<sup class="footnote-marker">57</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 21.</i>
Leibowitz’s stance is paradoxical, but it accurately reflects one important feature of the place of the Pentateuch in Judaism, namely, its dependence on authoritative interpretation. Leibowitz is scathingly dismissive of any attempt, such as Ben Gurion’s, to read the Bible as an autonomous text. He describes this as Lutheranism and bibliolatry. To this he adds his characteristic theocentrism: the Bible exists not to serve human needs but to call men to the love and fear of God. As a result it is misconceived if it is seen as a source of scientific or historical information. The only proper route to such knowledge is not revelation but scientific enquiry. “The sanctity of Scripture is not a historical or scientific but a religious category,”<sup class="footnote-marker">58</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 350.</i> and is therefore unaffected by any discoveries in these fields.
Shalom Rosenberg has described Leibowitz’s approach as “Torah for the sake of Heaven” rather than “Torah from Heaven,”<sup class="footnote-marker">59</sup><i class="footnote">Rosenberg, 113.</i> and it lies at an opposite extreme from that of Mordecai Breuer. Leibowitz dismisses biblical criticism as irrelevant to Judaism. Breuer, alone among Orthodox scholars, accepts its findings as both academically warranted and of religious significance.<sup class="footnote-marker">60</sup><i class="footnote">Mordecai Breuer, “Emunah u-Madda be-Parshanut ha-Mikra,” <i>Deot</i>, “Cheker ha-Mikra be-Machshavah ha-Yehudit ha-Datil he-Chadashah,” 11 (1959), 18–25, and 12 (1960), 13–27. See also Zvi Kurzweil, <i>The Modern Impulse of Traditional Judaism</i> (New York: Ktav, 1985), 79–91.</i> In a strange hybrid of neo-Kantianism and Jewish mysticism, Breuer distinguishes between the Bible as phenomenon and noumenon, as perceived and as it exists in itself. There is the Bible as document and as Torah, much as there is the world as nature and as creation.<sup class="footnote-marker">61</sup><i class="footnote">In this regard, Breuer is influenced by his uncle, Isaac Breuer. For a recent study of Isaac Breuer’s thought, see Alan Mittelman, <i>Between Kant and Kabbalah</i> (Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1990).</i> In one aspect it is understood through the network of causality, in the other as the direct revelation of God. That is the difference between the Bible as seen by Wellhausen – a palimpsest of documents composed and redacted over centuries – and as seen by Judaism: words written in fire on fire, preceding the creation of the world and representing a chain of mystical names of God.
We might expect Breuer to proceed, as does Leibowitz, to declare the two aspects non-interconnecting. Instead he does the opposite. Firstly he accepts the findings of critical scholarship, if not in detail then at least in broad principle. Then he insists that this must have significance for faith itself. For the believer must now ask himself why God chose this mode of revelation and no other, namely, a Pentateuchal text which bears all the signs of having been written by several different hands? His answer is that it is precisely this that God chose to reveal about the world, that it can be seen from different perspectives, each of which represents a religious reality. Breuer is particularly struck by the fact that the documentary hypothesis rests on the use, by different putative authors, of different names for God. He links this to the Jewish tradition that the different names refer to different aspects of God, like justice and compassion. Our experience of the biblical text is  therefore like our experience of the world. It seems as if now one, now another attribute of God is operative. Only at the level of mysticism do we perceive the unity behind the various manifestations of the divine, and only at the level of the mystical meaning of the Torah do we see the unity of what otherwise appears to be a fragmented and multiple text.
Rosenzweig, Leibowitz and Breuer stand at the margins of Orthodoxy, and there are obvious problems in each of their positions. Rosenzweig makes revelation dependent on personal receptivity. But this is not how Jewish tradition did or could understand it. Among other things, the Torah revealed <i>laws</i> binding on the people of Israel for all future generations. For Rosenzweig, the Torah reveals <i>commandments</i> binding only on those who personally experience the call of God.
Leibowitz is open to the opposite objection. For him the Torah primarily reveals laws; indeed it is law itself, the halakhah, which determines the status of Torah. But can the Bible be so emptied of informational content? How, for example, would Leibowitz respond to the claim of some radical critics that the Pentateuch is mythic rather than actual history and that we cannot be certain that either the exodus or the theophany at Sinai took place? Doubtless he would reply that revelation is ultimately a halakhic, not a historical fact: we are bound to the Torah not because of what happened at Sinai, but because of the collective decision of postbiblical Jewry to accept the Pentateuch as sacred. But if the halakhah is no more than a collective human decision, what then happens to Leibowitz’s insistence on the theocentricity of Judaism? Authority, in his system, seems to rest with Jews, not with God.<sup class="footnote-marker">62</sup><i class="footnote">See H. Ben-Yerucham and H. Kolitz (eds.), <i>Shelilah Lishmah</i>, (Jerusalem: El ha-Shorashim, 1983), for a collection of critical essays on Leibowitz’s thought. See also Peninah Ilan, “Al Kedushatam shel Kitvei Kodesh,” <i>Deot</i> 3; A. Ron, “Al Kitvei Kodesh ve-Informatziah Madait,” <i>Deot</i> 25.</i>
Breuer’s position, too, is idiosyncratic. Accepting to the full the findings of biblical criticism, he rescues the unity and divinity of Torah only by resorting to Jewish mysticism. But mysticism is not central to, nor of unquestioned authority within, Judaism. What is more, it is a postbiblical development. And, as a number of critics have pointed out, consistency would require Breuer to accept historical criticism of Jewish mysticism as well. It cannot be the one point of faith invulnerable to critical enquiry.<sup class="footnote-marker">63</sup><i class="footnote">See the responses of Jacob Katz, Uriel Simon, Joseph Heinemann, Meir Weiss, Dr. Halperin and Yaakov Zeidman in <i>Deot</i> 13 (1961), 14–23.</i>
Faced with these difficulties, a third group adopts the approach of <i>rejection</i>.<sup class="footnote-marker">64</sup><i class="footnote">This is the approach of the traditional nineteenth-century exegetes such as Malbim, Samson Raphael Hirsch and Mecklenburg. It is adopted in the recent, popular Artscroll commentaries to biblical texts. In one (<i>The Book of Esther</i>, x) the author states bluntly that “No non-Jewish sources have even been consulted, much less quoted. I consider it offensive that the Torah should require authentication from the secular or so-called scientific sources.” For more nuanced views see Louis Rabinowitz, “Torah min ha-Shamayim,” <i>Tradition</i> 7:1 (Spring 1965), 34–45, and Steven Shaw, “Orthodox Reactions to the Challenge of Biblical Criticism,” <i>Tradition</i> 10:3 (Spring 1969), 61–85.</i> Torah is to be understood from within, not on the basis of external evidence and methodologies. If it is axiomatic to Jewish faith that the Torah is the word of God and that its authoritative interpretation is preserved in the oral tradition, no argument that proceeds from other premisses touches the Jewish understanding of the Bible, either by way of confirmation or refutation. The talmudic sages emphasised the difference between their receptivity to non-Jewish science and their rejection of non-Jewish readings of the Bible: “If you are told, ‘There is wisdom among the nations,’ believe it. If you are told, ‘There is Torah among the nations,’ do not believe it.”<sup class="footnote-marker">65</sup><i class="footnote">Lamentations Rabbah 2:17.</i> Precisely because the Torah is the text of Jewish singularity, its proper understanding lies within the community of faith and its received teachings. Jews had been long aware, through their rifts with Sadducees, Christians and Karaites, that a single document could be given a variety of meanings. It could authorise not only Jewish tradition but also radical departures from it. Guardianship of the meaning of Torah is therefore as important as belief in its divine origin. It follows that rejection of modern scholarship has ample precedent in the rabbinic sources.
<b>A fateful meeting</b><br>The Jewish encounter with secular bible scholarship has necessarily run along different lines to its Protestant counterpart. In one respect the Bible is less central to Judaism, because of the Oral Law and rabbinic tradition. “Scripture alone,” a principle of Protestantism, is for Judaism a mark of sectarianism, the Sadducean and Karaite heresy. For that reason there can be in Judaism no equivalent of Protestant biblical fundamentalism. In another respect, however, the bible is more central because it represents not just evidence of revelation but the content of revelation itself. For Judaism the Torah is not merely a record of events (the exodus and Sinai) but the constitution of the covenant made on the basis of those events. In it God reveals not only His presence but also His will. What is important to Judaism, therefore, is not only what historically lies behind the text, but the text itself. For that reason, while Protestantism might survive the displacement of the text, Judaism cannot.
We have charted the various responses to secular biblical scholarship. But we have not yet set the problem in its breadth and pathos. For this was no mere intellectual encounter. We began the chapter with the martyrdom of Chaninah ben Teradyon in the second century CE. A half-century earlier Josephus, that complex Jewish historian, was moved to testify to his non-Jewish readers about
<span class="poetry indentAll">our reverence for our own Scriptures. For, although such long ages have now passed, no one has ventured either to add, or to remove, or to alter a syllable; and it is an instinct with every Jew, from the day of his birth, to regard them as the decrees of God, to abide by them, and, if need be, cheerfully to die for them… What Greek would endure as much for the same cause?<sup class="footnote-marker">66</sup><i class="footnote">Josephus, <i>Against Apion</i>, in <i>Works</i>, volume 1, Loeb, 1926, 179–81.</i></span>
That passion intensified during the long centuries of exile. Heinrich Heine called the Torah “the portable fatherland of the Jew.” Echoing him, George Steiner has spoken of “Our homeland, the Text.” <sup class="footnote-marker">67</sup><i class="footnote">George Steiner, “Our Homeland, the Text,” <i>Salmagundi</i> (Winter/Spring 1985), 4–25.</i> Emil Fackenheim recalls “a picture from my childhood… Jews fleeing from a pogrom… The fleeing Jews in the picture are bearded old men, terrified, but not so much as to leave behind what is most precious to them. In the view of antisemitism these Jews would doubtless be clutching bags of gold. In fact each of them carries a Torah scroll.”<sup class="footnote-marker">68</sup><i class="footnote">Emil Fackenheim, <i>What is Judaism?</i> (New York: Macmillian, 1987), 60.</i>
Judaism was Torah. The rest was endless commentary. Prior to the nineteenth century, Jewish existence or identity without Torah would have sounded a contradiction in terms. Julius Guttman correctly noted that there is no precedent in Jewish history for the modern phenomenon of Jews who define themselves as religious while rejecting the traditional understanding of “Torah from Sinai.”<sup class="footnote-marker">69</sup><i class="footnote">Julius Guttmann, <i>Dat u-Madda</i> (Jerusalem: Magnes Press, 1955), 259.</i> Despite the fierce philosophical disputes of the Middle Ages, this was the unshakable grounds on which all Jews stood. That ground was split asunder by the earthquake of the Enlightenment. Since then, Orthodoxy alone has preserved the Torah of tradition into the twentieth century, while other groups have filtered its voice through independent and prior imperatives: ethics, autonomy, history or national culture. The Bible has not ceased to be part of Jewish consciousness. But it has lost its central, seminal authority as the constitutive document of a covenantal people.
A relatively small part of modern Jewish theology has been devoted to the question of “Torah from Heaven.” It is as if scholars have sensed that in confronting it they approach holy ground. For the fate of Torah in Jewish thought is little less than the axis on which the meaning of Jewish existence turns. At stake are the central terms of Jewish belief: textuality and history, interpretation and time, revelation and the covenant between God and a chosen people. In the next chapter, therefore, I attempt one way of understanding the problem in the larger context it deserves.

Chapter 8; Midrash and History

<big><strong><i>Midrash and History</i></strong></big>
At the beginning of his <i>A History of the Jews</i>, Paul Johnson poses a formidable question. “The Jews,” he writes, “created a separate and specific identity earlier than almost any other people which still survives. They have maintained it, amid appalling adversities, right up to the present. Whence came this extraordinary endurance? What was the particular strength of the all-consuming idea which made the Jews different and kept them homogenous?”<sup class="footnote-marker">1</sup><i class="footnote">Paul Johnson, <i>A History of the Jews</i> (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1987), 1.</i>
Johnson is right to pose the question in these terms. For Jews were a people defined by an <i>idea,</i> specifically a faith. For that reason they were able to survive the loss of all other bases of nationhood: territory, sovereignty, the Temple and priesthood, even a shared culture and a common language of everyday speech. From the first to the nineteenth centuries of the common era, disempowered, dispersed, distributed among a variety of cultures, Jews nonetheless retained the characteristics of a nation. This, neither they nor their neighbours doubted. They were a people preserved by the force of a single all-consuming idea: the idea, quite simply, that they were a people apart, chosen for a special destiny.
Of the content of this idea, there is no mystery. God, creator of the universe, had, after the division of mankind into a multiplicity of nations, taken one extended family to be His witnesses. They were to be the bearers of His covenant. Their lives would enact His will. Their fate would mirror their faith or faithlessness. History itself would be a commentary to the covenant. And this idea, its prescriptions and organising themes, was contained in a document – no mere document but the constitution of the covenant, the divine word accepted by a people as the code of its destiny: the Torah.
The idea of “Torah from Heaven” was, even before it was explicitly formulated, far more than a belief about the origin of a text. It was a belief about the origin of a destiny. “Torah from Heaven” did more than negate the idea that a people was the author of its own texts. It reversed it. It suggested that <i>the text was the author of the people</i>. It went beyond the assertion that the Pentateuch was sacred scripture. It affirmed that the covenant it embodied had brought the people into being and would keep them in being despite their disobediences and exiles. The text was the source of Israel’s separate and specific identity and the secret of its extraordinary endurance. “The script,” notes George Steiner, “is a contract with the inevitable. God has, in the dual sense of utterance and binding affirmation, ‘given His word,’ His <i>logos</i> and His bond, to Israel. It cannot be broken or refuted.”<sup class="footnote-marker">2</sup><i class="footnote">George Steiner, “Our Homeland, the Text,” <i>Salmagundi</i> 66 (Winter/Spring 1985), 12.</i>
But this last sentence brings us face to face with the elemental drama of modern Jewry. <i>If</i> the Torah cannot be broken or refuted, then it applies no less to the present than the past. The events of the past half-century are not mere history but the unfolding of a timeless covenant through time. The arguments of modern Jewish thought are, on this interpretation, not <i>philosophical</i>, the abstract pursuit of knowledge wherever it might lead. Rather, they belong to what was once the domain of <i>prophecy</i>, the attempt to understand the religious meaning of specific events. To be sure, we no longer have access to prophetic certainty. Therefore we do not know whether the Holocaust echoes the Book of Job or Lamentations or the “suffering servant” of Isaiah or Ezekiel’s vision of collective death and resurrection. We do not know whether the return to Zion is a fulfilment of the prophecies of ingathering and whether the State of Israel is the first step towards the messianic age. But of one thing we can be certain: that these are events with religious meaning. They belong to that interplay between divine providence and human free will that the sages saw as the essence of the covenant. It is not absurd to interpret the present through the texts of the past. To the contrary, that is where its meaning lies. For Torah, the word binding God and Israel, cannot be broken or refuted. It is the code through which Jewry’s present no less than its past is to be deciphered.
But – and it is a momentous “but” – for some Jews the uniqueness of modernity is precisely that it cannot be assimilated to biblical anticipations. The Holocaust shatters our prior paradigms of suffering and evil. Israel, a secular Jewish state in the holy land, has no place in the prophetic scheme of heavenly redemption. At Auschwitz, Jews stared evil in the eye and could find no divine consolation. In Israel, Jews took fate into their own hands, relying on no divine protection. For such Jews, the present is not to be understood as the fifty-eighth century, covenantal time, a frame of reference that relates their lives to creation, the patriarchs, the exodus and the prophets. Instead it is the twentieth century, secular time, a context that marks a radical break with the past. For them, the covenant has been both refuted and broken: refuted by the Holocaust, broken by the conscious secularity of Israel. The meaning of the present is not to be sought in the past but in the revolutionary decision on the part of Jews to liberate themselves from covenantal <i>destiny</i> in favour of the active shaping of <i>history</i>, responsive to no heavenly voice. Which then is the image of Torah in our time: the scroll of Rabbi Chaninah ben Teradyon, its parchments burning but its letters immortal, or the tablets of stone brought down by Moses and shattered into fragments at the foot of the mountain?
Judaism is a religion of texts and its central arguments are arguments about texts. The division of opinion about “Torah from Heaven” is therefore vaster than its academic terms of reference imply. “Torah from Heaven” is the generative principle of Jewish destiny. Remove it and Jews and Judaism are reduced to the universalities of ethics and theology and the accidents of history and sociology. To understand the seismic movements of modern Jewish thought we must set them against the broadest of backgrounds: the relationship between revelation and textuality, interpretation and time, language and spirituality. In particular we must pay attention to the point of transition between biblical and postbiblical Judaism, for it is our best model with which to understand the stresses to which the covenant is subject at times of crisis and epochal change.
<b>The word</b><br>Searching for a characterisation of Jewish consciousness, the nineteenth-century historian Heinrich Graetz formulated a fundamental insight:
<span class="poetry indentAll">To the pagan, the divine appears within nature as something observable to the eye. He becomes conscious of it as something seen. In contrast, to the Jew who knows that the divine exists beyond, outside of, and prior to nature, God reveals Himself through a demonstration of His will, through the medium of the ear. The human subject becomes conscious of the divine through hearing and obeying. Paganism sees its god, Judaism hears Him; that is, it hears the commandments of His will.<sup class="footnote-marker">3</sup><i class="footnote">Heinrich Graetz, <i>The Structure of Jewish History</i>, translated by Ismar Schorch (1975), 68.</i></span>
Subsequent researches into the nature of ancient Near Eastern religions allow us to flesh out this proposition. The differences between mythological cultures notwithstanding, their common feature is “the notion of a cosmic continuum, of a monism of divine life which finds expression or individuation in and through the plenum of nature.”<sup class="footnote-marker">4</sup><i class="footnote">Michael Fishbane, <i>The Garments of Torah</i> (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1989), 50.</i> There is no clear-cut differentiation between man and nature on the one hand, man and God on the other. Instead there is deep harmony. An iconic insect or animal can represent a cosmic deity, for the gods are present in nature, as is man. Life-and-death, time itself, is a self-germinating, endlessly repeated cycle. Reality constitutes a single unbroken whole.
This natural harmony is decisively rejected by Israelite monotheism. The world is demythologised or in Max Weber’s term, “disenchanted.” In place of the all-in-all, the opening chapters of Genesis set forth a vision in which God, man and nature are radically distinct. God stands outside the world which He creates. He acts through history, not nature. He acts ethically, which is to say through choice and principle. He is subject, not object. God is, in Peter Berger’s phrase, “fundamentally immune to magical manipulation.”<sup class="footnote-marker">5</sup><i class="footnote">Peter Berger, <i>The Sacred Canopy</i> (New York: Doubleday, 1967), 117.</i> Man too is marked by his ability to confront, name and master nature; by his freedom and responsibility and thus his capacity to be an agent in history.
The sensed immediacy of the gods, systematically present to the senses, has no place in this vision. A chasm separates man the finite being from an awesomely transcendent God. Only one thing now connects them, fragile, insubstantial but infinitely resonant: words. Man speaks to God in prayer. God speaks to man in revelation. Through speaking and hearing, transcendence enters the human frame. The word is the vehicle of all meaning and relationship, the point at which heaven and earth touch. Though God is unimaginably distant, “the word is very near to you; it is in your mouth and in your heart so that you may obey it.”<sup class="footnote-marker">6</sup><i class="footnote">Deuteronomy 30:14.</i>
God brings the world into existence through words: He speaks and the world is. Adam and Eve experience God as “a voice” in the garden. The patriarchs and prophets encounter Him in the promise and the command. The miracles in Egypt and the wilderness are only prolegomena to the formative moment of the covenant, itself an act of speaking and hearing. Moses reminds the Israelites that at Sinai, “You came near and stood at the foot of the mountain while it blazed with fire to the very heavens… Then the Lord spoke to you out of the fire. <i>You heard the sound of words but saw no form; there was only a voice.</i>”<sup class="footnote-marker">7</sup><i class="footnote">Deuteronomy 4:12.</i> The commands reverberate with a twofold theme: the prohibition against worshipping any form that can be <i>seen</i>, and a repeated invocation to “<i>hear</i>” and thus obey the word of God. For God is found in words.
<b>Canonisation and interpretation</b><br>God, heard collectively at Sinai, continues to be heard by the prophets. But there is already a perceptible difference between the word spoken for the present moment and the word spoken for eternity. Moses relays <i>laws</i>; subsequent prophets warn, reprimand, envisage, but they do not legislate. The covenant unfolds in and through the history of Israel, of which prophecy is the inspired, authoritative commentary. But its essential constitution has been given in Israel’s prehistory, in the decisive encounter in the wilderness.
At a certain point in Israel’s existence, however, a twofold crisis supervenes, gathering momentum over several centuries and threatening the very basis of the covenant. The first is the <i>cessation</i> of the word, the gradual eclipse of prophecy. Already in the wake of the return of the exiles from Babylon we hear Zechariah’s dream of a time when “every prophet will be ashamed of his prophetic vision. He will not put on a prophet’s hairy mantle in order to deceive.”<sup class="footnote-marker">8</sup><i class="footnote">Zechariah 13:4.</i> It is not that there are no more prophets. It is that there are too many. Their words no longer carry assurance and the promise of authenticity. An alienation has set in from the primal experience of the heard word. There is a sensed moment of transition. Its most powerful expression is the long process of the canonisation of the sacred scriptures. With this activity a period has reached its closure. Beginning with Ezra, a new religious type enters and dominates the religious arena: not the prophet but the scribe. That is not to say that the covenant has ceased to unfold, but from now onwards it does so in a new, though still verbal, medium. Judaism had moved from the word <i>heard</i> to the word <i>interpreted</i>.
Interpretation was henceforth to bear the burden of prophecy, namely of turning the word spoken for eternity into the word spoken for the present. But a second crisis now threatened, perhaps the most serious since Israel’s history began. From the late second Temple period to the second century CE the bases of Jewish existence were one by one weakened and then destroyed: the Temple, sacrifices and priesthood, monarchy and sovereignty, even the land of Israel as the centre of Jewish life. Two things differentiated the destruction of the second Temple from that of the first. There were no prophets to interpret catastrophe. And by the time of the collapse of the Bar Kochba rebellion in 135 CE, an exile was taking shape that had no end in sight and which was in fact to last until the present century. The burden placed on interpretation was immense. Could the word spoken at Sinai apply to a situation unprecedented in Jewish history? If Judaism was to survive it would have to do so along different axes than political sovereignty or the Temple and its service. Could the divine word yield a meaning even for this hour? If it could not, the covenant itself was at risk of being broken and refuted.
At this stage a doctrine implicit in Judaism since its beginnings took on an immense significance: the idea of an oral Torah, coeval with the Written Torah and of equal authority, the concept of “revelation including within itself as sacred tradition the later commentary concerning its own meaning,”<sup class="footnote-marker">9</sup><i class="footnote">Gershom Scholem, <i>The Messianic Idea in Judaism</i> (New York: Schocken, 1972), 288.</i> No principle could have had more fateful consequences. It meant that the divine word could leap intact over even the abyss of catastrophe. New situations and the responses they called forth were already contained in the original revelation. What Rabbi Akiva was to say in the shadow of the ruins of Jerusalem was no more and no less than a “law spoken to Moses at Sinai.” The rabbis had no doubt as to the critical importance of this idea. Because of it, despite the silence following the end of prophecy, the Word continued unabated. Exegesis replaced inspiration. “Since the destruction of the Temple,” the Talmud noted, “prophecy has been taken from the prophets and given to the sages.”<sup class="footnote-marker">10</sup><i class="footnote">Babylonian Talmud, <i>Bava Batra</i> 12a.</i> The chain of transmission and renewal was unbroken, for tradition carried the dignity and authority of revelation.
The early rabbinic period has left us with a record of two intense activities. One was the articulation and codification of the Oral Law. The other was the work of showing that the Oral Law was implicit in the Written Law. There can be no doubt that oral law is as old as the law itself: no law can exist without interpretation and application. The Written Torah, for example, leaves underdefined some of its most basic institutions, such as the nature of <i>tefillin</i> (phylacteries) or the precise manner in which the Sabbath is to be observed. To be translatable into action the law must therefore be accompanied by further provisions not explicit in the text itself. Hence the necessity of an oral law. But the question now arises as to the status of the Oral Law: its authorship and authority. To this, the logic of the covenant yields only one possible answer. If Sinai is the constitutive moment of Israel’s existence, the unique point at which heaven and earth touched and the immutable code of Israel’s being was revealed, then all law, oral as well as written, is contained within it. Only the words transmitted by Moses carry permanent legislative authority. All oral law is therefore a direct tradition from Sinai (<i>halakhah le-Moshe mi-Sinai</i>) or an interpretation of the written text using rules themselves authorised by that revelation.
Few ideas are more fundamental to Judaism. Revelation is not progressive, nor is history evolution. To the contrary, revelation was a unique event to which subsequent history is the commentary. As a result, all authority lies within the word spoken at Sinai. Neither the prophets nor the sages saw themselves as innovators. To be sure, they might be mandated by the Torah to issue protective decrees or temporary suspensions to safeguard biblical law, but the law itself could be neither added to nor subtracted from. Oral law was therefore no mere “tradition,” law seen as the product of historical evolution. Such a view, though it accords with the assumptions of modern historicism, is wholly at odds with Judaic concepts of revelation, interpretation and authority. For if the covenant cannot be broken or refuted, then it contains within itself the code by which Israel agrees to be bound not only at some time but for all time. There can be no new revelation which alters the terms of the old, whether delivered by prophets, the “collective conscience” of the Jewish people, or historical catastrophe. On this, Jewish faith depends.
In the crisis affecting Jewry at the end of the second Temple period this faith was to prove crucial. For it meant that beneath the wreckage of the physical and institutional world of the Bible, its spiritual world was intact and unchanged. There was nothing new that was not at the same time and essentially a disclosure of the old. Though the <i>circumstances</i> of Israel’s existence had changed, its <i>terms</i> had not. The covenant was still in force. Its own texts said so. The curses at the end of the book of Leviticus, prophesying devastation and exile, ended with God’s insistence that “In spite of this, when they are in the land of their enemies, I will not reject or abhor them so as to destroy them completely, breaking My covenant with them.”<sup class="footnote-marker">11</sup><i class="footnote">Leviticus 26:44.</i> If that were so and the Torah was still in force, then contained within its initial revelation must be the rules and meanings governing a Judaic response to the present. “The sages that have arisen in every generation received their teachings from Sinai.”<sup class="footnote-marker">12</sup><i class="footnote">Exodus Rabbah 28:9.</i> That faith is central to Judaism, and it was given consistent expression by those who lived through catastrophe, the Pharisees and the early rabbinic sages. Thus was crisis negotiated and the continuity of the covenant secured.
<b>Crisis and continuity</b><br>Two points, however, should be noted about this period in Jewish history. The first is that it <i>was</i> a crisis. No religious faith, however ancient and vigorous, is invulnerable to events which threaten its very survival. In the present instance, Jewry was deeply fragmented by the situation it faced in the centuries immediately before and after the Common Era. The route taken by the Pharisees and the rabbinic sages was by no means the only one possible. We know of several groups who did not believe that interpretation could bear the weight placed upon it, and who thus denied the concept of an Oral Law. Among them were the Sadducees, a conservative and privileged group associated with the priesthood and the Hasmonean kings, who denied the elasticity implicit in an oral Torah which continually disclosed new facets of the Mosaic revelation. There were the Jewish sectarians, among them the group known through the Dead Sea Scrolls of Qumran, who believed that scripture pointed not to the continuation of the past but to an apocalyptic end of history in which the foundations of the world would be shaken. And there were the Jewish‒Christians, one of whom, Paul, declared that the covenant had now ended and a new one taken its place.
Faced with crisis a tradition can respond in several ways. It can cling to conservative literalism, the route taken by the Sadducees. It can hope for miraculous deliverance from its predicament, the path taken by the sectarians. Or it can branch out in a new direction, replacing one tradition with another, the course mapped out by the early Church. The idea that revelation contained within itself the mandate for its own interpretation – that the new is continuous with and implicit within the old – was neither simple nor self-evident. The metamorphosis from Temple to synagogue, prophet to sage, sacrifice to prayer, atonement to repentance, agricultural to charitable redistribution and enlandisement to exile involved massive and systematic reinterpretation. Nonetheless, the history of postbiblical Judaism until the modern age is that of those who undertook this reinterpretation. The Sadducees and sects rapidly disappeared. Christianity became a religion in its own right. Those who remained Jews were those who were loyal to the faith that change of circumstance and new interpretation did not mean change in the terms of the covenant.
The second point, equally fundamental, is that we are now in a position to assess the claim that divided Pharisees and rabbis on the one hand from Sadducees, sectarians and Christians on the other, namely that postbiblical Judaism is marked by its <i>principled continuity with</i> rather than its <i>departure from</i> the terms of biblical Judaism. Until recently, no issue had been more fraught with ideology. For the Sadducees, and in later centuries the Karaites, the Oral Law was a rabbinic invention. Only revelation, not interpretation, carried divine authority. For the Church fathers, rabbinic Judaism was an obstinate refusal to recognise the new religious dispensation, the end of the “old” covenant. For surely the biblical texts themselves pointed to the advent of the Messiah. For nineteenth-century Jewish historians, anxious to legitimate reform, the early rabbis were themselves reformers. The Oral Law was a fiction under cover of which they enacted change. If any of these was true then the millennial claims of Judaism were false. The covenant <i>had</i> changed. Either it had been superseded by a new testament or it had evolved into a tradition whose authority was merely human and, being human, could be revoked. These assumptions governed both the reading of texts and the interpretation of history, so that a detached evaluation was difficult, perhaps impossible.
Recent researches, however, have allowed us to see how ancient is the history of interpretation in Israel. Focusing on the idea of “inner-biblical exegesis,” scholars have disclosed within the prophetic books themselves a constant reworking of Pentateuchal themes. Applying to the Bible the insight of Gershom Scholem<sup class="footnote-marker">13</sup><i class="footnote">Gershom Scholem, “Revelation and Tradition as Religious Categories in Judaism,” in <i>The Messianic Idea in Judaism</i>, 282–303; “The Meaning of the Torah in Jewish Mysticism,” in <i>On the Kabbalah and its Symbolism</i> (New York: Schocken, 1972), 32–86.</i> and Simon Rawidowicz<sup class="footnote-marker">14</sup><i class="footnote">“On Interpretation,” in Simon Rawidowicz, <i>Studies in Jewish Thought</i>, (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society of America, 1974), 45–80.</i> into the importance of interpretation for Jewish consciousness, Michael Fishbane concludes that close textual analysis of the Bible supports “the validity of early Pharisaic claims that their exegetical tradition derives from biblical antiquity.”<sup class="footnote-marker">15</sup><i class="footnote">Michael Fishbane, <i>Biblical Interpretation in Ancient Israel</i> (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1985), 527.</i> The “hermeneutical imagination” at work in the prophetic books is marked by its “desire to prolong the divine voice into a present which presupposes the entire Sinaitic revelation, and its willingness to subordinate the human exegetical voice, whose undisguised presence would then underscore a gap in the authority of the revealed law.”<sup class="footnote-marker">16</sup><i class="footnote">Fishbane, <i>The Garments of Torah</i>, 11.</i> Put at its simplest, the relationship between the prophets and the Mosaic books is precisely that suggested by the Judaic concept of oral law. The axioms explicit and implicit in rabbinic Judaism – that oral law is as old as the law itself, that tradition unfolds not through innovation but interpretation, and that this is a continuous process dating back to Israel’s origins – have thus received new scholarly attention and vindication. To be sure, there is inevitably a difference between prophetic and rabbinic exegesis, between modes of interpretation before and after the closing of the canon. Nonetheless literary analysis has provided fresh and independent support for the rabbis’ own contention that they were not innovators but rather continuers of the covenant in a time of cataclysm.
No less significant is the evidence provided by the shape of the biblical canon. Here we touch on the vexed question at stake between Judaism and Christianity: the advent of the messianic age. There can be no doubt that the concept of a final redemption is implicit in the Bible from its very beginning. Substantively and stylistically the Bible presupposes a chiasmic or arching structure of time. Many of its laws and narratives are cast in a chiasmus, an A-B-B-A form in which the second half reverses the order of the first (for example, “He who <i>sheds</i> the <i>blood</i> of<i> man</i> by <i>man</i> shall his <i>blood</i> be <i>shed</i>” [Genesis 9:6]). Form here mirrors content, for the chiasmus suggests that there is a moral order in the universe which may be disrupted but which will eventually be restored. In a chiasmus, the end is implicit in the beginning. The harmony present at the beginning of Genesis will return at the end of time. Exile already contains within itself the promise of ultimate return. From the outset, history holds the possibility of disruption: the sin of Adam, the rebellion of the Israelites. Such is the inevitable result of human free will. But human freedom exists in subtle dialectic with divine providence. Thus disruption is accompanied by the promise of eventual restoration. The story of Israel and of mankind is one of alienation and reconciliation, exile and return. This constitutes the messianic thrust of the biblical literature.
But the explosive question has been: <i>When</i> is the messianic moment? It was this question that, over the centuries, persistently divided the Jewish mainstream from its schismatic movements: the early apocalyptic sects, Christianity, the Sabbatean and Frankist pseudo-messianisms of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries and the quasi-messianic thrust of German‒American Reform and secular Zionism. The history of Judaism has been written by those who, in answer to the question “When will the Messiah come?” have replied <i>without loss of messianic faith</i>, “Not yet.” Was this answer already implicit in sacred scripture?
Here we note an extraordinary feature of the canonisation of the Hebrew Bible. At the core of the Bible, bearing the name Torah, is a Pentateuch, not a Hexateuch.<sup class="footnote-marker">17</sup><i class="footnote">See, for example, Gabriel Josipovici, <i>The Book of God</i> (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1988), 47.</i> The Torah does not end at what might seem to be the most logical point, with the book of Joshua and the fulfilment of the promise of the land. Instead it ends a book earlier, at Deuteronomy, with the Israelites still waiting to enter the land and Moses seeing it from afar. The same pattern is evident in Genesis itself and in the Hebrew Bible as a whole. The book of Genesis closes with Jacob’s family in Egypt and Joseph’s vision of return. The book of Chronicles, with which the Hebrew canon ends, closes with Cyrus’s permission for the Babylonian exiles to return. The story of Jewish history might have been structured differently. Genesis might have ended with the Israelites leaving Egypt. The Bible as a whole might have ended with the return of the Babylonian exiles, their covenantal renewal documented in the books of Ezra and Nehemiah, or the glorious vision of the closing chapters of Isaiah heralding an era of justice and peace. Such a division would have produced a natural sense of closure. Instead, the ordering of the biblical texts forces us repeatedly to focus on a promised but unachieved future. The Bible tells of a story not yet completed, a destination not yet reached. Recently, Brevard Childs has alerted us to the importance of the canon for our understanding of the Bible as a whole.<sup class="footnote-marker">18</sup><i class="footnote">Brevard S. Childs, <i>Introduction to the Old Testament as Scripture</i> (London: SCM Press, 197)9.</i> If so, then the canonisation of the Hebrew Bible suggests precisely what Judaism maintained as its normative belief: that messianic faith is both fundamental and always directed to the future. Judaism, in contradistinction to Christianity, maintains that human existence is redeemable but not yet redeemed. The announcement of the end of history is always premature.
<b>Midrash and Time</b><br>Thus the route taken by postbiblical Judaism cannot accurately be described as merely one among several alternatives. It was, as recent literary analysis has helped us to understand, the one suggested by the inner logic of the Bible itself. It was the route of continuity sustained through catastrophe. It was predicated, above all, on the idea of the Oral Law which was in turn entailed by the belief, enshrined in the Written Torah, that the covenant between God and Israel would endure for all time.
The means by which Judaism survived the loss of sovereignty, Temple and land was essentially textual, namely by reinterpretation understood as the disclosure of new facets already present within the original Sinaitic revelation. This entailed a specific view of the relationship between text and time, and the rejection of alternatives: Sadducean literalism, sectarian apocalyptics and the Christian new covenant, each of which Judaism saw as <i>dis</i>continuous with the Bible. We must now explore in greater detail the nature of textuality and time in postbiblical Judaism from the mishnaic to the Middle Ages.
For the rabbis, since all development is already implicit in the sacred text of Torah, change is merely apparent, not real. History as the arena of transformation is negated. Scholars have noted the extraordinary fact that in the Mishnah and the Jerusalem and Babylonian Talmuds we find little reference to the most important events of the ages during which they were compiled. Despite their vast and elaborate detail, it is impossible to reconstruct a contemporary history from these sources. “The Mishnah’s framer’s deepest yearning,” writes one scholar, “is not for historical change but for ahistorical stasis.”<sup class="footnote-marker">19</sup><i class="footnote">Jacob Neusner, <i>Judaism: The Evidence of the Mishnah</i> (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1981), 27.</i> The historian Yosef Hayim Yerushalmi puts the point more forcibly still. One of the most distinctive features of biblical Judaism is its dedication to history as the working out of the covenant. Indeed it was ancient Israel that first conceived of history as the stage of the drama of redemption, the place where God’s will and design were revealed. It is therefore “all the more remarkable that after the close of the biblical canon the Jews virtually stopped writing history.” Between the first century and the nineteenth, with the sole exception of the period following the Spanish expulsion, there were almost no histories and historians. “It is though, abruptly, the impulse to historiography had ceased.”<sup class="footnote-marker">20</sup><i class="footnote">Yosef Hayim Yerushalmi, <i>Zakhor: Jewish History and Jewish Memory</i> (Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press, 1982), 16.</i>
Time, for Judaism, is the vehicle of revelation, and with the shift from revelation to interpretation, a new concept of time took hold, one that dominates both the halakhic and aggadic imagination. All time becomes a simultaneous present. There is no concept of anachronism: “There is no ‘before’ and ‘after’ in Torah.”<sup class="footnote-marker">21</sup><i class="footnote">Babylonian Talmud, <i>Pesachim</i> 6b.</i> In the rabbinic readings of the Torah, the patriarchs inhabit the world of the sages.<sup class="footnote-marker">22</sup><i class="footnote">See Yitzchak Heinemann, <i>Darkhei ha-Aggadah</i> (Jerusalem: Magnes, 1970), 35–43.</i> Jacob contemplates the Roman conquest.<sup class="footnote-marker">23</sup><i class="footnote">Midrash Tanchuma, <i>Vayetze,</i> 2.</i> Moses hears a legal exposition by Rabbi Akiva and learns that it is “a law given to Moses at Sinai.”<sup class="footnote-marker">24</sup><i class="footnote">Babylonian Talmud, <i>Menachot</i> 29b.</i> In halakhah the same atemporality applies. A single legal argument extends from a first-century mishnaic teacher to a talmudic interpreter to a medieval commentator to an eighteenth-century codifier with no sense of innovation or discontinuity. Rabbi Joseph Soloveitchik has described the halakhic sense of time in these words:
<span class="poetry indentAll">[T]here is a past that persists in its existence, that does not vanish and disappear but remains firm in its place… The Jewish people’s all-embracing collective consciousness of time – the sages of the tradition, the Second Temple era, the age of classical prophecy, the Exodus from Egypt, the lives of the patriarchs, the creation itself – is an integral part of the “I” awareness of halakhic man… The consciousness of halakhic man, that master of the received tradition, embraces the entire company of the sages of the <i>masorah.</i> He lives in their midst, discusses and argues questions of halakhah with them, delves into and analyses fundamental halakhic principles in their company. All of them merge into one time experience.<sup class="footnote-marker">25</sup><i class="footnote">Joseph B. Soloveitchik, <i>Halakhic Man</i>, translated by Lawrence Kaplan (Philadelphia, PA: Jewish Publication Society, 1983), 117–20.</i></span>
This entailed a way of reading texts. The definitive rabbinic mode of reading is <i>midrash</i>, literally a “searching out” of meaning implicit in the words. Much has been written about the methods of midrash, but what concerns us here is its fundamental hermeneutic stance, namely that the biblical text contains infinite intentionality. In general, the meaning of a text is governed by the intention of its author, the context of its composition, the audience for whom it was intended and the linguistic conventions within which it was written. These criteria have some determinacy when applied to a human author but none when applied to a divine Author speaking to all Jews in all generations. The generative principle of midrash is the bridging of the hermeneutic distance between Sinai and the present. Its assumption is that the meaning of the Torah cannot be historicised to a single context. Its task is to search out, within the Word spoken then and there, the meaning intended for now and here.
The modes of classic rabbinic midrash varied from the highly formal, utilising fixed exegetical rules such as those collated by Hillel, Rabbi Akiva and Rabbi Ishmael, to the spontaneous, imaginative and allusive. Midrash was used both to derive laws (<i>midrash halakhah</i>) and to interpret scriptural narrative (<i>midrash aggadah</i>)<i>.</i> In some cases, especially in the domain of law, there were decision procedures for arriving at a correct conclusion. In others such as the fleshing out of biblical narrative and ethical and theological reflection, the rabbis were inclined to let conflicting interpretations stand, reflecting as they did the many-sidedness of truth seen from the human perspective.<sup class="footnote-marker">26</sup><i class="footnote">See Gerald Blidstein, “Al Rav-Muvaniut ha-Torah,” <i>Deot</i> 44<i>,</i> 270–74.</i> Of two opinions it could be said that “these and these are the words of the living God,”<sup class="footnote-marker">27</sup><i class="footnote">Babylonian Talmud, <i>Eiruvin</i> 13b, <i>Gittin</i> 6b.</i> or that “one verse yields many meanings,”<sup class="footnote-marker">28</sup><i class="footnote">Babylonian Talmud, <i>Sanhedrin</i> 34a.</i> or, as a later aphorism put it, that “there are seventy faces to the Torah.”<sup class="footnote-marker">29</sup><i class="footnote">See Responsa Radbaz, 643; Numbers Rabbah 13:15.</i> In the middle ages kabbalists and philosophers used extensions of midrashic methodology to ground their systems in the biblical text. But underlying all these internal variations is the belief that Torah is the repository of all truth, and that truth in turn acquires its validation and authority by being discovered in its words. Its guiding principle was summarised in the dictum of a mishnaic sage: “Turn it [the Torah] over and turn it over again, for it contains everything.”<sup class="footnote-marker">30</sup><i class="footnote">Mishnah, <i>Avot</i> 5:25.</i>
In the Middle Ages, under the influence of rationalism and the polemic with Christian biblical interpretation, a sharp distinction was made between <i>derash</i>, the midrashic meaning and <i>peshat</i>, the literal, grammatical or historical sense. For the first time commentators such as Abraham Ibn Ezra, Rabbi Shmuel ben Meir (Rashbam) and Rabbi Joseph Kara attached independent dignity to <i>peshat</i>, the “plain sense of things.” However, even for such commentators midrash retained its primacy as authoritative reading. Thus Rashbam, in a passage explaining his methods, writes that “the main point of the Torah” is to teach the laws and ethical principles derived by midrash. He confesses that his own concern, which is to seek “the deep plain sense of Scripture,” is of secondary significance.<sup class="footnote-marker">31</sup><i class="footnote">Rabbi Shmuel ben Meir, <i>Commentary</i> to Genesis 37:2; see also his comments to Genesis 1:1.</i> Or as we might put it, if Torah yields a multiplicity of meanings, the plain sense is certainly one of them,<sup class="footnote-marker">32</sup><i class="footnote">See the interesting, if speculative, comments of David Weiss Halivni, <i>Midrash, Mishnah and Gemara</i> (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1986), 105–15.</i> but what is normative for the life of the community is the midrashic tradition. What is more, a clear polarity between <i>derash</i> and <i>peshat</i> is unknown to the early sages. In a masterly essay, Raphael Loewe has shown that though the term <i>peshat</i> was used by the rabbis of the talmudic age, it referred not to the “literal” but rather to the recognised, accepted or authoritative meaning.<sup class="footnote-marker">33</sup><i class="footnote">Raphael Loewe, “The ‘Plain’ Meaning of Scripture in Early Jewish Exegesis,” <i>Papers of the Institute of Jewish Studies</i> (Jerusalem: Magnes Press, 1964), volume 1, 141–85.</i>
Midrash, then, is neither a primitive anticipation of later, more critical methods, nor is it simply one interpretive genre among others such as the independent search for the plain, original meaning. For its early and medieval practitioners, midrash <i>was</i> the plain sense of the verse, given the cognitive assumption of reading a text <i>as Torah</i>, namely that the meaning it holds for us, here, now is the one it was intended to hold when the words were first spoken.<sup class="footnote-marker">34</sup><i class="footnote">See Adin Steinsaltz, “Peshuto shel Mikra,” <i>Deot</i> 20 (Summer 1960), 13–18.</i> For their author was not Moses but God, and their audience was not the generation of the wilderness but all future generations also.
Midrash is a precise reflex of rabbinic theology, the detailed working out of the proposition that throughout the dislocations of exile, the covenant remains unchanged. It is exegesis born in the tension between the <i>empirical discontinuity</i> of the present with the world of the Pentateuch, and the <i>principled continuity</i> of Pentateuch with the present as its unbroken, unbreakable and still operative code. Without the discontinuity, there would be no need for midrash. Without the continuity, there would be no possibility of it. Midrash is the continuation of the covenant through the perceived discontinuities of history.
<b>The midrashic concept of Torah</b><br>Midrash as a way of reading the biblical text implies a particular view of what <i>kind</i> of text it is. What is its purpose or point? To what genre is it to be assigned? The answer is implicit in the name tradition gave it, namely <i>Torah</i>, meaning law, teaching and instruction. For midrash, the question to which Torah is the answer is less “What happened?” than “How then shall I live?”
An extreme expression of this is to be found in a midrash cited by Rashi at the beginning of his commentary to the Torah. “Rabbi Yitzchak said: the Torah should have begun with the verse, ‘This month shall be to you the first of months’ [Exodus 12:2] which is the first of the commandments given to Israel.”<sup class="footnote-marker">35</sup><i class="footnote">Rashi, <i>Commentary</i> to Genesis 1:1; Midrash Tanchuma [Buber], <i>Bereishit</i>, 13.</i> Behind Rabbi Yitzchak’s remark is the assumption that the Torah is essentially <i>a book of commandments</i>, and should therefore have begun with the first command addressed to the children of Israel. This implies a remarkable indifference to factual information, for it contemplates a Torah which omitted without loss the narratives of creation, the flood, the patriarchs, the exile and the first stages of exodus. The suggestion is not to be taken at its face value, for Rabbi Yitzchak was aware that the Torah did <i>not</i> begin in middle of the book of Exodus. But it reveals an essential characteristic of midrash. When the sages ask, “Why was this written?” or “Why was this passage placed next to that?” their typical answer is not “Because that is how things happened,” but “To teach you that…”
To be sure, much aggadic midrash is concerned to fill in the lacunae of biblical narrative. What did Cain say to Abel? Who was the “man” who wrestled with Jacob? Who found Joseph wandering in the field? But in answering such questions, midrash does not adopt the naturalism that informs the biblical text itself. Instead, in Yitzchak Heinemann’s phrase, it engages in “creative historiography,” almost invariably with a controlling theological or ethical intent. The Bible’s moral contrasts are heightened;<sup class="footnote-marker">36</sup><i class="footnote">See Zevi Hirsch Chajes, <i>The Student’s Guide through the Talmud</i>, translated by Jacob Shachter (London: East and West Library, 1952), chapter 17, 139–47.</i> episodes in the lives of the patriarchs foreshadow later developments in Jewish history; daring theological reflections are placed into the mouths of biblical characters.<sup class="footnote-marker">37</sup><i class="footnote">For one strand in this tradition, see Anson Laytner, <i>Arguing with God</i>, (Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson, 1990).</i> Every nuance of the text is searched not for its correspondence with empirical actuality but for its halakhic or moral implications. For the sages, Torah is not an assemblage of facts but a series of rules and models of how Israel should live and thereby be sanctified. That is its genre and proper mode of interpretation. Torah is not <i>information</i> but <i>instruction</i>.
That is not to say that there was no discussion of the correspondence between Torah and reality. That there <i>was</i> correspondence was assured by the fact that the Author of the Torah was also the Author of the world. But there was deep debate as to which served as the commentary to the other. A rationalist strand within Judaism argued that what we know of the world must govern our understanding of Torah, while a mystical tendency insisted that what we know of Torah must govern our understanding of the world. Rabbi Ishmael and Rabbi Akiva debated whether the Torah was to be understood through, or independently of, the conventions of human language.<sup class="footnote-marker">38</sup><i class="footnote">See the sources cited in Abraham J. Heschel, <i>Theology of Ancient Judaism</i> [Hebrew], volumes 1–2 (London: Soncino, 1962).</i> Maimonides and Nachmanides disagreed as to whether Jacob’s wrestling match with the angel, Balaam’s talking donkey and Jonah’s sojourn in the belly of a whale took place in physical space or in prophetic visions.<sup class="footnote-marker">39</sup><i class="footnote">Maimonides, <i>Guide for the Perplexed</i>, 2:42; Nachmanides, <i>Commentary</i> to Genesis 18:1.</i> The medieval philosophers declared that if a verse conflicted with the dictates of reason it was to be understood other than literally, while the medieval mystics assumed that precisely where a verse conflicted with reason it disclosed the structure of a supernatural reality. Similar arguments took place about aggadic statements themselves: Were they meant literally or metaphorically, mystically or philosophically? But these differences, though profound, were marginal to the issue at hand. They concerned the nature of language and reality but not the <i>point</i> of the Torah which was, for all, authoritative instruction on how to live and the interpretive key to nature and history.
We can now attempt a modern restatement of what <i>Torah min ha-shamayim</i>, “Torah from Heaven,” meant for rabbinic tradition. Torah is the constitution of the covenant between God and Israel. As such it is a relational concept. It involves One who proposes the covenant and those who accept it as binding; One who commands, and those who are commanded. It embodies two ideas, the <i>giving</i> of the Torah and the <i>receiving</i> of the Torah. The giving of the Torah is a mysterious and metaphysical idea, though no less and no more so than any other divine activity. “And God said” is a statement of the same logical form as “And God did.” The mystery in both cases lies at the intersection of the infinite with the finite, the supernatural with the empirical. Revelation and miracle both speak of the breakthrough of the transcendent into the world of the senses. By the twelfth century Maimonides was aware that such concepts lay outside the parameters of science. Science was concerned with the regular and repeatable. It could find no point of access to events that were by their nature unique and non-recurring. The revelation at Sinai, he wrote, is “one of the mysteries of the Torah,” adding that “It is very difficult to have a true conception of the events, for there has never been before, nor will there ever be again, anything like it.”<sup class="footnote-marker">40</sup><i class="footnote">Maimonides, <i>Guide for the Perplexed</i>, 2:33.</i> The idea of Torah as revelation is therefore inaccessible to scientific research and belongs to a different frame of reference. But this provokes the positivist question: What <i>difference</i> does belief in revelation make?
The answer lies in the second pole of the relationship: the receiving of the Torah. <i>Torah min ha-shamayim</i> was not, for the rabbis, a mere metaphysical postulate. It was instead a hermeneutic stance. It determined how Torah was to be understood. Specifically it entailed what we might call a <i>covenantal reading of the Torah</i>, and we are now in a position to spell out what such reading involves. Firstly the Torah reveals not only information about God but God Himself: for God is found not in nature but in words. To be sure, God creates nature and acts in history, but He can be discerned in both only through His will made articulate in His word. Neither creation nor history carry their meaning on their surface: only the prophet, bearer of the word, or the sage, the word’s interpreter, can decipher it. The primary encounter is not with something outside the text but with the text itself.
Secondly the Torah is a covenantal document and its proper interpretation follows from this fact. Its eternity is no theological abstraction but follows from the covenantal commitment that God will not break or retract His word to Israel. Its words convey not “facts” but instruction and command. The seminal facts of the Pentateuch, the creation and the exodus, have moral implications and their significance lies in teaching us how to live. Torah can therefore never be simply <i>read</i>: it is proclaimed, heard, studied and obeyed. The encounter with the text is an explicitly religious act which must be prefaced by a blessing. There can be no detached academic study of Torah, because to understand it as Torah is to hear it as command. Nor is there universal access to the Torah, for it is addressed to the covenantal community, specifically to the heirs of those who at Sinai agreed to be bound by it.<sup class="footnote-marker">41</sup><i class="footnote">Hence the rabbinic assertion that “If you are told, ‘There is wisdom among the nations,’ believe it. If you are told, ‘There is Torah among the nations,’ do not believe it” (Lamentations Rabbah 2:17).</i> Those who interpret Torah do so as part of that community, meaning that they are bound by the tradition of interpretation accepted as authoritative by the congregation of faith. Indeed, “The community can be defined as a concentric tradition of reading.”<sup class="footnote-marker">42</sup><i class="footnote">Steiner, “Our Homeland, the Text,” 7.</i>
Thirdly, since Torah forms the constitution of a covenant never to be revoked, there can be no further revelation; instead there can and must be continuing <i>commentary</i> on revelation. The sages were indeed heirs of the prophets, for midrash in its broadest sense is as old as Judaism itself. To be sure, there are marked differences between the prophetic and rabbinic literature, due to the intervening canonisation of Scripture, the difference in their historic context and the rabbinic insistence, after the close of prophecy, on the primacy of “rule-governed imagination”<sup class="footnote-marker">43</sup><i class="footnote">The phrase is Frank Kermode’s. See his “The Plain Sense of Things,” in Geoffrey Hartman and Sanford Budick (eds.), <i>Midrash and Literature</i> (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1986), 179–94.</i> over inspiration. But the centrality of commentary in biblical and postbiblical Judaism exemplifies in both substance and form the working-through of its fundamental assumption, namely the <i>principled continuity</i> and “<i>textuality</i>” of Jewish history. What happens now and in the future is “prescripted”; its meaning has already been written and merely awaits interpretation. This does not mean that events are predetermined. Man has free will and thus faces an open future. For precisely this reason, midrash is always necessary. The future cannot be foreseen; therefore the meaning of the text cannot be known in advance. It is disclosed, retrospectively, afresh in every generation. But midrash is always possible. For Torah as covenant rules out absolutely one eventuality: a “hermeneutic rupture,” an event so shattering as to render the biblical text inapplicable. To see an unbridgeable gap between the past and the present is, for Judaism, to have declared the covenant broken. <sup class="footnote-marker">44</sup><i class="footnote">On the general point, see Stanley Fish, <i>Is There a Text in This Class?: The Authority of Interpretive Communities</i> (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1980).</i>
<b>Covenant and criticism</b><br>Once put this way we can see that the doctrine of <i>Torah min ha-shamayim</i> was untouched and untouchable by biblical criticism. For they were and are two wholly opposed approaches to texts. To be sure, there are many different kinds of critical scholarship. But what they held in common, at least until recently, were the assumptions of post-Enlightenment scholarship, which stood at the remotest extreme from a covenantal reading of Torah. They sought detachment while the covenantal reading required commitment. They sought “original” meaning while midrash sought out the meaning for the present. They sought universal criteria of meaning while midrash invoked criteria internal to the community of faith. The question posed by critical scholarship was: How should this text be understood as a book among books? The question posed by <i>Torah min ha-shamayim</i> was: How should this text be heard and responded to as the word addressed by God and accepted by Israel as the unbreakable constitution of its being?
Nothing could be more familiar to Jews from their relationship with Sadducees, Karaites and Christians than the fact that the same text could yield a variety of meanings depending on the assumptions brought to bear on it. For Judaism, biblical criticism was therefore less a revolution than a new variant on an ancient theme: an approach to the Bible which disregarded its character as an eternally binding covenant and thus ruled out, <i>ab initio</i>, the concept of an oral law. That a single text can hold a variety of meanings for different faiths and cultures is unquestionable. Indeed there are certain texts – the Bible is the supreme example – which are so intimately related to the central values of a civilisation that it is more accurate to describe fundamentally opposed readings as producing different books, rather than different interpretations of the same book. Just as the <i>Tenakh</i> (Hebrew Bible) of Judaism was not the Old Testament of Christianity, so the Torah of Judaism was not the Pentateuch of the critics. Christianity had rewritten <i>Tenakh</i> by casting it as the prefiguration of a new covenant. The Enlightenment had rewritten it a second time by conceiving it as a historical document without special claim to authority. This was less a re-reading than a cultural revolution.
The illusion that somewhere beneath these conflicts of interpretation there lies an presuppositionless “correct reading” is based on a faulty philosophy of language and literature. At the very least, to establish the parameters of a correct reading we must determine to what genre the text in question is to be assigned. The hermeneutic axiom of <i>Torah min ha-shamayim</i> is precisely what Enlightenment scholarship denied: that the Torah is authoritative instruction directed to the community which agreed throughout its history to be bound by the covenant of which it was the constitution. Whatever, then, critics were studying, it was not <i>Torah</i> the book, as it had been understood from its beginnings and as it internally suggested that it be understood.
In its earliest forms, however, biblical criticism had large ambitions. Source criticism in particular aimed to answer the historical question: What actually happened? If it could do this it would, given the Enlightenment assumptions of its practitioners, have established its own supremacy as a “scientific” discipline as against the “mythic” approach of religion itself. In no respect was it guilty of greater hubris. Summing up the results of two centuries of critical research into the “genesis of the text,” Meir Sternberg writes, “Rarely has there been such a futile expense of spirit in a noble cause; rarely have such grandiose theories of origination been built and revised and pitted against one another on the evidential equivalent of the head of a pin; rarely have so many worked so long and so hard with so little to show for their trouble.”<sup class="footnote-marker">45</sup><i class="footnote">Meir Sternberg, <i>The Poetics of Biblical Narrative</i> (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1985), 13.</i> Modern archaeological research has tended, if anything, to confirm the historicity of biblical narrative; and, as we shall see, the most recent literary approaches to the Bible have abandoned the fragmentation of the text into “sources” and concentrated instead on reading it as a unity.
To be sure, these no more amount to a reinstatement of faith than the original claims of criticism amounted to a refutation of it. But what they suggest is the extraordinary set of myths that lay behind Enlightenment scholarship in its more imperialistic moments. One we will explore in the next chapter: the idea that somewhere, purged of all faith commitments, there exists a vantage point of absolute detachment from which all truths governing the meaning of human existence can be impartially assessed. Another, more relevant here, is the idea that texts (religious texts especially) are a veil covering a pristine core of historical truth, which must be removed if objectivity is to be arrived at. On this view, which held sway in the nineteenth century, texts are not to be read but dissected to reveal what lies beneath them.
This is a way not of reading the Bible but of misreading it, to which the most eloquent commentary is the Bible itself. For the fundamental axiom of Torah is that God is not seen but heard. He is not to be found in “objective” history (events as they are grasped by the senses) but in covenantal history (events as they are perceived through the “word” of faith). The most subtle dialectic in the Torah itself is between these two levels of reality. The long narrative of Joseph and his brothers is an extended study of the interplay between “history” (the apparently random acts of individuals) and “providence” (the end foretold in Joseph’s dreams which improbably but inevitably comes to pass). The whole of Genesis is a set of variations on the dissonance between the divine word (the promise of children and a land) and empirical reality (the childlessness of the matriarchs and the landlessness of the patriarchs).
Indeed two of the most powerful parodies of the “scientific” approach to faith (what is believable is only that which is empirically confirmed) are contained in the book of Exodus. God “empirically” confirms His existence to Pharaoh through the plagues, but at the same time gives him the “strength” or “hardness” of heart to disbelieve. God demonstrates His presence to the Israelites at the division of the Red Sea: they “see” and therefore “believe,” but in the very next passage are rebellious again. The faith that requires this kind of confirmation is not faith. Nor is it accidental that after the most precisely “scientific” demonstration of God in the Bible – Elijah’s controlled experiment on Mount Carmel – God instructs the prophet that He is not to be found in the wind, the earthquake and the fire but in a “still, small voice.” God is not seen with the senses but heard with the ear of faith. He is, to use Buber’s terms, not the “It” of empiricism but the “Thou” of relationship: the relationship of loyalty, fidelity and trust whose formal expression is covenant.
Historical research has provided us with an ironic commentary on its own methods. The earliest independent documentary evidence of the existence of the people Israel is the Merneptah stele (c. 1224–1211 BCE) which contains the sentence “Israel is laid waste, his seed is not.” The second most ancient, the triumphal inscription of Mesha, king of Moab (ninth century BCE), announces “Israel has perished for ever.” If objective evidence is to be believed, then Israel as a living people does not exist; a conclusion reiterated in the twentieth century by Arnold Toynbee. Against this, the people Israel knows – with a moral certainty which is the only certainty of faith – that Torah, as the covenantal word of the living God, cannot be rescinded. On this it stakes its very existence in each generation.
<i>Torah min ha-shamayim</i> is no abstract, metaphysical doctrine immune to proof or refutation. To the contrary, it makes precisely testable claims. Its most powerful, indeed definitive, claim is that Israel will always exist as a people and always testify to the presence of God. Given the history of Israel, its wanderings and persecutions, no claim can have been more improbable. In the late twentieth century, after the most systematic attempt in history to ensure that “Israel is laid waste, his seed is not,” Jews are confronted with the not unastonishing fact that the people Israel still lives, that it has been ingathered from its millennial dispersion and has returned to the land to which Abraham once travelled in response to the divine word nearly 4,000 years ago. No more conclusive vindication has ever been given of the power of a book over the course of human destiny. The only claim the Torah makes about itself is that the people who live by its covenant will, obscurely but unmistakably, testify to the presence of God in history. This I believe to be true, no more strikingly so than in this present, savage and secular century.
<b>The birth of history, the eclipse of midrash</b><br>But though Judaism was immune to the challenge of Enlightenment scholarship, Jews were not. And here we reach the heart of the drama whose lasting effects have been charted throughout this book. The intellectual and social environment of nineteenth-century Europe was one in which the traditional collective identity of Jews had no place. Its key terms – history, progress, evolution, autonomy, universality, the individual and the state, the dichotomy between private and public domains – constituted a language into which Judaism could not be translated. For Judaism was a religion of a group that was neither a collection of individuals nor a state. Its ethics were particularistic, not universal. Its laws were divine commands, not choices of the autonomous self. Judaism made no distinction between private and public identities. Above all it held a midrashic view of time wholly at odds with the evolutionary assumptions of Hegelian philosophy, Darwinian biology and Fraserian anthropology.
Not only this, but a model of time in which the older a system was, the more primitive, could not but pass savage judgement on Judaism – a judgement explicit in all the great philosophers of the age: Kant, Hegel, Schopenhauer and Nietzsche. The archetypal Jewish experience of modernity was, in John Murray Cuddihy’s phrase, a “consciousness of underdevelopment.”<sup class="footnote-marker">46</sup><i class="footnote">John Murray Cuddihy, <i>The Ordeal of Civility</i> (Boston, MA: Beacon Press, 1987), 167.</i> Until the nineteenth century Jews had explained their situation in terms of biblical-rabbinic theodicy. They were in exile because of their sins and they would be redeemed by God in the fullness of time. Now, for the first time, that model was challenged by a secular alternative. Jews were outsiders because of their separateness and they would be redeemed by westernisation.
This was a crisis for tradition no less grave than that which had faced Jews eighteen centuries earlier. Once again Jewry disintegrated into conflicting patterns of response, this time into Reform, Conservative and Reconstructionist Judaisms, secular Zionism, culturalism and Jewish ethnicity. Each confronted a critical problem, namely the towering authority of the biblical and rabbinic tradition which in principle excluded change in the terms of the covenant. For non-Orthodox Judaisms the issue was the mandate for halalchic innovation. For Jewish secularisms it was the simple issue of whether there could be a Jewish identity without a religious base. The crisis, made urgent by the rising tide of antisemitism, had no precedent since the first century CE. But the same forces that produced the problem seemed to offer a solution. Judaism, which had resisted history, could no re-enter history.
It is a face whose significance cannot be overestimated that the first gesture of Jews in coming to terms with the new European situation was the founding, in Berlin in 1819 of a society for the study of Jewish History. Its project was <i>Wissenschaft des Judentums</i> (“the science of Judaism”), but though its overt aim was the objective study of Judaism’s past, its ultimate agenda was otherwise. The society’s statutes declared that it had been founded as part of the movement “to harmonise, by way of educational work, the Jews with the present age and with the states wherever they live.”<sup class="footnote-marker">47</sup><i class="footnote">Paul Mendes-Flohr and Jehuda Reinharz (eds.), <i>The Jew in the Modern World</i> (New York: Oxford University Press, 1980), 188.</i> One of its founders, Eduard Gans, calling on Jews to become fully integrated into society, added that this would not necessarily mean their disappearance as Jews: Judaism will live on “as the river lives on in the ocean.”<sup class="footnote-marker">48</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 192.</i> The irony was unmistakable. One could now objectively study the Jewish past because Judaism was a thing of the past. Leopold Zunz, one of the most distinguished of the new scholars, declared that a historical study of rabbinic literature was now possible because “no new significant development is likely to disturb our survey.”<sup class="footnote-marker">49</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 197.</i> Moritz Steinschneider is reported to have said that the aim of the movement was “to give the remains of Judaism an honourable burial.”
As abruptly as Jewish historiography disappeared with Josephus in the first century, so it reappeared in the nineteenth, led by figures like Nachman Krochmal and Heinrich Graetz. What was revolutionary was not the histories themselves but the acquisition, by Jews, of <i>historical consciousness</i>. This was, in the course of time, to have a transfiguring effect on all subsequent developments outside Orthodoxy. Yosef Hayim Yerushalmi has this to say about its genesis:
<span class="poetry indentAll">Modern Jewish historiography began precipitously out of that assimilation from without and collapse from within which characterised the sudden emergence of the Jew from the ghetto… The modern effort to reconstruct the Jewish past begins at a time that witnesses a sharp break in the continuity of Jewish living and hence also an ever-growing decay of Jewish group memory. In this sense, if for no other, history becomes what it had never been before – the faith of fallen Jews. For the first time history, not a sacred text, becomes the arbiter of Judaism.<sup class="footnote-marker">50</sup><i class="footnote">Yerushalmi, <i>Zakhor: Jewish History and Jewish Memory</i>, 86. See also Lionel Kochan, <i>The Jew and His History</i> (New York: Schocken, 1977).</i></span>
Jewish history was born in alienation, but it added to it an impetus of its own. Whereas midrashic consciousness lay in a sense of the <i>presentness of the past</i>, historical consciousness involved a sense of its pastness. Until the nineteenth century, as Yerushalmi has noted, Jews had memory rather than history. Each year, on Passover, Jews remembered the Exodus not as a remote event but as a present reality. The Mishnah had ruled that “One is obliged to see oneself as if one had personally gone out of Egypt.”<sup class="footnote-marker">51</sup><i class="footnote">Mishnah, <i>Pesachim</i> 10:5.</i> The Jewish calendar was a way not of <i>recalling</i> but of <i>re-enacting</i> history. The metamorphosis of modern Jewish thought lay in its new conception of time: in its distancing of the past as something that happened long ago and somewhere else to someone else. Time was the vehicle of real, not merely apparent, change. This meant in turn that the covenant was not a fixed, immutable datum. Like everything else, it was subject to evolution and change.
The birth of history was the eclipse of midrash. We can trace precisely the moment of transition. It was in 1670, when Spinoza published his <i>Tractatus</i>. In its seventh chapter, “Of the Interpretation of Scripture,” Spinoza decisively rejects an understanding of the Bible through tradition and commentary. Scripture is to be understood only through Scripture and as a document located in history. This Copernican revolution was not internalised by Jewry until a century and a half later, but when it was, its effects were momentous. The historicisation of Judaism allowed Reform to take the prophets, Conservative Judaism, the mishnaic sages, as models of innovation. Secularists like Simon Dubnow, removing what they saw as the religious veil that covered Jewry, were able to reconceptualise it as a culturally autonomous but essentially secular community. The most dramatic consequence, though, lay in the birth of Zionism. In its most radical form, Zionism was quite simply the <i>return</i> of Jews to history after 2,000 years of coma.
The idea of a detached, “scientific” reading of texts was, as we have seen, part of the mythology of the nineteenth century which twentieth-century sociology of knowledge and hermeneutics has effectively challenged. When we read, we do so with presuppositions, within conventions and for purposes. When Jews for the first time began to read the biblical and rabbinic literature historically, though they invoked the legitimation of “science,” their purpose was avowedly revolutionary. No one has described this process more poignantly than the literary critic Harold Bloom. Poets, he argues, create space for themselves within the constraints of the literary canon by deliberately misrepresenting their predecessors. The titles of two of his books, <i>The Anxiety of Influence</i> and <i>A Map of Misreading</i>, summarise his thesis. A poet coming late to a tradition can only clear the ground for originality by first distorting and thus neutralising the tradition. For the creative artist, all reading is “defensive warfare” and all interpretation misinterpretation.<sup class="footnote-marker">52</sup><i class="footnote">Harold Bloom, <i>The Anxiety of Influence</i> (New York: Oxford, 1973); <i>A Map of Misreading</i> (New York: Oxford University Press, 1975).</i>
Bloom’s theory is explicitly Freudian. The poet, like the child, is engaged in an Oedipal struggle against the oppressive past. As with Freud, Bloom’s account is less convincing as a general theory than as an analysis of what it felt like to be a Jew in the modern world. Internalising the stigma which made them seem to others alien and uncivilised, Jews felt the need to liberate themselves from the past. Because their past was textual, the battle necessarily involved an assault on the text. There is no more exact opposition than that between midrashic and historicist approaches to textuality, the one seeking to transport ancient words alive into the here-and-now, the other confining their meanings and imperatives to the there-and-then.
The effect of historicism was inevitably to atomise and relativise Judaism and to dismantle the concept of a Jewish destiny. To be sure, this was not the intent of the historians. On the contrary, most felt that Jewish history had a theme and a direction and that the Jewish people had a distinctive character or “genius.” But the thesis could not withstand scrutiny because it was built on the negation of its essential premiss, namely the normativity of the past. In the hands of different practitioners, the historical study of Judaism led to the affirmation of the diaspora and the negation of the diaspora, to Jewry as a religious and as a secular people, to Judaism as the faith of individuals or the collective creed of a nation. The variety of revisionary readings of the Jewish past was limited only by the range of imagined Jewish futures. The unity of Jewish history was lost at the moment that its generative principle was challenged, namely Torah as the covenantal text which brought a people into being and mapped the terms of its destiny. Hence our assertion that, for the people of the Book, the fragmentation of the Book <i>was</i> the fragmentation of the people.
<b>A new hearing</b><br>What has happened since? We have argued that, despite the divergent readings of the Jewish present, the epic events of the twentieth century have represented for many Jews the indivisibility and uniqueness of the Jewish fate. Has this been mirrored in a return to the text in which that fate was foreshadowed and given meaning?
In 1946, the German literary theorist Erich Auerbach, in his justly famous essay, “Odysseus’ Scar,” set out to explore the structural differences between Homeric and biblical narrative. His finding was that the biblical text is utterly contrasted to Greek epic in its spare, focused, morally driven prose. Unlike Homer, it abjures external detail; it makes strategic use of words unsaid and facts undisclosed; it is “fraught with background.” From his analysis, Auerbach drew a number of important conclusions: that biblical narrative involves an absolute claim to truth, that its silences invite continuing interpretation, and that its texture bears the character not of art but of command. He added:
<span class="poetry indentAll">If the text of the biblical narrative, then, is so greatly in need of interpretation on the basis of its own content, its claim to absolute authority forces it still further in the same direction. Far from seeking, like Homer, merely to make us forget our reality for a few hours, it seeks to overcome our reality: we are to fit our own life into its world, feel ourselves to be elements in its structure of universal history.<sup class="footnote-marker">53</sup><i class="footnote">Erich Auerbach, <i>Mimesis (</i>Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1971), 15.</i></span>
Auerbach’s essay became the starting point of the massive recent interest in the structure of biblical poetry and prose. Its significance lay in the fact that he reached his conclusions not on the basis of tradition and theology but in and through the text itself. It suggested that Torah as the will of God, as covenantal document, as the key with which to decipher history and as a text which invites its own midrash are not subsequent doctrinal developments, but rather the working-out of implications already latent in biblical substance and style. Needless to say, Auerbach was not a theologian but a secular critic, only too aware of the distance between the biblical world and his own. But his work, and that of his successors, suggests that the hermeneutic stance that lies behind the idea of <i>Torah min ha-shamayim</i> is not an accident of history nor an invention of later theology. It is, rather, how the Bible asks to be read.
Lending philosophic weight to this insight were the profound meditations of Martin Buber and Franz Rosenzweig, each determined to break away from the historicism of the nineteenth century and to “hear” again Torah as revelatory word.<sup class="footnote-marker">54</sup><i class="footnote">See, recently, the fine essays on Buber and Rosenzweig in Fishbane, <i>The Garments of Torah</i>, 81–111.</i> It was Buber who formulated the modern restatement of Torah as a dialogue between heaven and earth. “Only that man,” wrote Buber, “who wills to do and hear what the mouth of the Unconditioned commands him is a man worthy of the Bible.”<sup class="footnote-marker">55</sup><i class="footnote">Martin Buber, <i>On the Bible (</i>New York: Schocken, 1982), 212.</i> Rosenzweig undertook a searching exploration of speech as the medium of human‒divine encounter. Language “awakes to real vitality only in revelation.”<sup class="footnote-marker">56</sup><i class="footnote">Franz Rosenzweig, <i>The Star of Redemption</i>, translated by William Hallo (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1971), 111.</i> “That which we hear as a living word in our I and which resounds to us out of our Thou must also be ‘as it is written’ in that great historic testament of revelation whose essentiality we recognise precisely from the presentness of our experience. Once more we seek the word of man in the word of God.”<sup class="footnote-marker">57</sup><i class="footnote">Ibid., 198.</i> In their joint translation of the Bible, Buber and Rosenzweig sought to recapture the “immediacy of spokenness” of the word as revelation.
Auerbach’s seminal essay has been developed in a variety of ways by contemporary scholars. Roland Barthes<sup class="footnote-marker">58</sup><i class="footnote">Roland Barthes, <i>Image, Music, Text</i> (London: Fontana, 1977), 125–41.</i> and Harold Fisch<sup class="footnote-marker">59</sup><i class="footnote">Harold Fisch, <i>A Remembered Future</i> (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1984), 155–72.</i> have shown how texts like Jacob’s wrestling match with the angel and the book of Job frustrate the patterns of art and myth. Michael Fishbane’s researches have traced the midrashic process to the beginnings of the biblical literature itself.<sup class="footnote-marker">60</sup><i class="footnote">Fishbane, <i>Biblical Interpretation in Ancient Israel</i>.</i> Robert Alter has shown how the apparent repetitions in the Pentateuch are in fact finely nuanced variations,<sup class="footnote-marker">61</sup><i class="footnote">Robert Alter, <i>The Art of Biblical Narrative</i> (London: George Allen and Unwin, 1981).</i> while a number of writers have traced the way in which the textual tensions and apparent inconsistencies create involvement and interpretation on the part of the reader.<sup class="footnote-marker">62</sup><i class="footnote">See, for example, Herbert Schneidau, <i>Sacred Discontent</i> (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1977).</i>
But these are only part of the transformation biblical scholarship has undergone in recent decades. Literary analyses such as those of Meir Weiss and Meir Sternberg have focused on the intricate subtleties of biblical style.<sup class="footnote-marker">63</sup><i class="footnote">Meir Weiss, “The Craft of Biblical Narrative” [Hebrew], <i>Molad</i>, 1962; Meir Sternberg, <i>The Poetics of Biblical Narrative</i> (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1985). See also J.P. Fokkelman, <i>Narrative Art in Genesis</i> (Assen: van Gorcum, 1975), and Shimon Bar-Efrat, <i>Narrative Art in the Bible</i> (Sheffield: Almond Press, 1989).</i> Brevard Childs’s “canonical” approach has reminded us that the Bible is not merely a document but also sacred scripture, to be understood at least in part through the faith traditions it has generated. <sup class="footnote-marker">64</sup><i class="footnote">Childs, <i>Introduction to the Old Testament as Scripture</i>.</i> There has been renewed scholarly interest in midrash, both as a branch of rabbinic literature and as a mode of interpretation that has points of contact with modern hermeneutic theory. More importantly from an inner Jewish point of view has been the rediscovery of the immense theological possibilities of midrash. A key figure in this context has been Rabbi Joseph Soloveitchik, whose philosophical work has been largely cast in this mode and whose essay, “The Lonely Man of Faith,” was a virtual reinvention of midrash in the language of modern consciousness.<sup class="footnote-marker">65</sup><i class="footnote">See, for example, Susan Handelman, <i>The Slayers of Moses</i> (Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1982); Geoffrey Hartman and Sanford Budick (eds.), <i>Midrash and Literature</i> (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1986).</i> Midrash as a response to catastrophe has figured largely, too, in the work of the leading contemporary non-Orthodox theologian, Emil Fackenheim, for whom it is the most potent resource for reflection on the Holocaust.<sup class="footnote-marker">66</sup><i class="footnote">Emil Fackenheim, <i>The Jewish Return into History</i> (New York: Schocken, 1978), 252–72.</i>
These developments fall far short of a reinstatement of traditional views. But collectively they testify to a revolutionary turn away from historical criticism and to a renewed desire to hear the Bible in its unity and uniqueness. The discrepancies which once led to dismemberment or emendation of the text are now taken to be integral to its texture. There has been a shift of emphasis from historicist concern with the writing of the Bible to hermeneutic interest in how it is to be read. Where once the mark of a “scientific” approach was to ignore tradition, today there is scholarly interest in the constant interplay between text and tradition. Cumulatively this amounts, if not to a return to, then at least to a new openness to the biblical voice in its integrity and singularity and to the inexorable unfolding of possibilities latent in the text itself.
But Torah is not merely a text. It is a covenantal constitution, the code of Jewish destiny. Something else has driven the Jewish re-engagement with the Bible, namely history itself. The shaping events of the twentieth century – the Holocaust and the return to Israel – have held for many Jews unmistakable biblical resonances. The Holocaust evoked the Ninth of Av, the Jewish day of mourning for the lost Temples, and the books of Lamentations and Job. Israel’s independence and its wars recalled the book of Joshua and the later struggles of the Maccabees. Successive immigrations of Jews from lands of persecution brought to mind the exodus and the festival of Passover. These metaphors and memories testify to the hold of biblical archetypes on the contemporary Jewish imagination.
Jewish history, for the prophets and the rabbis, was a series of events that happened again and again in the slow spiralling towards redemption. Each, to be sure, was a slight variant of its predecessors and it was just this that generated midrash, the new meaning of the old text. But there was nonetheless a pattern, a continuity, which once discerned became the recognition of providence. There were times – the destruction of the Temple was one, the Holocaust a second – when the pattern came perilously close to dissolving. But the covenant remained, and with it the Torah. It was in the first crisis that the sages produced their most daring midrashic readings, holding pain and faith together when they threatened to split apart. It is these midrashim that speak most directly to the Holocaust, more so indeed than any conventional theology. The events of the twentieth century have held for Jews intimations of a scriptural gravity in which the echo of earlier events was unmistakable. In pointing back toward the Book, they reminded many Jews that they remain the people of the Book, and as such a people not of history but of destiny.
We have suggested that <i>Torah min ha-shamayim</i> was and is more than a set of abstract beliefs about a text. It is a total vision, linking the ideas of revelation, covenant, command, the presence of God in history, and the interpretation of texts, time and events. The nineteenth century posed for Jews a series of crises that seemed to explode all these concepts, and we still live among their fragments. The depth of this drama cannot be overstated. To experience God, for Judaism, is not to see but to hear. The assault on the Word could not but be an assault on the Jewish God. Nor can we escape reflection on the fact that within a century, the culture which had reduced the book of the covenant to fragments had reduced a third of the people of the covenant to ashes.
The Torah was given once, said the sages, but it is received many times: whenever Jews hear it addressing them. Since the Holocaust there has been a partial return to the Book. There has been a new willingness to hear its strange and commanding singularity. And there have been, too, moments in this extraordinary half-century in which it seemed to Jews that history itself was once again beckoning them to wrestle with their destiny and with the texts in which it is prescripted and disclosed. After the whirlwind and the earthquake and the fire, a voice as yet still and small has begun to be heard.

Chapter 9; The Tower of Babel

<big><strong><i>The Tower of Babel</i></strong></big>
Jewish thought has passed through a crisis, one of the most serious in its history. The story we have told has been of a religious tradition in a state of fragmentation. Despite the fact that we have spoken of “modern Jewish thought” as if it were a single entity, we have found little common ground among the various contemporary approaches to the Holocaust and the State of Israel, the diaspora and Jewish peoplehood, halakhah and the authority of Judaism’s sacred texts.
To be sure, modern Jewish thinkers have something in common. They have reflected on the same set of subjects in the light of Judaism’s classic themes: exile and redemption, covenant and peoplehood, revelation and interpretation. Perhaps, then, the current diversity of Jewish thought is no more than a continuation of the longstanding “argument for the sake of Heaven” which has historically characterised Judaism in its philosophical moments. If so, the disagreements between Jews today are not unique. They echo those between Hillel and Shammai, Rabbi Akiva and Rabbi Ishmael, Maimonides and Nachmanides, and the eighteenth-century Chassidim and their opponents. On this interpretation, Judaism has always been constituted by debate and dialogue rather than by dogma. Its unity is not to be found in a list of propositions agreed by all. Rather, it is to be found in a shared set of themes to which the various philosophies of Judaism are the multifaceted and open-ended commentaries.
There is some truth in this approach, but not enough. There is no precedent for the depth of disagreement that currently characterises Jewish thought. To be sure, there were profound intellectual disputes in the past. But they took place within clearly defined boundaries. Premodern Jewish commentators and philosophers shared a cluster of commitments that made them recognisably participants in the same tradition, adherents of a single faith, speakers of a common language. That cannot be said today. It would not have occurred to any Jewish thinker prior to the nineteenth century that there could be Jewish faith without belief in the divine revelation of Torah, or that there could be Jewish identity that was not religious identity, or that there could be Jewish peoplehood in the absence of the unifying bond of halakhah. Even the events which more than any other have shaped modern Jewish consciousness – the Holocaust and the State of Israel – have given rise to a bewildering variety of interpretations. For some they have confirmed religious faith. But for others they have refuted it.
For some time, Jewish thought has been in a state of disarray to find an adequate parallel for which we would have to travel back to the second Temple period, some 2,000 years ago. The question is why. Some modern thinkers – most notably Emil Fackenheim and Irving Greenberg – have argued that the cause lies in the Holocaust. Its disclosure of radical evil shattered all previous paradigms of faith. Its unredeemed tragedy “ruptured” the covenant. Religious belief, once engraved on tablets of stone, has been broken. Today’s Jews and their conflicting beliefs are the fragments that remain.
It is a powerful image but, I believe, a wholly mistaken analysis. The fissures that mark modern Jewish thought have their origins in the nineteenth century, not the twentieth. They preceded the Holocaust and were not produced by it. If anything, the Holocaust and the State of Israel have given rise to a renewed search for tradition, a search which has led to a tentative re-engagement on the part of non-Orthodox thinkers with the concepts of revelation, halakhah and the meaning of Israel as a covenantal people. But the ghosts of the nineteenth century still haunt the Jewish imagination, and they have not yet been exorcised.
In the first chapter we explored the social background to the crisis of the nineteenth century. In this last chapter we must confront its intellectual dimension. More than Jews were dislocated by the massive changes which swept across Europe. So too was Judaism. Let us now attempt to say why. To do so we must take one stage further the argument of the previous chapter about the connection between revelation and language. And we must consider them both in the context of the idea that modern thought, Jewish and non-Jewish, has found more problematic than any other: the concept of a chosen people.
<b>Genesis and pluralism</b><br>One of the most striking facts about the Hebrew Bible is that though it focuses almost exclusively on the history of Israel, it does not begin with it. Instead it opens with two prototypes of humanity as a whole: Adam and Noah. One might call them natural and civilised man respectively. Each signifies a universal religious order, both of which fail. Natural man reaches his nemesis in the generation of the Flood, when the world is filled with violence. Civilised man is guilty of the opposite failing, hubris or overreaching ambition, symbolised by the tower of Babel. The story of Babel, set as it is immediately prior to the choice of Abraham, is crucial to an understanding of Judaism. In it, mankind is depicted as “one people with one language.” Harmony reigns. But humanity sets itself the project of ousting God. The city and its tower designed “to reach to heaven” represent a man-made universe to rival creation. The tower of Babel is a perennial metaphor for all secular utopias, from Plato’s Republic to the Communist Manifesto and the Third Reich.
The divine response is to divide humanity into a multiplicity of languages, peoples and cultures. To be sure there is the promise, implicit in Genesis, explicit in the prophets, that one day mankind will be restored to its original harmony. But <i>not yet</i>: not until a metaphysical “end of days.” In the meantime and for all historical time, human civilisation is irreducibly plural. Cultures are distinct and cannot be translated into one another. There is to be one great symbol of this fact: Abraham and his family, later to become the children of Israel, eventually to become the Jews. They will be marked by their <i>non</i>-universality. They will be holy, meaning separate, distinct, “a people that dwells alone, not reckoned among the nations.”<sup class="footnote-marker">1</sup><i class="footnote">Numbers 23:9.</i> They will have no natural basis of continuity. Instead, their survival and history will be peculiarly tied to the terms of their divine covenant. They will be “God’s witnesses” in their victories and defeats, their land and their exiles. They will be the exceptions to every universal rule. “You shall be holy to Me, for I the Lord your God am holy, and I have <i>set you apart</i> from other peoples to be Mine.”<sup class="footnote-marker">2</sup><i class="footnote">Leviticus 20:26.</i>
Judaism embodies a unique paradox that has distinguished it from polytheism on the one hand and the great universal monotheisms, Christianity and Islam, on the other. Its God is <i>universal</i>: the creator of the universe, author and sovereign of all human life. But its covenant is <i>particular</i>: one people set among the nations, whose vocation is not to convert the world to its cause, but to be true to itself and to God. That juxtaposition of universality and particularity was to cause a tension between Israel and others, and within Israel itself, that has lasted to this day.
Had Israel believed in a tribal god – one nation among others, with one god among others – there would have been no tension. The nation and its god would have risen or fallen together. But because Israel’s God is God of the universe, there are times when He stands apart from His people and calls them to account for their sins. Through Amos He says “You only have I known of all the families of the earth, therefore I will visit upon you all your iniquities.”<sup class="footnote-marker">3</sup><i class="footnote">Amos 3:2.</i> Through Malachi He declares, “From where the sun rises to where it sets, My name is honoured among the nations…but you profane it.”<sup class="footnote-marker">4</sup><i class="footnote">Malachi 1:11–12.</i> When the first Temple is destroyed, Jeremiah explains that this is not the defeat of a nation <i>and</i> its god, but a defeat of a nation <i>by</i> its God. God is not for His people right or wrong. Israel’s relationship with God is continually dependent on its fidelity to the covenant.
Had Israel been a universal faith, again its existence would have been simpler. The world would have been divided into believers and infidels, the saved and the unredeemed. Against this, the Torah insists that God is the <i>God of all humanity</i>, not only of the saved elect. Such is the burden of the book of Jonah. Such, more fundamentally, is the message of exile and exodus. Man is called on not only to love his neighbour, the one who is like himself. He is called on to love the stranger, the one who is not like himself. Israel knows this from the core of its being, for it, more than any other people, has suffered the experience of being strangers in a land not its own. A Mishnah comments on the verse, “Let us make mankind in Our image, after Our own likeness,” that when we make many coins from the same mint they are all alike. But when God makes many people in the same image, they are all different.<sup class="footnote-marker">5</sup><i class="footnote">Mishnah, <i>Sanhedrin</i> 4:5.</i> Meaning: we are called on to recognise God’s image in those who are not in our image.
Israel thus testifies in its very being to the oneness of God and to the plurality of man. It furnishes a protest against tribalism on the one hand, and universal solutions to the human situation on the other. For neither does justice to the human “other,” the “stranger” who is nonetheless in the image of God. Tribalism denies rights to the outsider; universalism grants rights if and only if the outsider converts. Tribalism turns the concept of a chosen people into that of a master race. Universalism turns what may be the absolute truth of a single culture into the measure of all humanity. The opening chapters of Genesis describe the recurring outcomes of such visions: violence on the one hand, hubris on the other. Against this, Abraham is to become the father of a single family whose children are to be taught “to keep the way of the Lord, doing what is right and just,” and through whom “all the peoples of the earth will be blessed.” He prays and goes to war on behalf of his neighbours, the people of Sodom. But he dwells alone, a “stranger and sojourner” among the nations.
There can be little doubt that, historically, Israel has paid a high price for its religious destiny. Refusing to assimilate with its neighbouring tribes and nations or to convert to one or other universalist faith, it has experienced the full force of hatred of the “stranger” in the form of persecutions, inquisitions, expulsions, pogroms and attempted genocide. Granted a glimpse of the future of his children, Abraham was overcome by a “deep dark dread.” Nonetheless, with or against its will, Israel has repeatedly born witness to Genesis’s statement of the human situation: that it is the stranger no less than the brother who bears within him the image of God, and a world that cannot live with strangers is a world not yet redeemed.
The biblical juxtaposition of the tower of Babel and the choice of Abraham signals, I believe, one of the great theological truths: that in an unredeemed world there are no final solutions, no universal utopias. The tower, eternal symbol of a world of “one people with one language,” is destined to remain unbuilt, however much blood is shed in its name. To be sure, Judaism stakes its faith on belief in a messianic age when the harmony with which creation began will once again return. But equally it stakes its faith on the belief that the messianic age is <i>not yet</i>. The world is redeemable but not yet redeemed. Until then humanity is divided into a multiplicity of languages under the sovereignty of one God.
Implicit in Judaism is a deep analogy between faith and language. A language is spoken by a people; there is no such thing as a private language or a universal language. We are born into a linguistic community; we do not choose to be born to English- as against French-speaking parents, and yet that fact has the greatest significance in shaping our sensibilities. By speaking any natural language we are participants in the history of a civilisation: its nuances of meaning and association were shaped by the past and yet persist into the present. And to speak a language is to internalise its rules of grammar and semantics; without these rules we cannot express ourselves articulately.
Applying these ideas to Judaism: faith is neither private nor universal. It is a phenomenon, in the first instance, of a particular people. Just as we can be born into a linguistic community so we can be born into a faith community and its obligations. By speaking the language of faith we are in constant dialogue with the past: this is what we described in the previous chapter as the midrashic view of revelation and tradition. And faith has rules, its own grammatical structure – in the case of Judaism, the halakhah – without which there can be no religious expression. It was just these aspects of Judaism which, as we shall see, were uniquely difficult to translate into modern Western thought.
Faith, after Babel, is covenantal, and one covenant does not exclude another. Isaac and Jacob are chosen, but Ishmael and Esau are also blessed. God rescues Israel from Egypt, but – He asks through Amos – did He not also bring the Philistines from Caphtor and the Arameans from Kir? Is the God of Israel not also the God of the Ethiopians?<sup class="footnote-marker">6</sup><i class="footnote">Amos 9:7.</i> There can be truth which is absolute and yet particular. There can be covenants which bind a people without negating the other covenants of other peoples. Because there are many faiths but only one God, we are called on to love the stranger who is unlike ourselves no less than the brother or neighbour who is like ourselves. To be sure there is a covenant which is universal – for Judaism, the covenant with Noah – which sets the minimum threshold for different peoples to live together in justice and peace. But beyond this lies the intrinsic plurality of human meanings and the distinct integrity of different faith communities. To this truth Judaism, with its code of difference, is an eternal witness.
<b>Enlightenment and universality</b><br>Against this, one of the great beliefs of the Enlightenment was that there exists in the realm of human meanings some universal truth or at least some detached perspective (what Thomas Nagel calls “the view from nowhere”) from which all claims to truth can be universally judged. It was, after all, <i>universality</i> that marked the two outstanding models of Enlightenment knowledge: science (based on observation) and mathematical logic (based on reason). The kind of truth which promised progress was truth which held under all circumstances and which could therefore be tested without reference to factors which varied from one culture to another, such as authority, tradition or revelation. Such truth was “scientific.” And since science had yielded such spectacular results in explaining natural phenomena, there was every reason to suppose that it would do likewise in explaining human phenomena as well.
In ethics, for example, from the eighteenth century onward we find attempts to ground the norms of human behaviour in reason (Kant), emotion (Hume), social contract (Hobbes, Rousseau), the consequences of action (Bentham, Mill), the structure of history (Hegel), human will (Nietzsche) and existential decision (Sartre). Not all of these were rationalist approaches, but what they have in common is that their subject matter is man-as-such, not particular human beings set in specific traditions, each with its own integrity. There is a vast chasm separating those like Kant and Mill who believed that there are universal principles of ethics, and those like Nietzsche and Sartre who argued that there is nothing beyond individual decision and will. But despite this, they share the same fundamental either/or: either there is ethical truth, in which case it applies to all men equally, or there are only the private decisions of individuals, in which case there is no objective ethical truth. Ethical principle is universal or it is private: such is the axiom of the Enlightenment’s heirs.
This seemingly self-evident proposition had one fateful consequence. It excluded Judaism. For, as we have seen, Judaism was and is predicated on the conviction that there can be truth which is absolute and yet particular. Behind the Judaic belief in revelation, halakhah and the religious interpretation of history is the idea that God enacted a covenant with a particular people, thus endowing it with a unique sanctity and destiny. That truth might be covenantal, revealed, particular to those who witnessed that revelation and agreed to be bound by its terms; that it might therefore be opaque to the universalist disciplines of science and logic; that the structures of human meaning might be true without being universal: these were the principles on which Judaism depended and which the Enlightenment systematically denied.
In the previous chapter we considered one example at length: the concept of <i>Torah min ha-shamayim</i>. What was ultimately at stake between the Judaic concept of revelation and biblical scholarship from Spinoza onwards was the issue of the universality or particularity of meaning. What made critical scholarship appear “scientific” is that it seemed to involve no faith commitments. The meanings it sought were those that could be uncovered by methods that could be used by anyone: philology, archaeology, comparative history and so on. Recently, as the shortcomings of these methods became clear, there has been a move in some circles toward “reader response” approaches in which the meaning of the text is invented by the reader: roughly analogous to the transition, in ethics, from Kant to Nietzsche. Again the same dichotomy has held sway: either meanings are universal or they are private. Against this, Judaism insists that meanings are like languages, neither universal nor private but the property of a particular community extended through time. Since religious truth is absolute but not universal, it cannot be arrived at through (universal) reason but only through (particular) revelation. And since revelation is to be applied to the concrete human situation it must contain within itself the rules of its own interpretation, namely an oral as well as a written law. These ideas made no sense to Enlightenment thought with its implicit assumption that either (religious) truth is universal or it is not truth but subjective decision.
The intellectual crisis through which Judaism has passed and from which it is only slowly recovering is, I believe, this. Cultures can collide. Not all modes of thought are compatible with one another. In their encounter with Enlightenment, Jews met a culture into which Judaism could not be translated. Two systems of thought, each opaque to the other, met in headlong confrontation. One – Judaism – broke into fragments as soon as the attempt was made to transpose it into the language of the other. The history of the modern Jewish mind has been the record of the attempt to hold together two conceptual systems which fundamentally exclude one another. Jewish philosophy has burned brightly these past two centuries, more so than at any time since the days of Maimonides. But it has not been the light of the bush Moses saw in the desert, which burned and was not consumed. Instead it has been the light of a meteor as it enters an atmosphere and begins to disintegrate. Because the intellectual heritage of the Enlightenment still exerts its power, it is important to spell out some of the ways in which Jewish faith takes issue with its fundamental assumptions.
<b>Religious knowledge</b><br>The history of modern philosophy begins with the moment in the early seventeenth century when Descartes raised the question. What can I know with absolute certainty? What can I not doubt? Descartes’s famous answer – “I think, therefore I am” – is less important than his objective, to ground knowledge on the foundation of certainty. For three centuries thereafter, philosophy was to be driven by the quest for demonstrable knowledge whose two paradigms were science and logic.
The consequences for religious faith were immense. To be sure, Descartes himself still retained God at the centre of his system. But this could not last for long. It soon became evident that if everything was open to doubt, so too was religious faith. Immanuel Kant established that existence – even God’s existence – could never be the subject of logical proof. Darwin’s theory of evolution suggested that there were other ways of explaining the apparent order of the universe than by purposeful creation: the operation of chance and necessity might produce the same result. Within a century, Kant and Darwin had overthrown the two most powerful theological “proofs” of the Middle Ages: the ontological argument and the argument from design. Neither reason nor observation led inescapably to God; and these were, it seemed, the only reliable sources of knowledge. Theology suffered a blow from which it has not yet recovered. At worst, the positivists concluded, statements about God were unverifiable and therefore meaningless. At best, they were private expressions which lacked objective reference. Faith became, as H. L. Mencken put it, “an illogical belief in the occurrence of the improbable.”
Judaism was not unaffected by this revolution. Medieval Jewish philosophy, most notably in the case of Maimonides, had offered metaphysical “proofs” that now bear the mark of their time. But what is fundamental and in retrospect deeply significant is that philosophy as such was always a marginal Jewish undertaking. In the first century it was undertaken by Philo of Alexandria, but not by the rabbinic sages. In the twelfth century it was subjected to a fine critique by Judah Halevi. The philosophical work of Maimonides has remained controversial for eight centuries despite his unquestioned pre-eminence as a halakhist. In the modern period Samson Raphael Hirsch, Samuel David Luzzatto, Abraham Kook, Joseph Soloveitchik and Michael Wyschogrod all expressed sharp reservations about Maimonides’s Aristotelianism. Judaism has consistently had an uneasy relationship with philosophy. Why so?
At the core of Judaism is faith in God not as a <i>concept</i> but as a <i>person.</i> This is an idea impossible to translate into philosophical categories, ancient or modern. For if God is the Platonic, timeless source of all being, how can He be involved in the shifting contingencies of the human situation? How can He be moved by human pain or prayer? How can He be present at some times, and at others “hide His face”? How can He have a will expressible in finite commands? How, above all, can God <i>love</i> – not in the abstract, but in a way significant to human beings as individuals. How can God love not just man-as-such, but particular persons and peoples in their uniqueness and individuality? That God <i>does</i> love, care, command and choose is Judaism’s most monumental claim. For Judaism God is more than the cause of causes or necessary being, concepts explorable by science or metaphysics. God is a person, for <i>only</i> if God is a person does the universe hold objective meaning for human beings <i>as persons</i>.
For Judaism, the search for religious certainty through science or metaphysics is not merely fallacious but ultimately pagan. To suppose that God is scientifically provable is to identify God with what is observable, and this for Judaism is idolatry. To suppose that His existence can be logically demonstrated is to make God the subject of necessity – that which could not be otherwise – and this too is a denial of Judaism’s ultimate beliefs. Nor is this twentieth-century apologetics. It is a consistent theme of the Bible itself. God cannot be represented, imaged or conceptualised. He is “I am that I am” or “I will be what I will be.” Even Moses, greatest of the prophets, is granted a glimpse only of God’s “back” for “man may not see Me and live.”
The idea that God might serve as an explanatory hypothesis is sharply parodied in the book of Exodus. The Egyptian magicians, unable to reproduce the plague of lice, declare, “This is the finger of God.”<sup class="footnote-marker">7</sup><i class="footnote">Exodus 8:19.</i> God here becomes a quasi-scientific hypothesis. Such, so the Bible suggests, is how He appears to a pagan culture. Even Maimonides, who more than anyone else in the history of Judaism saw science and metaphysics as routes to the love and fear of God, explicitly reversed the conventional relationship between philosophy and faith. We philosophise, he wrote, <i>because we are commanded</i>.<sup class="footnote-marker">8</sup><i class="footnote"><i>Mishneh Torah</i>, <i>Yesodei ha-Torah</i>, 1–4. See Leo Strauss, <i>Philosophy and Law</i> (Philadelphia, PA: Jewish Publication Society, 1987).</i> The first command, for Maimonides, is to know that God exists; therefore we must pursue knowledge, for all truth leads to God. But the command precedes the pursuit. “Hearing” and “obeying” precede philosophical “knowing.” Philosophy for Maimonides is not what it was for Plato or Aristotle: an independent discipline with its own self-sufficient justification. It is a religious duty, a means to an end. Even Maimonides’s conclusion is stunningly minimalist. Philosophy can tell us only what God is not, not what God is.
Because God is a person, we can know God only as we know persons: through relationship. The key categories of Judaism are all relational: hearing, obeying, covenant and command. None designate God in Himself. All speak of God in His relationship with man. God, as Martin Buber put it, is a being who can be experienced only as a Thou, never as an It. This, Judah Halevi wrote eight centuries earlier, is the difference between the God of Abraham and the god of Aristotle. God cannot be known, comprehended or compassed through magic or myth, philosophy or science. At most, argued Halevi, one can through such means arrive at knowledge of that aspect of God that the Bible describes by the word <i>Elohim</i>, meaning the cause of causes or the force of forces. But one cannot thereby arrive at knowledge of God as a person, the bearer of a proper name, God as He acts in history and reveals His will for the human situation, the God who loves and evokes love. Such knowledge arises only through revelation, “hearing” and prophecy. Greece, says Halevi, had philosophers. Israel had prophets.
As a result, the word “faith” in Judaism does not signify a mode of knowledge or belief. It is, above all, a form of moral commitment. To have faith is to trust that God will honour His word, and to be loyal in honouring the word given by man. The Bible sets out in the sharpest possible way the contrast between <i>cognitive</i> certainty yielded by logic or the senses, and <i>moral</i> certainty that the word, once given, will not be retracted. Abraham, Isaac and Jacob are promised as many children as the stars of the sky, the dust of the earth and the sand of the seashore. But each must live with the childlessness of their wives. They are promised the land of Israel, but must endure as strangers and exiles. Moses is charged with bringing the Israelites to the promised land but must die on the far side of the Jordan. The prophets have faith in divine justice but must live in a world where evil reigns, the righteous suffer and power is the hands of the oppressor. Faith is the ability to live with moral certainty in the face of cognitive uncertainty. To have faith is to have the courage to resist the two great spiritual temptations of wishful thinking on the one hand and nihilism on the other: the illusion that the world is at it should be, or despair that the world – <i>this</i> world – can ever be as it should. It is to have trust in the promise and loyalty to the covenant. It is to believe that the word spoken will come to pass, but not without trust and effort on the part of man.
<b>Halakhah and autonomy</b><br>This was not an idea that made sense in terms of the post-Cartesian philosophy of knowledge. But of yet greater consequence for Judaism was the philosophy of ethics. Here the seminal figure was Immanuel Kant. For it was he who shaped the modern conception of ethics to the extent that, as Alasdair MacIntyre notes, for many “who have never heard of philosophy, let alone of Kant, morality is roughly what Kant said it was.”<sup class="footnote-marker">9</sup><i class="footnote">Alasdair MacIntyre, <i>A Short History of Ethics</i> (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1967), 190.</i> But Kant was a devastating critic of Judaism. He saw it as an antiquated system of law and ritual which was opposed, to religion and ethics as he understood it. It was a criticism that could not be ignored, for many Jews had the same admiration for Kant that Maimonides had for Aristotle. Much of modern Jewish thought is, explicitly or implicitly, an attempted reconciliation between Kantianism and Judaism. Therein lies its tragic failure, for it too cannot be done.
Kant’s most revolutionary idea was that of <i>autonomy</i>. In his <i>Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals</i>, he argues that all previous efforts to discover the “principle of morality” have been mistaken. Morality was seen as a set of laws external to the agent, and the question therefore arose: Why should one be moral? But any answer to this question is self-defeating. For if one has a reason to obey the law – hope of reward or fear of punishment – then one’s action is not moral but pragmatic, a matter not of principle but of self-interest. The fallacy lay in seeing morality as externally imposed (heteronomous) law. Instead it is imposed by the agent himself. Morality is necessarily autonomous. In so far as we are moral, we are each legislators of our own morality. It is this principle which more than any other lies behind liberal arguments on homosexuality, abortion and euthanasia, namely that we have an inalienable right to determine what we will do with our bodies and lives. More specifically, it rules out absolutely a central concept of Judaism, that there can be a revealed morality in the form of commandments and the halakhah. Judaism was, for Kant, a prime example of an externally legislated and thus heteronomous and impure moral system.<sup class="footnote-marker">10</sup><i class="footnote">For a translation and exposition of Kant’s <i>Groundwork</i>, see H. J. Paton, <i>The Moral Law</i> (London: Hutchinson, 1948).</i>
Judaism rejects the Kantian argument because it sees morality, like language, as an essentially shared enterprise, a phenomenon not of individuals but of communities and societies. It cannot be reduced to private moralities made by autonomous decisions. Judaism’s central virtues – justice, compassion, righteousness and the pursuit of peace – are concerned with collective rather than individual beatitude. A society of autonomous moralities would resemble the state of affairs described at the end of the book of Judges: “In those days there was no king in Israel: everyone did what was right in his own eyes.”<sup class="footnote-marker">11</sup><i class="footnote">Judges 21:25.</i> That is a description not of moral law but of moral chaos.
Indeed in the absence of <i>divine</i> law, it is likely that a civilisation will arrive at the condition of humanity before the Flood: corrupt and full of violence. Eichmann, chief executor of Hitler’s Final Solution, stated at his trial with unmistakable sincerity that he had been guided throughout his life by Kant’s moral precepts.<sup class="footnote-marker">12</sup><i class="footnote">Hannah Arendt, <i>Eichmann in Jerusalem</i> (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1979), 135–37.</i> Judaism views law as the essential vehicle of righteousness; but it cannot be mere human law. During the Third Reich the greatest German philosopher of his time, Martin Heidegger, declared that “The <i>Führer</i> himself and alone is the present and future German reality and law.”<sup class="footnote-marker">13</sup><i class="footnote">See Emil Fackenheim, <i>Encounters Between Judaism and Modern Philosophy</i> (New York: Schocken, 1980), 217.</i> Against this Judaism insists that human law is always subject to divine law, and that since God desires righteousness, law is His single most important revelation to man. It is divine law which binds commoner and king, which bids the rich to attend the cry of the poor and the powerful to heed the needs of the powerless; a law which must sometimes be enforced, for not all men are moral but morality binds us all.
To be sure, the rabbis valued autonomy in the sense of moral action as an end in itself. One might perform a command “not for its own sake,” but the ideal was to do so “for its own sake.” Maimonides defined the proper service of God as being “impelled by no external motive, neither by the fear of calamity nor by the desire to obtain benefit.” It is instead to “do what is truly right because it is truly right.”<sup class="footnote-marker">14</sup><i class="footnote"><i>Mishneh Torah</i>, <i>Teshuvah</i> 10:3.</i> In one remarkable passage the Talmud suggests that when God gave Israel the commandments, He suspended Mount Sinai over their heads and warned that if they did not accept the covenant, they would die. On this Rabbi Acha bar Yaakov commented, “This constitutes a strong objection to the Torah.”<sup class="footnote-marker">15</sup><i class="footnote">Babylonian Talmud, <i>Shabbat</i> 88a.</i> The heteronomous character of revelation threatened to undermine its binding force. Nonetheless, continues the Talmud, the Israelites later accepted it in the days of Esther and Ahasuerus.
What Judaism rejects is the simple either/or of heteronomy or autonomy. Instead it sees moral development, both for a nation and for individuals, as a gradual transition from one to the other, from externally to internally imposed law. So seriously, indeed, did Judaism regard the requirement of autonomy that it held that a Jew is duty-bound to study Torah all the days of his life, until its imperatives became part of his personal vision and character.
So Judaism was sensitive to the claim later raised by Kant and included it within its system of values. But this does not imply that Judaism is compatible with Kantian moral philosophy. It is not. For while both systems recognise the <i>claim</i> of autonomy they assign different <i>priorities</i> to it. Kant takes it to be determinative of morality. Judaism does not. Instead it insists on the primacy of divinely revealed command over morality as self-legislation. It believes that like language, moral behaviour has objective rules (in the case of Jews, the halakhah) which are progressively internalised by the individual in his course of moral education. Neither Torah as revealed command nor halakhah is translatable into the terms of Kantian ethics. Kant himself was in no doubt about this. Here was one conflict between Judaism and modern ethical thought.
<b>Universality and covenant</b><br>But there was another. For Kant added a further stipulation to his definition of morality. A moral judgement must be <i>universal</i> in scope. We must, says Kant, “be able to will that a maxim of our action should become a universal law.” This was the rational requirement of moral consistency. I may, for example, be tempted to break a promise. But I cannot consistently will that all people should break their promises, for if so, no one would trust anyone else’s undertakings and the institution of promising would collapse. Thus stated, the doctrine has self-evident logic. But it rules out most of Judaism’s commands. For many of them relate specifically to Jews. Judaism is not a universal faith. It is the religion of a particular people. Its commands do not apply to everyone. Seen from a Kantian perspective, therefore, they fail the test of morality.
As with autonomy, the rabbis had long before accepted the thesis of universalisibility. To the rules which applied to man as such, they gave the name of the “seven Noachide commands.” Indeed, according to the eleventh-century sage Rav Nissim Gaon “all commands which are dependent on reason and human understanding have been obligatory for all humanity since the day man was created on earth.”<sup class="footnote-marker">16</sup><i class="footnote">Introduction to commentary to <i>Berakhot</i>.</i> It is possible that Judaism might recognise a distinction on Kantian lines, between commands that are “moral” and thus universal, and those which are, in Saadia Gaon’s term, “traditional” (i.e. dependent on revelation), for which no complete rational explanation could be given and which were binding only on Jews. Moses Mendelssohn seems to have argued along these lines, distinguishing between “revealed legislation” which applied to Jews and “universal propositions of reason” which applied to humanity as such.<sup class="footnote-marker">17</sup><i class="footnote">Moses Mendelssohn, <i>Jerusalem</i>, translated by Allan Arkush (Waltham, MA: Brandeis University Press, 1983).</i>
A more convincing account of Judaism, however, is that it takes a quite different view of morality. Morality is rational, but reason is not the source of moral obligation. That lies in covenant, the agreement on the part of humanity to be bound by certain laws. There can be a hierarchy of covenants, not all of which are universal. The covenant between God and Noah creates duties towards all mankind as “the image of God.” The covenant between God and Israel imposes further duties, between Jews and God and between Jews and one another as members of a community sharing bonds of collective responsibility. Morality, then, is grounded in formally binding relationships, some of which are universal, but not all.
Kant’s theory is only one, and not necessarily the most plausible, account of the moral life. For it fails to explain why certain duties which we regard as moral are <i>not</i> universal but highly specific. Michael Wyschogrod provides us with one case which merits reflection.
<span class="poetry indentAll">In the devastating 1976 earthquake in Communist China there was a report of an incident in which a father insisted on rescuing a local Communist officer rather than his child, whose moans he heard but ignored in order to save the official, whose social value he placed above that of his son. By the time he returned to the wreckage in which his son was buried, he found him dead. The Chinese Communist press pointed to this incident as an example of proper Communist behaviour.<sup class="footnote-marker">18</sup><i class="footnote">Michael Wyschgrod, <i>The Body of Faith</i> (Minneapolis, MN: Seabury, 1983), 215–16.</i></span>
Here was an act that was justified on Kantian and, as it happens, utilitarian grounds. The father made no distinction between persons in favour of his son, and he acted to secure the most beneficial consequences for society as a whole. Nonetheless one might legitimately feel that the father was deficient in some important moral sense.
Judaism suggests a different account of morality, according to which the sense of obligation is born in primary relationships – within the family, for example – and gradually extended to the community as a whole and beyond that, to those who lie outside the community. On this view, it is perfectly intelligible that members of a covenantal community might owe special duties to one another. The moral crux, however, would be how the community treats the <i>outsider</i>, the one who is a “stranger,” not a “brother.” The Torah itself consistently emphasises the duties to love and not oppress the stranger “because you were yourselves strangers in the land of Egypt.” Rabbinic law extended the obligation of charity and compassion to non-Jews, regardless of race or faith, on the grounds of “the ways of peace.” Judaism, then, is not an abstract moral system grounded in reason, but rather a revealed moral tradition grounded in covenantal relationships and the historic experience of powerlessness and suffering. Its universality grows out of its particularity. This was not a view that recommended itself to Kant. But it is difficult to see how Kantian theory can give a satisfactory account of actual moral traditions and communities.
<b>Historicism and the modern self</b><br>One could multiply almost indefinitely the conflicts between Judaism and post-Enlightenment thought, but two in particular are worthy of attention. We touched on one in the previous chapter, namely nineteenth-century historicism: belief in “the uniqueness of all historical phenomena” and the idea that “each age should be interpreted in terms of its own ideas and principles.”<sup class="footnote-marker">19</sup><i class="footnote">Alan Bullock and Oliver Stallybrass (eds.), <i>The Fontana Dictionary of Modern Thought</i> (London: Fontana, 1983), 285–86.</i> The essence of historicism is its sense of the pastness of the past. What happened <i>then</i> has no necessary authority <i>now</i>.
Historicism went hand in hand with the Enlightenment assault on tradition. Edward Shils notes that “the time through which we have just lived has been one in which what was inherited from the past was thought of as an irksome burden to be escaped from as soon as possible.” From the French Revolution onwards, “Traditionality became the ubiquitous enemy to every critic of the <i>ancien régime</i>.”<sup class="footnote-marker">20</sup><i class="footnote">Edward Shils, <i>Tradition</i> (London: Faber and Faber, 1981), 2, 6.</i>
The effect of historical consciousness on Judaism was to erode, indeed disintegrate, the idea of an authoritative Judaism or Jewish destiny. From a historicist perspective, Judaism is simply its own history, and there is no normative direction in which the future ought to unfold. It is made afresh as each generation individually, communally or nationally decides what to accept or reject from tradition in the light of its experience of the present. There is no Judaism beyond the decisions of Jews. There is no meaning in history beyond that which we choose to impose upon it. Nor do ancient texts speak to us with the immediacy of revelation. The past cannot command. At most it can be entered as a foreign country, somewhere else and long ago.
Against this, the concept of covenant implies that we can be obligated by the past. The Israelites’ assent to the words of God at Sinai binds their children for all generations. This is not a mysterious idea. The citizen of a state may be bound by laws enacted many centuries before his birth. A judge may be bound by precedents he had no share in making. The fact that history can be studied descriptively does not imply that it has no prescriptive force, that covenants or laws have no duration over time. To study history is one thing; to conclude that a tradition is nothing over and above its own history is something else, a conscious revolution against the past. Nathan Rotenstreich has rightly noted that “A concept of tradition that testifies to the changes that have taken place within Judaism and opens the way for further changes by denying the norms that provide men with imperatives is, in the end, destructive of tradition as a vital governing force.”<sup class="footnote-marker">21</sup><i class="footnote">Nathan Rotenstreich, <i>Tradition and Reality</i> (New York: Random House, 1972), 112.</i>
Equally destructive, and closely related, has been the modern concept of the self. Traditionally, Jewish identity was a given. Converts excepted, one did not choose to be a Jew. One was born a Jew and thus entered, unasked, a history and set of obligations. A born Jew is, according to the Talmud, “already foresworn at Sinai.” One is obligated without any need for a formal act of assent to the duties of Jewish life. But this traditional concept of Jewish identity offends against two of the most powerful axioms of modern thought. One is David Hume’s insistence that one cannot derive an “ought” from an “is,” a moral judgement from a descriptive statement. The other is Jean-Paul Sartre’s declaration that “existence precedes essence,” that there is no morally significant role into which we are born.
Against this, Judaism maintains that the “is” of birth entails the “ought” of the commandments and that “essence precedes existence,” in that one can be born into a covenantal role. Again the crucial analogy is with language. We are born into a linguistic community. This is a fact we did not choose, but it has the greatest consequence for our modes of self-expression. Fundamental to modern thought and the common feature of historicism, Hume and Sartre, is a sharp distinction between facts and values. The past cannot command. Birth cannot create obligations. What is cannot disclose what ought to be. This distinction arises from and reinforces the basic dichotomy of post-Enlightenment thought between what is true and universal on the one hand, and what is private and subjective on the other. Facts are true and can be agreed on by everyone. Values are not facts and are therefore private and subjectively chosen. Judaism sees this as a false dichotomy. Values are indeed not facts. But neither are they private or subjective. They are created by covenant: by a revelation of the part of God of what is just and right, and by an agreement on the part of a community to be bound through time by that revelation. As a result, a covenant in the past can command the present and one can be born into a covenant that one did not choose.
<b>Untranslatability</b><br>The crisis of Jewish faith in modernity, then, has been of a singular and special kind. It was not that some new set of discoveries called into question the premisses on which Judaism rested. It was, rather, that a new mode of thought took hold, complex in its ramifications but simple in its basic dichotomies, which systematically excluded Judaism. No more compelling image exists for Enlightenment universalism than the tower of Babel, the search for “one language” that would comprehend the human situation. But every concept of Judaism presupposes that, before the end of days, this search is misconceived and will end in tragedy. Instead the unity of God coexists with and finds expression in a plurality of languages, cultures and faiths. God communicates to man through language. Faith therefore is neither universal nor subjective but, like language, a phenomenon of communities and their rules, traditions and histories. Judaism bears witness to this fact in the covenant by which it agrees to yield to neither tribalism nor universalism but to live as a distinctive people, different from others, while yet remaining faithful to God, the creator of all mankind.
As soon as the attempt was made to translate the concepts of Judaism into Enlightenment thought, they disintegrated. Cartesian philosophy of knowledge left no space for a personal God. Kantian autonomy excluded Jewish ideas of revealed command and halakhah. Kantian universality excluded the concept of a divine covenant with a particular people. Historicism excluded midrashic consciousness, the idea that through tradition and interpretation the past commands the present. The self of Sartre excludes the very idea of Jewish identity as a set of moral obligations conferred by birth. As a result, Jews were thrown into one of the great intellectual crises of their history.
We have traced the effects throughout this book. The Cartesian revolution is evident in widespread Jewish secularism. Kant’s conception of autonomy is present in liberal Judaism’s rejection of halakhah. His principle of universality left its mark in the early Reform abandonment of Judaism’s particularist commands. Historicism undermined the idea of “Torah from Heaven.” The Sartrean self has led to unprecedented confusion about modern Jewish identity. Despite the bold attempts of Jewish thinkers to effect a synthesis between the classic terms of Judaism and post-Enlightenment thought, the effort was bound to fail.
It is no accident that almost all the great continental philosophers of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries Voltaire, Kant, Hegel, Schopenhauer and Nietzsche – delivered sharp attacks on Judaism as an anachronism. Voltaire described it as a “detestable superstition.” Kant called for its “euthanasia.” Hegel took Judaism as his model of a slave morality. Nietzsche fulminated against it as the “falsification” of all natural values. In the twentieth century, Sartre could see no content to Jewish existence other than the defiance of antisemitism. Martin Heidegger, the greatest German philosopher of his time, became an active Nazi. Modern Western philosophy, promising a new era of tolerance, manifestly failed to extend that tolerance to Judaism and the Jews. Against this background, the transition from Enlightenment to Holocaust is less paradoxical than it might otherwise seem.
The Enlightenment was one of the great universalist movements in human civilisation, more so even than Christianity and Islam. Its promised salvation lay in the power of science to control nature and of reason to resolve conflict. It presupposed no revelation, tradition or faith. In liberalism it offered a simple solution to the conflict of religions, namely a new dichotomy between public and private domains. The public domain was to be neutral, governed only by universal reason (Kantian principle or the utilitarian maximisation of consequences). Religion was to be private, the subjective persuasion of individuals. It was a brilliantly abstract answer to a series of resolutely concrete human dilemmas. And yet one fact stands out in retrospect. The Enlightenment did not end antisemitism, but gave added impetus to it in a new and more systematic form.
Enlightenment thought consistently focused on man-as-such, humanity in the abstract, the self divorced from all tradition, particular histories and accidents of birth. Jews were to be accorded rights, but not as Jews; instead as abstract individuals. But Jews testified to the concrete particularism of human identity. They were not atomistic selves. They were, both in their own and others’ eyes, members of a people, participants in a history, bearers of a revelation, adherents of a tradition. Neither Jews nor Judaism fitted into the remorseless logic of philosophical abstraction. As always in their history they found themselves separate, distinct, “not reckoned among the nations,” now singled out by the philosophers of modernity no less than by the Christianity and Islam of the Middle Ages.
For Jews bore witness to the particularity of the human situation in the presence of God. Nowhere was this more manifest than in the sensed <i>differentness</i> of the Jews. But it has been precisely the differentness of the Jews that has, throughout history, been the moral refutation of each successor to the tower of Babel, each “final solution” to the human predicament. For <i>if the other cannot be affirmed in his differentness, then the world is not yet redeemed</i>.
<b>A crisis of identity</b><br>But one haunting question remains. Why did Jews embrace Enlightenment as they had, for the most part, not embraced Christianity and Islam? The short answer, surely, is this. To convert to another faith, though it carried advantages, was to betray a people and its history. This at most times Jews were unprepared to do. But Enlightenment offered a challenge of a quite different kind. Here was a new universal order that was not religious but secular. To embrace it did not involve conversion. To Jews, having suffered for 1,800 years for their differentness, the prospect was overwhelming.
One case is particularly illustrative. Time and again in our analyses of modern Jewish thought we have come across a lonely figure at the eye of the storm: Benedict Spinoza. It was Spinoza who first naturalised revelation, dissolved the bonds of halakhah, separated Jewish history from providence and the land of Israel from special sanctity. Spinoza was excommunicated by the Jewish community of Amsterdam in 1656, and indeed his thought argued the end of a distinctive Jewish existence. Nonetheless, as the later inspiration of the two diametrically opposed movements of radical Reform and secular Zionism, Spinoza stands as the archetypal modern Jew. The question of his identity is therefore peculiarly emblematic.
Spinoza was the descendant of Marranos, Jews who had been forced to convert to Christianity in the wake of the Spanish inquisition and expulsion. Only recently have scholars given significance to this fact.<sup class="footnote-marker">22</sup><i class="footnote">Yirmiyahu Yovel, <i>Spinoza and Other Heretics</i> (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1989); Michael Wyschogrod, <i>The Body of Faith</i>, (Minneapolis, MN: Seabury, 1983), 40–52.</i> Marranos represent a paradigm of conflicting identities. Outwardly Christian but secretly practising Judaism, they were held in suspicion by both communities: by Christians as covert Judaisers and by Jews as public betrayers of the faith. Spinoza’s thought is an extended attempt to construct a world liberated from this double-bind. His hero is Euclid, his model, geometry, and his aspiration is for a metaphysical and political order where there are no traditional and particular identities, only universal reason and the abstract individual.
Spinoza, followed in turn by such figures as Marx, Durkheim and Freud, testifies to a fact of fundamental significance: that modernity was experienced by Jewish intellectuals as a <i>crisis of identity</i>. As in fifteenth-century Spain, Jews were called on to undergo a kind of conversion, this time not to Christianity but to secular citizenship. But now as then, they found themselves regarded by European society as outsiders. They became secular Marranos, inwardly Jewish, outwardly westernised, viewed by both sides with suspicion, carrying the burden of double alienation.<sup class="footnote-marker">23</sup><i class="footnote">For a study of this general condition see Erving Goffman, <i>Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled Identity</i> (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1968).</i> There was one solution. If one could arrive at a world free of the lingering traces of religion, whether by reason (Spinoza), revolution (Marx) or the cure of neurosis (Freud), if one could <i>stand outside</i> the givenness of religious meanings, then alienation could be cured. There were Jews therefore who not merely embraced the universalism of modern Western thought, but became its most active shapers.
Seen in the full perspective of hindsight, Enlightenment constituted an assault on Jewish particularism more subtle and powerful than medieval Christianity and Islam. Some saw with absolute clarity that two mutually exclusive civilisations were about to collide. Spinoza was one, and was prepared to draw the consequence that Jews should now abandon Judaism. Others, especially traditionalist Orthodoxy, drew the opposite conclusion, that Jews should decline the offer of emancipation and continue to live segregated lives. For the most part, however, Jews believed that Enlightenment and Judaism were compatible. Thus was born an unprecedented Jewish ambivalence about identity. Jews continued to be Jews, but became at the same time passionate universalists. They denied that they were different, but were continually reminded that they were.
The new Judaisms that emerged in the nineteenth century were, each in its own way, attempts to escape the singularity of the Jewish situation. Reform offered universal ethics in place of distinctive ritual. Secular Zionism offered a Jewishness of nationhood in place of religion. Each spoke of “normalisation.” Both rejected the idea of a chosen people. It is impossible to understand the crisis of modern Jewish thought without appreciating the extent to which Jews saw in secularism a deliverance from eighteen centuries of unparalleled and unabated religious persecution. Enlightenment thought, hostile though it was to Judaism, was passionately embraced, for it seemed to promise the triumph of reason over prejudice and universal citizenship over religious identity. American Reform’s Pittsburgh Platform of 1885 summed up a mood that could be found in many sectors of Jewish life: “We recognise in the modern era of universal culture of heart and intellect the approach of the realisation of Israel’s great Messianic hope for the establishment of the kingdom of truth, justice and peace among men.”
That secularism might not end anti-Judaism but instead transform it into racial antisemitism; that even the Holocaust and the State of Israel might not end antisemitism but instead transform it into a fundamentalist anti-Zionism: these, for the Jews of modernity, were the unimaginable disillusionments. The history of Jewish thought since the Holocaust has been the response to this second crisis, coming as it did so soon after the first. Its central theme has been the slow realisation that the pursuit of normalisation was neither possible nor ultimately admirable. Seemingly inexorably, Jews are cast in the role of a singular people bearing witness to a universal God.
Arthur Green has noted that “The period of Jewish history that began in late-eighteenth-century Germany has ended. We whose identities were formed after 1933, 1945, 1948 and 1967 are no longer modern Jews.”<sup class="footnote-marker">24</sup><i class="footnote">Arthur Green (ed.), <i>Jewish Spirituality from the Sixteenth Century to the Present</i> (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1987), xv.</i> The modern Jew had placed his faith in the universalist thrust of Western civilisation. The postmodern Jew has a more sombre awareness – born of his knowledge of the Holocaust and anti-Zionism – that universalism has its darker side and that Jews are called on to testify to the plurality of faith and to the religious right to differentness. There is no clearer evidence of the recent transformation of Jewish consciousness than the fact that, in the 1960s, Jews began to describe themselves once again as “the people that dwells alone.” Alongside the fragmentation of Jewish thought and life has gone a new awareness of collective fate and what Emil Fackenheim calls the “singled out” Jewish condition. The turning point was the worldwide Jewish response to the threat to Israel in the weeks prior to the Six-Day War. Twice within a quarter-century Jews had faced the threat of genocide. West and East, Christianity and Islam, had left a legacy of hatred that, in Europe and now the Middle East, threatened the covenantal promise with destruction. Jews were agreed on this, that they would survive and in surviving show that they were an eternal people. This is the leitmotiv of Jewish postmodernity.
The “new Jewish stand”<sup class="footnote-marker">25</sup><i class="footnote">A.Roy Eckardt, <i>Jews and Christians: The Contemporary Meeting</i>,<i> (</i>Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1986), 37–61.</i> manifests itself in many ways: an understanding of the State of Israel as a response to, though neither an explanation or redemption of, the Holocaust; a resurgent Jewish ethnicity; a return within liberal Judaism to previously discarded forms of particularism such as religious ritual, the Hebrew language, Jewish schooling and even a fresh assessment of halakhah; and the new interest of secular Jews in the Bible. Perhaps the most notable phenomenon has been the renaissance of Orthodoxy as the most vigorous sector of contemporary Jewish life. Since the beginning of the nineteenth century it had been seen as destined for eclipse, but against all predictions, Orthodoxy has risen phoenix-like from the ashes of the Holocaust.<sup class="footnote-marker">26</sup><i class="footnote">See Reuven Bulka, <i>Dimensions of Orthodox Judaism (</i>New York: Ktav, 1983).</i> Its newfound strength is evident in its large and relatively stable families, in the growth of intensive Jewish day schools, the proliferation of <i>yeshivot</i>, and the many thousands of <i>ba’alei</i> <i>teshuvah</i>, Jews who have found their way back to traditional styles of study and life. Intellectually too, most of the leading thinkers of recent years have worked broadly within the Orthodox tradition: Soloveitchik, Leibowitz, Wyschogrod, Berkovits, Greenberg and Hartman. Even the most significant current non-Orthodox thinker, Emil Fackenheim, has dedicated his work to an engagement with the rabbinic tradition as did his precursor, Franz Rosenzweig. Collectively this represents a marked turn from the universalist, rationalist and historicist mood of the nineteenth century.
Does this crisis of identity, from which Jewry is only slowly emerging and of which Jewish thought still bears the signs, have some religious meaning? One biblical passage above all others has seemed, at times of trauma, to epitomise the Jewish destiny. Not surprisingly, for it is the passage in which Israel receives its name. For the sages of the second century CE it described the confrontation between Jews and Rome. For Nachmanides in thirteenth-century Spain it foreshadowed the persecution of Jews at the hands of medieval Christianity. It is no less evocative in the wake of the Jewish encounter with Enlightenment. It is the narrative of Jacob’s wrestling match with the angel.
Following a suggestion of the eleventh-century exegete Rabbi Shmuel ben Meir,<sup class="footnote-marker">27</sup><i class="footnote"><i>Commentary</i> to Genesis 32.</i> let us offer this commentary. Jacob had his own crisis of identity. For he had received the blessing not as Jacob but dressed in the clothes of Esau. Now, after a long exile, he is about to confront Esau again. There is no alternative but to be Jacob. Jacob is afraid and tries to run away, but now he finds his way blocked by an angel. He wrestles and wins, but not without facing the risk of death and the actuality of injury. But he is now Israel: he who knows the inescapability of his identity, though it involves struggling with God and man.
It is a scene repeated many times in Jewish history. The burden of chosenness, of being singled out by God, is heavy, and man tries to flee from it. The Israelites in the wilderness try to return to Egypt. Jonah seeks to escape his prophetic mission. Ezekiel predicts a time when Israel will “want to be like the nations, like the peoples of the world.” The nineteenth century was such a moment. Jews sought in normalisation a release from the destiny of differentness. But in the Holocaust, their way was blocked by the angel of death. We will never fully understand those dark biblical passages in which God turns His people towards life by the threat of death. Why must Jews endure suffering to remain a people? That, like the Holocaust, remains a mystery no prophet has ever fathomed. Like Jacob after his struggle, the Jewish people limps, still scarred by that encounter. But those who remain have like Jacob taken up the journey again, no longer seeking flight from fate but instead determined to survive as Jews. The State of Israel, diaspora Jewish activism and a renascent Orthodoxy all express this fundamental affirmation. The Jewish people has returned to its perennial vocation: to be Israel, the people of the covenant, though this means struggling with God and with man.
<b>Covenantal fate</b><br>The historian Barbara Tuchman, reflecting on the course of Jewish fate, writes:
<span class="poetry indentAll">The history of the Jews is…intensely peculiar in the fact of having given the Western world its concept of origins and monotheism, its ethical traditions, and the founder of its prevailing religion, yet suffering dispersion, statelessness and ceaseless persecution, and finally in our times nearly successful genocide, dramatically followed by fulfilment of the never-relinquished dream of return to the homeland. Viewing this strange and singular history one cannot escape the impression that it must contain some special significance for the history of mankind, that in some way, whether one believes in divine purpose or inscrutable circumstance, the Jews have been singled out to carry the tale of human fate.<sup class="footnote-marker">28</sup><i class="footnote">Barbara Tuchman, <i>Bible and Sword</i> (New York: Ballantine, 1984), ix–x.</i></span>
Paul Johnson, at the end of his <i>A History of the Jews</i>, comes to a strikingly similar conclusion. Jews were, he writes, “exemplars and epitomisers of the human condition. They seemed to present all the inescapable dilemmas of mankind in a heightened and clarified form… It seems to be the role of the Jews to focus and dramatise these common experiences of mankind, and to turn their particular fate into a universal moral.”<sup class="footnote-marker">29</sup><i class="footnote">Paul Johnson, <i>A History of the Jews</i> (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1987), 586.</i>
Perhaps, then, the story of modern Jewish thought has some larger significance. Subject like other peoples to secularisation, Jews experienced it in a uniquely traumatic way. Emancipation and Enlightenment contained a hidden premiss. Jews were to be tolerated and granted rights to the extent that they became instances of man-as-such, humanity in general. Socially, this meant assimilation. Intellectually, it meant the disintegration of those values and beliefs by which Jews had pledged themselves to be bound since Sinai. Many Jews believed this process to be benign, for who in the early nineteenth century could foresee the consequences and recall the story of the tower of Babel? But what began as the promise of a new era of equality and tolerance ended in the ovens of Auschwitz.
And yet out of this tragic process something not unremarkable has occurred. Jews have not ceased to be Jews. In the diaspora, for the most part, they have found freedom. In Israel they have found themselves, after 1,900 years of exile, gathered once more as a sovereign people in the land of their beginnings. There has been a slow mending of the wounds, physical and spiritual, of the past two centuries. There is a renewed search for peoplehood and tradition. Above all, there has been a recovery of the sense of Jewish singularity, as if the epic events of the twentieth century contained intimations of that larger design called providence, summoning Jews to continue the covenant across the discontinuities of time.
The dilemma faced by the great religious and philosophical attempts to understand the human situation is the conflict between the unity of truth and the plurality of man. Sir Isaiah Berlin once wrote:
<span class="poetry indentAll">One belief, more than any other, is responsible for the slaughter of individuals on the altars of the great historical ideals… This is the belief that somewhere…there is a final solution. This ancient faith rests on the conviction that all the positive values in which men have believed must, in the end, be compatible, and perhaps even entail one another.<sup class="footnote-marker">30</sup><i class="footnote">Isaiah Berlin, “Two Concepts of Liberty,” in Michael Sandel (ed.), <i>Liberalism and Its Critics</i> (Oxford: Blackwell, 1984), 29–30.</i></span>
No finer statement has been given in our time of the project of the tower of Babel. In a century which has witnessed totalitarianism, fascist, communist and religious fundamentalist, on an unprecedented scale, it remains a still urgent moral.
If the role of Jews is, as Johnson argues, to “turn their particular fate into a universal moral,” then Judaism’s truths have not lost their wider relevance, even if they have recently lived a hazardous life among Jews themselves. Faith belongs to particular covenants with a universal God. There are universal requirements of morality, but beyond this minimum our moral and spiritual lives are as plural as languages, neither private nor universal but bound by the rules preserved by faith-communities in their dialectic between revelation and interpretation. Each of us carries the inescapable burden of duality, of being true to our faith while recognising the image of God in, and being a blessing to, those who are unlike us. Any attempt to reduce this duality to a unity results in either tribalism or universalism, both of which end in human sacrifice.
Between Babel and the end of days, the unity of truth cannot be purchased at the cost of the plurality of man. For the world, though redeemable, is not yet redeemed. Truth, though absolute, is not yet universal. Indeed, to paraphrase Johnson, the universal moral <i>is</i> the particularity of fate. The challenge of unredeemed time, one that has lost none of its force in an age of mass destruction, is to work through the religious and moral implications of differentness: of the fact that one God has created one world in which many faiths, cultures and languages must live together. Judaism stakes its being on faith in the religious integrity of difference.
These are difficult truths, and modern Jewish thought is in part the story of attempts to find alternatives that would end or at least mitigate the burden of differentness. But after its fateful, almost fatal, encounter with modernity, Jewry’s dialogue with destiny has been taken up again. The covenant has neither altered nor ceased but continues to unfold in the strange, paradigmatic story of a singular people and its relationship with God.

Further Reading



Chapter 1

<b>Themes of Jewish modernity</b><br>Borowitz, Eugene, <i>Choices in Modern Jewish Thought</i>, Behrman House, New York, 1983.
Cohen, Arthur, <i>The Natural and Supernatural Jew</i>, Vallentine, Mitchell, London, 1967.
Cohen, Arthur and Mendes-Flohr, Paul (eds.), <i>Contemporary Jewish Religious Thought</i>, Scribner’s, New York, 1987.
Glatzer, Nahum, <i>Modern Jewish Thought: A Source Reader</i>, Schocken, New York, 1977.
Katz, Jacob, <i>Out of the Ghetto</i>, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1973.
Mendes-Flohr, Paul and Reinharz, Jehuda (eds.), <i>The Jew in the Modern World: A Documentary History</i>, Oxford University Press, New York and London, 1980.
Meyer, Michael, <i>The Origins of the Modern Jew</i>, Wayne State University Press, Detroit, MI, 1967.
Noveck, Simon (ed.), <i>Contemporary Jewish Thought</i>, Bnai Brith Great Books Series, Clinton, MA, 1963.
Rotenstreich, Nathan, <i>Tradition and Reality</i>, Random House, New York, 1972.
Sacks, Jonathan, <i>Tradition in an Untraditional Age</i>, Vallentine, Mitchell, London, 1990.
——— <i>Arguments for the Sake of Heaven</i>, Jason Aronson, Northvale, NJ, 1991.
——— <i>The Persistence of Faith</i>, Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London, 1991.
——— <i>Orthodoxy Confronts Modernity</i>, Ktav, Hoboken, NJ, 1991.

Chapter 2

<b>The valley of the shadow</b><br>Berkovits, Eliezer, <i>Faith After the Holocaust</i>, Ktav, New York, 1973.
——— <i>With God in Hell</i>, Sanhedrin Press, New York, 1979.
Cohn-Sherbock, Dan, <i>Holocaust Theology</i>, Lamp Press London 1089.
Eliach, Yaffa, <i>Hasidic Tales of the Holocaust</i>, Avon Books, New York, 1982.
Fackenheim, Emil, <i>The Jewish Return into History</i>, Schocken, New York, 1978.
——— <i>To Mend the World</i>, Schocken, New York, 1982.
Fleischner, Eva, <i>Auschwitz: Beginning of a New Era?</i> Ktav, New York, 1977.
Gilbert, Martin, <i>The Holocaust</i>, Macmillan, London, 1984.
Goldberg, Hillel, “Holocaust Theology: The Survivors’ Statement,” <i>Tradition</i> (Winter 1982), 341–57.
Greenberg, Irving, <i>On the Third Era in Jewish History: Power and Politics</i>, National Jewish Resource Center, New York, 1981.
——— <i>Voluntary Covenant</i>, National Jewish Resource Center, New York, 1982.
——— <i>The Jewish Way</i>, Summit Books, New York, 1988.
Jakobovits, Lord, “Religious Responses to the Holocaust: Retrospect and Prospect,” <i>L’Eylah</i> 25 (April 1988), 2–7.
Katz, Steven T., <i>Post-Holocaust Dialogues</i>, New York University Press, New York, 1983.
Kirschner, Robert. <i>Rabbinic Responsa of the Holocaust Era</i>, Schocken, New York, 1985.
Lamm, Norman, “The Face of God: Thoughts on the Holocaust,” Yeshiva University Press, New York, 1986.
Maza, Bernard, <i>With Fury Poured Out</i>, Ktav, Hoboken, NJ, 1986.
Morgan, Michael (ed.), <i>The Jewish Thought of Emil Fackenheim: A Reader</i>, Wayne State University Press, Detroit, MI, 1987.
Polen, Nehemiah, “Divine Weeping: Rabbi Kalonymos Shapiro’s Theology of Catastrophe in the Warsaw Ghetto,” <i>Modern Judaism</i> 7:3 (October 1987), 253–70.
Rosenbaum, Irving J., <i>The Holocaust and Halakhah</i>, Ktav, New York, 1976.
Rubinstein, Richard, <i>After Auschwitz</i>, Bobbs-Merrill, Indianapolis, IN, 1966.
Rubinstein, Richard and Roth, John K., <i>Approaches to Auschwitz</i>, SCM Press, London, 1987.
Sacks, Jonathan, “The Holocaust in Jewish Theology,” in <i>The Holocaust in History and Today</i>, Yad Vashem, London, 1988.
Solomon, Norman, “Jewish Responses to the Holocaust,” <i>Studies in Jewish/Christian Relations</i> 4, Selly Oak Colleges, Birmingham, 1988.
Soloveitchik, Joseph B., <i>Halakhic Man</i>, Jewish Publication Society of America, Philadelphia, PA, 1983.
Wyschogrod, Michael, “Faith and the Holocaust,” <i>Judaism</i> 20:3 (Summer 1971), 286–94.
——— “Auschwitz: Beginning of a New Era? Reflections on the Holocaust,” <i>Tradition</i> 16:5 (Fall 1977), 63–78.

Chapter 3

<b>Israel: between exile and redemption</b><br>Domb, I., <i>The Transformation</i>, Hamadfis, London, 1958.
Eisen, Arnold, <i>Galut: Modern Jewish Reflection on Homelessness and Homecoming</i>, Indiana University Press, Bloomington, IN, 1986.
Elazar, Daniel, <i>Israel: Building a New Society</i>, Indiana University Press, Bloomington, IN, 1986.
Fisch, Harold, <i>The Zionist Revolution: A New Perspective</i>, St. Martin’s Press, New York, 1978.
Hartman, David, <i>Joy and Responsibility</i>, Ben-Zvi Posner, Jerusalem, 1978.
——— “The Challenge of Modern Israel to Traditional Judaism,” <i>Modern Judaism</i> 7:3 (October 1987), 229–52.
Harkabi, Yehoshafat, <i>Israel’s Fateful Decisions</i>, I. B. Tauris, London, 1988.
Hertzberg, Arthur, <i>The Zionist Idea: A Historical Analysis and Reader</i>, Atheneum, New York, 1981.
Hoffman, Lawrence A. (ed.), <i>The Land of Israel: Jewish Perspectives</i>, University of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame, IN, 1986.
Liebman, Charles and Don-Yehiya, Eliezer, <i>Civil Religion in Israel</i>, University of California Press, Berkeley, CA, 1983.
 ——— <i>Religion and Politics in Israel</i>, Indiana University Press, Bloomington, IN, 1986.
Luz, Ehud, <i>Parallels Meet: Religion and Nationalism in the Early Zionist Movement 1882–1904</i>, Jewish Publication Society, Philadelphia, PA, 1988.
Oz, Amos,<i> In the Land of Israel</i>, Fontana, London, 1983.
Rubinstein, Amnon, <i>The Zionist Dream Revisited</i>, Schocken, New York, 1984.
Schweid, Eliezer, <i>Israel at the Crossroads</i>, Jewish Publication Society, Philadelphia, PA, 1973.
——— <i>The Land of Israel: National Home or Land of Destiny</i>, Associated University Presses, London and Toronto, 1985.
Selzer, Michael (ed.), <i>Zionism Reconsidered</i>, Macmillan, London, 1970.
Spero, Shubert and Pessin, Yitzchak (eds.), <i>Religious Zionism after Forty Years of Statehood</i>, World Zionist Organisation, Jerusalem, 1989.
Yehoshua, A. B., <i>Between Right and Right</i>, Doubleday, New York, 1981.

Chapter 4

<b>Diaspora debates</b><br>Brook, Stephen, <i>The Club: The Jews of Modern Britain</i>, Constable, London, 1989.
Cohen, Steven M., <i>American Modernity and Jewish Identity</i>, Tavistock, London, 1983.
——— <i>American Assimilation or Jewish Revival?</i>, Indiana University Press, Bloomington, IN, 1988.
Cooper, Howard and Morrison, Paul, <i>A Sense of Belonging: Dilemmas of British Jewish Identity</i>, Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London, 1991.
Glazer, Nathan, <i>American Judaism</i>, University of Chicago Press, 1972.
Goldscheider, Calvin, <i>Jewish Continuity and Change</i>, Indiana University Press, Bloomington, IN, 1986.
 ———<i>The American Jewish Community</i>, Brown University Press, 1986.
Goldscheider, Calvin and Zuckerman, Alan, The Transformation of the Jews, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 1984.
Goldy, Robert, <i>The Emergence of Jewish Theology in America</i>, Indiana University Press, Bloomington, IN, 1986.
Halkin, Hillel, <i>Letters to an American Jewish Friend</i>, Jewish Publication Society, Philadelphia, PA, 1977.
Halpern, Ben, <i>The American Jew: A Zionist Analysis</i>, Schocken New York, 1983.
Herberg, Will, <i>Protestant, Catholic, Jew</i>, Anchor Books, New York, 1960.
Liebman, Charles, <i>The Ambivalent American Jew</i>, Jewish Publication Society, Philadelphia, PA, 1973.
——— <i>Deceptive Images: Toward a Redefinition of American Judaism</i>, Transaction Books, New Brunswick, NJ, 1988.
Neusner, Jacob, <i>Israel in America</i>, Beacon, Boston, MA, 1985.
——— <i>Stranger at Home</i>, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 1981.
Silberman, Charles, <i>A Certain People: American Jews and Their Lives Today</i>, Summit Books, New York, 1985.
Woocher, Jonathan, <i>Sacred Survival: The Civil Religion of American Jews</i>, Indiana University Press, Bloomington, IN, 1986.

Chapter 5

<b>In search of the Jewish people</b><br>Eisen, Arnold, <i>The Chosen People in America</i>, Indiana University Press, Bloomington, IN, 1983.
Elazar, Daniel, <i>People and Polity</i>, Wayne State University Press, Detroit, MI, 1989.
Fackenheim, Emil, <i>The Jewish Return into History</i>, Schocken, New York, 1978.
——— <i>To Mend the World</i>, Schocken, New York, 1982.
Friedmann, Georges, <i>The End of the Jewish People?</i>, Hutchinson, London, 1967.
Greenberg, Irving, <i>On the Third Era in Jewish History: Power and Politics</i>, National Jewish Resource Center, New York, 1980.
——— <i>Voluntary Covenant</i>, National Jewish Resource Center, New York, 1982.
——— <i>The Third Great Cycle in Jewish History</i>, National Jewish Resource Center, New York, 1981.
Sacks, Jonathan, <i>One People?</i>, Oxford, Oxford University Press (forthcoming).
Soloveitchik, Joseph, <i>Divrei Hagut ve-Ha’arakhah</i>, World Zionist Organisation, Jerusalem, 1981.
Wyschogrod, Michael, <i>The Body of Faith</i>, Seabury, Minneapolis, MN, 1983.

Chapter 6

<b>Halakhah and modernity</b><br>Berkovits, Eliezer, <i>Not in Heaven: The Nature and Function of Halakhah</i>, Ktav, New York, 1983.
Bleich, J. David, <i>Contemporary Halakhic Problems, volume I</i>, Ktav, New York, 1977.
——— <i>Contemporary Halakhic Problems, volume II</i>, Ktav, New York, 1983.
——— <i>Contemporary Halakhic Problems, volume III</i>, Ktav, New York, 1989.
Herring, Basil, <i>Jewish Ethics and Halakhah for Our Time, volume I</i>, Ktav, New York, 1984.
——— <i>Jewish Ethics and Halakhah for Our Time, volume II</i>, Ktav, New York, 1989.
<i>Judaism</i> 29:1 (Winter 1980) [a special issue devoted to “Halakhah, Authority and the Future of Judaism”].
Roth, Joel, <i>The Halakhic Process: A Systemic Analysis</i>, Jewish Theological Seminary, New York, 1986.
Soloveitchik, Joseph, <i>Halakhic Man</i>, translated by Lawrence Kaplan, Jewish Publication Society, Philadelphia, PA, 1983.
——— <i>The Halakhic Mind</i>, Seth Press, New York, 1986.
Spero, Shubert, <i>Morality, Halakhah and the Jewish Tradition</i>, Ktav, New York, 1983.

Chapter 7

<b>Judaism and its texts</b><br>Bergman, Samuel Hugo, <i>Faith and Reason</i>, Schocken, New York, 1976.
Buber, Martin, <i>On the Bible</i>, Schocken, New York, 1982.
Cohen, Hermann, <i>Religion of Reason out of the Sources of Judaism</i>,
Ungar, New York, 1972.
Fackenheim, Emil, <i>Quest for Past and Future</i>, Beacon, Boston, MA, 1968.
——— <i>Encounters between Judaism and Modern Philosophy</i>, Schocken, New York, 1980.
——— <i>What is Judaism?</i>, Macmillan, New York, 1987.
Guttmann, Julius, <i>Philosophies of Judaism</i>, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York, 1964.
Haberman, Joshua, <i>Philosopher of Revelation: The Life and Thought of S.L. Steinheim</i>, Jewish Publication Society, Philadelphia, PA, 1990.
Hertz, J.H., <i>The Pentateuch and Haftorahs</i>, Soncino, London, 1962.
Heschel, Abraham, <i>Theology of Ancient Judaism</i> [Hebrew], Soncino, London, 1965 (volumes 1 and 2); Jewish Theological Seminary, Jerusalem, 1990 (volume 3).
Hirsch, Samson Raphael, <i>Judaism Eternal</i>, translated by I. Grunfeld, Soncino, London, 1959.
——— <i>The Pentateuch with Translation and Commentary [Terumat Tzvi]</i>, Judaica Press, New York, 1986.
Holtz, Barry (ed.), <i>Back to the Sources: Reading the Classic Jewish Texts</i>, Summit Books, New York, 1984.
Horwitz, Rivka, “Revelation and the Bible according to Twentieth Century Jewish Philosophy,” in Green, Arthur (ed.), <i>Jewish Spirituality from the Sixteenth Century to the Present</i>, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1987, 346–70.
Kurzweil, Zvi, <i>The Modern Impulse of Traditional Judaism</i>, Ktav, New York, 1985.
Levinger, Jacob, <i>Isaac Breuer: Concepts of Judaism</i>, Israel Universities Press, Jerusalem, 1974.
Mittelman, Alan, <i>Between Kant and Kabbalah</i>, State University of New York Press, Albany, NY, 1990.
Rosenberg, Shalom, “Revelation,” in Cohen and Mendes-Flohr (eds.), <i>Contemporary Jewish Religious Thought</i>, 815–25.
Rosenzweig, Franz, <i>On Jewish Learning</i>, Schocken, New York, 1955.
Seeskin, Kenneth, <i>Jewish Philosophy in a Secular Age</i>, State University of New York Press, Albany, NY, 1990.
Simon, Uriel (ed.), <i>Ha-Mikra ve-Anachnu</i>, Dvir, Tel Aviv, 1979.

Chapter 8

<b>Midrash and history</b><br>Alter, Robert, <i>The Art of Biblical Narrative</i>, George Allen and Unwin, London, 1981.
Alter, Robert and Kermode, Frank (eds.), <i>The Literary Guide to the Bible</i>, Fontana, London, 1989.
Faur, Jose, <i>Golden Doves with Silver Dots</i>, Indiana University Press, Bloomington, IN, 1986.
Fishbane, Michael, <i>Text and Texture</i>, Schocken, New York, 1979.
——— <i>Biblical Interpretation in Ancient Israel</i>, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1985.
——— <i>The Garments of Torah</i>, Indiana University Press, Bloomington, IN, 1989.
Handelman, Susan, <i>The Slayers of Moses</i>, State University of New York Press, Albany, NY, 1982.
Hartman, Geoffrey and Budick, Sanford (eds.), <i>Midrash and Literature</i>, New Haven, CT, Yale University Press, 1986.
Heinemann, Yitzchak, <i>Darkhei ha-Aggadah</i>, Magnes Press, Jerusalem, 1970.
Kochan, Lionel, <i>The Jew and His History</i>, Schocken, New York, 1977.
Scholem, Gershom, “Revelation and Tradition as Religious Categories in Judaism,” in <i>The Messianic Idea in Judaism</i>, Schocken, New York, 1972, 282–303.
——— “The Meaning of Torah in Jewish Mysticism,” in <i>On the Kabbalah and its Symbolism</i>, Schocken, New York, 1972, 32–86.
Yerushalmi, Yosef Hayim, <i>Zakhor: Jewish History and Jewish Memory</i>, Washington University Press, Seattle, WA, 1982.