Olat Reiyah
עולת ראיה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Olat Reiyah

Introduction



Essays on Prayer

The Constant Prayer of the Soul



A Guide to Prayer and its Elements



Prayer and Torah



Paths of Action in Prayer



Modeh Ani



Tzizit



Tefillin



Ma Tovu



Adon Olam



Yigdal



Netilat Yadayim and Asher Yatzar



Blessings of the Torah



Morning Blessings



Akedah










"And God tested Avraham..." There is a limit to freedom of will, that attribute which is most pronounced through the act of choice, where ever it is found. Even those manifestations of life which we consider to be free expressions of human choice have in the depths of their existence certain elements of necessity which are hidden from the eye. The Knower of secrets, blessed be He, before whom all hidden things are revealed, wanted to bring into the light of existence all the light of holiness, all the eternal and lofty which was buried -  hidden away in the great soul of Avraham. Toward this end he was graced with absolute freedom of will, free of any inner or outer constraints, in order that his unconditional inner selfhood manifest in all the greatness of its glorious might. This is the secret of the testing in its highest sense - 'and God tested Avraham.'








S.v. And he saw the place afar off: These things are sealed and closed – the amazing events of the soul that happened to the forefather during the course of the three days of walking. It is impossible to elucidate these hidden things of the holy of holies. However that which appeared on the third day, when the holy light reached the height of its power – in place of that which should have been words of speech to designate the mountain – the appearance came as a vision of prophecy. As [his] soul had already climbed to the higher place where all stimuli unite – and as in all spiritual appearances, speech and sight also unite and join into a single perception. The speech, which was in the form of seeing, and the prophetic vision penetrated the soul of the giant forefather so much that his eyes – even being eyes of flesh – became the carriers of prophetic majesty. And before he yet came close to the place that was full of holy majesty, the fascination that connected the higher soul to the holy splendor of the place, already drew it close. [The place hence] already ascended in its significance in such a way that it was no longer possible to designate it with its natural superficial designation as "one of the hills"; but rather the special place to where all of the holiness in life, in the world and in experience are attached. "And he saw the place afar off" – he already saw the majesty of the higher glory that was hidden in the clouds of fog from descending into the hearts of people to give them eternal life. "What did he see? He saw a cloud attached upon the mountain."


































After all of the sublime elevation that occurred to his soul, it did not have the impact of separating him at all from that great trait of influencing the world - his surroundings with all of their physicality. [Hence] he returned to his lads according to their station - he returned to those same lads that he left "with the donkey," to be available for them, to raise them up and improve them.

Morning Supplications



Korbanot



Eizehu Mekoman



Baraita of Rabbi Yishmael



Pesukei dezimra



Blessings of the Shema



Laws of the Amidah



Amidah



Birkat Kohanim



Prayers for Fast Days and Rain



Vehu Rachum



Tachanun



Reading of the Torah



HaGomel



Returning the Torah to the Ark



Kedusha d'Sidra



Aleinu



Song of the Day



Pitum HaKetoret



L'David



Six Remembrances



Chapter of Repentance



Thirteen Principles of Faith



Hatavat Chalom



Prayer Upon Entering the Study Hall



Laws of Blessings



Terumot and Maaserot



Hamotzi



Laws of the Meal



Birkat Hamazon



Blessing on Fragrance



Blessing on Miracles



Shehecheyanu



Blessing on Sight



Blessing for Healing



Marriage



Circumcision



Pidyon HaBen



Baruch Dayan HaEmet



Minchah



Maariv



Sefirat HaOmer



Bedtime Shema



Erev Rosh Chodesh



Rosh Chodesh



Kiddush Levana



Blessings for Chanukah



Megillah Blessings



Song of Songs



Shabbat Candles



Kabbalat Shabbat



Bameh Madlikin



Shalom Aleichem



Kiddush



Songs for Shabbat



Shacharit for Shabbat



Birkat HaChodesh



Musaf for Shabbat



Daytime Kiddush



Mincha for Shabbat



Barechi Nafshi



Pirkei Avot



Songs for Motzei Shabbat



The Hallel



Pesach



Haggadah



Shavuot



Rosh HaShanah Prayer



Shofar



Musaf for Rosh HaShanah



Ten Days of Repentance



Yom Kippur



Between Yom Kippur and Sukkot



Sukkot and Shemini Atzeret

