Tov haLevanon
טוב הלבנון
Duties of the Heart, trans. Rabbi Yosef Sebag
http://dafyomireview.com/article.php?docid=384

Tov haLevanon

Introduction of the Author

knowledge of the laws in the torah and its halacha, generally and specifically, and to learn the forbidden and the permitted, and the actions which are obligatory. 
Their fulfillment or transgression are not known [to other people] for they depend solely on the heart and mind. None but G-d can observe them.












even though technically only thoughts of avodah zara (idol worship) are punishable for dwelling about in one's mind, nevertheless, even for other sins, they are extremely damaging to the intellect and to the neshama (higher soul), as our Sages said (Yoma 29a): "thoughts of sin are worse than sin". 









Just like when the powers of the heart cease, the powers of all the limbs will likewise cease, because the heart is the root and power of the entire body, and from it the life [force] flows to all the other powers. So too, if the duties of the heart cease, the duties of the limbs become null and void. 






that one constantly reflects on the benefits of G-d towards him, how He bestows on him all good, in order that love and fear of G-d enter his heart. 


 i.e. not only the inner duties depend on the heart, but even for all the duties of the limbs - their start and fulfillment are primarily from the heart... for one cannot do something with his limbs without first resolving in his heart to do it... Therefore, since we see that the duties of the limbs depend primarily on the heart, and hence the heart is the root of torah and service. If so, obviously, the heart by itself, even without the limbs, is also under duty of service according to its power and ability. 
<b>with all your heart</b> -- behold the verse set torah and emuna (faith) as depending on the heart and soul. Once a man attains these, then it is possible for him to serve G-d "with all his might". For without love of G-d fixed in his heart and soul, a man will not do any further service. 


<b>on the heart and tongue</b> -- after the Torah repeatedly exhorted on the heart which is the cornerstone of the Torah, it added a commandment on the tongue which is secondary to the heart, and which depends on the work of the heart and soul, as our Sages said (Shabbat 33b): "the heart understands, the tongue articulates, and the mouth completes. And the well-being of the heart and soul depends on the tongue. If the heart and tongue are lacking perfection, the soul will likewise be lacking perfection, as Scripture says: "Do not allow your mouth to cause your flesh to sin" (Eccles. 5:5). It is also well demonstrated in the wisdom of truth (Kabala) how [sins of] the mouth and tongue damage the soul. 






even though they said (Sotah 22b) "one should always occupy himself in the Torah even shelo lishma (not devoted to G-d), since from shelo lishma (not devoted) comes lishma (devoted to G-d)". Perhaps it means that even so, one will not receive any reward for those mitzvot he did shelo lishma. Alternatively, perhaps, his reward is much less relative to the reward for doing a mitzva lishma, as our Sages said (Nazir 23b) "a sin lishma (devoted to G-d) is greater than a mitzva shelo lishma (not devoted)", which implies there is some reward for a mitzva shelo lishma. Hence, according to this the author's words are not literal. 

<b>precede, by nature</b> -- one of the 5 "precedences" as is known in the science of logic - is called "precedence by nature". This refers to something whose nature does not need the nature of something else nor vice versa, even though neither preceded the other in time. For example, plants precede creatures by nature because the plant, namely, the growing power is needed by creatures, for they also need a growing power. But the "conscious awareness power" which exists in the nature of conscious creatures is not needed by the nature of plants (see the book Shaarei Kedusha to understand this - translator). So too by deeds, the duties of the limbs necessarily require the duties of the heart but the duties of the heart do not require the duties of the limbs.) 


<b>O my hope</b> -- David beseeched that he will be successful in his ways to guard G-d's statutes at all times. These are necessarily the duties of the heart.
<b>to separate from the superfluous</b> -- these are the material possessions and bodily pleasures which are not necessary for health of the body, service of G-d, or necessary livelihood. 

<b>love of this world</b> -- It is well known in the writings of chakira (rational inquiry) that love of this world and love of the next world are two opposites, and there is no possibility whatsoever for both to co-exist together.
<b>we don't understand the matter of our Creator</b> -- due to the coarse physicality of the body which conceals the light of the intellect which shines from the soul.


"countless" - Everything physical is necessarily bounded in the three dimensions. Hence, necessarily it must be finite. For it is impossible to find in actual reality an infinite number of physical objects, as will be demonstrated through logical proofs (see Gate 1 ch.5). But "your commandments are exceedingly broad". The term "broad" here means infinite. For the Duties of the Heart cannot be encircled by any edge or boundary. For, they can offshoot, widen, and branch out indefinitely. And even though it is impossible for an actual physical thing to be infinite, it can nevertheless, potentially branch out infinitely. So too, for the Duties of the Heart, even though they depend on physical powers, they can nevertheless potentially branch out infinitely, since their number is unlimited. Understand this. 









i.e. the question was remote and uncommon. Even though in the words of our Sages we find such questions such as "one who made an animal into a grave stone" (Tosfos Kesuvos 4b). This is because our Sages were already complete in the duties of the heart, and they also had the ability to deduce from the answers to these questions other laws which are common. Unlike this student which the wise man rebuked who did not reach this level. 










The author will now clarify from the Torah and prophets that one who refrains from rational inquiry on the roots of the Torah and instead relies solely on the tradition is negligent (poshea) and like one who is falling short in fulfilling the duties the Creator placed on him.



Even though among the commandments of the limbs, there are also some commandments which Reason accepts, and on these the Sages said (Eruvin 100b) "even if the Torah were not given, we could have learned modesty from the cat, honesty from the ant, chastity from the dove.." But this is not from logical proofs. Rather it is from the aspect of mussar (ethics). Likewise, the details of monetary pleas cannot be known through Reason alone. This is unlike the Duties of the Heart where all of them can be demonstrated by clear logical proofs, and there aren't any derivatives of them which cannot be demonstrated by logical proofs. And likewise we have been commanded to inquire specifically on them - not to rely [solely] on what the Sages will tell us from Tradition. 


<b>the Tradition should be preceded by nature</b> -- i.e. Rational inquiry requires the Tradition. For it is impossible to find without the [guidance of the] Tradition. Without the Tradition, it is highly unlikely that a man will grasp the roots of Judaism by reason alone. Tradition guides a person on the intellectual journey - to which bend to turn in his rational inquiry. But the tradition alone can be without inquiry for the weak minded and women. Behold, the tradition on existence of G-d and His Unity, and other fundamental principles precede by nature to the commandments of the Heart, which are the bringing of rational proofs on their truth.










<b>they regarded secular matters lightly</b> -- i.e. acquiring a name and seeking honor.

<b>the moral principles and ethical standards</b> -- i.e. when they mentioned the chain of tradition from Sinai, they mentioned of each of the receivers what he innovated of moral principles. But they did not at all mention their chidushim (novel ideas) in questions of dinim (monetary laws) which they expounded in their rational inquiry. 

they did not set their attention to investigate strange questions, before these would be needed practically. Only in monetary laws, since this is very common and relevant, and is very necessary for the welfare of the world, as they said (Avot 1:18) "on three things the world stands, on justice, truth, and peace". But for other orders, they would not investigate too much on derivative laws.
they would cleave very much to love of G-d until they no longer cared about loss of money or personal honor in regard to things which touched on the honor of G-d ... as we see there on how Rabbi Ada bar Ahava could not restrain himself until he rose up and did what he did.



<b>Wash yourselves, make yourselves clean</b> -- washing and cleaning is referring to cleanliness of heart and mind, namely, that he removes from his heart the lust for sin, and from his mind, the thinking of them, until he resolves in his heart to desist from them, as Scripture says "tear your hearts and not your garments,etc." (Yoel 2:13), which means renouncing sin and removing it from his heart. This is the main component of repentance as is known.
<b>but the matter is very near to you, in your mouth and in your heart</b> -- hence, all deeds depend on the intent of heart.


<b>with what shall I come before the L-ord...Shall I come with Olah offerings?</b> --behold, certainly, the proper repentance for sins of the limbs is known, as our Sages said (Yoma 86a): "there are three types of atonement..." and the repentance of each type is explained. Likewise an Olah offering atones for [bad] musings of the heart as our Sages said (Vayikra Raba 7:3). The question here was with what can he bow his heart and straighten its crookedness. Should he come with Olah offerings? Can the Olah straighten his heart to the service of G-d from now on, just like it can atone for [bad] musings of the past? The answer was "He has told you, O man, what is good, and what the L-ord demands of you; but to do justice, to love kindness, and to walk humbly with your G-d", i.e. That G-d desires only wholeness of the heart, and wholeness of (temimus) sentiment and mind to His service. 











































<b>laughter and rejoicing</b> -- to this man's nature tends, due to his composition and inherent lust which stems from his physicality (the body), as Scripture says: (Job 11:12) "man is born as wild donkey's colt". 

















<b>defeat</b> (nitzuach) -- It is known that the science of logic divides into three methods nitzuach (defeat), raya (proof), and mofet (definitive proof). Nitzuach (defeat) is when one cannot decide on either of the two views definitively, only that one view has more and stronger questions and claims which can be raised against it than the other view. The view which has fewer and weaker questions against it will prevail over the other view, and it is proper to follow that view even though it may also have some questions which can be raised. The "proof" (raya) is where one view has many questions and claims which can be raised against it while the other view has no claims against it. Certainly, it is proper to uphold it. This is better than nitzuach (defeat). Because here there are no claims and questions against it from the aspect of rational inquiry, but nevertheless, perhaps his inquiry was somehow flawed [for example, due to lacking certain information]. The "mofet" (definitive proof) is that which is impossible to refute in almost any way whatsoever, similar to the miracles of the prophets which were openly visible to the senses [at that time]. Behold, science is divided into three divisions: theology, nature, mathematics. It is known that for most of the science of theology, it is impossible to bring a "raya" (proof), and all the more so, a mofet (definitive proof). For due to the enormous depth and awesomeness of this science, and the limitations of human intellect, it is almost impossible to establish a clear view which is without any doubts. But they can be clarified in the way of Nitzuach (defeat), and a few of its topics through "raya" (proof) which are close to being mofet (definitive proof). For the science of nature, on the other hand, which is not as deep, one can explain much of it in the way of raya (proof), and some even from mofet (definitive proof). But the science of limudit which is the science of mathematics and geometry, all of its matters are clarified through mofet (definitive proof). This is what the author wrote that not all rational inquiry is found as mofet (definitive proof), but as nitzuach (defeat) or rayah (proof). 









<b>sovereignty</b> -- in that He is our king, our Master, our Maker, and how can we greet His face and assume His service. 



<b>associated</b> -- i.e. if in the service of G-d, a man has some other motive combined with serving G-d, G-d will not accept it.

<b>humility</b> -- that we realize our petty worth compared to Him.




<b>all things begin and end</b> -- He made our soul, and when it will separate from the body, it will return to Him, like Scripture says: "[then the dust shall return to the earth as it was, and] the spirit shall return to G-d who gave it" (Ecles. 12:7). Then, from Him the good person will receive the greatest good and the bad person, who inclined to the corrupt ways, will receive the greatest evil.









<b>bring your soul to a true judgement</b> -- behold since a man is biased on himself, it is unlikely that he will admit his own flaws and lackings and therefore will not judge himself correctly, as our Sages said (Shabbat 119a): "a man cannot see a fault in himself" - unless he habituates himself in much in-depth analyses and separation from worldly matters.

First Treatise on Unity

Introduction


he will not have any merit for his religious deeds



If the intent in saying "one" was merely to exclude multiple gods, it should have said "H-shem yachid" (which, in hebrew, connotes specifically one and not many )
<b>our G-d</b> -- He granted us existence and formed us, and took us to be His people. 

The reason the Torah exhorted on doing this always even though it is not an obligation to do this always, on this the author answered that the intent of the verse is on habituating the tongue on them always.





Chapter 1



Chapter 2

















Certainly for a blind man who leans on a seeing man, it is impossible that he will align his walking very straight like the seeing man, without straying a bit in his steps. And even though this is not perceivable in the first blind man who is close to the seeing man, nevertheless, if there are many blind men who follow the seeing man, then, when each of them strays a bit, the combined straying will accumulate until it is possible that one of them will stumble. Furthermore, all of them will deviate from the straight path. The analogy is that one who does not know the truth of faith through his own intellect but instead relies on tradition, one man from another, for many generations up until the one who properly understood from his intellect, behold, most of the time, it is possible that each one strayed a bit from the truth, until eventually, it became a big straying. 

there was a man called Mani, yimach shemo, who would claim there are two gods, one who does good and one who does evil, and those who went after him are called after his name with the term: Minim.  
The word "apikoros" refers to the name of a man who was called "apikoros", yimach shemo, who would completely deny the existence of G-d, the Moray (Maimonides' guide for the perplexed) mentions him in the end of the first chapter, those drawn after his views are called "apikorsim", this term was also borrowed to refer to those who denigrate the Sages, and falsely give misinterpretations of the Torah, or the like, as brought in tractate Sanhedrin. 


The term "fool" applies to a man who is able to understand with his faculties, however, he does not want to toil but instead seeks comfort, as in "the fool does not desire understanding" (Mishlei 18:2), this is what the verse says: "the toil of the fool" - meaning the toil that the fool fears from and instead chooses comfort for himself.
<b>will tire him</b> -- Just the opposite, it will tire him even more.
<b>who knows not to reach a city</b> -- Just like he is lazy to study the roads properly, thinking he will manage without knowing it well, he will tire himself even more, because he will bring himself to err on the road and will not reach any city.

Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5

 Understand, that to clarify the roots of religion, there are many different ways, but the central pillar which everything depends on is the logical demonstration of the "chidush haolam" (this world was brought into existence from nothing). When this has been clarified, then automatically, it will be demonstrated the existence of G-d who created it. Many of our Sages already endeavored in this route such as Rabeinu Saadia Gaon, and Rambam (Maimonides). Behold, Rambam in part 1 chapter 73 of the Moray Nevuchim started to show the logical demonstration of the existence of G-d and that He is the absolute Unity and not physical, but he brought the proofs from the words of the philosophers, and he spoke at length denigrating their views and all of their proofs. He then returned at the beginning of part 2, after mentioning the words of Aristotle who believed in the existence of G-d while also believing in the eternal existence of the world, and along the same line of reasoning which Aristotle brought for the existence of G-d and that He is one and not physical. The Rambam rose to argue with him and refute his proofs on the eternity of the world, and to demonstrate that Aristotle has no proof on this, until just the opposite - one can prove the creation. However, the author here, of blessed memory, sifted the truth from the words of the philosophers, and added strength and pure hands to revive the proofs for creation and to mend their breaches, and automatically the existence of G-d will be demonstrated.
Regarding the necessity of all three premises, since the main proof stands on the "chidush haolam" (that this world was brought into existence from nothing), and from there we begin to clarify the existence of G-d, namely, from the visible to the invisible, therefore it was necessary to bring these three premises, because from the first premise alone, the non-believer can claim: "whatever created this world was itself created from another cause, and that cause also has a cause, and so on endlessly". Therefore, he added the second premise. And lest the non-believer refute saying that this world is without beginning (eternal), he added the third premise.


<b>efes v'ofes</b> -- this means that which is absolutely nothing, with no potential nor any way that would leave a possibility of existence in it. He doubled the term merely to emphasize the matter. Some want to explain his intent in doubling the term to refer to two types of nonexistence: (1) that which is nonexistent in actuality but has the potential for the thing, such as a seed from the fruit of a tree, which is nonexistent from being a tree but is not nonexistent in potential, since it has the potential when placed in the soil to produce a tree. (2) that which is nonexistent in potential and in actuality, such as a rock, which will never produce a tree. For this he added the word: "ofes", but if so, we need to complete the proof of the author, because that which he went on to say: "because nothingness cannot do anything", even though it clarifies that something which is completely nonexistent cannot do anything, but we still don't know that the "ofes", which is something which is non-existing in actual but exists in potential cannot do anything. To clarify this, we need to bring the eighteenth introduction from the beginning of part 2 of the Moray (Rambam's Guide for the Perplexed): "anything which comes out from potential to actual must necessarily have been taken out by something else which is external to it (i.e. you cannot have something existing eternally in potential and then suddenly - "Big Bang" all by itself. Rather, there must be something external to it which took it out to actual - translator). [Proof:] because either way,(1) if the thing which took it out from potential to actual was internal to it, and also that there is nothing [external] preventing it from coming out to actual - then it would never be in a state of potential. (2) Alternatively, if the thing which took it out from potential to actual was internal to it and there is also something [external] preventing it and holding it back [from coming out to potential], there is no doubt that this external thing which is holding it back is what will bring it from potential to actual. Understand this. We will explain further later on. Now the proof of the author is established, that something cannot make itself, and even something which exists in potential needs something else to bring it out [to actual]. 

This means to say that anything which has an end [to its existence], must also have a beginning, i.e. a start [of its existence], because something which has no end [to its existence] is only that which is infinite from all perspectives (i.e. no finiteness whatsoever). This matter also applies to [finite] things which do not actually exist together simultaneously, but rather follow each other, when this one comes [to exist], the other ceases [to exist] (such as living things where offsprings outlive parents) - that it is impossible for this to go on countlessly in endless stages until one can say that they have no first beginning, because if then even the thing that is here in the present would not exist, similar to the familiar saying among the philosophers: "if the first did not exist, the last (present) would not exist", which means to say, if there was not a first beginning to the thing, then it would be impossible for the thing to exist in the present also. 

If we have before us many things together, then the nature which each part has on its own, will also be contained in the combined whole since the whole is the sum of its parts, and through the part we measure the whole, namely how many parts are in the whole, and since each part is finite then it must be that the combined whole is also finite. This is a clear proof that it is impossible for many combined [finite] measures together to be infinite. 


i.e. before we took a part from it undoubtedly it was greater than it is now. And since it is now also infinite therefore it must be equal to what it was before we took out the part since anything infinite cannot be made less.




The composite thing occurs in one of two ways, (1) either its parts precede it also in time, such as water and flour, whereby the water precedes the dough in time, and they also precede it by nature, namely that the water and the flour can exist independently without the existence of the dough, while the existence of the dough cannot exist without the existence of the water and the flour. (2) Or, the parts do not precede the composite [in time], such as the composite of a living man, for example, [1] the physical body and [2] the "life spirit" in a man, even though both were created simultaneously, nevertheless they precede the formation of man by nature, since the formation of these parts does not need the existence of man but the existence of man needs them. Therefore the author only wrote that the parts precede the composite by nature, while the composer precedes the composite by time and by nature.

Chapter 6







There are no plants created for nothing, every one is for man's need, whether for his food, his animals' food or for healing purposes [or clothing material, etc], likewise for animals, or for the benefit of their skin or for various types of healing. 










This we can observe after burning something, the fire can be seen, the air which is the smoke rises, the moisture in the smoke is the element of water, and the ashes are the element of earth.

Chapter 7




Every thing and every creature by itself is called an "individual" (Ish), such as one man or one living thing, like a horse or mule or a grass or a tree. The term "kind" (min) refers to a group of individuals such as the species of man or the species of horses. The term "group" (geder) refers to something which includes many "kinds" such as "living creature", which includes the species of man and all the various living things (animals, birds, fish, etc). The term "type" (sug) is more general, as you would say the term "growing (thing)" includes all the trees and plants and all the living creatures. There is a higher "type", namely "composite" (murkav of the elements) which includes inanimate objects like stones, metals, and all growing (things). There is another type even more inclusive, such as the term "physical" (geshem), which also includes the four elements, but which only includes physical things, until the term "essence" (etzem), which includes every existing thing, whether physical or spiritual. This is the type which is over and above (most general) and is called the supernal type. 

The intent of the author is to ascend to the first cause, therefore I did not need to explain here the matters of Mikre (incidental). 














The scientist/rational investigator, from the role he assumes as rational investigator, it is his way to believe only that which he has clarified through logical proofs. While the "believer", who believes that which has not been clarified to himself through logical proofs, has already gone out of the role of "scientist/investigator" and has no business debating with them. And now that we are here today, and we have permitted ourselves to delve in the sea of rational investigation in order to clarify through logic the existence of G-d, to affix faith in Him in our hearts, in addition to the faithful tradition of our Torah. We have already attained an understanding of a logical proof of this, through which, out of love for Him, we can fix in our hearts.





It is not proper for one to look to the ends of the earth, and consider more than what the proof requires him to believe in order to resolve the difficulties raised in his rational inquiry. 



Therefore when we see a legal document (in court), orderly and of uniform handwriting, behold there is a strong likelihood that only one writer wrote it, and we will judge the case assuming so.






And if someone claims that it is the work of two scribes, the burden of proof will be on that person. And even though this is not a complete proof, nevertheless it is sufficient proof, because it is not proper for us to ask a man to bring proofs and verify strange and remote possibilities, but rather only for normal and regular cases. The author will soon bring clearer arguments. He also brought this argument in order to strengthen the matter, like the usual way of investigators/philosophers. 



there is a consensus that mikre (incident properties) do not apply to spiritual matters, (the nine attributes of mikre brought earlier): "Eich", "Kama" (brought earlier in this chapter), etc., because it is not relevant to speak of movement, place, or situation. Hence for spiritual things the only difference is in their Etzem/essence). 
<b>whatever is distinct is limited/bound</b> -- i.e. any difference is a border. For once there is a difference between two things, namely, that one has something that is not in the other, this difference limits it in that it does not attain the matter in the other thing.














The number one precedes all of them since, for two things, there is something which precedes them by nature, namely, unity. And that which is Eternal (without beginning) cannot have any matter whatsoever preceding it. 







This proof was similar to the fourth proof, except that there he built the proof from the matter of difference or boundary that must exist between them. There, he did not get into the matter of finiteness but instead came from the aspect of difference and border. Here he started from the argument of finiteness, namely that its power must be finite, and then ended with the argument of border - because its all the same thing. (i.e. its a different way of saying the same thing). He repeated it [differently] to strengthen it and impress it in the mind of the reader.

Chapter 8


For example, one man does not have absolute "unity" due to his being joined and composite of many parts. But he has some unity relative to two people.
Mikre is something which is not essential for the thing and it can exist without it, sometimes it is attached to it and sometimes not, while something which is in its essence is found on it always. 



















The "one" with which we count some number is itself not really a number, because a "number" is basically: the grouping together of matters. And also, "one" never makes plurality, as you say "one multiplied by one", "one multiplied by two", everything remains unchanged, unlike the number two and above which always multiplies over, since two multiplied by two is four, two by three is six, and similarly for all numbers. Therefore "one" is only the foundation of numbers and the sign of beginning. 

... there is nothing truly one besides G-d, if so, perhaps this term was borrowed to refer to a beginning without prior beginning. Likewise the Midrash Bereishis Raba says: "the verse did not say 'the first day', but rather 'day one', to teach on the unity of G-d." 







<b>does not resemble anything</b> -- That He has no comparison whatsoever to any of His creations. For example, for one grain of sand versus the universe and everything in it, even though this is extremely tiny and this is extremely big, nevertheless there is a comparison between the two and a shared characteristic...and the difference between them is only in size, but relative to Him, one cannot make any comparison by any trait or measure, just like one cannot compare a voice to a picture. 



A thing which changes must have two powers, namely, the power that it is now, and the power for that which it has the potential to become, and this contradicts unity. 


If we say, for example, that Reuven is similar to Shimon, this comparison that we are comparing Reuven with is an "incident" that occurred to Reuven, that he is similar in that respect. 
 Anything which has Mikre is considered more than something else, because Mikre is something which is added to the Etzem (essence) of that thing.

It is possible to ask - How can we say on G-d that He is the absolute unity. Behold, this is also Mikre, it is a type of numerical property which is also ascribed to physical things. i.e. they are ascribed the incidental property of number, namely the number one, two, etc. If so, the true unity is also an incidental property and something additional attributed to His essence, and this is also plurality.

Chapter 9

he will now clarify that the Creator is the true Unity, in addition to what he clarified in chapter 7 that the creator is one. 




The head of all beginnings cannot possibly be plural, since if it were plural, then unity must have preceded it, and we already said that He is the head of all beginnings.

Chapter 10

After he brought proofs that G-d is the true Unity, he returns to clarify that G-d has no plurality from the view of the attributes of praise and good traits with which we praise G-d and which are found in scripture. 


















































Since the good reward cannot be understood by a foolish or a simple person. The crude cannot understand spiritual pleasure, only physical pleasures, and likewise only physical punishments. Therefore, the scriptures speak only of physical reward and punishment, and hinted in few places of spiritual reward and punishment. 
His true name, as He is. What we are not capable of uttering in its true way.

(His Name is changed in the Torah) such as the name "Yud-Hey-Vuv-Hey" which teaches that He was, is, and always will be. Or the name "Adon-ay" which teaches that He is master over the creations, or the name "Elo-him" - that He is powerful and all-capable, or the name "Sha-day" - that He is "meshaded" the marachos. The verse adds "of heaven and earth" to teach that we do not completely understand His true Name but rather we see Him according to what we understand through His existence and deeds.




His Divinity would not be a term described through our forefathers, heaven and earth, or "spirit of all flesh". 












All of these different attributes is because we are not capable of reaching even the tiniest part of praise that is befitting to Him.






i.e. the mind's eye, He cannot be found in any place. Only through reason we know His existence, that at least He exists.
i.e. I did not mean to ask on existence in the mind, namely, intellectually where is He. Rather I meant, concretely - where is He in space?


He is not localized in any place whatsoever, but from the side of spiritual life force of everything created, it is clear to us that nothing is devoid of Him. 
through the proofs which demonstrate that the Creator is exalted above any likeness or form and that they are merely Mikre (incidental properties) of His creations.

The soul does not occupy any "place", even though it fills the body, it has no physical place. And that which the Sages say that the soul dwells in the heart or the brain, this only refers to the beginning of its influence. But certainly it does not dwell there in space.





















This verse is an analogy on the study of the hidden, that one should learn or examine only until the limit he is capable of grasping, since otherwise he will vomit even that which he learned and no emuna (faith) will be left in him.



















so too, for one who claims to have understood the matter of unity by learning one page this is because his understanding is weak and he does not benefit from the matters of the Unity hinted at in the Torah. His benefit is like the benefit of a blind man from the light of the sun, as will be explained.





Not only does wisdom benefit to heal the eyes of the intellect but rather it is an elixir of life to the entire body and the soul.

Second Treatise on Examination

Introduction









<b>any advantage possessed by another person as if it was taken away from them</b> -- It is human nature for one to think that all the good he sees by his fellow is stolen from him and that G-d created the entire universe for his honor only.



He thinks that the benefits which he is proud of are not from G-d, because he thinks G-d does not exist. Alternatively, he thinks G-d does not help him. Alternatively, due to his arrogance, he thinks he deserves those benefits more than the other person, therefore he thinks that benefit is evil and therefore it must be that G-d did not bestow it. Therefore, he does not pray to G-d to thank Him for his own benefits.








<b>trial</b> -- as written "He fed you in the wilderness with manna, which your fathers knew not, that He might humble you, and that He might test you, to do you good in the end" (Devarim 8:16).
<b>suffering</b> -- to humble his pride and submit his high heartedness.


Since they don't realize that G-d intends good for them, and that He brings these troubles to benefit them in their final end, they may stumble into evil in trying to remove these troubles, until they will say that evil is more prevalent than good, and thus G-d created the world, so man will toil and suffer, and that bad things happen randomly through "nature".





Chapter 1


<b>according to one's mental capacity</b> --because certainly, no man is capable of understanding G-d's wisdom fully. Only that it is one's duty to recognize a bit according to his mental capacity.



The difference in wisdom is not from differences in the Maker but from differences in the receiver of the wisdom.

Chapter 2


Even though the animals of the land and the birds of the sky also possess signs of intelligence and amazing things, as known to the studiers of nature, nevertheless, this is set in them only according to their survival needs (it is a "practical intelligence" only), unlike the superiority of human beings whose wisdom is encompassing, allowing him to understand the secret of other creations, in order to understand through this the will of G-d, and His wisdom. 


The righteous go in the proper light, i.e. they follow the light of their intellects and gaze with wisdom to examine which path is the proper path so that they do not stumble.
<b>and the living will take it to his heart</b> -- i.e. while a man is still alive, he must investigate the purpose of man and his end.

Chapter 3


















Even though death appears to be something very bad for that individual creature, but when one reflects on the collective good, one will realize and understand that this is how it must be according to the physical nature of the world, and without this evil, the world could not endure due to the coming generations, for it is impossible for one thing to arise without the loss of something which preceded it.


From warm to cold, from summer to winter. It appears that the warm is better, but after examination, one will realize that each one has a specific benefit.













<b>will draw from it the lesson as to his final end</b> -- For his land refers to his neshama (soul), which G-d gave to him "to work it and to guard it" (Bereishis 2:15) in purity, to succeed in planting and bearing fruit in the vineyard of G-d, until the time it is called back. The intelligent man sees that if he spends all of his time working only for his soul, he will not be able to earn a living to provide for his body, and like our sages said: "all torah study without working for a livelihood will in the end be neglected" (Avot 2:3). Therefore, he sees proper to hire himself out to some work, or some business dealing with faith, in order to sustain himself. But when he is free from this work, he returns diligently to torah study and service of G-d until he reaches the level of Tzadik (righteous). Then G-d will direct special attention on him to give him abundance and to bless his handiwork, as scripture says: "I never saw a righteous forsaken" (Tehilim 37:25), until he increases strength and pure hands to honor G-d with his money (give charity etc), and to ascend his soul from level to level until he merits the Olam Haba, eternal rewards, and a higher soul. But the fool does not work on his soul. Rather, he only endeavors to make profit, to serve his body, and to amass the superfluous and the pleasures of the masses, and he abandons his soul barren and to waste. Unseeded, it will not sprout, nor receive on it any shefa (spiritual light) or divine clinging until it will no longer be capable even to return to its source due to having defiled itself. Rather, to the sheol (Gehinom) he will descend, and the underworld will blanket over him. On him it is written (Yeshaya 3:9) "Woe unto their soul! for they have brought evil unto themselves".

Chapter 4


 <b>The Earth, we observe is at the center</b> -- the earth and everything in it, is suspended in space by the word of G-d, and its inhabitants dwell all around its surface, and despite that it is a globe, no one falls from it, even though it would seem that those living on the opposite half, who stand opposite us, should fall off. It appears to each of the inhabitants that they are standing on top of the earth, and the heavens are above them. This is an unbelievable wonder of the wisdom of the Creator. 










<b>Forever, O L-ord, Your word stands fast in heaven</b> -- The word of G-d and the power of His deeds are always in the celestial spheres and all of their hosts - this is what perpetuates their existence, similar to the verse: "You give life to all of them" (Nechemia 9:6). If G-d were to withhold His hashpaa (influence) from them, they would immediately cease to exist. 
<b>Your faithfulness is unto all generations</b> -- G-d's kindness is faithfully on all the creatures of the earth.

<b>They stand this day according to Your ordinances</b> -- i.e. the continuous existence of all the creations is due to Your constant ordinance and command...none of them exist through "nature", rather it is G-d who grants them existence continuously. 
"<b>O my soul, bless the L-ord...</b> -- the entire Psalm is in the present tense, i.e. G-d does this always, as David ends off "but if You turn away Your face, they shall vanish". All this teaches that G-d's power never ceases to sustain all. 


<b>faculties of his nefesh (lower soul)</b> -- the feeling soul from which arise the five senses, and also the power of imagination, and the power of awareness, and other bodily powers. 
<b>the light of reason</b> -- this is the neshama (higher soul).
Through it man was distinguished from the animals, since they also possess faculties of nefesh.








<b>And he (Solomon) spoke of trees</b> --  he revealed the benefit of each plant and explained for which use it was created.

Chapter 5






the "Aruch" explained that in Greek language, "philosopher" means "one who loves wisdom". The term "philosophy" is derived from the term "philosopher". 















all the changes and variations of circumstances are according to a properly thought out plan to benefit him in his final end and to complete his tikun (rectification/mission) in this world.





<b>This essence is his soul, bound up in him with the body by means</b> -- Behold, the physical and the spiritual are opposites of each other, only that they are joined through intermediate means suited to receive both of them. The Ruach Chaim (spirit of life), which is the nefesh bahamit (lower soul) is bound to the spiritual, namely, the neshama (higher soul), and it is also bound to the natural heat (life force), and the natural heat is bound to the blood, and the blood to the sinews, and the sinews to the bones.












<b>They are more sensitive to its needs</b> -- the parents feel the infants pain and exertion more than they feel their own pain.












<b>illnesses</b> -- such as chicken pox and measles.
<b>painful incidents</b> -- many weaknesses come in the boyhood years.

<b>Be ye not as the horse or as the mule</b> -- they need to be leashed and muzzled, so too man. The painful incidents humble his lusts.














<b>there are servants and officers</b> -- this corresponds to the four powers in the stomach he mentioned. The servants are the organs/limbs and sinews, veins, etc. generally and specifically. On them are four officials which are: drawing, retention, digestion, excretion. 
<b>One of them is charged with the duty of supplying the servants' need and delivering these to the king's steward</b> -- i.e. the man in totality is the king over the body's limbs/organs. The official who receives all income from the king designated for the needs of the servants and deposits them to the steward who collects all goods for this purpose. This official is the power of "drawing" and the steward refers to the stomach, where all food and drink descend there.  
The second official refers to the power of "retention", just like the treasurer of a king manages the property of the king and distributes meat, bread, and wine, or the like according to the needs of each one of the king's servants.  
The third official corresponds to the power of digestion, while the fourth refers to excretion.


<b>forgetting</b> -- i.e. that the matter dissipates from his mind, and it is not constantly held at attention in his thoughts. It remains only as long as he wants to remember it.












<b>to a strict reckoning</b> -- he whose understanding is greater, G-d holds him to a stricter reckoning, because he understands more to guard from sin.

it appears to the eye, that the shadow is something "tangible", since it moves from place to place. But with the understanding, he understands that the shadow is not, rather it is due to an obstruction between the rays of the sun and the place of the shadow. 
Likewise, it appears impossible that a single drop of water, small and weak, can carve a hole in a hard rock. But we can see that if this happens continuously for a long time, on a hard rock, a hole is carved out. The understanding grasps that the drop caused this hole. Because each time the drop fell on the rock, it carved out a tiny amount which the senses cannot detect until many drops like this combine their effects.

































<b>He put the fear of man</b> -- this is due to the spiritual powers in man.


<b>all your movements are tied to the Creator's desire</b> -- the "Moray Nevuchim" Part 1 ch.72 writes that all "motion" found in the world, ultimately started from the tenuat hagalgal (movement in the mystical worlds). For certainly, all the movements and changes of living creatures which are not related to the commandments of G-d are due only to "movements" in the time and circumstances. Hence, the creature depends on the "movement". Likewise, when a living creature moves to seek food, this is due to hunger, whereby the previous food has now been digested and consumed, and this is also a "movement". Likewise, any human desire, or wish comes due to something else which aroused him on this. Hence, everything depends on the "movement". Ultimately, the root of all movements is tied to the "galgal elyon" (upper mystical worlds), which changes the times and circumstances - and the "movement" of the galgal elyon is tied to the Creator's desire. Understand this.  
Hence, remember that every turn which you turn to is tied to the wish of the Creator, except for matters of good and evil.

























It is a nature implanted in man to pursue business dealings and to hoard money in order to give to he who is good before G-d and to strengthen society.






When the thing to buy with them is not available, they are useless, as written regarding a famine: (Yechezkel 7:19) "they will cast their silver to the street and their gold will be worthless..."

Chapter 6


This is one who has a proud spirit, the entire world and everything in it is not enough for him.

Third Treatise on Service of God

Introduction



The powerful man is pained by him and feels the wretchedness of this weak person and that he has no helper.












<b>Could I see any perish for want of clothing or any poor without covering?</b> -- even though the author already brought a proof from Job previously on someone giving charity to receive heavenly reward (and here he is bringing a proof for one who acts out of pity). [Answer:] There he brought a proof from the verse "The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me", namely that it is proper for the blessing of the poor to come on him as a reward for the mitzvah (good deed) he did, since certainly, he also had intent for heavenly reward in giving charity to the poor in the case when he did not feel his pain. For a man is not so moved to feel pity in giving food to a poor person because the suffering of hunger is not so visible to the eye. Whereas here, the verse is speaking of a case where a person is distressed and feels pain on seeing the poor man perishing without any clothing, and the eye sees his predicament, naked and destitute.


<b>who created the benefit and the benefactor</b> -- since all good that manifests in the world comes from G-d's decree.














<b>has created man with deficiencies</b> -- even this that He created man lacking everything, poor and destitute - this is out of mercy for man, in order that he examine his matters and sees his lacking, and that he has no other option than to lift his eyes to his Father in heaven.
<b>so that he may examine all his conditions</b> -- i.e. his intellect will push him to assume the service of G-d after he examines all these things.




<b>the minimum of service</b> -- i.e. the least and minimum service of G-d which a person does not fulfill his obligation less than this.





Chapter 1

From the time a human being is born, the beneficence that G-d bestows on him is apparent, but the time when he will be able to comprehend this good through intellectual inquiry is only after he has matured and is able to grasp intellectual things, to understand wisdom, to examine the greatness of the Creator and His benevolence towards him.

Chapter 2




 i.e. to build, to plant, in all types of acts and works of his, which deplete his strength. And even though there is foolishness in this, that he strains himself for a world which is not his, and it should be enough that he troubles himself only for things that endure for the duration of his lifetime. Nevertheless, it is a nature, which the Creator implanted in the hearts of human beings which is necessary for the propagation of the human race, for without this, the world would be desolate.

<b>common to all living creatures</b> -- even other creatures have a nature to amass and hoard more than their needs as we see by the bees and its honey, and other living creatures.

Chapter 3



<b>fear, hope, necessity or compulsion</b> -- i.e. that this submission comes from fear of hope, which means something which will come in the future, namely, reward and punishment. It pains him that instead of reward, he will get punishment. These things submit him out of necessity and compulsion when he contemplates the contrast, i.e. receiving reward versus receiving punishment instead.
because the soul is joined to the body, i.e. the intellect in the soul causes submission of the body.
<b>one of these leads to the other</b> -- i.e. submission due to fear of punishment and hope for reward induced by the torah leads to the submission induced by the understanding. Because before a person will be straight in his intellectual perception, he was not able to resist the lusts which naturally overpowered his intellect, as the author mentioned last chapter. Only when he has submitted his lusts using the torah way (of fear and hope), then this will cause him to ascend to the submission induced by the intellect. Hence it is like a ladder to it.

Hence, it is possible that he will combine his fear of punishment and hope for reward from G-d with the fear and hope from human beings since he is habituated in this.

i.e. if the soul does something not motivated by reward and punishment, but rather only by willing generosity, such as in the case where a man gives a gift to his friend due to love that he feels towards him, not because he fears him or hopes for some reward in exchange - certainly this is because the contentment he feels that the receiver favorably accepts his gift weighs as much or more than the gift he donated. So too, one who serves G-d out of love, that which G-d desires in his service is [the reward] he receives in exchange for it, and the person who serves thus chooses this exchange more than the toil of his service. 

i.e. for good deeds which are induced by the torah and their cause is hope for reward or fear of punishment, the picture in the man's mind of reward and punishment will only be of a physical character, related to his body, just like he feels now (since he is superficial), and so too will be his service. But he whose service is induced by the understanding and by love, this [reward and punishment] is pictured by him spiritually. Therefore, all of his service is from his spiritual side. Understand this. 

The torah is like an opening and a path to the service prompted by the understanding.
The fear/submission placed in a man's heart induced by reward and punishment is like a seed which is planted. A man's heart is like the field. The torah is like the working of the land, namely, plowing, for the torah teaches the heart which matters bring punishment and which bring reward.




<b>with great strength</b> -- if so, it is more acceptable to G-d, as our Sages said: "according to the difficulty is the reward" (Pirkei Avot ch. 5).  
<b>"and with the help of G-d</b> -- And that which G-d helps on it is an indication that certainly it is more precious in His eyes, and more important before Him. 






Without the torah, the intellect does not understand the benefit of prayer. Because G-d will not change nor be affected by his prayer. And if the man is not worthy of the good [that he is praying for], due to his [insufficient] deeds, how can he possibly entice G-d with his words, and ask before Him to grant him his request? And if he is worthy of the good due to his deeds, certainly G-d will not corrupt justice, and will not withhold support to a righteous man. But from the torah, we see that the forefathers and the prophets (who were exceedingly righteous) were answered in their prayers. And we were commanded on it, and it is a positive Biblical commandment according to that view, as the Talmud (Taanit 5a) expounds on the verse "to serve Him with all your heart": "what service is with the heart? This is prayer". And even though our understanding falls short of being able to grasp its full matter, just like the understanding does not understand other precepts in the torah. Likewise, for the fast which we fast on Yom Kippur which atones for all our sins. And for Tzedaka (charity) as a certain heretic asked Rabbi Akiva (Bava Basra 10a): "if your G-d loves poor people, why doesn't he support them?", etc. until he brought the verse: "Is it not to share your bread with the hungry...[Then shall your light break forth as the morning]" (Yeshaya 58:7), see there. Likewise, tithes and acts of kindliness is because of this. And even though there are many other matters which the understanding cannot grasp, the author took as examples primary pillars that the world almost stands on.

























<b>Its ways are ways of pleasantness</b> -- the ways of commandments in it are ways of pleasantness, many of them are explained by reason; "and all its paths are peaceful" - even he who lacks understanding will be rectified through it, and will complete the service of G-d in fulfilling it, for it is complete. No instruction is lacking in it, even those which depend on the understanding.




















i.e. woe to him for bringing evil on his soul, since he is left with neither torah, nor rational precepts, and he is analogous to the animals of the field, and even worse than them. For then, his soul is singed by matters of the body and its lusts until when the body dies, nothing will be left for it. Rather, his soul will separate and be destroyed like his body and go up like smoke, similar to what our sages said (Rosh Hashana 17a): "their souls are burned and its 'ashes' scattered under the feet of the righteous"

Chapter 4


He was complete with all qualities and traits which bring a person to Ruach Hakodesh (enlightenment) and prophecy, as they said in Sotah (end of mishna ch.9). Fear brings to purity, etc.

<b>kindness, generosity, and goodness</b> -- i.e. the purpose of creating the human race in this world, is only in order to bestow on man kindness, generosity, and goodness - the eternal life of the next world.



<b>associating with G-d either secretly or by flattery</b> -- such as one who serves G-d outwardly, but also has intent in this so that other people will praise and honor him. Hence, he associates in his worship, [two motives: devotion to] G-d and benefit from human beings. Likewise, one who flatters other people in matters of religious worship because he fears them - this person also associates fear of G-d with fear of flesh and blood. 
<b>loving to do that which G-d has forbidden</b> -- that he lusts in his heart to do what the torah prohibits.





he transgresses the commandments of G-d openly due to fear of human beings or love of them.


<b>do not give your strength to women</b> -- for the semen is the life of the body, as the Rambam wrote in Deos 4:19.
<b>Labor not to be rich, cease from your own wisdom" - "Labor not to be rich</b> -- lest you become satiated and rebel against your Maker. 
<b>cease from your own wisdom</b> -- do not say "I will not allow my heart to stray due to wealth".

 i.e. that the torah commanded us to separate ourselves from what is permitted to us, as a fence, or in the way of asceticism. 

<b>The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning</b> -- his heart is broken and he always worries on the day of his death.
<b>but the heart of fools is in the house of merrymaking</b> -- always joyful and good spirited on account of his bodily pleasures, similar to the verse (Yeshaya 22:13) "eat and drink for tomorrow we will die".



On the contrary he will come to love the world even more, because he abstains himself from small worldly benefits in order to attain greater worldly benefits. 
As he wrote earlier in chapter 2, "Secondly, the intellect is a spiritual entity, originating in the higher, spiritual world. It is a stranger in this world of gross material bodies. Sensual lust in man is the product of natural forces and of a combination of his physical elements. Its foundation is in this world, its root in this abode." Hence it is natural that the intellect becomes weak against the power of lust. This is what is written "G-d is in heaven", and if so, the soul within you is like a stranger among the bodily lusts since "you are on earth, therefore let your words be few". Because it is likely that you will allow your mouth to sin and be drawn in your words after the body.




<b>whether it be good or evil</b> (Koheles 12:14) -- whether he benefited himself with superfluous pleasures, or whether he refrained himself and afflicted himself not for the sake of G-d - G-d will bring him to judgment.











































<b>fear the L-ord and the king</b> -- Just like you fear G-d, so too you are under duty to fear the king which G-d has appointed, in His place on the actions of human beings. 














He serves concealed idolatry, namely, he joins the service of G-d with the service of praise and honor, only that it is concealed and other people cannot detect that he serves G-d jointly.
They do not yearn for the bliss of the afterlife, hence they are not able to break their lusts for the reward of the afterlife because they don't understand its bliss, even though they know that there is reward in the afterlife.  
The reason being, because they love this world very much.


each one of the dead flies will spoil and bring up bubbles in the [perfumed] oil until eventually the oil exudes a foul odor. This analogy is to arrogance and pride which bubble inside him and produce hot air until it eventually spoils his service and piety.

Chapter 5


















<b>he does not have the ability to do so</b> -- i.e. that it is impossible for a created being to benefit the Creator, and especially since the Creator, who is absolutely perfect in every way, does not need anything.

Now he will begin to explain the urge of the understanding in the way of questions and answers; How the understanding induces the service of G-d out of love, over the service induced by fear of punishment, whose source is in the nefesh, which feels reward and punishment and is from the aspect of good and evil. The understanding argues with its own source, namely, the aspect of truth and falsehood - to establish the nefesh in the service which is induced from the Understanding.





i.e. how can I know whether the longing in me is true or false?





i.e. even though the stories in the torah and the prophets induced me to the ways of G-d, nevertheless, my longing was lax and false. Unlike now when it has become clear to me through the method of wisdom (rational enquiry).



<b>tranquility</b> -- a mind tranquil and quiet from the worries of the service of G-d.




<b>concentrate your mind...</b> -- i.e. which is the worse evil, to lose one limb or to die altogether?

<b>the pleasures are mixed with griefs</b> -- there is no pleasure in this world which is complete, without worries. They inevitably become increasingly mixed with worries. A human being always longs for what is more. What he possesses is as nothing compared to his heart's desire to obtain more than this, as our Sages said (Koheles Raba 13:1) "no man ever dies having obtained [even] half of his desire". Hence, his desire and grief in what he lacks is greater than what he has obtained. 
<b>its lusts soon cease</b> -- the pleasures of this world and its enjoyments. A man desires and lusts for some matter which he is not able to obtain. And when he does obtain the thing he desired, the thing transforms to being loathsome in his eyes and his lust for it then becomes heavy on him. Understand this.

<b>your strengthened power of perception</b> -- this is the good that you will obtain when you separate [from the lusts] - you will perceive what awaits you in your final end - a pleasure without interruption and without worry. The good that awaits you when separating from the lusts and physical enjoyments of this world is that this will bring you to understand "your strengthened power of perception", i.e. great recognition and intent on your final abode, i.e. after death. When you see just how great your power of perception has been magnified after you have renounced the worldly lusts, all the more so, after death when the body has become completely separated from you.













In every act of his [master's] service, he should not credit himself with good, rather he should think that this service is very petty compared to the service he is obligated to his master. i.e. that [generally] his service be petty in his eyes relative to what he is obligated to his master.

Chapter 6

increased service [in return] for the specific benefits to me which is in addition to the service which all human beings are obligated in.



<b>whoever assumed the service for the glory of G-d</b> -- i.e. even the commandments which the intellect obligates, if he assumes them also because G-d commanded them in addition to because the intellect obligates them - his reward is greater, similar to what our Sages said (Avoda Zara 3a) "one who is commanded and does is greater than one who is not commanded and does...", and even greater is one who fulfills G-d's torah because they are G-d's commandments and dedicates his life on this as we find by the tribe of Levi.








<b>But whoever among them rebels against G-d</b> -- i.e. of the family which G-d has bestowed special goodness above the rest of the nation, and it was proper for them to increase service for this. But instead, on the contrary, they rebelled against G-d, their punishment will be greater.







i.e. when I wish to serve G-d for the good He has bestowed on me, immediately, I start to think that I will do this service and repay G-d so that He will bestow on me additional future benefits as reward for this repayment.


<b>with so little of clear intent to fulfill my obligations</b> -- i.e. what causes me these thoughts is because it appears to my eyes that His benefits to me do not obligate so much service and I can discharge my duty with just a little bit of service.



you forget to thank on the past good for you are constantly preoccupied in seeking future pleasures.
<b>except through your supplication for it</b> -- of that which your heart desires and seeks from G-d, that which appears good to your eyes and your outlook.
<b>and in what you do not know</b> -- i.e. even though it appears to your eyes that the Creator has not benefited you because you do not understand the good He has done to you in refraining from fulfilling your heart's requests. This is for your ultimate benefit, which you will obtain in your final end. The Creator knows that this request [of yours] will have a bad ending.
<b>who has done all this for you from the beginning</b> -- all these benefits without your requesting them, and likewise He refrained from granting your requests in order to benefit you in the future....
<b>your service would be wholly devotional</b> -- to unload all your needs on G-d, and thinking that all that He has done to you - it is all for your benefit according to the decree of His divine wisdom. This is like the saying of one of our Sages (Taanis 21a) "this is also for the best" and (Berachos 60b) "all that the Merciful One does, is for the best".

<b>you neither know yourself nor how to conduct yourself</b> -- i.e. you do not realize how little is your understanding and how petty are your merits, and what [little] benefits you actually deserve for your wisdom (torah study) and deeds.

Chapter 7

<b>which is requisite for the continuance of the Divine bounty</b> -- i.e. through this service, G-d will not remove His kindness and truth from him. 
to not make the good which the Creator has bestowed on him into a destructive tool to sin with, such as a wise man with his wisdom or a rich man with his wealth. Likewise, not to rebel against his Maker due to the great favors similar to (Devarim 32:15) "But Jeshurun grew fat, and kicked." 




if he engages in that good and in its continuance, it will continue by him, but if he abandons exerting himself in it and seeking after it, it will leave him. Rather, he should believe that its continuance depends on the will of G-d and His decree.



He should estimate himself compared to other people whose bounties are less than his, thereby seeing the kindness of G-d towards him, instead of being jealous of those who have more bounties than him.

Chapter 8






<b>Whatsoever the L-ord pleases, that He does, in heaven and on earth</b> -- all the changes in the elements and their synthesis occur by the will of G-d.
<b>The L-ord kills, and makes alive</b> -- hence, life and death of living things also depend on the will of G-d.
<b>the L-ord makes poor and makes rich, etc.</b> -- hence, even the "incidents" on human beings and their benefits depend on Him.
<b>Who is he that says and it comes to pass, when the L-ord commands it not?</b> -- this includes generally all the events and matters which occur to human beings - it is all from the command of G-d.
<b>Out of the mouth of the most High, proceeds not good and evil?</b> -- i.e. who is the rational person which can claim that something can happen in the world which G-d did not ordain? i.e. that G-d did not decree that it shall be so.
<b>Vain it is for you to rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrows</b> -- i.e. the workers will rise up early in vain to their work, and even so, at night they will eat their bread in sorrow.
<b>for so He gives His beloved sleep</b> -- to those who deprive themselves of sleep to toil in torah, the Holy One will give them their livelihood in abundance. From here, we see that G-d rewards human beings according to their good deeds. 
<b>the Creator formed man and other living creatures to fill the world</b> -- to guide the world according to His wish, they are all forced according to His decree.







... the Moray Nevuchim mentions this view in part 3 ch.17 in the name of the group of Metozla which are non-Jews who maintain that the acts of G-d follow His trait of wisdom while the bad we see follow His trait of kindness only that we do not understand His ways of beneficence. Likewise, the good we see by the wicked is really bad according to the divine decree. They maintained that the primary reward and punishment is in the next world...
the Moray Nevuchim also mentions this view in part 3 ch.17 in the name of the group of Ashria which are arabs ... they hold that even though man is forced in all his deeds, nevertheless, G-d gave man the torah to command them despite that man does not have the ability to fulfill it and it is possible that G-d commanded us on the impossible...  
... and according to this view, it is possible, that one who fulfills the commandments will be punished, while one who transgresses them will be rewarded. This is indeed a disgraceful view.
i.e. that the reward comes from good deeds, and punishment from committing bad deeds and rebelling against G-d. This is contrary to the view of the Ashria who maintains the reward and punishment is only from the will of G-d.
<b>in both worlds</b> -- i.e. even though we see a wicked person prosper in his wickedness while a righteous man is destroyed in his righteousness, it should not be difficult to us, since we believe that the primary reward and punishment is in the next world.
<b>at the same time...all things.. happen by the decree of the Eternal</b> -- like the second view. And that nothing is hidden from G-d as Elihu said: "For His eyes are upon the ways of man, and He sees all man's steps; There is no darkness, nor shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves" (Job 34:21-22). And this is what took Job out of the trap of his error, that due to the question of necessity versus righteousness, and pre-knowledge versus free will, he almost turned the plate upside down, to claim that G-d left the universe and does not supervise over this world. The view of Eliphaz HaTemani is the view of our torah, only that he did not know how to answer these questions. Therefore, he steadfastedly maintained that it is impossible for man to be punished unless he sinned. The view of Bildad HaShuchi is the view of the Metozla we mentioned. The view of Tzofat HaNaami is the view of the Ashrias. Job debated with them until Elihu enlightened the eyes of all of them and answered them like the author mentioned, as I will explain. (see also Moray Nevuchim Part 3 ch.23).

<b>G-d has a victorious claim upon us while we have no claim upon Him</b> -- i.e. the human mind has no ability whatsoever to forward a claim against G-d. Because His scope of vision is not like ours, His guidance of His creatures is not like the guidance we utilize for ourselves, His wisdom is not like ours, and there is no comparison whatsoever between them... and as scripture says "For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are My ways higher than your ways, and My thoughts than your thoughts" Isaiah 55:9


so too due to our weak power of apprehension, G-d placed a veil, i.e. the secret, between our understanding and the wisdom behind His providence so it may be easier for us to approach His service. And the more our intellect strengthens, the more we will understand this secret.

Chapter 9




even though you said it is impossible to fully understand this mystery, nevertheless, help me to understand a bit so that I may grasp some understanding of it. And just like your analogy of the sun, where if one's eyes are not so weak, it is enough for him a thin veil to protect his eyes. So too, perhaps I do not need to be completely ignorant of this knowledge. 









<b>who wearied himself in both matters and lost out in both places</b> -- First that he wearied himself in hoarding money and to build buildings in that country which he left to another person. Two, his leaving the country naked and destitute, and his remaining days were impoverished and barren.





to remove from the nefesh bahamit (animal soul) in you the curtain of folly, namely, its animalistic lusts.  
So that G-d may enlighten you with His wisdom.
through this you will be worthy of reward, in that you stood up against your evil inclination and chose good.
<b>He disciplines you in this world</b> -- by bearing hard labor, prepared for every human being, as written: "man was born to toil" (Job 5:7).
<b>by your bearing the yoke of His service</b> -- to subdue your lusts so that you will be suited to take on the yoke of His service.
<b>ye mighty in strength</b> -- who strongly and mightily serve Him.
<b>All this could not have been possible if you remained in your former state.</b> -- i.e. of utter nothingness.























<b>except in certain matters</b> -- i.e. sometimes all your powers are in G-d's hands. He will allow you to do certain things which He wishes and prevent you from doing things which He does not wish. Likewise, for your speech, sight, and other senses. Hence, sometimes G-d completely rules over a person and guides him against his will. 


<b>none of them can contribute anything to your essential being</b> -- i.e. to the rectification of your soul and to your eternal reward.

<b>for they are only things that incidentally affect your body</b> -- what occurs when you eat and drink, namely, the production of blood, flesh, fat.
<b>None of them is necessary for you</b> -- i.e. for what will be beneficial to you in your final end.
<b>Their relation to you...</b> -- i.e. even though you are forced to engage in matters to further your body's welfare, nevertheless, you have no benefit whatsoever from the body and its powers in respect to your essential being. The body is like the embryonic sack, or the egg-shell which is needed incidentally while the embryo is not yet complete. So too your body is needed only for the duration of your stay in this world so that you may complete the matter of your soul.




<b>Take counsel with him in all your affairs</b> -- do not do anything before weighing the matter with your understanding, as the wise man said (Prov. 4:26): "Give careful thought to the paths for your feet".


since he is coming to purify himself, and sees his entire existence in this world in order to serve his Creator, behold, all the permitted pleasures he partakes of this world will also be counted for him as a mitzvah. For he is rectifying and strengthening his body for the service of the Creator. And likewise, the opposite, if he rebels against G-d with his faculties and chases after his heart's evil lusts, behold all his permitted pleasures will be added to his sins, in that he used his body to rebel the advice of G-d.


i.e. since you are coming to defile yourself, behold, all the powers and servants of your body will become habituated to lust for the lusts. And all your deeds will entice you to continue in the joy and gladness [in the lusts] they are used to. Day by day, they will lure you into sin, until your nature and body will tend towards and become ingrained to be disgusted by the service of G-d, and as the verse wrote: "Yeshurun became fat and kicked" (Deut. 32:15). And the sages said (Pirkei Avot 4:2): "sin brings more sin." Behold, he hinted here, that even though the free will is in a man's hands, nevertheless, there is an aspect of necessity and fate. For after, he chose for himself the path of righteousness, behold, all his actions and good deeds will pull his nature and force him towards the service of G-d, as the sages said "mitzvah brings more mitzvah". And the opposite, if in the beginning of his choice, he chose evil, behold, his sins will tend the powers and faculties in him toward animalistic pleasures, until they become habit and ingrained in him as second nature, and draw him by force towards more sin, as if he is forced into them.










what also comes out of this entire discussion of the Understanding is that even though the existence of man is primarily out of necessity and divine decree, according to what G-d implanted in him of powers and dispositions and to whether they will tend towards the good traits or the bad traits due to each person's particular nature, nevertheless, each person has been granted the ability to choose through his understanding and he can transform his traits from bad to good or vice versa. He will continue this theme in the next chapter. Know it well. For it is all precious words, and it includes all that the great and faithful thinkers deeply inquired into of the matter of necessity and righteousness, and foreknowledge versus free will, and everything that follows from this.

Chapter 10


<b>hen you can trust that the pleasure</b> -- i.e. the joy of doing a mitzvah, that we should know that through it, we will attain the delights of Olam Haba, a pleasure which is everlasting, without any mixture of grief. This is to exclude the pleasures of matters of this world which swiftly end and are mixed with grief.

<b>for grief ... everlasting and unceasing pain</b> -- If you see that your evil inclination overpowers you and you are not able to repel it, that is certainly a lasting pain. It is proper to feel grief. And all the more so, if you actually stumbled in deed - and to find solace in this through repentance.  
i.e. to fear something which leads him to something eventually painful and which will not have a good end, and that he does not have the ability to avert that painful thing, even though right now it seems proper, as the wise man said: "there is a way that seems right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death" (Mishlei 16:25). Therefore, one must fear always [to be careful] that his deeds will not result in sin. This is to exclude matters of this world, whereby it is not permitted to fear events. Rather, trust in G-d. On this our sages said (Berachos 60a): "whoever fears is a sinner". 

 i.e. hope which is strength and trust - to busy himself in things whose end is the reward of Olam Haba, even though it appears to his eyes that these things will harm his secular affairs, let him hope to G-d that He will shield him.



i.e. even though you are in a stronger position than he who rebukes and humiliates you, nevertheless humble yourself before him since his intent is to benefit you.
































i.e. when his soul is hungry for the forbidden food or forbidden relation, due to his lust, he will not yet understand the disgrace of this. But after he has done the deed, and his lust is gone, he will lie down in shame on his sin and his punishment is in the next world. 
<b>seeks the truth for himself</b> -- who does not fool himself with false claims.

Fourth Treatise on Trust

Introduction





































He will receive reward for his trust in G-d in the afterlife since placing one's trust in G-d is a big mitzva, as written (Bereishis 15:10): "And Avraham believed in the L-ord; and He counted it to him as a righteousness".





Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3

i.e. even that which a person finds favor and compassion in the eyes of another human being - this is due to G-d's giving the person compassion on that human being towards him.














That a generous man cannot help due to his own power, rather the help is from G-d and the man is just an agent, therefore it is more proper to trust in G-d. 


i.e. That incident did not happen by itself, even though this incident is caused by another incident, and the other incident itself is caused by another incident, and so forth until the first cause - all of them came through a decree from G-d. He coordinated all the incidents in a controlled way. 













i.e. nullify your taava (physical desires) so that they will not lead you to nullify a commandment of G-d, and separate from what is permitted to you, "so that He will nullify the will of others to your will", i.e. so that His providence on you will be greater than His providence on other people, and everyone in the world will yield for your sake, as the talmud says (Berachos 6b) "the whole world was created for his sake only".







Man does not find his food readily like other living creatures which do not need to pursue causes and means.








If everything were prepared for man, he would be idle to chase after sin, also his body's nature and physicality would tend to kick and be ungrateful for the favors of G-d due to the delight in his heart, since everything would be ready before him. He would think that he is deserving of all this and he would not realize that it is from G-d. 










"the witchery of this world" refers to the worldly pleasures which spellbind the eyes of the one who gazes at them until he thinks they are good for him but he does not realize their ultimate end.








He bears his sufferings and is not begrudging towards G-d and accepts them with a good countenance.





























It will not damage that which he is made idle from torah study and service of G-d since this too will be considered for him as righteousness and service

Chapter 4





 i.e. To explain which is the proper way of trust, that can be called complete/flawless trust in G-d versus the trust which is mixed with trusting in something besides G-d such as one who trusts in G-d and also in some means, which would not be a proper and just trust. 







 i.e. even though this person died by putting himself in danger and it was already predecreed by G-d that he would die through this danger and at that time. Nevertheless, he will be punished like one who murders another person, despite that the other person's death was predecreed. Even so, the murderer is guilty. 





















































The sages expounded on the reason - so that a man will always hope to G-d day by day that He will provide his daily bread.




One surrounded by family will benefit from this for only a short time, since either he will have a long life and will see the death of his children and relatives and will be left lonely and in painful solitude or if he will not live a long life, what need does he have for relatives? And this is worse than the first case. 
he left behind all of his work and separated from his mother, father, and all of his relatives and went after Eliyahu. 




Here he added the term "enemies", something he did not mention earlier regarding the man who is solitary or a stranger, because this is the normal way of the world, that the solitary man or the stranger/foreigner due to little worldly association and his low stature has no enemies, unlike the man with a wife, sons, relatives, friends, who has much association in the world and develops enemies due to jealousy.
i.e. to be saved from their burdens, namely, all those things mentioned above that a stranger is saved from.







i.e. perhaps you will say, if the matter is so (that G-d is doing it and the person is only an intermediary) why should I thank a person who benefits me, since he is forced by G-d and does good to me without choice due to the decree of G-d? (Answer:) you are obligated to thank him nevertheless since he is the one G-d chose to cause the good and G-d brings good through the righteous and faithful before Him.







For example, fasting and prayer, perhaps his body will be too weak, or sukka and lulav, perhaps he will not be able to obtain the sukka wood or the lulav.
If a man does not choose to pursue doing good and to refrain from sins, and instead trusts in G-d that He will prepare that good deeds will come his way and that G-d will distance from him the causes which lead to sins - this is a great mistake. 


Or to give charity he needs to have money, and to encounter a proper poor man, etc. These external means are not in our free choice nor in the desire of G-d, but rather occur by encounter and opportunity. Only that for good deeds, there is a bit of siyata dishmaya (Divine assistance) as our sages taught (Shabbat 104a): "if one comes to purify himself, he is helped", but "if one comes to defile himself, he is given an opening" (ibid 104a), i.e. that the means are left to chance.



 And if you ask, how can this be a mitzvah if there was no act done yet? For this he said that the completion of the act is not essential to the mitzvah. Even though the mitzvah is not accomplished, he will receive reward from the choice and resolve to do it. But if the act is completed, the reward is greater, and likewise for punishments of sins.
Lest you ask: "if so, (that in the choice and resolve in the service of G-d, I must not trust in G-d) then also I must not trust in Him for matters of my livelihood. If so, why did the author say earlier that one should "submit himself to the course the Creator has decreed for him...". On this he answered, that there is a big difference between the two. 







That even though it appears good, it is possible that in the end it will lead to destruction, and the opposite, what appears evil and bitter in one's eyes may turn out in the end to be a great salvation. And like our sages said (Berachos 54a): "a person should bless on the bad, like he blesses on the good..."


<b>and with intent to do it for the sake of His great Name</b> -- i.e. with all this, everything goes by the intent as our sages said (Nazir 23b): "a sin lishma (for the sake of G-d) is greater than a mitzvah that is not lishma
<b>to teach us on it</b> -- means to remove the veil of foolishness from our eyes and to strengthen our choice towards Him so that we may also know the ways of His service and by which way we should seek it....















I will give you a place to walk among these (angels) that stand" - means that he will have kiyum (ability to exist) in the world of angels.















<b>it is a kindness of the Almighty</b> -- i.e. to bestow good reward (Olam Haba) to a tzadik due to his own good deeds alone, even if he does NOT teach others and rebukes them. Even though, justice demands that a person be held accountable for the sin of his fellow since "all of Yisrael are arevim (responsible) for each other" (Shevuot 39a) for visible matters (provided one can effectively rebuke the other person) and also since we have been commanded to teach others and rebuke them as a positive commandment. Nevertheless, from the abundant kindness of G-d which has intensified on us, G-d does not withhold his reward in Olam Haba. Likewise, even if one teaches others and rebukes his fellow back to the good, it is still, [strictly speaking,] not enough to merit the reward of Olam Haba which is infinitely great, were it not for His kindness.


Hence the torah and the prophets did not mention the rewards of Olam Haba in the section of the covenant and the rebuke (Parsha Bechukosai, Ki Tavo, Shema) since, according to justice, a man does not deserve this reward, and it is sufficient to give man reward in this world. Hence, the torah only mentioned what is proper according to justice. Similarly, our sages taught: "prophecy was asked 'what should be the punishment for the sinner?', It replied: 'the soul which sins shall die'. 'The torah was asked, etc.', it replied: 'let him bring an Asham (offering) and be atoned', G-d was asked, etc. He replied: 'let him come and do teshuva'. Understand this. And since the torah did not mention the rewards, it likewise did not mention the punishments despite that it is a debt he must pay according to his sins.
G-d's kindness here means that G-d waits for him always in this world and gives him time to repent, and if he repents, even if it is just before his death, G-d will exempt him from the punishments of Olam Haba.







<b>the prophet is addressing worldly people</b> -- means according to their attachment to physicality and physical pleasures which their hearts constantly turn to and seek the good of their bodies and fear what is harmful to it, while the spiritual pleasure or pain which their soul will be subject to in the next world is worth nothing to them compared to the physical pleasure or pain [in this world]. This is like in the Kuzari 1:104...Therefore, G-d mentioned the rewards and punishments in this world according to what they hope for and fear from while they are alive here, namely, while they are attached to the physicality of the body and standing in this lowly world.  
But Yehoshua Kohen Gadol was an exceedingly wise man, pure, and already divested of the desires of physicality and elevated himself to the level of the spiritual. For him, the main reward was spiritual pleasure and he desired it even while still in this world, as explained in the wisdom of truth (Kabala). For this he wrote "Understand this".


<b>that He will pay reward to one who is fitting for it</b> -- One who has perfected his soul by purifying its physical and has become fitting to draw near to the spiritual light should trust that G-d will desire in Him, and will draw His kindness on him in the reward of Olam Haba, even though he does not deserve it due to his deeds. 
<b>and mete out punishment to one who deserves it</b> -- i.e. punishment comes on him through the aspect of justice and is a debt which he became obligated in [and must pay].

<b>and let the fear of Heaven be upon you</b> -- i.e. don't think that just like reward in the next world goes only by the grace and desire of G-d, so too the punishments of Olam Haba are not according to his deeds but only according to the desire of G-d... On this he wrote: "and let the fear of Heaven be upon you", i.e. the fear of punishment from above should nevertheless be upon you since punishment is according to Din (justice) in this world and in the next - not from the aspect of "desire".

To transform the love of this world and its great longing, which is the way of people to long greatly for matters of this world and its pleasures, and transform it with the love of G-d in this way of love.

Chapter 5





<b>all the days of the poor are evil</b> -- "poor" refers to one who is not content with what he has, as the sages said: "who is wealthy? One who is content with his portion."

Fifth Treatise on Devotion

Introduction

 After having demonstrated in the previous gate the ways of trust in G-d, and that trusting in any creation is foolish and useless, that it yields no benefit as derived through reason and through scripture. If so, it is certainly proper to devote all our actions to G-d. This is the subject of this gate.





Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4














 It is an evil sickness of which there is none greater. They will cast off behind them all of G-d's orders and commandments of the duties of the heart, and which are concealed, and will choose, in exchange for them, visible service, which they fabricated from their hearts in order to show off their praise to the public. And the commandments which do not bring them any benefit or honor - they will banish them completely. And many of the masses take them as a proof and an example, and will hasten to do like them. Oy to their souls for they caused themselves evil. 



<b>all the more so, he does not understand how to complete them properly</b> -- to complete the duties of the heart wholeheartedly, without doubts.

Chapter 5


<b>which will teach [even] on things I do not mention</b> -- because there are many more snares, traps, and plans of the yetzer on people which are too numerous to specify. 




<b>You are asleep to him</b> -- i.e. you are like one sleeping who does not think about his deeds and plans against you.




<b>deadly arrows</b> -- arrows which are smeared at their tips with various deadly poisons and venoms, so that when they are shot in the flesh of a man, the wound can never heal and the man will die due to this wound. 












Do not distract your mind by fighting any war besides the war of the yetzer.












Even though it appears at the beginning of your war against him that he is a mighty and powerful warrior, when you stand up to him with a strong hand and an outstretched arm, immediately, he will turn around and run away from you, and like our sages said: "one who comes to purify himself is helped from above"







<b>bad thoughts</b> -- they damage him, as our sages said: "thoughts of sin are worse than sin" (Yoma 21a). And even though a man is not punished for his thoughts, nevertheless, they damage his soul, and they are like snares on his footsteps to bring him to actual sins.





<b>the purpose of this is to induce you to pursue the temporary pleasures</b> -- i.e. in this, the physical nature of man tends quickly towards adopting [this view] because it is an excuse to pursue bodily pleasures...)








<b>naturalists:</b>  these are the sorcerers and necromancers.
<b>worshippers of the stars</b> -- who make offerings to the heavenly forces (angels, etc.), such as in Yirmiya 7:18. This group is better than the previous cases (the atheists), as explained in the Kuzari that the atheist philosophers are worse than the worshippers of the stars. And likewise this is the way of the yetzer to descend from level to level. And likewise the entire matter mentioned on this.
<b>what reason obligates</b> -- i.e. what reason obligates regarding the Unity of G-d, reflecting on His good, and serving Him. Likewise for other commandments which reason obligates and abstinence from (excessive) physical pleasures, in addition to what the torah writes - it is all truth.







<b>with 13 attributes the torah is expounded</b> -- these are all traditions, except for the "kal v'chomer" (major to minor logical inference) which a man can deduce on his own since reason obligates it. But the "hekesh", the "binyan av", and the other attributes, according to Rashi (in Sukkah 31a) a man is not allowed to deduce on his own but rather must have received it from the tradition.

The torah was stricter with matters of the oral law than matters of the written torah. Since one does not incur the death penalty except on specific, known capital offences. But the Zaken Mamre ("rebellious elder" - a scholar who disobeys a decision of the supreme beit din in Jerusalem, which the above verse is referring to), incurs the death penalty for even one detail of a torah mitzva ruled by the supreme Beit Din. And according to the Rambam, even for a part of a mitzva d'rabanan (Rabbinical law) he also incurs the death penalty. 


 Even the places which mention the afterlife do not explicitly explain it and what it is, but rather only hint to it briefly, such as the matters of Karet (cutting off) as our sages expounded (Sanhedrin 4b) [on the verse in Bamidbar 15:31: "Because he has despised the word of the L-ord, and has broken His commandment, that soul shall utterly be cut off; his iniquity shall be upon him"] (the double expression "cut off" in hebrew refers to "cut off" in this world and "cut off" in the next world. And likewise as on the verse (Devarim 5:15): "[Honor your father and your mother, as the L-ord your G-d has commanded you;] that your days may be prolonged", they expounded in Kidushin 39b that it is referring to the day which is totally prolonged (i.e. the eternity of the afterlife).












<b>considered a fool and a simpleton</b> -- in that you don't know of the things happening in the world.



these are the two kinds of enticement brought at the end of chapter 4 of this gate. Until now was the first kind. From now on the second kind.
It is known that through two ways a [logical] proof is established. One, through true premises. Two, through conclusions that necessarily follow. i.e. if there is a foundation of premises which are undoubtedly true, then when the premises are combined with each other, the conclusions that are drawn from them must undoubtedly follow... a spurious and faulty proof is due to either one of the premises is not true or that the conclusion does not follow these premises on proper consideration. This is what the author wrote that the proofs of the yetzer neither the premises are true nor do the conclusions follow.


<b>his enticements on you will be (increasingly) stronger</b> -- at first he comes with an argument of "maybe". Afterwards, he strengthens on you to establish his view as truth.
<b>more imperative</b> -- you will accept his view with great imperative.
<b>because you rely on your mind when you have doubts</b> -- you will rely on him. You think that this is not the acts of the yetzer since he has infiltrated in you with wisdom.



<b>which was near to truth, and where falsehood was still concealed</b> -- the falseness was not visible there, only the truth was visible and the falsehood was concealed inside it.
<b>and descend you to a lower level</b> -- where the falsehood is more visible, and from level to level until you will be confident in yourself and will believe in that which is complete falsehood. 







One benefits from fire if he is far away and it enlightens the eyes. But if one gets close and clashes with it, it burns. So too for wisdom, it is beneficial in being like a candle to the feet of the torah and the religion. Then the light is sweet and good to the eyes of the intellect. But it burns those who enter it to damage and demolish the flames. On this it says "do not stray after your hearts" (Bamidbar 15:39) and in the end they will inherit Gehinom.

<b>but this was in my heart like a burning fire</b> -- Lest you think that one who is very close to the torah also gets burned even if he is good. On this he brought this verse to teach that closeness from torah and yira (fear) is on the contrary, the level of the prophets. The torah only burns those who stray from its paths.











<b>a generation clean in its own eyes, and yet is not cleansed of their excrement</b> -- he sees himself more pure and clean than the early generations and seeks actions to become more righteous than them, but in truth he is not even clean of the filth and waste of nursing babies. i.e. he transgresses sins that are known even to the [talmud torah] children. 












































"<b>If I am not for myself, who is for me?</b> -- These words are directed to the understanding. (Not to the yetzer.) If I don't watch over myself using my understanding to stand up against the arguments and lusts of the yetzer, who will help me, since the free will is granted to me and there is no outside help?
<b>And if I am only for myself, what am I?</b> -- even if I were free from the yetzer in my mind (as the Talmudic saying for emancipation (Gitin 85b): "you are for yourself"), and I could serve G-d according to my knowledge,  
<b>what am I</b> -- would this be enough of an expression of gratitude to the blessed Creator, etc., as he wrote above.
<b>And if not now, when?</b> -- This is corresponding to what he wrote: "what is the measure of my days, etc.", i.e. since all the days of a man and even all the days of the universe do not suffice for the due service, if so, if one wastes one second from the service of G-d, when can he ever repay this?) 













































i.e. let everything be equal in your eyes, and do not differentiate on them, lest they consider you pious, and give you a reputation for being an ascetic and a pious man, whereby you will lose your reward.

























Whether all of a man's matters must necessarily follow only the decree of G-d or whether they depend on the righteousness and the deeds of human beings, as discussed at length in the gate of trust.
If G-d wanted you to be a Tzadik (righteous person), He would have compelled you in this. 



He spoke of this at length in the fifth chapter of Gate 3. There he demonstrated that the foundation of faith is to believe that regarding things which are related to yira shamayim (fear of G-d, i.e. moral issues), free will is in a man's hands. While for things related to worldly matters, everything is bound to the decree of G-d.. only that it is beyond the power of our minds to grasp the depths of this secret and its full explanation. 
He will entice you to adopt the trait of arrogance.
<b>You are unequaled in your generation and singular among your contemporaries</b> -- All human beings in your era are not worthy of you. All of them were created only to serve you and you give life to all of them through your religious deeds.













Which is exceedingly more bitter and evil than any punishment imaginable in this world.







<b>no pain</b> -- these are the words of the yetzer. But in truth, our sages said (Berachos 18b): "The worm is as painful to the dead as a needle in the flesh of the living", but he will tell you: "you do not need to be concerned about that time, rather, only about the time you are on the face of the earth".


<b>unbearable load and remote goal</b> -- it is with extreme difficulty that a man can escape from all sin, hence he is constantly being punished by them.
<b>due to your having clinged to the service of G-d</b> -- i.e. if you did not take on yourself the way of chasidut (piety) and perishut (asceticism), G-d would not have been so meticulous with you. 
 You can see from what scripture says: "with those near Me, I will be sanctified", that to those close to Him, He demonstrates His justice, and is more meticulous with them. 


<b>he will picture in your mind financial destitution</b> -- He will remind you of many people who lost their wealth, and will picture vividly in your mind their suffering, until your heart refrains out of fear.
<b>put poverty before your eyes</b> -- he will picture before you and imagine yourself as if you are walking naked and barefoot, begging for food, if you lose your money.







<b>whether they are permitted or forbidden</b> -- i.e. when the pleasure passed, then the permitted or forbidden are equal to you, and you have no more pleasure from the forbidden than from the permitted.














<b>the study of Jewish laws and the disputes of the sages in them</b> -- i.e. why should you exert yourself in the omek iyun hadinim (depths of talmudic investigation), and to decide with your reasoning between the disputes of the sages, and to insert your head between great mountains. What will you know that they didn't know?



<b>the connection between concealed wisdom and revealed wisdom</b> -- the wisdom of the reasons of mitzvot (Talmud), the wisdom of nature (science), astronomy, and other well known wisdoms, - all of them are connected and linked to the concealed wisdom, namely, the wisdom of Kabbala and inquiry.

Chapter 6








As they said explicitly: (Orach Chaim 1:64) "better a small amount with (kavana) intent than much without intent".  
Even though it is small in quantity, it is large in quality and brightness

Sixth Treatise on Submission

Introduction





Submission is the opposite of arrogance, that a person much habituates himself to be in lowliness of spirit and brokenness of heart, until he can eradicate this strange god which dwells in his heart. The masters of ethics already wrote, and the Rambam quoted them in his Shmonei Perakim introduction to Pirkei Avot: "Even though for all middot (character traits) it is proper for a man to go in the middle way. For example, to not be too hot-tempered nor too soft-hearted, not too stingy nor too generous, and likewise for all the character traits. When a man sees that he is tending too much towards one side, he should force himself to bend to the other extreme until his natural disposition stands on the middle way. The exception is arrogance, whereby one should not seek the middle way. Rather, one should tend himself always towards submission as much as possible. And like our sages said (Avot 4:4): "Be exceeding lowly of spirit..."
that the servant submits to his master, since the primary matter of servant hood is that the servant submits to his master and does his will.


[the attribute] of master hood, in that He alone is divested of the trait of submission unlike any created being, that even though it may have some signs of master hood relative to that which is below it which submits to it, nevertheless it also has signs of servant hood due to its own submission to that which is above it. The only exception is G-d - it is not conceivable to attribute to Him any vestige whatsoever of the trait of submission. Therefore He is the Master of masters.


Submission is the bandage and medicine to excrete from a man the primary great poison hidden inside him, in his physical nature, and to expel from his insides the viper of his animalistic side - namely, arrogance, the head of all sicknesses of character traits, which requires one to bend himself greatly towards the ways of submission until he extracts this affliction from his heart





Chapter 1



Chapter 2





<b>after an elevation of the soul</b> -- i.e. separating from its physical and from the lusts of its animal side.
<b>after rising above being similar to the animals</b> -- above the base traits and pettiness.
<b>from having greater wisdom</b> -- Not out of arrogance rather only out of wisdom and nobility of soul, it is disgraceful in his eyes the conduct of the low people, and attaching with the contemptible.












i.e. the verse is not referring only to a monetary borrower and a lender. Rather it is only a proverb on every thing whereby one person needs to associate with another person for some benefit.

Chapter 3












 In the previous chapter he brought the verse "a borrower is a slave to a lender" for this, because there he was speaking of the duty and that it is proper that the borrower be submissive. Here, however, he is speaking from the side of a cause which pressures him, submits his heart, and lowers his [arrogant] nature. Likewise for all the things in this chapter. Therefore he brought the verse "why should he take your bed from under you?", which is a cause that breaks his heart. 
<b>does not have the ability to redeem himself</b> -- and he sighs from the work and suffers from it.
<b>and becomes submissive towards him himself to his master</b> -- so that he lightens on him his yoke.

Chapter 4



Let the righteous man crush me and the true prophet hurt me for all of his strikes and rebukes are a kindness.




<b>...and he should submit in his heart</b> -- lest he will be punished a greater punishment due to other people praising him.
<b>as written: 'For I relate my iniquity; I worry about my sin'</b> -- so too it is proper for this one to worry about his sins.







the more G-d benefits him, the more he will increase valor in the service of G-d out of fear lest the benefits be greater than his service.
<b>he does not set his heart on this benefit</b> -- he does not rejoice because of it.





<b>Thus, the man is tested</b> -- This is the sign of a test. That G-d tests him on how he will conduct himself with this benefit in the service of G-d.
If he fulfills his debts to the Creator properly it is a sign of a benefit. If he has no benefit from it, since he is perpetually worried about losing money and amassing more money and also is not fulfilling his debts to the Creator properly, it is a sign of a test. 
In the future he will give a judgment and accounting on whether he paid his debts to G-d.  G-d acts with forbearance towards him, and leaves the money in his hand lest he repents and it becomes a benefit to him.
If he is only preoccupied with eating, drinking, and rejoicing in pleasures, it is a sign of a retribution, that he is eating the reward of his good deeds in this world to be destroyed in the next world.

Chapter 5











































<b>The lofty eyes of man shall be humbled...</b> -- Our sages said: "whoever becomes arrogant, it is as if he pushed against the 'heels' of the Divine Presence, since it is written, 'The whole earth is full of His glory'. Says the Holy One: 'I and he are not capable of dwelling together..." (Berachos 43b). This is what the verse means: "the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and the L-ord alone shall be exalted on that day". When the arrogant who push against the heels of the Divine presence are destroyed.

<b>The L-ord lifts up the meek: He casts the wicked down to the ground</b> -- it is clear from this verse that the arrogant are called "wicked". 


<b>people's situations</b> -- i.e. how honor and greatness does not last long. Rather everything changes, the proud are brought low and vice versa.
<b>the swift changing of governments</b> -- not only for small scale greatness, but even for great countries.



<b>the end of all is death</b> -- even during the time of a country's success, the success is not on an individual level, since every individual goes to his place and to the depths of a pit. 

Chapter 6


 i.e. the submission should not be out of poverty of spirit, due to ignorance of one's soul, but rather after an elevation of spirit, from rising above being associated with the animals, as written in chapter 2. 



i.e. in which circumstances is humility proper. This is similar to what he explained in chapter 10 of the third gate that sometimes one must don the trait of arrogance.
<b>cultivate a broad heart</b> -- this refers to the trait of savlanut (forbearance) for one who has a narrow heart is not able to bear any thing.

<b>If I repaid the one who did evil to me</b> -- i.e. if I repaid with evil even to those people who did to me evil, even though human nature tends to take revenge from those who distress him. 


















 That his spirit be esteemed in his eyes, and his soul be high, i.e. that he is a baal taava (insatiably desirous) for matters of the next world, that he always yearn to attain more and more acquisitions in matters of the next world. Because, if his spirit is lowly in his eyes and his soul is meek in matters of the next world, it will be sufficient for him a little good deeds and service and he will tell himself 'who am I that I should raise my heart to go in the matters of the Tzadikim?'





<b>not out of arrogance</b> -- [an example of arrogance:] not wishing to associate himself with those "lesser" than himself.

Chapter 7



i.e. at evil times, he will be silent and will not be questioning of G-d's ways.

Chapter 8





<b>a man cannot be called a slave...</b> -- The term "slave" here refers to a slave acquired with money as he says afterwards regarding a buyer and a seller. The reason is that for this type of slave, the term "slave" applies completely, and he has no trace whatsoever of masterhood because of the principle "whatever the slave acquires belongs to the master" (Pesachim 88b). Likewise, his master is a complete master. Because if this master was himself also acquired by a second master, then his slave would also belong to the second master. And it is known that the slavehood status of created beings is similar to that of slaves acquired with money, as written: "Do you thus give back to G-d, Oh foolish and unwise people? Is He not your Father who acquired you? Has He not made you and established you?" (Devarim 32:6). Hence the term "master" cannot possibly apply to a man since it is not conceivable for a man to own a slave because he himself is already acquired by "the most high G-d, possessor of heaven and earth" (Bereishis 14:19) and therefore "whatever the slave acquires belongs to the Master". 

Chapter 9



Chapter 10








<b>due to his lowliness and humble spirit</b> -- whatever befalls him, does not appear to him to be a decline from his level which is lowly in his mind.






<b>If he was wiser than I, I concluded that he must be more G-d fearing than me</b> -- and that is the purpose of it all, and this is all of a man as written "the fear of G-d is his treasure" (Yeshaya 33:6), and our sages, of blessed memory, said: (Kidushin 40b) "study [of torah] is greater for it leads to action"
<b>since his wisdom is greater than mine</b> -- and as they said (Avot 3:17) "without wisdom there cannot exist fear [of G-d]"










He who makes himself proud is hated by G-d and G-d reduces him to even less than his true level. This is like the allusion in the Midrash (Bereishis Raba 65:11) "an analogy to a province who would call themselves 'the giantons of the king'. A woman had a midget son arrived to some place and said 'my son is a gianton'. They replied to her: 'to you he seems like a gianton but to us he seems like the midget of the midgets.'" (end of midrash). At first they said she had a midget son, and since she said he was a gianton, they reduced him more than his true status and said he is among the midget of the midgets.

Seventh Treatise on Repentance

Introduction


his nature changes, to love something and then afterwards hate it. 

His traits such as anger or contentment, etc. change in him according to his age, place, and habit. 

 and a human being's behavior follows his nature, traits, and [habitual] conduct)


The early sages already said that a man's intellect receives light from the torah, just like the moon receives its light from the sun. This is what is meant "behold, the moon", i.e. it is like the moon, "which has no brightness" - it does not illuminate on its own, because it is a dark mass. Only the sun grants it light. So too the intellect of man does not shine from the side of the physical body. Some commentaries explain the verse to refer to great men - that their righteousness will be shown to be null and void if G-d chooses to judge their deeds meticulously.





Chapter 1


<b>ignorance of G-d</b> -- that he does not realize G-d's awesome greatness, hence he does not care about His commandments. Also, he does not know well the service, how and with what to serve Him.

Chapter 2



For example, one who transgresses in forbidden relations, after he finishes the deed and his desire and lust have left him, he feels the shame and disgrace of his transgression and regrets, as the sages said: "the wicked are full of regret"

Chapter 3

 i.e. that he knows clearly that he did these things. This is to exclude where he is in doubt, that he does not clearly remember the act or the disgracefulness of it, or that he only remembers it partially.







<b>his sin is pending</b> -- the sin is held for him. Justice demands that he be punished immediately for it, only that G-d withholds the punishment and waits until he repents or until his measure is up.

Chapter 4



To never repeat them and to not desire them in his heart.

Chapter 5

The essential components are general principles, while the conditions are branches of them.
The conditions are exceedingly numerous since every penitent needs many tikunim (rectifications) according to the nature of the sin, the nature of the sinner, and the factors which led him to sin. 
<b>the imminent punishment</b> -- the sinner should imagine as if a sword is drawn out for him, and he is being taken immediately to the execution platform to be punished for his crimes. 

To shame and humiliate his soul for ingraining in his heart lusts and bad thoughts.
<b>And tear your hearts</b> -- to abstain from his soul's lusts, and to straighten the crookedness of his heart.
To completely renounce everything the Creator has prohibited, and to remove desire for them from his heart, and not yearn for them at all, just like one does not yearn for something very remote from him. For example, one who has a hundred silver coins will certainly not lust for 1 million gold coins because it seems unattainable to him. How much more so, to not desire for something the Creator has prohibited which should seem even more remote.









<b>realize their enormity</b> -- when he compares his puniness and insignificance relative to the loftiness of the King of kings, the holy One, blessed be He, which he transgressed against.

Chapter 6













Even though repentance always helps, even after the punishment comes, and even in lower levels than this, but that is from the aspect of the kindness of G-d, whereas this verse is referring to the aspect of "wisdom"

Chapter 7


whereas even the smallest of sins, when repeated many times, is considered extremely big.
For the biggest of sins, if he abandons it and beseeches forgiveness, it is not considered anything. 
<b>invites on himself punishment</b> -- invites death on himself.

i.e. even for the smallest of sins, if you persist in it, you are being light with the command and prohibition of the Creator. Know with Whom you are being light.

<b>but rather it is proper to mourn</b> -- since only the Creator knows of them, because then you will receive full punishment. For if people knew of them and shamed you for them, your punishment will already be reduced. This is similar to what the author wrote earlier in Gate#5 chapter 5 regarding when the evil inclination comes from the side of arrogance.

Chapter 8



Chapter 9







Regarding each matter, to do whatever is possible. [Example:] For prohibited food, to afflict himself with fasting, with forbidden relations, to guard from [unnecessarily] looking at women or speaking to them, for Sabbath and festivals, to minimize his [useless] speech or strolling on the Sabbath, for swearing falsely, to not swear even for the truth.

Chapter 10
































<b>all of us hope for the good</b> -- i.e. even though all of us hope for the good, and each person yearns for [the bliss of] the afterlife - the matter does not depend on desire and yearning, rather one must hasten towards it and exert oneself to acquire it. 



























All of a man's labor is for himself. And if in losing his soul he is silent, then what does he desire further in all of his deeds? 
 i.e. is it possible that after my protracted wickedness, and the passing of most of my days in sin, that G-d will accept me in my repentance?! Because it is incorrect, for even one who transgresses all sins during all of his days, but repents in the last one - G-d will have mercy on him. 

To teach you that everything goes by the end of his deeds, for even one who was righteous all of his days but sinned in the end - he will die for the sin he committed.

Eighth Treatise on Examining the Soul

Introduction







Chapter 1


The torah and the world are like opposites, as they said (Berachos 61a) "Oy li mi yotzri, Oy li miyitzri". The proper way is for a man to go in the middle path between the torah and the world, namely, that all of one's affairs in his worldly pursuits do not cross the bounds of the torah's commandments and warnings. Since this is so, behold, all of one's days, a person needs to seek an accounting with himself between the torah and the world - whether he trampled something of the torah for a worldly benefit. 
The account is "between his nefesh (bodily soul/instinct/will) and his intellect" because they are also antagonistic, as mentioned in Gate #3 ch.5 in the debate between them.







From these verses we learn that a man must consider whether he has fulfilled his duty to the Creator for the benefits G-d has bestowed on him.

Chapter 2



Chapter 3













You alone made me and covered me in my mother's belly, a place where there is no light and nothing can reach there.
You drew me and extracted me. The previous verse was evidence on the wonder of the formation in the womb and afterwards (the second) on the wonder of birth.













How can one lift his face to use matters of this world for his own selfish pleasures against the will of the Creator? And since the matters of the world guard their purpose and do not change their nature, which the Creator has set for them, how can one change the purpose the Creator set for him using the matters of this world? 



Parsha Ki Tavo (Devarim 28) "G-d will strike you with 'techorim'...and you will become meshuga (insane)..", that the nature in his body will abandon its post and then many diseases will befall him.




















































The praises and psalms with which we exalt and elevate our Creator along with the acknowledging of His many kindnesses on us are in order that we humble/submit ourselves greatly in picturing His greatness and in what we are obligated to serve Him.
we pray to Him on our needs and troubles, even though nothing is hidden from His eyes, and He knows our needs better than we do, and He provides sustenance to all living things according to its deeds and according to what His wisdom decreed, nevertheless, we pour our prayers to Him in order to feel our great need for Him and placing our trust in Him, as the author writes later in number 18.

































All this refers to deep, Divine matters, close to the level of Ruach HaKodesh. 

due to his strong trust in G-d, since everything G-d does is for the good. 

and he knows that whatever happens to him is a decree from G-d who knows what is good for him better than he does.




<b>what he may claim and what may be claimed from him</b> -- refers to between him and the king.

i.e. do not continue neglecting in thinking that you can continue neglecting making your accounting with the Creator since you see that He did not punish you right away for the previous sin, as if your affairs are hidden from His eyes, and therefore you would like to continue your deeds. 
Likewise, do not think G-d overlooks, and that He already overlooked your previous sin and He will continue overlooking more. 












































Based on the produce that grew from the field, the master calculated how much produce would have grown had he planted all the seeds and claimed the whole amount from him. According to this, the more the ground was fertile and blessed, the more he will be claimed for the loss of potential produce. So too by a man, the more his ability and recognition is greater, the more he will be claimed for loss in the service of G-d. 









If a man commits some sin, certainly no claim or excuse will absolve him from the punishment, like the thief which he brought as an illustration, that even though desperation pushed him to steal, nevertheless he is obligated to pay Kefel, and if he cannot pay, he will be sold for his theft.







Just like in water, when a person looks on it with a friendly face, it will reflect to him a friendly face. So too, for the heart of a man, if he is in goodwill towards his fellow, then his fellow's heart will also be in goodwill with him. 








When you strengthen yourself, and toil hard on this - then you will be illuminated with the light of wisdom.

 Men who are used to iniquity and toil - it becomes their nature, until they do not understand the truth, similar to the analogy of the spider web the author mentioned.



















One who precedes before himself the matter of death, and places it before his eyes always, rectifies himself.

































































































































One who is lazy from in-depth investigation is wiser in his eyes than multitudes who investigate and back up their words with truth and reason.





The fool's aim is only to traverse the road and he is not interested in looking behind him.


that if he thinks to please one of them, the second one, who is jealous of her, gets angry. 





this means to say, more than what you imagine now that your intellect is capable of, because since the soul is spiritual, it can increase for you much wisdom which you cannot imagine, its ability is unlimited, and it is possible to reach with it very exalted levels when you endeavor in this. 




The soul drowns due to excessive physical pleasures, like a man drowns at sea, the physical pleasures are like a torrential flood to the relative spirituality of the soul.

















even though they accepted everything that came to them and did not sin with their tongues, nevertheless their hearts were always grudging against G-d and not desiring in His decrees but were like one who is forced to accept against his will.
and through their lips, they expressed their bad hearts and thoughts, that they did not desire in G-d and in His decrees. 








For a virtuous man, G-d brings him to a test in order that the good in him can come out from potential to actual, and then through the actions he will attain purity and illumination of the soul far more than if his righteousness did not come into actual action and stayed as potential. Through this, his reward will increase. This is the matter of all the tests of the torah.




























to exert himself to earn only for what is enough for himself, since he dwells in a land which is not his, to who will he leave all the fruits of his toil at the time he will leave there?
since one is a stranger in the land, a little favor someone does for him is a great kindness, similar to what Ruth said (Ruth 2:10): "Then she fell on her face, and bowed herself to the ground, and said to him, Why have I found grace in your eyes, that you should take knowledge of me, seeing that I am a stranger?" 

 your matter in this world is the true, most extreme state of being a stranger, more than any possible state of being a stranger in the world; 
here you are by yourself and all alone, no man can help you or redeem you from the time you came to this world until the time you will leave it, as will be explained. 
















 by reflecting much on them, your understanding on their matters will deepen. Like the nature of truth, the more one contemplates it, the deeper one understands it and it comes closer to the heart.
Even though he wrote them briefly, they comprise many matters and branches which can be understood by each person according to his intellectual power and the brightness of his soul.




those who rebuke others on their wickedness, the delight of G-d and the blessing of G-d will come to them, and certainly for one who rebukes himself for his wickedness, his reward will be greater and more intense.

Chapter 4




Establishing of them in one's thoughts means returning to them and reviewing their matters in one's thoughts, time after time.
The darkness which brought the doubts in your emuna which are stuck in your heart.








do not be wearied due to the lengthiness of the introductions, because this is the way of truth, it cannot be clarified except through many introductions due to the depth of its matter.

Ninth Treatise on Abstinence

Introduction







Chapter 1



Chapter 2



to curb the thoughts of the heart and tendencies which are only evil since one's youth, from all the lusts and desires which oppose the (spiritual) soul. 




To remove from oneself what is not necessary since this distracts one's soul.


















 In normal business trade, one who exchanges something for another must know the worth of what he is giving and what he is getting for it. Who is foolish that receives in exchange something which he does not know its worth, and even more so if he does not even know the worth of what he is giving away. [How much more so if] he loses something infinitely valuable for something which is not worth anything.
<b>They exchanged their glory for the likeness of an ox eating grass</b> -- Just like the worshippers of the golden calf exchanged the service of G-d for the service of the golden calf, so too they exchange the service of G-d for possessions of gold and worldly pleasures

Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5

In the previous chapter, he mentioned the marks of abstinence in a general sense, to distinguish between abstinence which is for G-d and abstinence which is hypocritical. Now he returns to explain the ideal kind of specific abstinence which is in accord with the torah. 















<b>equally disgusted</b> -- That it be equal to you, that which the Creator has prohibited, even though it is not disgusting to you, just like something which is disgusting to you by nature. For you will habituate your nature and draw it according to the commandment of the Creator, because since the Creator has forbade them, certainly, it is proper that they be much more inconceivable to you than what your nature abhors, because that [your nature] is from the powers of your body while the commandment of the Creator is from the powers of your soul.

<b>honor yourself through lowering someone else</b> -- seeking that your fellow be lowered in order that you be honored.
until you are not pained in abstaining from this, and you no longer need to force your soul which desires this thing. 

























Scripture correlated the eternal afterlife and the good in this world with the tongue, and also exhorted on it before the other limbs - to teach you that the success of a person in this world and in the next depends on the tongue. 

















Eating brings sleepiness and heaviness of the limbs.






it is the way of those who drink (wine) together to speak slander, and lashon hara (evil speech) due to their drunkenness and joy of heart, as scripture says (tehilim 69:13): "They that sit in the gate speak against me; and I was the song of the drunkards".

Tenth Treatise on Devotion to God

Introduction







Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4






<b>it exists only due to the Creator's strengthening them and His helping them<b> -- except for Avraham, who reached this level without G-d's help because since the Creator tested him in this, certainly He did not help him to attain it.</b></b>



those tests are not comparable to the test of Avraham, because the tests of other pious ones came from other human beings' wickedness and free will on them, and G-d helped those pious ones to stand up to the test, and sanctify His Name, sometimes G-d even performed miracles for them. But in the test of Avraham, however, G-d Himself tested him, and Avraham himself stood up to the test on his own, without help, out of his great piety.