Bartenura on Mishnah Oholot
ברטנורא על משנה אהלות
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Bartenura_on_Mishnah_Oholot
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Bartenura on Mishnah, trans. by Rabbi Robert Alpert, 2022
-https://www.sefaria.org

Bartenura on Mishnah Oholot



Chapter 1



Mishnah 1

שנים טמאים במת אחד טמא טומאת שבעה -the entire Mishnah is explained further on.
אדם הנוגע במת, טמא טומאת שבעה – as it is written (Numbers 19:11): “He who touches the corpse of any human being shall be impure for seven days.” Because he has become a primary source of Levitical uncleanness/ritual impurity, as the corpse is a progenitor of the primary sources of ritual impurity/אבי אבות הטומאה.
אדם הנוגע בו טמא טומאת ערב – as it is written (Numbers 19:22): “[Whatever that impure person touches shall be impure] and the person who touches him shall be impure until evening.” Because he became a secondary source of impurity/ולד הטומאה, has only has ritual impurity until nightfall/טומאת ערב. But the Sages decreed on a person who has contact with a טמא מת/one made unclean through a corpse while he is still connected to the corpse, that he will be ritually impure seven [days] (see Talmud Avodah Zarah 37b).

Mishnah 2

כלים הנוגעים במת וכו' – whether metal vessels or vessels or clothing which require only rinsing in order to be restored to Levitical cleanness and clothing, are defiled like the corpse itself, as it is written (Numbers 19:16): “[And in the open, anyone who touches a person] who was killed or died naturally, [or human bone or a grave, shall be impure seven days].” The person who was killed is like a corpse, and this is the law for all the rest of the vessels. Therefore, vessels that come in contact with the corpse become a progenitor of the primary sources of ritual impurity/אבי אבות הטומאה, but vessels [that come in contact] with vessels ae a primary source of ritual impurity for always second-degree of ritual impurity never become like [those vessels] that are first-degree of ritual impurity.
השלישי בין אדם בין כלים – become first-degree of ritual impurity, and are defiled until nightfall.

Mishnah 3

כיצד ארבעה – vessels that come in contact with a corpse are progenitors of the primary sources of ritual impurity like it (i.e., a corpse). But a person [who is defiled] with utensils [which came in contact with a corpse becomes] a primary source of ritual impurity/אב הטומאה. And vessels [that were defiled by a corpse that came in contact with a person, is also a primary source of ritual impurity, like the person himself, as it is written (Numbers 31:24): “On the seventh day you shall wash your clothes and be pure, [and after that you may enter the camp],” hence you learned that every person who is defiled for seven days of defilement defiles vessels for a defilement of seven days.
הרביעי בין אדם בין כלים -become first-degree of ritual impurity. And the say law applies with “How so- for three?” for one is able to teach that a person who comes in contact with a corpse or vessels with a person are defiled with ritual impurity for seven days; the third, whether a person or vessels are defiled with ritual impurity until nightfall, but from the concluding clause [of the Mishnah] for the fourth who are defiled through contact with a corpse, we understand it, that even a person with utensils that came in contact with a corpse and/or vessels that came in contact with a person is taught that there is a period of defilement for seven days. All the more so, a person with the dead himself, or vessels with a [defiled] person, where there is a defilement of ritual impurity for seven days.
שפוד (a spit) – like a kind of column of metal that is fastened in the tent and upon its end they tie the tent.
אין האוהל מתחשב (the tent does not come into consideration)- because the tent does not defile the spit, therefore it is not considered in the number of the order of the defilements, but rather, all that is placed in the tent of the corpse is like it is touching the corpse itself, and there are only four here. Alternatively, even if the spit is not within the tent, but rather that it touches the tent from outside, nevertheless, the tent does not come into consideration in the number of the order of our Mishnah. And this proved further on/ahead in the Chapter "סכום עבה"/The Thick Coarse Woolen Blanket (Chapter 15), in the Mishnah "טבליות של עץ"/Tables of Wood (Mishnah 2).

Mishnah 4

שהכלים שלשה – as for example vessels that came in contact with a corpse and vessels [that came in contact] with vessels. And further, vessels are third [degree of ritual uncleanness [which came in contact’ with vessels that are second [degree of ritual uncleanness], all are impure.
והאדם שנים – as for example, a person [who came in contact] with a corpse and a second person [came in contact] with that person that was defiled [through contact] with a corpse. But a third person who has third [who came in contact] with [a person] with second [degree of uncleanness] is ritually pure.
שהוא באמצע – as for example, vessels and a person and vessels. For the fourth, whether it is a person or vessels defiles until nightfall, as we learned from our Mishnah above (see Mishnah 1).

Mishnah 5

מטמא בגדים – all of this that is not explained [in the Mishnah] as it is written (Leviticus 15:7): “Whoever touches he the body of the one with the discharge shall wash his clothes, [bathe in water, and remain impure until evening],” so we see that he defiles [his] clothing at the time of his contact with the one with the discharge/the person who has gonorrhea.
ואין הבגדים הנוגעים בזב מטמאין בגדים – because the person with the discharge/gonorrhea is a primary source of Levitical uncleanness/אב הטומאה, and the clothes that touch it become first [degree of ritual uncleanness]. But they do not defile other clothing, for a person and vessels do not become susceptible to receiving defilement other than from a primary source of ritual impurity.
והבגדים הנושאין את הזב מטמאין אדם – as for example, lying and sitting of a person with a discharge/gonorrhea which defile a person because they become a primary source of ritual impurity like the person with a discharge/gonorrhea himself As it is written (Leviticus 15:10): “Whoever touches anything that was under him shall be impure until evening.”
ואין אדם הנושא את הזב מטמא את האדם – and even at the time that he carries him prior to his separating. For he is aught other than first degree of ritual impurity and a nothing that is first [degree of ritual impurity] can defile a person.

Mishnah 6

עד שתצא נפשו – as it is written (Numbers 19:13): “Whoever touches a corpse, the body of a person who has died, [and he does not purify himself, defiles the LORD’s Tabernacle; that person shall be cut off from Israel. Since the water of lustration was not dashed on him, he remains impure; his impurity is still upon him],” that Scripture comes to teach that a person does not defile until he dies.
מגוייד (he who had his arteries opened, bled to death) – cut piecemeal, the language of (Daniel 4:11): “Hew down the tree.”
זוקק ליבום – all the while that he is rapidly passing away/lying on his deathbed, his sister-in-law (i.e., widow of his brother who died without issue) is forbidden to get married
ופוטר מן היבום – if he (i.e., the brother-in-law) died, and he left a son who is rapidly passing away. His wife is exempt from Halitzah/the ceremony that frees the widow of a man who died without children from the obligation to marry one of her deceased husband’s brothers and allows her to remarry [through the removal of a special sandal from the foot of one of her deceased husband’s brothers].
ומאכיל תרומה – if the mother of his mother is an Israelite who was married to a Kohen (see also Mishnah Tractate Yevamot, Chapter 9, Mishnah 5).
ופוסל – he invalidates his mother from [partaking of] the heave-offering/priest’s due if she is the daughter of a Kohen married to an Israelite.
וכן בהמה וחיה אין מטמאין- the ritual impurity imparted by an unslaughtered carcass, until their souls depart
כזנב הלטאה (like the tail of a species of lizard) – meaning to say, what is this spasmatic movement (jerking motion) similar to? To the tail of a species of lizard.

Mishnah 7

האיברים – there must be upon them flesh and sinews and bones and through this it is considered a limb. And we are speaking of whether the limb was detached from the living or whether a limb from the dead.

Mishnah 8

פיסת הרגל (the foot to the ankle) – the sole of the foot is the foot.
ששה בכל אצבע -for five fingers, which are thirty.
קרסול (ankle) – It is the Aramaic translation of כרעיים/leg, (see Leviticus 11:21): “[But these you may eat among the all the winged swarming things that walk on all fours:] all that have, above their feet, jointed legs [to leap with on the ground,” קרסולי. It is the place of the connection of the foot and the foreleg.
קטלת ([club-shaped], the thigh with the knee-pan)- above the top of the knee.
בקנה (forearm) – he bone that is connection to the hand. From the language (Ezekiel 40:5): “The rod that the man held [was six cubits long, plus one handbreadth for each cubit],” that with it they measure the cubit.
מרפק (elbow) – KODO in the foreign language.
מאה ואחד מזה – that all that he counted until now was from one side from the body, such as for example, one hand and one leg and one rib.
מפתח של לב (valve of the heart) -this is the chest. That because of the movement of the chest, the lung causes to blow on the heart, it is found that the chest opens the path that from it the air enters in and goes out to the heart.
בנקוביו (the perforations/organs of the extremities) – the testicles and the membrum virile.
בשר כראוי (when there is an appropriate amount of flesh) – in order that it will rise up in length and be healthy (see Tractate Kelim, Chapter 1, Mishnah 5), if it is connected to a living person.
ואין מטמאין באוהל – for defilement from a tent is not other either with a complete person, as it is written (Numbers 19:14): “When a person dies in a tent,” or with a limb that is similar to a person, as it states (Numbers 19:16): “or human bone,” just as a human being that has flesh and sews and bones and defiles in a tent, even a limb that has flesh and sinews and bones defiles in a tent.

Chapter 2



Mishnah 1

אלו מטמאין באוהל, המת וכזית מן המת -and if this is difficult, an olive’s bulk of a corpse defiles, from that which is defiled from contact with the dead, all the more so, this matter is resolved in the Gemara in [Tractate] Nazir [50a, it is needed only for [the case of] a premature/non-viable birth whose limbs were not connected with sinews as it lacks an olive’s bulk of flesh.
נצל (decayed matter – liquid and coagulated portions of a corpse) – the flesh of a corpse that swelled up like a kind of ill-smelling secretion.
מלוא תרוד (A tarvad/spoon-full of dust) – a spoon, and its measurement is two handfuls.
רקב – the body of a corpse when its moisture has departed and it becomes like a kind of dust. But a handful of a a mass of earth from a grave containing parts of a decaying human body doesn’t defile other than from a corpse that was buried naked in a coffin/bier of marble and covered with a covering of marble, until it is known with certainty that there is combination of decayed matter of cloth or wood or other dirt. But a corpse that was buried in its covering or in a wooden ark or in dust, has no decayed matter. And similarly, a corpse that was buried missing a limb has no decayed matter.

אבר מן המת ואבר מן החי – as it is written (Numbers 19:16): “[And in the open, anyone who touches a person who was killed or who died naturally,” a limb that the sword separated from the living is like the corpse.
ורובע עצמות – one quarter of a Kab (i.e., 24 egg-bulks) of bones.
מרוב המנין או מרוב הבנין – My Rabbis/Teachers explained, that they are small/minute from having in them the majority of the number [of bones] and/or the majority of the frame, for even though that they don’t have the majority of the number [of bones] nor the majority of the frame, they defile.
ורוב בנינו ורוב מנינו (the greater portion of a corpse as to the size of limbs and the greater number of joints/limbs)– the majority of the frame of the body, or the majority of the number of the bones even though it is not the majority of the frame of the body, they defile, and even though there isn’t a quarter [of a Kab] in them. And the majority of the frame, such as the legs and the thighs/haunches, and the ribs [and the spine]. And the greater number of joints/limbs, such as the tops of the fingers of the hands and the feet, and similar kinds of things to them, and provided that there will be one-hundred and twenty-five limbs, they defile.

Mishnah 2

רביעית דם (a quarter-LOG of blood) – that all of it left [the body] after death.
ורביעית דם תבוסה (a quarter LOG of blood that flows from a person at the time of his death or afterwards – which has the status of a corpse) – that part of a quarter [of a LOG] of blood while living and after death. And further ahead in Chapter 3 [Mishnah 5], it explains this.
תבוסה – it is the language of (Ezekiel 16:6): “[When I passed by you and saw you] wallowing in your blood, [I said to you: [Live in spite of your blood’].” And the quarter [of a LOG] of blood all of which exited [the body] after death, is from the Rabbis, as it is written (Numbers 19:13): “[Whoever touches] a corpse, the body of person who has died. 
But [the concept] of דם תבוסה/that part of a quarter [of a LOG] that flows from a person at the time of his death or afterwards. For the Rabbis hold that there is "יש אם למסורת" /the consonantal text of the Torah is authoritative [when looking at Leviticus 21:11): "ועל כל נפשות מת לא יבא"/He shall not go in where there is any dead body,” [the word] נפשת/dead, is written defectively (i.e., without the letter “Vav” In it).
רבי עקיבא אומר משני מתים – one-half of a quarter [of a LOG of blood] from this dead person and one-half of a quarter [of a LOG of blood] from another dead person, defiles in the tent, for he (i.e., Rabbi Akiba) holds, "יש אם למקרא"/the vocalized text of the Torah is authoritative, [as the Biblical verse from Leviticus 21:11) is pronounced: "נפשות מת"/any dead body, implying two souls and one measurement, for since it does not state [in Scripture] "נפשות מתים"/dead bodies. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Akiba.
ר' עקיבא אומר כל שהוא – just bones defile with the majority of the number of bones and the majority of the frame, even though one-quarter of a Kab which is the designated measurement for bones, so also, it is defiled if the blood of minor – all of which exited the body, even though it doesn’t have the quarter [of a LOG] which the designated measure for blood.
וחכמים אומרים רביעית – if you were to say that with the bones that it is known that all of them are in front of you, shall you say regarding the blood that I state that there remains a drop of any amount and that not all of it has come out? But the Halakha is according to the Sages.
כזית רמה –[a olive’s bulk of a worm] that was born in the flesh of the corpse.
מטמא כבשרו – that a room that comes out from the corpse even while living, is considered to be like the flesh of a corpse, because, a person while alive is called a worm, as it is written (Job 25:6): “How much less man, a worm, [the Son of man, a maggot].”
וחכמים מטהרים – And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
אפר שרופים – a person that was burned and became ash, and the ash of wood was not combined in it.
שעורו ברובע – [a quarter] of a Kab of ash, defiles.
וחכמים מטהרי – And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
עפר קברות – dirt that the blood and moistness of the corpse is mixed in. And a spoonful of dust and a bit more is impure, because it is impossible to fill a spoon and a bit more so that there would not be in it a spoonful (i.e., two handfuls) of the body of a corpse when its moisture has departed, that it stated above (i.e., in Mishnah 1 of this chapter) that this is impure, But here, it also speaks of a corpse that is buried naked in a marble coffin/bier which has other dirt mixed into it.
ר' שמעון מטהר – But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.
אימנו חיבור לטומהא – for if it had overshadowed over part of it, it is not as if it overshadowed over all of it. And similarly, regarding the matter of contact/touching.

Mishnah 3

עצם שעורה – defiles through contact and through carrying, as it is written (Numbers 19:18): “[A person who is clean shall take hyssop, dip it in the water, and sprinkle on the tent and on all the vessels and people who were there,] or on him who touched/ועל הנגע [the bones or the person who was killed or died naturally or the grave,” but there it does not state, "בעצם אדם"/human bone (as we find in Numbers 19:16). [This comes] to teach about the bone the size of a barleycorn that defiles through contact even though it is not recognized that it of a human being. But in the tent, it is written (Numbers 19:14): “When a person dies in a tent,” and with regard to a bone for the matter of defilement through overshadowing in a tent, we require that it is recognized that it (i.e., the bone) is of a human being, for in another place (Numbers 19:16) it (i.e., the Torah) states, “or human bone”/או-בעצם אדם.
וארץ העמים – Everything that is outside of the Land [of Israel] is called ארץ העמים/the land of the nations [which is ritually impure]. And here we are speaking of a clod/lump of dust that comes from outside the Land which defiles through contact and through carrying but does not defile though overshadowing in a tent. But a person who enters the land of the nations, even if he did not touch nor carry anything, as for example, that he was riding upon a horse, is impure, but on the airspace of the land of the nations they (i.e., the Rabbis) also decreed.
בית הפרס (area in which uncertainty exists concerning the location of a grave or a corpse) – a field in which a grave was plowed and the bones of the corpse were broken and threshed in the dirt of that field. [And the word] פרס from the language of פרוסה/a broken piece (Isaiah 58:7): “It is to share your bread with the hungry.”
כמה חסרון בשדרה (how much is a sufficient lack in the backbone) -that it will not be defiled [through overshadowing] in the tent, but rather through contact and through carrying.
כמלא מקדח (as large as the hole made with the large carpenters’ borer/drill) – as wide as the incision that they make with an awl.
כדי שינטל מן החי וימות – and the Sages estimated the loss as equivalent to a Sela.
בקטן של רופאים – with a small awl that the doctors open up the wounds.
בגדול של לשכה (concerning the large one of the chamber) – that the Sages estimated as an incision like the size of a Pundiyon.

Mishnah 4

הגולל (the stone placed on top of a burial cave/top-stone) – a large and wide stone that they seal/stop up the mouth of the grave from above. [This is] from the language of (Genesis 29:3): “[When the flocks were gathered there,] the stone would be rolled [from the mouth of the well and the sheep watered.]”
דופק (the frame supporting the movable stone of a tomb -against which the turning body knocks) -two large stones, one from this side and the another from the other side, so that the stone placed on top of a burial cave rests upon them.
מטמאין במגע ובאהל – as it is written (Numbers 19:18): “or on him who touched the bones or the person who was killed or died naturally or the grave,” just as the corpse defiles through contact and through overshadowing in a tent, even the grave defiles through contact and through overshadowing in a tent.
ואינן מטמאין במשא that we expound (Numbers 19:16): “And in the open, anyone who touches a person,” to include the stone placed on top of the burial cave and the frame supporting the movable stone of a tomb (i.e., גולל ודופק), and it is written: (Numbers 19:16): “anyone who touches,” because of contact he defiles, but he does not defile because of carrying
אם יש תחתיהן עפר קברות – which defiles through movement, because of the dirt that is moved with them when it defiles through carrying, because of the holding of the corpse. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehoshua.
דופק דופקין (but the frame supporting the frame stones) – near the frame supporting the movable stone of a tomb, they sometimes place another stone to support it and the stone placed on top of the burial cave is not leaning upon it, and this called דופק דופקין/the buttress/frame stone of buttressing stones.

Mishnah 5

ואלו אם חסרו טהורים – for they lack the according to the measurement.
כזית מן המת – for such is the beginning of the creation of a human with an olive’s bulk.
ורביעית דם – since but at the beginning of the creation of a minor, he has less than a quarter [of a LOG] of blood.
ואבר מן החי שחסר עצמו (the limb of a living person that is missing his bone) – even a marrow-bone/thigh-bone that is missing from him any part of it does not defile because a limb from a living being, but if is missing from his flesh, it always defiles until he is lacking enough to produce new flesh [on a healing wound]. But a limb from a corpse, is an olive-bulk’s worth of flesh that separates from him, is impure, and a wone like that of a barley-corn that separates from him is also impure.

Mishnah 6

השדרה והגולגולת משני מתים – half of the vertebrae of the spine from this corpse and half of the vertebrae of the spine from another corpse, the skull.
ואבר מן החי משני אנשים – half of a limb that is torn off from this living person and half of a limb that is torn off rom another living person, and they appear as one limb.
וחכמים מטהרין -from defilement by overshadowing in a tent. But they defile through contact and carrying because of a bone the size of a barleycorn. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 7

שנדקדקו (that were crushed/powdered) – that were ground. It is the language of (Exodus 30:36): “Beat some of it into powder, [and put some before the Pact in the Tent of Meeting].”
ר' שמעון מטהא – from all defilement. And they do not defile neither through contact nor through carrying nor through overshadowing in a tent.
וחכמים מטמאין – with all of them [they defile], as there is a quarter [of a LOG].
אבר מן החי שנחלק לשנים טהור – and even if he went back and reconnected them, but the connections of a man are not a connection/attachment.
שניטל חצאים (if it was taken away by halves) – that it was taken from the living person by halves, but not taken from him a complete limb as one, for there was never a measurement for it. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.

Chapter 3



Mishnah 1

כל מטמאין באוהל – that are stated above at the beginning of chapter two [Mishnah 1].
שנחלקו – their measurements [were divided] in half.

לתוך הבית – that is within one tent.
רבי דוסא בן הרכינס מטהר – for he holds that they do not combine to make up according to the measurement.
הנוגע בכשני חצאי זיתים מן הנבילה – at the opening of the tent, and separates them from the carrion, to state to you, that just as that Rabbi Dosa holds that they don’t combine for defilement through the overshadowing of the tent, here also he holds that they don’t combine for defilement of contact and for carrying, whether regarding a corpse or whether regarding a carrion.
הנוגע בחצי זית ומאהיל על חצי זית (he who touches half an olive’s bulk and overshadows over half an olive’s bulk) – that the person who overshadows over corpse, is impure as if he was with the corpse in the tent. And in the Gemara [Tractate Hullin, chapter 9] in the chapter העור והרוטב/The Hide and the Broth [of the Meat], folio 125b, it maintains that the overshadowing of the tent in the first clause [of the Mishnah] are pressed ritual impurity (I.e., a corpse or part of a corpse located beneath a roof or a covering imparts ritual impurity only to objects beneath that covering; anything above the covering remains ritually pure if there is a handbreadth between the corpse and the roof or covering), for there isn’t between the defiling agent/defilement less than a handbreadth, and because of this the Sages declare it impure, for all of it is touching/contact. But the concluding clause [of the Mishnah] that stated: “But a person who is in contact with half an olive’s bulk and another thing overshadows him”/אבל הנוגע בכחצי זית ודבר אחר מאהיל עליו וכ' -that the Rabbis agree that it is pure, we are speaking of when there is an opening of a handbreadth between the defilement and between the tent. And in this the Rabbis agree that they do not combine, for touching and the tent are two categories, and those things that are from two categories do not combine. But Rabbi Dosa holds that even with pressed ritual impurity/טומאה רצוצה they don’t combine, and not even for contact [with one half of an olive’s bulk] and the contact of the tent [with one half of an olive’s bulk]. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Dosa.
אמר ר' מאיר אף בזו ר' דוסא מטהר וחכמים מטמאין – Rabbi Meir disputes with the first Tanna/teacher [of the Mishnah] who stated that when there is an opening between the defilement and the tent of a handbreadth, the Sages admit that it is pure, and that they don’t combine, but he himself said, that even in this the Rabbis dispute with Rabbi Dosa who state that the contact/touching and the tent are one category, hence they combine to make up the measurement and they defile But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Meir.
חוץ מן המגע עם המשא – as for example, that he touched half of the olive’s bulk and he moved a half an olive’s bulk.
והמשא עם האוהל- that he moved half an olive’s bulk and overshadowed with a tent over half an olive’s bulk.
משם אחד – as for example, touching and touching, carrying and carrying, tent and tent.

Mishnah 2

מלא תרווד רקב (ladleful of corpse mold) – that we stated above at the beginning of Chapter Two [Mishnah 1] that it defiles in a tent.
שנתפזר לתוך הבית – and it was combined with whatever an amount of dust.
ור' שמעון מטהר – he holds that its end is like its beginning, that just as at its outset if the corpse is buried in burial shrouds or in a wooden casket/bier, it has no mass of earth from a grave containing parts of a decayed human body/רקב, for we require that there will be nothing folded/rolled with him, even its end, after it had become became a mass of earth from a grave containing parts of a decayed human bod, if something else combined with hi it doesn’t defile. But the Halakah is not according to Rabbi Shimon.
אם מתכבסת הכסות ויוצא ממנה רביעית דם – and how do we measure it? He brings water in a measure and washes it, and he brings other water according to that measure and places in it a quarter [of a LOG] of blood. If their appearance is equivalent, this is defilement, but if not it is ritually pure.

Mishnah 3

נשפך באויר – within the house.
אם היה מקומו קטפרס (if the place where he was standing was sloping) – if the place where the blood was split was a declivity/slope.
והאהיל – and a person [overshadowed] over a part of it.
טהור – for a slope is not a connection.
היה אשבורן (a cavity for the reception of water) -a place where it is gathered, like within a hole/indentation.
או שקרש (or it congealed/became solid) – the blood and even the sloping place, it is a combination and it is impure, and even if it overshadowed over part of it.
נשפך על האסקופה (if it was poured on the threshold/lintel) – like a kind of balcony/portico that is in front of the opening of the house.
והיא קטפרס בין מפנים that tilts towards the inside.
בין מבחוץ – that tilts towards the outside.
והבית מאהיל – upon part of it. טהור – everything that is in the house from the defilement of the overshadowing of the tent, even though that ultimately the blood will descend inside, it is not a connection.
חוץ מן השינים והשער והצפורן – as it is written (Numbers 19:16): “or human bone, or a grave, shall be impure seven days],” just as the bone which was created with it, and its stump/that which is cut does not grow again, even all that are created with it, and its stump/that which is cut does not grow again. They excluded teeth which sere not created with, they excluded hair and fingernails that when they are cut, do grow again.

Mishnah 4

הבית טמא – all that is inside [the house] is impure, for it overshadows on the hair that is connected to the corpse.
עצם שיש עליו כזית בשר – the bone is considered a handle for the flesh.
תחובים בידי אדם – for the flesh is not connected to the bone from its essence, but rather a person inserted it thee in the manner that we insert the flesh on a spit.

Mishnah 5

איזהו דם תבוסה - it is referring to our Mishnah above in Chapter 2 [Mishnah 2], which teaches that a quarter [of a LOG] of blood that flows from a person at the time of his death of afterwards is ritually impure, and it explains here what is “mixed blood”/דם תבוסה/blood that flows at the time of death or after
שמינית בחייו ושמינית במותו – they combine to [form] a quarter [of a LOG of blood].
רביעית בחייו ובריבית במותו – that they combined and he took from the mixture a quarter [of a LOG] of blood, this is “mixed blood.” But not one-eighth [of a LOG] during his life and one-eighth [of a LOG] after his death.

כמים – and they do not defile.
ואיזהו דם תבוסה – that is impure.
צלוב שדמו שותת (a crucified person whose blood flows gently/gushes forth) – and falls without any interruption, because the drop of death is mixed in it. But dripping, that if falls drop by drop, little by little is nullified and it is pure.
רבי יהודה אומר לא כי – meaning to say, the matter is not like this.
אלא השותת טהור – that I state that drop which the soul is dependent upon stood on the wood that it is suspended from, but there isn’t in this drop the last drop of death.
והמנטף טמא – we don’t say that little by little is nullified, for Rabbi Yehuda holds that blood does not nullify blood. But the Halakha is according to Rabbi Akiba.

Mishnah 6

כזית מן המת פתחו בטפח – the corpse that is in the house and it has many openings, all the vessels that are placed in the cavity of the openings underneath the lintel/cross-piece of the opening from the outside, even though the openings are locked, and there is an interruption between the tent of the corpse and the tent of the vessels, all of them are impure. For the Sages decreed that defilement on a place which is the exit path of defilement that ultimately is of a corpse to exit there, and when we don’t know which path he will remove it, all of them are impure. But if there is an olive’s bulk from a corpse in the house and he intended to remove it through the window that has an opening of a handbreadth, he protects all of the locked openings since he knows the place that ultimately the defilement will leave in that path, but if it is entire corpse and he intended to remove it through the window that has four [handbreadths], he protects all of the locked openings for with the measure of four handbreadths, the Sages estimated that it is appropriate for the removal of the corpse.
אבל להוציא את הטומאה בפותח טפח – even a complete corpse, its defilement departs through the window all the time that it is open, and defiles the vessels that are in the house that are at its side if there is a window that is open a handbreadth.
גדול מכזית כמת – specifically like a pressed-in olive’s bulk, its opening is with a handbreadth. But more than an olive’s bulk, its law as is it was a complete corpse, and it doesn’t protect over the locked openings until there would be four [handbreadths].
רבי יוסי אומר השדרה והגולגולת - that in his Bet Din/court, it is like a complete corpse, and if he intended to remove them through a window, it does not protect the locked openings until there would be four [handbreadths]. And such is the Halakha.

Mishnah 7

טפח על טפח על רום טפח – a board/plank which is a handbreadth wide by a handbreadth [long] and above from the ground a handbreadth, and overshadows over an olive’s bulk of a corpse or on vessels, brings the defilement on to the vessels.
מרובע – that if its width was less than that of a handbreadth, even though its length was two handbreadths, we don’t say – place what remains from its length upon its width and make it quadrilateral. For this, it (i.e., the Mishnah) teaches "מרובע"/cubic, that there must be in its width a handbreadth and in its length a handbreadth.
כיצד – meaning to say, how does it interpose before the defilement/uncleanness?
ביב שהוא קמור (a drain/pipe/gutter which is arched) – digging in the ground and its foundation, that is arched and there the waste-water (i.e., that which is poured in the gutter) that is in the house descends and from there exits to the public domain.
יש בו פוחת טפח – that is a handbreadth by a handbreadth at the depth of a handbreadth in the drain/gutter itself.
וביציאתו – in the opening of the drain/gutter that from it the waters go out to the public domain.
טומאה בתוכו – if there is an olive’s bulk from the corpse within the drain, for the olive’s bulk from the corpse its opening is with a handbreadth.
הבית טהור – that the defilement/uncleanness leaves through the opening of the drain that goes out to the public domain. And this is what is taught [in the Mishnah]: "חוצץ בפני הטומאה"/interposes before the uncleanness.
טומאה בתוך הבית הביב טהור – for there is no path for the uncleanness to bring it in through the opening of the drain, for the path of the uncleanness is to remove it through the opening of the house but not to bring it into the drain.
ואין ביציאתו פותח טפח טומאה בתוכו הבית טמא – for the uncleanness/defilement goes up from the drain to the house since it lacks a path to leave through the opening of the drain that goes out to the public domain, for all that is less than a handbreadth the defilement/uncleanness does not leave.
אין פו פותח טפח ואין ביציאתו פוחת טפח – it is is taken for naught for there isn’t in its outlet an opening of a handbreadth, for since it lacks an opening of a handbreadth, on its outlet we are not concerned,, for it is as if there is like there is no cavity at all and the drain is considered like the ground of the house, and the Sages stated: All that is in the tent will be defiled, including the bottom/ground of the house which is like it until the depth/interior of the earth.
אחד חור שחררוהו מים – this that is open a handbreadth that brings the defilement/uncleanness, there is no difference if this hole was made through the water or that reptiles/insect perforated it.
או שאכלתו מלחת (or a cave formed through saline corrosion) – the language of )Jeremiah 17:6): “In a barren land without inhabitant.” It is like white dust similar to salt and it consumes and falls and makes a hole on its own.
מרבך של אבנים (an irregular pile of large stones) – large stones that are arranged and set up one on the other. But sometimes it is arranged on two [stones] and the lower ones are separated from each other and there is a tent [overshadowing] a handbreadth.
סואר של קורות (a pile/frame of beams) – beams that are set up on top of the other that stand ready for building, but sometimes there is between them a tent overshadowing a handbreadth.
כל שאינו עשוי בידי אדם אינו אוהל – which we derive through an analogy/Gezerah Shavah from [the comparison of the usage of the word] אוהל (Numbers 19;14: "זאת התורה אדם כי ימות באוהל"/This is the ritual: When a person dies in a tent”) and אוהל (Exodus 40:19; "ויפרש את האוהל על-המשכן"/He spread the tent over the Tabernacle”), just as there (in the Tabernacle) it was done at the hands of a person, so also here (regarding the defilement of the corpse) at the hands of man.
בשקיפים (clefts) – It is the Aramaic translation of (Isaiah 57:5): “Among/under the clefts of the rocks,” the clefts of the rocks
ובסלעים – in the clefts of the stones/rocks, and the שקיפי and נקיקי הסלעים are one and the same, but one was made through the rain and the other was made on its own. But even though they were not made at the hands of man Rabbi Yehuda agrees/accepts them, for he does not derive the Gezerah Shavah/analogy of “tent”/”tent” from the Tabernacle (see above) but rather for an opening to be handbreadth alone, but more than a handbreadth, such as a fistful, we stated in [Tractate] Sukkah [at the beginning of] the chapter "הישן"/He who sleeps (Chapter 2 – folio 20b at the bottom and folio 22a at the top). For Rabbi Yehuda agrees that even if it was made of its own, it brings the uncleanness. And similarly with clefts and rocks. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Chapter 4



Mishnah 1

מגדל העומד באויר (a tower/cupboard standing isolated) – a wooden turret that has walls but the walls themselves have a cavity in their thickness, such as perforated holes that are open to the inside and the outside but they lack an opening of a handbreadth, and it is customary to hide there needles and hooks/curved pins and small vessels.
שהוא עומד באויר—underneath the airspace of the sky, such as that it stands in the courtyard.
טומאה בתוכו – in the cavity of the turret itself.
כלים שבעוביו – in the thickness of the cavity of the walls.
מחצה למחצה – from its half of the thickness of the cupboard/turret and towards the inside is like the inside, from its half [of the thickness] towards the outside is like the outside. Whether the defilement is in the turret/cupboard and the vessels are in its thickness, or whether the defilement is in its thickness and the vessels are in the turret/cupboard. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.
טומאה בתוכו – within the turret/cupboard.
הבית טמא – even though that its doors are sealed. As it (i.e., the Mishnah) explains the reason that the manner of the defilement/uncleanness is to depart from there to the house.
טומאה בבית מה שבתוך המגדל – this is with its doors sealed. For if they are opened, it is no worse than a window that is between the two houses. For the reason that what is within the turret/cupboard is ritually pure, is that there is no path for the defilement that is in the house to enter into the turret/cupboard.
אם יש שם פותח טפח – between the rims of the turret/cupboard and the ground or between the wall of the turret/cupboard to the wall or between the roof the turret to the ceiling of the house.
טמאים – on account of the defilement that is in the house. But if there isn’t there [an opening] of a handbreadth, the turret/cupboard is like a לבוד/joined (i.e., that two solid surfaces are considered to be joined if there is a gap less than three handbreadths between them). And the defilement of the house does not enter there.
טומאה שם הבית טמא – if there was defilement between the rims of the turret/cupboard to the ground of the house. Or [there was defilement] between the roof of the turret to the roof of the house or between the walls of the turret to the walls of the house, even though there isn’t between them an opening of a handbreadth. הבית טמא – for the turret/cupboard does not protect regarding the defilement that is below it within the house so that it doesn’t defile all that is in the house.

Mishnah 2

תיבת המגדל -it is customary to make small chests within the wooden turret/cupboard, in order to hide in them vessels and food and liquids.
בה פותח טפח – there is in its cavity an opening of a handbreadth, but there is no defilement hidden.
ואין ביציאתה – in the hole of its opening, there isn’t a handbreadth.
טומאה בתוכה הבית טמא – and even though that its opening is small. As it explains the reason, because it is the manner of the defilement to go out, by force, its end is to exit through the path of this opening, therefore, it defiles immediately in the path of its exiting.
שבתוכה טהור מה– since there isn’t in its removal an opening of a handbreadth, it doesn’t bring in the defilement.
ואין דרך טומאה ליכנס – that its conclusion is not to bring into it a corpse.
ור' יוסי מטר – for perhaps its end is not exit through the path of this opening which has the measurement of defilement/uncleanness, for it is able to be remove it by halves or to burn it in its place. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 3

היה – the turret/cupboard was standing within the house, but the opening of the drawer was towards the outside.
טומאה בתוכה בבית טהור – for what is there is a reason to defile it? For there is no defilement that has an opening of a handbreadth and it is not hidden within. And because the departure of defilement also does not defile, because its departure/exuding is not inside within the house.
טומאה בבית מה שבתוכו טהור- for it is not the manner of defilement to enter/seep in there.
מוכני (wheel-work, machine for lifting weights) – a wheel that is made for the turret/cupboard to bring it from place to place.
משוכה לאחוריו (if its base protruded -backwards)- distanced from the back of the turret/cupboard to the side of the house. For the turret stands on the opening and the wheel-work/base protrudes backwards towards of the house inside, but the defilement there within the wheel-work is opposite the beams of the house. Even though the house overshadows upon it.
הבית טהור – for the wheel-work/base is considered like a turret/cupboard, for the turret stands at the entrance and opens outward. And the three fingers that it (i.e., the Mishnah) took, if it was protruding more than three fingerbreadths, it would not be like a turret/cupboard, for it is not the manner to distance the wheel-work/base from the turret so much.
בזמן שיש שם פותח טפח – for the cavity of the wheel-work/base that the defilement is contained in is open a handbreadth, in order that there not be pressed ritual impurity that it breaks through and rises.
ואינה יוצאת – for the wheel-work/base is not detached completely from the turret/cupboard.
והמגדל בא במדה (and the cupboard comes in requisite size) – that it holds forty Se’ah in moist with are two Kors in dry. And when it is in requisite size it is not susceptible to receive defilement and it interposes before the defilement. But less than this measure, it is like the rest of the vessels that are susceptible to receive defilement and it does not interpose before the defilement. And every turret/cupboard that is taught in this chapter [of Mishnah], is a cupboard that comes in requisite size.

Chapter 5



Mishnah 1

תנור שהוא עומד בתוך הבית – the incision that is made in the oven that the smoke leaves from it is placed outside of the house.
והאהילו עליו נושאי המת – when they would carry the corpse to bury it, the corpse overshadowed over the “eye” (i.e., fire-place] [which is outside the house.
בית שמאי אומרים הכל טמא – for they (i.e., the House of Shammai) hold that the defilement enters into the oven through its “eye (i.e., fire place) and departs through its mouth into the house.
התנור טמא והבית טהור – the oven which overshadowed the corpse on part of it is impure, but the house is ritually pure, for the defilement does not go out through its mouth [according to the School of Hillel].
ר' עקיבא אומר אף התנור טהור – for since it (i.e., the corpse) did not overshadow over the oven but only on the “eye” (i.e., fire-place) that comes out from it, the oven is not impure. But the Halakha is according to the School of Hillel.

Mishnah 2

ארובה (the opening/aperture in the roof looking to the ground floor) – like a kind of window that is on the roof of the house which is the bottom of the upper chamber.
בכונס משקה – when they place the vessel on the liquids that enter, the liquids enter into it through that incision.
הכל טמא – if there is defilement in the house, the pot and everything that is on the upper chamber is ritually impure. For the pot does not protect, and the defilement ascends through the aperture which has an opening of a handbreadth.
ובית הלל אומרים הקדירה טמאה – it is a mere stringency that the School of Hillel is strict to invalidate to make the pot impure, for Rabbi Akiba holds that the pot protects over the defilement, as for example that the back of the pot faces downward near the defilement, for an earthenware vessel is not susceptible to receive ritual defilement rom its back. But the Halakha is according to the School of Hillel.

Mishnah 3

מצלת על הכל – [if affords protection] on everything that is in the upper chamber, for it interposes in front of the defilement.
אינה מצלת אלא על האוכלים ועל המשקים ועל כלי חרס – he (i.e., the School of Shammai) is speaking about the pot of those who are illiterate. And the reason of the School of Shammai is that the vessels of the illiterate/עם הארץ are impure in regard to a person who a חבר/member of the order for the observance of Levitical laws in daily intercourse, and every impure vessel does not interpose in front of the defilement. And because the illiterate holds his vessels as pure, we state to him that he protects over food and drink and earthenware vessels that are in the upper chamber, that for himself alone that we declare them pure, for those who are members of the order for the observance of Levitical laws in daily intercourse are separate/keep aloof from them and from their contact, for without this, all of their food would be impure. But the other vessels that have purification in a ritual bath/Mikveh, if they will purify them, he (the person who is illiterate) can lend them to a חבר and he would use them with immersion [in a Mikveh] alone, without sprinkling [of ashes] on the third and seventh days.

Mishnah 4

לגין (a vessel smaller than a pitcher but larger than a cup/flask) – of wood or of metal that is placed in this upper chamber that the pot is placed on the mouth of its aperture in the roof looking to the ground floor.
הלגין טמא טומאת שבעה – that the pot does not protect over a wooden vessel or a metal vessel as we have stated.
והמשקים טהורים – that the pot protects over foods and liquids.
ואם פינה (if she emptied it) – these liquids to another vessel that is the same upper chamber, the other vessel defiles them, for all of the vessels that are in the upper chamber are impure except for earthenware vessels. But the first vessel that the liquids were in are not defiled even though it (i.e., the vessel) is impure with ritual impurity for seven days. For if you said so, if so, the pot that is in the aperture in the roof looking to the ground does not protect over liquids at all, and we state that it protects over food and liquids.
האשה והערבה טמאים (the woman and the trough are impure) – for the earthenware pot protects them.
והבצק טהור – for the pot protects over the foods. And especially all the while that she did not separate from it, but if she lifted up [her] two hands from it and returned and kneaded it, this defiles the dough.

Mishnah 5

כלי גללים – of excrement of cattle.
כלי אבנים וכלי אדמה – al of these are vessels, even in the hand of illiterate people they are pure, and if they are placed upon the aperture in the roof looking to the ground fall, it protects over everything even on the vessels which require only rinsing to be restored to Levitical cleanness.
היה כלי טהור לקודש ולחטאת – for the Rabbis appointed them to the illiterate people on the Holy Things, in order that each person would not go and build an altar for himself, therefore, the vessel that is pure for Holy Things protects on everything, even according to the School of Shammai, and similarly, they are deemed faithful on the sin-offering of the ashes of the Red Heifer, as it is written (Numbers 19:9): “[A man who is pure shall gather up the ashes of the cow and deposit them outside the camp in a pure place,] to be kept [for water of lustration] for the Israelite community,” everyone is believed on its preservation.
מפני שהכלים טהורים – as for example, vessels of excrement and vessels of stones and vessels of earth which are pure from being susceptible to receive impurity. And similarly, earthenware vessels are pure when they are for Holy Things and for purification [water]. Even though they belong to an illiterate person, he is believed, for an illiterate person is believed for Holy Things and for purification [water] as we have stated.
כל אלו מצילין עם דפנות אוהלים – that is to say, they interpose in the face of defilement when they are placed in a place where there are walls of tents, and this aperture in the roof looking to the ground floor that is between the house and the upper chamber is considered like the walls of tents. But in a place where there are no walls, it does not protect, as will be explained further on (see the next Mishnah).

Mishnah 6

הבור והדות שבבית (a cistern and a subterranean masoned cellar that are in the house) – and the corpse is in the house and vessels are in the cistern and cellar, and there is someone who seizes the partitions that are around them. Both a בור/cistern and a דות/cellar are in the ground, but the cistern [is made] through digging and the cellar [is made] through building/masonry.
וכפישה (an inverted vessel divided into two compartments by the bottom between – put on it as a tight lid) – a large basket that they press/squeeze the olives to produce shrinking and maturing of fruits by underground storage/לכומרן and it holds forty Se’ah or more, and is not susceptible to receive ritual impurity and is placed on the cistern or on the cellar.
טהור – everything that is in them is [pure] since there are partitions there.
באר חלקה – that the mouth of the well is level to the ground of the house and there is no partition around it, for here there are no walls.
או כוורת פחותה (a broken beehive) – as for example large beehive that holds forty Se’ah, that is not susceptible to receive ritual impurity. But it is broken, and is not stuffed up with straw.
וכפישה נתונה עליו – on the mouth of the cistern or on the mouth of the beehive.
טמא – for it does not protect other than with the walls of tents, but a cistern lacks walls, and the walls of a beehive are not the walls of tents.
היה נסר חלק (if it was a smooth board) – that tis is not a vessel.
או סרידה שאין לה גפיים (or stuffed matting used for stoppers of stoves which lacks handles) -which have no partitions and it is not considered a vessel.
טהור – if they are placed on a smooth well or on a broken beehive, they protect and are ritually pure. For specifically, the inverted vessel divided into two compartments by the bottom between is a vessel but does not protect other than with the walls of tents, but a board and stuffed matting which lack handles, that are not vessels, protect without the walls of tents. A stuffed matting used for stoppers of stoves, is like a small wooden trough that the baker uses. גפניים/handles are anchors and handles.
חצי טפח מכאן וחצי טפח מכאן – for a vessel does not protect in a smooth well, that is in a vessel which lack walls one handbreadth [high], but if the vessel has walls that are a handbreadth, it protects over the cistern even though its walls do not protrude at all, and now it is stated that half of handbreadth of a vessel and half of a handbreadth of the walls of a cistern do not combine. And the כפישה/(basket) inverted vessel divided into two parts by the bottom between where they squeeze the fruits that we mentioned above, that if it is placed on a smooth well, it does not protect, we are speaking that it doesn’t have walls [at the height of] a handbreadth.

Mishnah 7

כשם שמצילים מבפנים – with the walls of tents, so they protect from the outside with walls of tents as I explain further on [in this Mishnah].
על יתדות מבחוץ – near the wall that will not be continuous from the wall [for a handbreadth] and then it is considered a tent to interrupt between the defilement that is underneath it to the vessels that are over it. And specifically with regard to the wall of the house that this wall was made into a tent, the basket/inverted vessel is considered a tent to interrupt, but the wall of a courtyard and/or a garden is not made into a tent, the basket is not considered a tent to interrupt [the flow of defilement].
וקדירה תלויה בה – it is proven in the Tosefta {Tractate Ohalot, Chapter 6, Halakha 5 and 6) that if the rims of the pot are pulled from the rims of the beam and outward with an opening of a handbreadth, no one disagrees that it does not protect, and vessels that are in the pot are ritually impure, but the lip of the pot is attached to the beam, no one disagrees that it protects and is ritually pure. Where they disagree is where it is drawn from the beam and there isn’t an opening of a handbreadth. Rabbi Akiba says that it protects and they are pure, whereas the Sages state that it doesn’t protect and they are impure. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Chapter 6



Mishnah 1

אדם וכלים עשויין אהלים לטמא – a tent that is supported by means of a person or through vessels is considered a tent to defile vessels that are underneath it, even if does not correspond to the defilement, as if they are placed in the tent of the corpse.
אבל לא לטמא – for they are not considered a tent outside in the presence of the defilement.
נדבך (a course of stones) – a large and wide stone. It is the language of (Ezra 6:4): נדבכין די-אבן גלל/”With a course of timber for each three courses of hewn stones.”
כלים שעל גביו טמאין – that it doesn’t interpose and it is like the one who doesn’t hold this opinion, for a tent is not made to make pure.
כלים שתחתיו טמאים – for tents are made to defile.
ורבי אליעזר מטהר – in both, for he holds that a tent is made to purify and it interposes in the face of defilement. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer.
נתון על ארבעה כלים – if the course of stones/נדבך was placed upon the four vessels even a vessel of dung that are not susceptible to receive ritual impurity.
נתון על ארבעה אבנים – which are not vessels, it is considered as a tent to the outside in the face of the defilement.
דבר שיש בו רוח חיים – except for a human.

Mishnah 2

אחד מהן – one of those who accompany the corpse to buy it and not from those who carry the bier. And the same law applies if another person shut the door, but it (i.e., the Mishnah) took the usual incident.
הגיף את הדלת – so that the defilement should not enter the house when they pass through the portico that is in front of the house, for there is a ceiling on top of it.
אם יכולה הדלת לעמוד – without the support of the key, he has a key like one who lacks one and the door [itself] interposes in the face of the defilement.
ואם לאו טמא – for every thing that is supported by vessels does not interpose in the face of the defilement. For as we stated (see Mishnah 1 of this chapter) a human and vessels are not made tents to purify. And that is the reason of straw, that is the reason of dried figs and that is the reason of plaster, because their standing through [the use of] vessels which are a wine jug, a basket and cylindrical vessels.
שהן נתונים בחלון – that the have a handbreadth by a handbreadth [measurement] that brings the defilement from house to house.
אם יכולים הגרגרות והתבן לעמוד בעצמן – without a jug or a basket.
טהורים – that the vessels are like they are not, and the dried figs and straw protect, and this is what will be with the dried figs that decayed and are not appropriate for eating, and similarly, decayed straw which is not appropriate for the eating b cattle and he nullifies them, and it is not his intention to remove them. And because of this, they interpose, for all where the straw and the dried figs close up everything, as for example here where there is a place for a wine jug or a basket, if he doesn’t nullify them, they do not interpose.
ואם לאו טמאין – as long as the wine jug will be if it made of earthenware that its mouth will correspond to the defilement and therefore it does not protect, for every thing that is susceptible to receive ritual impurity does not interpose in the face of the defilement. But if the back of the wine jug corresponds to the defilement, it interposes in the face of the defilement, for an earthenware vessel is not susceptible to receive defilement from its back.
בית שחצצו בקנקנים – and their mouths are towards the defilement, for now they do not protect.
וטח בטיח – whether from the inside or whether from the outside.
אם יכול הטיח לעמוד בפני עצמו טהור – that the plaster interposes in the face of the defilement.

Mishnah 3

כותל שהוא לאויר – that its one side is the airspace of the world, and its other side serves the house, as for example, the wall that separates between the house and the courtyard or between the house and its garden.
וטומאה בתוכו – that the wall was split/chipped and there is defilement in its cavity within the split/chip.
מחציו ולפנים – if the defilement is from the half of the wall to the side of the house.
הבית טמא – as it was within the house. And this half follows the house that we cast. But the person who stands at the wall from above even standing facing the defilement, 
he is pure, for it is not considered like pressed ritual impurity/טומאה רצוצה, and it doesn’t break through and ascend, for we consider it as it is lying/placed in the tent.
מחציו ולחוץ – to the side of the airspace, we do not cast it after the house, and therefore, a person who stands from above is impure, because he is not like he is lying/placed in the tent, and this is pressed ritual impurity which breaks through and ascends.
מחצה למחצה – and the defilement is in the middle.
רבי מאיר מטמא – that we cast it to the wall after the house and after the airspace as a stringency.
וחכמים מטהרין – that we completely cast it after the house. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
כל הכתל לבית – even if the defilement stands half of on the side of the airspace, it is as if it is ling within the house (according to Rabbi Yehuda).

Mishnah 4

כותל שבין שני בתים- and the wall that forms partition/separates between two houses.
טומאה באחד מהן – one of the houses.
מעזיבה (a concrete of stone chippings/clay covering the ceiling of the lower story and serving as flooring of the upper story) - a ceiling that separates between the house and the upper chamber.
רבי יהודה אומר וכו' – But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 5

טומאה בין הקורות – between the beams of the ceiling that there are boards on them and the concrete of stone chippings/clay covering the ceiling of the lower story and serving as flooring of the upper story/מעזיבה of their back. And our Mishnah is according to Rabbi Yehuda who stated: All of the concrete of stone chippings/clay are with the upper chamber (see previous Mishnah). And now it states that if there was defilement in the beams that are underneath of the concrete of stone chippings/clay, and a partition that is thin like the peel of garlic, it interposes between the defilement to the house so that the defilement is not seen in the house. אם יש במקום הטומאה פותח טפח – that is the that there is a cavity of one-handbreadth in the place of the defilement.
הכל טמא – the house and the upper chamber.
רואים את הטומאה כאילו היא אוטם (we regard the Levitical uncleanness – between the rafters – as if it was locked up/an obstruction) – and the defilement does not descend to the house but rather bursts through and ascends/rises.
היתה נראית לתוך החבית – that there isn’t under it like the peel of garlic.
בין כך ובין כך – whether there is an opening of a handbreadth wide or whether there isn’t an opening of a handbreadth wide.

Mishnah 6

בית המשמש את הכותל – the caves that are under the street when they dig a sepulchral chamber for a corpse from this side and a sepulchral chamber for a corpse from the other side, it is found that the wall is made of its own, and because of this, we call it a house which serves the wall that through the digging, the wall was made, but building that is upon the ground, the wall causes the house that it will be a house, and because of this, we call it [see above, Mishnah 3], “a wall that serves the house”
טומאה בבתים – in the sepulchral chambers and in the cavities/caves.
ועליהן כקליפת השום טהורין – because they form a partition to the defilement and their law is not like the law of a wall that is between two houses (see Mishnah 4).
טומאה בוקעת ועולה בוקעת ויורדת – and all that is juxtaposed to the defilement above and/or below is impure according to the law of all covered defilement, but from the sides it is pure, and the same law applies to the pillar that is in the house.

Mishnah 7

פרח - a thing that protrudes and is wide that comes out at the top of a column/pillar or in its middle.
כלים שתחת הפרח טהורים – here we are speaking of a column that stands in the public domain or in a garden and the defilement is underneath it, and the “capital” protrudes from the column outward a handbreadth and overshadows over the vessels that are under it.
טהורים – for the defilement bursts forth and ascends, but all that is on the sides is pure.
רבי יוחנן בן נורי מטמא – for the “capital” is like the column/pillar, and when the defilement bursts forth, it returns on all the vessels that the “capital” overshadows upon them. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri.
הטומאה והכלים שתחת הפרח – as for example, that the “capital” overshadows on the defilement and on the vessels.
פותח טפח – that the “capital” protrudes outside pf the column a handbreadth.
פרדסקים (closet, chests in the wall) – empty pillars that are placed I the wall of the house and in them are many windows/apertures and they have doors, and the defilement is under those pillars.
נפתח אחד מהן הבית טמא – that the defilement bursts through within and goes out to the house, And even the defilement from the half of the wall and outward is not judged to be like the house. Nevertheless, the house is impure.
ורואין את הפרדסקין כאילו הן אוטם – that is to say, if the door is locked and it is not opened, we view it as if there is no cavity there at all, but if the defilement is underneath them, the wall is judged half by half, like all of these that are taught about in the Mishnah above (i.e., in the previous Mishnayot of this chapter), from its middle and inwards, the house is impure; from its middle and outward, the house is pure.

Chapter 7



Mishnah 1

הטומאה. שעל גבה -that are on top of the wall.
טמאות – for the wall serves them, and the heads of he beams of the upper room are inserted/stuck in the wall and he wall is high and it is a partition for all of the upper rooms for this one is higher than that one. And especially when the place of defilement is a handbreadth by a handbreadth, for all of the wall is considered like a sealed grave and it brings the defilement to all of the upper rooms. But the wall is not judged half by half because it doesn’t have even a chip/split to the side of the upper room.
עליה אחת בנויה על גבי שני בתים – [that this wall forms a partition between the two houses] and he upper room is built on top of both of them (i.e., the houses).
היא טמאה – the first upper room, that this wall reaches until the concrete of stone chippings covering the ceiling of the lower story and serving as a flooring for the upper story but the defilement bursts forth and ascends in it.
וכל העליות שעל גבה טהורות – for the concrete of stone chippings covering the ceiling of the lower story and serving as flooring for the upper story/מעזיבה that is upon it interposes.
כותל השונית – a wall that is built in the place that sea reaches at the time that it continually stirs up.
טומאה בוקעת ועולה – if there is defilement underneath it, this wall does not defile all of its surroundings, because there is no cavity of a handbreadth.
נפש אטומה (a solid tomb-structure – to which there is no access) -a marker that they build on the grave to indicate the neighborhood of an unclean place, and that which is filled up is built upon the defilement itself but the corpse is not buried in bier in order that there will have a cavity of a handbreadth.
כקבר סתום – that defiles all of its surroundings through contact.
סמך לה סוכות – it refers to the solid tomb-structure/נפש אטומה referred to above, that we state that a person who comes in contact with it from the sides is ritually pure, but if he made for this marking put up to indicate the neighborhood of an unclean place Sukkot similar to a lintel, this Sukkah is impure, because it is similar to the tent of a corpse.
ור' יהודה מטהר – since it is from the sides. Bu the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 2

כל שפועי אהלים כאהלים – that if there was defilement underneath the slope even though it is not under the roof of the tent, it is impure, as if it was placed under the roof.
וכלה עד כאצבע (and finished off at one fingerbreadth) – from above to the side of the roof. That we aren’t concerned regarding a tent of defilement but rather that its inside will have the airspace like the measure of one cubic handbreadth squared.
טומאה באוהל – the width of the roof that is not sloped is called a tent.
הנוגע בו מתוכו וכו' – that the inner side of the tent and its outer side are considered like two vessels. But the side that is directed towards/opposite the defilement is like a vessel that comes in contact with the corpse itself, and the second side is like vessels that come in contact with vessels. Therefore, defilement that is within, a person who comes in contact/touches from the inside, has ritual impurity for seven days, for he is a person that touched vessels that came in contact with a corpse as it is taught in the Mishnah in the first chapter (see Tractate Ohalot, Chapter 1, Mishnah 3) that he has ritual impurity for seven days.
אל הנוגע מאחוריו טמא טומאת ערב – as is taught in the Mishnah regarding vessels [that come in contact] with impure vessels are defiled with ritual impurity for seven days. The third, whether a person or vessels is unclean with defilement that passes in the evening (see Tractate Ohalot, Chapter 1, Mishnah 2). But regarding the defilement from the outside, it is the opposite, for the outer side is like vessels that come in contact with a corpse, and the inner side is like vessels that come in contact with [impure] vessels. And the reason that the is that the inner side and the outer side are considered like two vessels, for the defilement that is within it, because it protects from being the defilement bursting forth and ascending, it lacks the power/strength to defile the person who touches it outside a ritual impurity of seven days, for when the defilement that is outside, since it protects from becoming the defilement that breaks forth and descends, it lacks the strength/power for the inside to defile a person who comes in contact with it for a defilement of seven days. But anyway, the tent itself, whether inside or whether outside is impure a ritual impurity of seven days, for it is like vessels [coming in contact] with [unclean] vessels, and all of our Mishnah is speaking about after the corpse has departed from the tent.
כחצי זית מתוכו וכחצי זית מאחוריו – Whichever way you turn, the tent is impure a defilement of seven days, for the half of an olive’s bulk that is inside combines with a half of an olive’s bulk from the outside. But a person who comes in contact/touches whether from the inside or from the outside, he has naught other than ritual impurity until nightfall, for since there isn’t an olive’s bulk in one place, it is impossible for each side to be considered other than vessels [coming into contact] with unclean vessels, therefore, the person who comes in contact is impure until nightfall.
מקצתו מרודד על הארץ ((part of the tent canvas is flat on the ground) – after they explained the tent, they explained the overlapping excess of the curtains of the tent [that are spread] on the ground.
מרודד – it is the Aramaic translation of (Exodus 39:3): “They hammered out sheets of gold” – beaten, hammered metal.
טומאה תחתיו – the defilement that is under that beaten, hammered metal.
או על גביו – on top of the beaten, hammered metal.
בוקעת ועולה בוקעת ויורדת – and the tent is defiled. But a person who enters inside of it is ritually pure if he didn’t come in contact with it.
מקצתו – of the tent.
מרודד על ארובה שבית בית לעליה – and the defilement is in the house.
רבי יוסי אומר מציל – upon the upper chamber/room.
כנטיית אוהל -that the aperture in the roof looking to the ground floor is in the airspace of the tent, then it protects over the entire upper chamber that is outside of the tent.

Mishnah 3

כולן טמאים – all of the vessels that are lying underneath the lintel of the opening in the empty space of the openings from the outside, all are ritually impure, even though that the openings are locked, for the Sages decreed defilement/impurity on the place which is the path for the removal of the defilement, for ultimately the corpse will leave through that path.
חשב להוציאו באחד מהן – even though it was not opened.
או בחלון שיש בו ארבעה – that through this the Sages estimated that it is appropriate for the removal of the corpse.
הציל על כל הפתחים – that are locked.
יחשוב עד שלא ימות המת – that from when the designation of defilement descended to the openings through the death of the corpse, it further does not ascend from them through intention but rather through action, such as when it is opened.
ובית הלל אומרים אף משמת – for intention releases the designation of defilement from the openings from here and onwards. But vessels that were in the openings prior to the intention, the School of Hillel agrees that they are impure.
היה – one of the openings was blocked up with stones.
סתום – with stones.
כשיפתח ד' טפחים – the rest of the openings were protected.
כשיתחיל – to open them, the remainder of the openings were protected.
בפותח תחלה – as for example a wall that lacks an opening and one comes to make a new opening, the other openings are not protected until he opens it four [handbreadths] by four [handbreadths].

Mishnah 4

והוציאוה מבית לבית – and in the second house she gave birth to a dead offspring, but it is doubtful to us if [the offspring came out dead from first house].
בשמן שהיא ניטלת בגפים (at the time that she is carried by her arms- put around the neck of her supporters) – that her colleagues/friends take it with her arms for she is not able to walk, we are concerned that the offspring came out dead from the first house.
הקבר – the womb of the woman that was opened when the offspring leaves it.
אין לנפלים פתיחת הקבר וכו' – this is the conclusion of the matter of Rabbi Yehuda. And this is what he said: that which we said that when the womb opened, there is no time to walk we didn’t say this other than regarding a non-viable birth until the fetus is (on leaving the vagina) forms a round head like a coil, meaning to say that he has a large round head like this spindle that the women sew on it a thread of warp/longitudinal direction, but if the non-viable birth/fetus did not have a round head like a coil but rather smaller than this, even though the womb was opened and the head of the fetus exited outside, she has time to walk and we are concerned lest his head came out from the first house. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 5

יצא האשון מת – the first fetus came out dead and the second fetus came out alive.
טהור – the second living [fetus] is [pure] from defilement through contact with a corpse. If they removed the dead [fetus] from the house prior to the second birth, that while it was still in the womb of its mother, it is not defiled, even though the womb was opened, for a pure object that has been swallowed does not defile.
הראשון חי והשני מת טמא – and even though they removed the living [first child] from the house prior to the birth of the dead [second child], for since the live child came out, the womb was opened and became defiled immediately, for the defilement leaves at the en
בשפיר אחד טמא – meaning to say, if both of them came out similar to one membrane (i.e., sack of a fetus), that they came out at the same time, it is impure. שפיר/sack of a fetus is the placenta that the fetus is placed on.
בשני שפירין- meaning to say, similar to two membranes one after the other, even if the first is alive and the second is dead. טהור – for Rabbi Meir holds that even though the womb was opened, it doesn’t defile until it (i.e., the fetus) exists to the airspace of the world. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Meir.

Mishnah 6

יצא רובו – of the offspring/child. But once most of his head departs [the womb) which when his forehead exits (see Tracate Niddah 3b), we don’t touch him.
שאין דוחים נפש -the offspring/child.
מפני נפש – the woman (i.e., the mother).

Chapter 8



Mishnah 1

יש מביאין את הטומאה – that if they overshadowed over the defilement and humans and/or vessels bring the defilement on a person and on the vessels, and even though they didn’t come in contact/touch the defilement.
וחוצצים – if the defilement is below them, they protect persons and vessels that are upon them. Because they do not interpose in the face of the defilement. And similarly if the defilement is upon them from the outside, it protects vessels that are underneath them.
שידה (chest) a large wooden box like a kind of ark.
תיבה – small similar to tables.
מגדל (turret/cupboard) – of wood made for storage.
כוורת הקש – large baskets made from straw or from willow or branches of palm trees.
כוורת הקנים – like baskets that are made from reeds.
ובור ספינה אלכסנדרית (tank of sweet water in a ship of Alexandrian merchantmen) – the large ships that they go to see on the large ocean (i.e., Mediterranean Sea), they make within it a large wooden vessel like a cistern that the place in it sweet water that is appropriate for drinking.
והן מחזיקין ארבעים סאה כלה – for since they are large in this measure, they furthermore are not susceptible to receive defilement, and they interpose in the face of defilement.
סקורטיא (a leather bed-sheet) – a hide that the tanners wear at the time of their work.
קטבליא (hide used as a spread) - a hid that they spread over the bed and lie upon it, and we call it NETA in Arabic.
שהן עשויין אהלים – hanging over similar to a tent. And the leather-bed sheet/סקורטיא and the קטבליא/hide used as a spread and the sheet and the matting and the mat are vessels and susceptible to receive ritual defilement, anyway when they are hanging over like tents they interpose before the defilement, for a tent even though it receives defilement interposes in front of the defilement.
ועדר בהמות – when they are standing and not walking and the head of this one is between the legs of that one.
ומכונות חיה ועוף – nests of wildlife and birds. It is the language of (Exodus 15:27): “The place You made to dwell in.”
והעוף ששכן – that was tied on the wall or on the tree.
והעושה מקום לבינה בשבלים – that cover the ears of corn/spike (i.e., the sheaves), a place that is similar to a house.
האירוס והקיסום ודלעת יונית וירקת חמורים (the lily with an aromatic root, the ivy, the Greek gourd and the ass-herbs) – all these are kinds of vegetables whose leaves are wide.
חוץ מן העיגול של דבילה – because that underneath the shade of the pressed cake of figs, they would regularly sit more than the rest of the foods. And this is taught in the Tosefta (Tractate Ohalot, Chapter 9, Halakha 5). But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri.

Mishnah 2

הזיזין (projections from door frames serving as a shed over the entrance – or a molding projecting from a window-sill serving as a bracket) – a piece of wood or an individual stone that protects out from the wall is called a זיז.
גזריות – like [the word]גזוזטראות /balconies). A building of stones or of wood that project from the wall.
והשובכות – of doves.
והשקיפים והסלעים – we explained this above at the conclusion of chapter 3 [of this tractate] (i.e., clefts in the stones and rocks – one made by the rain and the other made on its own).
גהרים (projection, jetty) - kind of holes that from there comes the light. And there are those who explain it as kinds of caves and thorns.-
והשננים (pointed rocks/cliffs) – teeth of the rock.
מעזיבה רכה – as for example that they make from willow and reeds and place upon them a bit of plaster.
מעזיבה בינונית – but if they are not able to endure other than a soft concrete of stone chippings, they don’t bring the defilement and do not interpose. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
אילן מיסך -the language of (Exodus 25:20): “shielding the cover with their wings.”
והפרעות היוצאות מן הגדר (the case of protruding boughs on one of which is an uncleanness – which protrudes from the hedge) – it is the manner of a fence that we place on its top thorns and thistles, and they are more abundant on the fence and protrude outward. And [the word] פרעות/long, entangled growth (i.e., protruding boughs). The language of (Numbers 6:5): “[the hair of his head] left to grow untrimmed.”

Mishnah 3

ואין מחזיקים ארבעים סאה בלח – for since they are susceptible to receive ritual defilement, they do not interpose.
שאין עושיין אהלים – they are not insert/planted similar to a tent, but rather are flattened/spread according to the aperture in the roof looking to the ground floor.
מוסף עליהם הריחים של אדם – that is the hand millstone, which are carried and susceptible to receiving ritual impurity. This excludes the millstone of cattle that are not carried and are not susceptible to receiving ritual impurity.

Mishnah 4

מסכת פרוסה (the spread web – i.e., the web hanging from the transverse beam) – the threads of the warp/longitudinal direction like they are spread out in a weaver’s vessel prior to weaving the cloth. If they were spread out over an aperture in the roof looking to the ground floor that is between the house and the upper room and the defilement is below it, it protects upon the vessels that are above, but if it overshadows the corpse or on the vessels, it does not bring the defilement, for it is not considered a tent until it is woven.
וחבילי המטה (the rope-work of the bed) – ropes of he better when it the straps are drawn in bedsteads.
והמשפלות (wicker baskets carried on a pole over the shoulder) – baskets that they remove the manure In them.
והסריגים שבחלונות (and the window lattices) – network/matting that they make in the windows, interposes, for the defilement does not pass to one side. And as long as there will not be in all of them an incision like is open to a handbreadth, for an incision/hole that is open to a handbreadth brings in the defilement.

Mishnah 5

ירקות שמנו – those that are taught in the Mishnah at the beginning of this chapter (Mishnah 1), The lily with the aromatic root/אירוס, and the ivy and the vegetables of ass-herbs and Greek gourd. And these are when attached, for if they are detached, if they became susceptible to receive ritual impurity, they don’t interpose, for something that is susceptible to receive ritual impurity does not interpose in the face of defilement. But if they were among those that were not susceptible, that is pure foods.
כפת הברד (hailstones) – a piece of the hail. It is the language of (Psalms 147:17): “He tosses down hail like crumbs.” Alternatively, hail that is made like an arch.
והכפור(frost) – water that flows/runs and comes down when it is frozen.
גליד – the frozen water of rivers (i.e., ice).
והמלח – all of these they don’t bring and they don’t interpose. Because they melt and do not endure.
דולג (which hops/skips) – animals and wild life, and jump at humans. But there are those who say, that hopping and jumping – both of them refer to humans, but rather hopping where his one foot is placed on the ground and he hops with the second; and jumps, with both feet.
וטלית המפנפת (a sheet suspended as a banner) – that when the wind waves it and it stands in the air like an arched compartment.
כבש את האבן על גבי הטלית (presses the stone on top of the cloak) – that there was a stone placed on one end of the cloak and the wind blew the second end and it became like a kind of tent.
מביאה את הטומאה – if it overshadowed over the corpse or on vessels, it brings the defilement o the vessels.
הבית שבספינה – as for example, that the house at the top of a ship and it overshadows on the vessels that are on the ship and on the corpse that is in the sea at the time that it is travelling. Another explanation, the house that is on the ship and it is not able to withstand the wind that is found, and even if it overshadowed on the corpse and the vessels that are on the ship do not bring the defilement, and it is not considered a tent. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 6

בשני חצאי זיתים – half an olive’s bulk in this one, and half in that one.
הבית טמא – that a tightly-fitting cover does not protect on the defilement that is under it so that the house would defile the house, but even though that they are in two jars, for since both of them are in the house they combine to the measurement to defile the house. But the jars are ritually pure, for the defilement of one-half an olive’s bulk that is in its companion jar enters into it, sine it is surrounded with a tight-fitting cover.
וכן שני חדרים שהן פתוחים לבית – and their doors are locked, and there is a half-olive’s bulk in this room and a half-olive’s bulk in that room, the house is impure, for ultimately the defilement exits, but the rooms are ritually pure, for there is no pay for the defilement to enter in.

Chapter 9



Mishnah 1

כוורת – that it has rims [at the bottom] and holds forty Se’ah in wet which are two KOR in dry, that it is susceptible to receive ritual defilement, and reclines on its side within the opening and part of it is outside and part of it is in the house.
ופיה לחוץ – and its rim is inside.
כזית מן המת נתון תחתיה – from outside.
כל שהוא כנגד הזית – if the olive’s bulk [of the corpse] is underneath it and vessels are on top of it opposite it, or the olive’s bulk [of the corpse] is upon it and vessels are underneath it opposite it.
תחתיה וגבה טמא – but what is within it is ritually pure. For even though the hive protects over what is within it, it does not protect on what is underneath it or on top of it opposite the olive’s bulk of defilement, for on what is within it, it is the law that it protects, for even if it is placed in the tent of a corpse it protects with a tightly-sealed cover/airtight lid, since it is not susceptible to receive ritual defilement, but what is underneath it and on its back it does not protect since it is a vessel, as is taught in the Mishnah above in Chapter 6 {Mishnah 1]: “Humans and vessels are made into tents to defile, but not to purify.”
וכל שאינו כנגד הזית תוכה והבית טהור – this is what he said: vessels that are underneath it and on top of it that are not opposite the olive’s bulk of defilement, and within it, meaning to say, vessels that are within it and even if hey are opposite the olive’s bulk [of defilement], and vessels also that are in the house, everything is ritually pure.
בבית אין טמא אלא הבית – if the olive’s bulk [of defilement] is in the house, there is nothing ritually impure other than the house, but the vessels that within the hive are pure, for its mouth is towards the outside.
בתוכה הכל טמא – if the olive’s bulk [of defilement] is within the hive, everything is ritually defiled, for we are dealing with a hive which is perforated from the walls with an opening of a handbreadth, as we are required to state further on [Mishnah 3] but rather that the incisions/holes are stopped up with straw, but the closing is not fastened, and it is the manner of the holes/incisions that the defilement goes out to the house since they are not fastened, and even vessels that are under it and on top of from the outside are ritually impure, for since the olive’s bulk [of defilement] we see it as is if it is filled with defilement, and a vessel cannot protect what is underneath it or on top of it. But when the defilement is in the house, we stated above [in this Mishnah] that there is no defilement other than the house, for the defilement does not enter in the hive through the incisions/holes even though they have an opening of a handbreadth, for since they are stuffed up, but it (i.e., the defilement) does not enter through its mouth for its mouth is towards the outside.

Mishnah 2

היתה גבוהה מן הארץ טפח – that now there is a tent of a handbreadth underneath it.
הכל טמא – that it brings the defilement into the house since it is a handbreadth high, and vessels that are on top of it, even those that are not opposite the defilement are also impure and even outside, for underneath it is like one that is full of defilement. And it doesn’t protect what on top of it, for the vessel does not protect. And similarly, if the defilement is also in the house everything is ritually impure from this reason, for the tent of the house brings the defilement to what is underneath it and doesn’t protect that which is on top of it. But if the defilement is on top of it, since it doesn’t protect over what is underneath it, we view what is beneath it as one that is filled with defilement, therefore, whatever is in the house and what is underneath it and what is on top of it -everything is impure.
אלא תוכה -that is to say, everything is impure except for what is within it (i.e., the house) which is pure.

Mishnah 3

בזמן שהוא כלי – that it was not hollowed out and was not nullified from the category of being a vessel. -
מחולחלת (hollowed out – not packed entirely) – that the walls are perforated with an opening of a handbreadth. They normally make incisions in the walls of the hive in order the bees can enter and depart, and sometimes that the incisions/holes are stopped up with straw but that the stopper is not fastened tightly.
היתה פחותה (if it was damaged) – that it was broken through/hollowed out and voided from the category of a vessel.
ופקוקה בקש – in the place of the hollowing out. But its walls are complete that they are not hollowed out.
או אפוצה (or made narrower by squeezing the parts together – i.e., pressing the lid down) – or even if its walls were not complete but rather that it was made narrowed, meaning to say, that it was closed in the place where it is hollowed out/not packed entirely, and there isn’t a handbreadth of hollowed out area.
כנגדו עד התהום טמא – but all of the rest is pure. For since it is not considered a vessel like a tent to protect what is inside it and what is on top of it.
על גבה – if an olive’s bulk from a corpse is placed on top of it.
כנגדו עד הרקיע טמא – but all of the rest of pure, for it protects what is inside of it and what is below it. Since it is not a vessel.
בבית – if an olive’s bulk from the corpse is in the house.
אין טמא אלא הבית – and all of the rest is pure, for its opening/mouth is outside.
בתוכה – if the olive’s bulk from the corpse is within it (i.e., inside).
אין טמא אלא תוכה – and all the rest is pure, for the defilement does not enter into the house because it is not hollowed out and its mouth is towards the outside, and it protects also over what is underneath it and what is on top of it, since It is not a vessel.

Mishnah 4

תחתיה והבית טמא – for they bring the defilement from this (i.e., underneath the house) to that (i.e., the house).
תוכה טהור – that which is inside [the house], since the its walls are outside, and what is on top of it is also pure, for it protects on what is outside, for it is not a vessel.
בתוכה – if the defilement is within it.
אין טמא אלא תוכה – and all the rest is ritually pure.

Mishnah 5

היה פיה לפנים – that it was leaning on its side and its rims were outside and its mouth was inside. For now, we are speaking of the time when it is a hollowed-out vessel and is not higher from the ground a handbreadth. But there is no distinction whether its mouth is outside or whether its mouth is inside, but that when its mouth is outside as is taught above (i.e., Mishnah 4) regarding a house, nothing is impure other than the house, but here, when its mouth is inside, it (i.e., the Mishnah) teaches that everything is impure, because the defilement enters through its mouth.

Mishnah 6

היתה גבוהה – above (see Mishnah 1), its walls are outside as its teaches [in the Mishnah] the defilement that is under it or in the house [or on top of it, everything is impure, other than what is within it,] but here its walls are within, everything is impure.

Mishnah 7

בזמן שהוא כלי מחולחלת – freely, it (i.e., the Mishnah) took [the term] מחולחלת/hollow, loosely put in (i.e., not packed entirely) for it does not benefit being loosely put in other than its mouth being outside regarding the matter of removal of the defilement from within it to the house, but here, where its walls are inside, it (i.e., the defilement) goes out through its mouth. But since the first clause of the Mishnah taught מחולחלת/loosely put in (i.e., not packed entirely) while it is a vessel, it also took it (i.e., teaches it) here.
כנגדו עד התהום טמא – but the rest is ritually pure. And we are speaking when it is not a handbreadth high from the ground.
תוכה או בבית תוכה והבית טמאים – because its walls are inside. But above (see Mishnah 1), where its walls are outside, it is taught that the defilement is in the house, there is no impurity other than in the house, but the rest is pure.

Mishnah 8

אלא גבה – but inside is impure when the defilement is in the house, because its walls are inside. But above (see Mishnah 1), its walls are outside, its inside and on top of it are pure.

Mishnah 9

היתה ממלאה את כל הבית – for all of it (i.e., the defilement) is within the house inside and it sits on its rims and its mouth reaches the top of the beam, for there isn’t between it and the ceiling an opening of a handbreadth.
טומאה בתוכה הבית טמא אמא בבית מה שבתוכה טהור – since this resembles a pipe/gutter that is arched/bent over underneath the house, that has an opening of a handbreadth, and there isn’t in its exiting an opening of a handbreadth as is taught in the Mishnah above in Chapter 3 [Mishnah 7].
בין עומדת – that is to say, this law is in vogue/practice whether it is standing and it reaches the beams, or whether it is lying on its side and there isn’t between its mouth and the wall of the house an opening of a handbreadth.
בין אחת בין שתים – this over that and there isn’t between the second opening to the beams an opening of a handbreadth, and similarly, there isn’t between the second rim and its mouth of the first an opening of a handbreadth.

Mishnah 10

הבית טהור – that the lintel descends and seals/stops up the mouth of the hive, and we are speaking of a case where the hive is not hollowed out. For if it is hollowed out, it is the manner of the hollowing out that the defilement would go out to the house like those mentioned above.
טומאה בבית מה שבתוכה טהור – we have this reading. That the defilement goes outside and doesn’t enter in into the hive. But in most of the books we have the reading, that what is within it is impure because the defilement leaves from the house via its opening that defiles what is in the hive, and it stand within the doorway.

Mishnah 11

באויר – in the courtyard or in the garden, where there isn’t a tent there. And its law is like of the hive that is in the midst of the doorway and its mouth is outside, as it is taught in the Mishnah at the beginning of the chapter (see Mishnah 1). And similarly, also if it is above the ground by a handbreadth, like it is above the ground a handbreadth of here at the beginning of the chapter (see Mishnah 2). But that of here, it doesn’t belong to mention a house, for we are dealing with a case where one is standing underneath the airspace.

Mishnah 12

בזמן שהיא כלי – where it stands in the airspace it doesn’t belong to mention that which is loosely put in/hollow, and because of this, it does not teach here, “or it was made narrower by squeezing the parts together,” as is taught above (see Mishnah 3), for the issue of making it narrower by squeezing the parts together (i.e., pressing the lid down) only applies with something that is put in loosely.
או מחזקת ארבעים סאה כדברי חכמים – which is in conflict with the first Tanna/teacher as he holds that it holds forty Se’ah. When it is damaged, it is voided from the status of being like a vessel, but it protects what is underneath it and within it and above it.
כזית מן המת נתון תחתיה – its law is like it is damaged and it is not [a handbreadth] high and its mouth is towards the outside, as it is taught in the Mishnah (see Mishnah 3) above.
היתה גבוהה מן הארץ טפח – these also, its law is like that of a hive whose mouth is towards the outside and it is damaged and stuffed up [with straw] and above [the ground] a handbreadth as it is taught in the Mishnah (see Mishnah 5) above.

Mishnah 13

היתה יושבת על שוליה וכו' טומאה תחתיה או בתוכה או על גבה – everything that is on top of it. As we taught concerning the hive that is sitting on its rims and its mouth is above, that is, that the defilement overshadows outward [to it] above rom its mouth.
בוקעת ועולה – even though above (see Mishnah 11) when it is lying on its side, and the defilement is underneath it, or on top of it, it protects what is inside of it, here its wall is above for it doesn’t protect over what is outside of it [also] doesn’t protect on what is within it, since there is no interruption between the airspace that is within it to the airspace that is above and outside of it. But specifically, opposite the olive’s bulk of impurity and not from the sides, since it is damaged and is not a handbreadth above the ground, for there is no tent there to bring the defilement to the sides.
אבל היתה גבוהה טפח או מכוסה – even though it is not a handbreadth above [the ground].
או כפאה על פיה (or turned upside down on its mouth) – where there is a tent to bring the defilement.
הכל טמא – and the covering is not considered to interrupt/form a partition between the airspace within it to the airspace that is above it, and it is not similar at all to lying on its side. And specially when it is covered with an inverted vessel – divided into two vessels by the bottom between or with other vessels even though it is not susceptible to receive ritual impurity, but when it is covered by a board, even though the defilement is above it, the defilement does not break through the board, as is taught in the Mishnah above in Chapter 5 [Mishnah 6] concerning a hive which is within the house.

Mishnah 14

היתה פחותה – that it became damaged and it is voided from the category of being a vessel.
כדברי חכמים – which is in conflict with the first Tanna/teacher and compares something that holds forty Se’ah to something that is damaged and stuffed with straw.
אין טומאה עלוה לה – at the time that the defilement is below it, it does not ascend into it.
אף לא יורדת ממנה - at the time that the defilement is within it, it doesn’t descend underneath it.
תחתיה טמא – but inside it/within it and on top of it, it is pure.
כנגדו עד הרקיע טמא – but underneath it is pure.

Mishnah 15

ארון שהיא רחבה – this bier/casket is a cliff/peak of a rock that protrudes from the mountain and is hewn/chiseled into a bier that is wide from the bottom and narrow from the top and its mouth is above.
הנוגע בה מלמטה טהור – for what is opposite its mouth is considered like the bier/casket, but not that which is on the sides.
‘רחב מלמעלה וצר מלמטה – or that it was equivalent, a person who touches it from any place is impure, according to the words of Rabbi Eliezer. For the covering splits the defilement in all of it, that the defilement ascends up to the covering and returns and descends over the face of all of it.
רבי יהושע מטהר – that it is not considered like a bier/coffin other than the handbreadth that is nearest to the cavity of the bier/coffin. Therefore, it does not burst forth from a handbreadth and below.
העשויה כמין קמטרא (that is made like a chest/box – for clothes, books) – it is vessel whose covering covers the thickness of the walls. It is the Aramaic for (II Kings 10:22): “He [Jehu] said to the man in charge of the wardrobe: [“Bring out the vestments for all the worshippers of Baal],” for the one appointed over the chest/box.
הנוגע בה מכל מקום טמא – for all that is opposite the covering is impure, for its covering covers all of it.
כמין גלוסקוס הנוגע בה מכל מקום טהור – its covering is not other than opposite its cavity like a peg that is inserted in a hole/incision in an emergency.
חוץ ממקום פתחתה – with a covering that is opposite its cavity.

Mishnah 16

חבית שהיא יושבת – their jars are narrow above to the side of the their mouths, and below to the side of the rims and wide in their middles, and they are like a kind of wide stomach that protrudes from them in their middles from the outside.
באויר – that is, in the airspace of the world, to exclude that which is under the tent.
קורקורתה (rimmed bottom of a vessel – corresponding to the bottom – under or on the rim of its bottom) – like its bottom and they are its rims.
בוקעת ועולה בוקעת ויורד – and all the vessels that are opposite the olive’s bulk [of defilement] are ritually impure, whether undeath it or whether above it or whether within it, something that is like the hive that is above [Mishnah 13] that sits o its rims. But that which is on the sides which is not opposite the olive’s bulk [of defilement] are pure.
והחבית טמאה – not that the jar itself is impure but we are dealing here with a jar that is not susceptible to receive ritual defilement as will be proven in the concluding clause [of the Mishnah], but that the jar is impure, meaning to say, even vessels that are outside of the jar opposite the defilement are impure, because a mere vessel,its mouth is wide like the measurement of its rimmed bottom and because there is no interruption between the airspace of its inside to the airspace that is on top of it above it [and] outside of it, because it doesn’t protect what is outside of it, it doesn’t protect what is inside/within it.
תחת דופנה מבחוץ טומאה בוקעת ועולה בוקעת ויורדת – and anything that is opposite the olive’s bulk [of defilement] is impure outside of the jar.
והחבית טהורה – that is, what is within the jar, even opposite the olive’s bulk [of defilement] for the walls of the jar protrude in the middle and when there is an olive’s bulk [of defilement] under the wall, its wall is similar to the hive which is lying on its side, that is inside is pure, because there is an interruption between the airspace of the inside that is opposite the olive’s bulk [of defilement] to the airspace that is outside of opposite the olive’s bulk [of defilement].
בתוכה ותחת דופנה – that is to say inside the cavity of its wall. We call it underneath its wall, because the wall goes and becomes narrow to the side of its mouth. And this excludes on its rim that is directed corresponding/opposite to its mouth.
אם יש בדפנות פותח טפח – that the belly of jar protrudes so much outward that there is in one place up until corresponding with the mouth of the jar a cubic handbreadth.

ואם לאו – but if there isn’t there a handbreadth.
טומאה בוקעת ועולה – and it is not impure other than opposite the olive’s bulk [of defilement].
במה דברים אמורים בטהורה – with a jar that is not susceptible to receiving ritual impurity.
אבל אם היתה טמאה – as for example, a mere jar that was smelted in a kiln/furnace, which does receive defilement.
או גבוהה אן הארץ טפח או מכוסה או כפויה – and even if it is pure.
וטומאה תחתיה או בתוכה או על גבה, הכל טמא – that if it susceptible to receive ritual impurity and sits on its rims and the defilement is underneath it or within it or on top of it, even though that an earthenware vessel is not defiled from above it, the jar itself is defiled here. Since this refers to vessels that are within after they are not surrounded by a tight-fitting lid, for a vessel does not protect even on wat is ithin it other than with walls of tents in a place where there isn’t an interruption from the airspace within to the airspace outside of it. And that which is below which is under its rims, and it doesn’t teach under its wall from the outside. But the jar itself is defiled, and since the jar itself is impure, all of the vessels that are within are defiled even that which is not opposite the defilement, for even though we hold that humans and vessels are not defiled from the airspace of an earthenware vessel, here, all the while that the olive’s bulk [of defilement] is underneath it, it defiles from the reason of attachments, since after the jar itself is impure. And similarly, something a handbreadth above from the ground even that is pure we view that which is underneath it as if it filled with defilement, and even the defilement above it. But now, all of these, their law is not equivalent (i.e., the same), for if the jar is susceptible to receive ritual defilement, whatever is within it, even if it is not opposite the defilement is impure. And one who overshadows over it from above, opposite the defilement is impure, but that which is not opposite the defilement is pure. But if it is a handbreadth above the ground or it is covered or turned upside down on its mouth, one who overshadows over it even that which is not opposite the defilement is impure. And we should not be astonished, that which is turned upside downs on its mouth and the defilement is above it, whatever is within it is like the pure vessels that are surrounded with a tight-fitting lid, but it is different here for there is no open space.

Chapter 10



Mishnah 1

ארובה שהיא בתוך הבית (a hatchway which is in the midst of the house) - and it is uncovered to the airspace, for there is no upper chamber roof from above.
כנגד ארובה טהור (that which is opposite the hatchway) – vessels that are placed below on the ground opposite the hatchway and they see the face of the sky are ritually pure.
מלמעלן (from above) – on the garret window in the wall projecting above the flat roof.
עירב את הטומאה (he combined the defilement) – and everything is impure. The house is impure and the person who places his foot in it is also impure.
וכנגד הטומאה טמא – that the olive’s bulk [of defilement] is stretched to here and to there.

Mishnah 2

אין בארבה פותח פתח – surely it comes to tell us that with less than a handbreadth we don’t say that with defilement there is a joining/לבוד (i.e., that two solid surfaces are considered to be joined if there is a gap of less than three handbreadths between them).
נתן את רגלו – the person who sets [his foot] is pure, for it resembles something concealed concerning it, for the defilement does not enter into the tent and doesn’t leave from it with less than an opening of a handbreadth.
אם טומאה קדמה את רגלו טמא – that surely at the time when he set his foot, he overshadowed over the defilement.
ואם רגלו קדמה את הטומאה טהור – that before the defilement came, a concealed tent had already been made, and at the time that the defilement enters there is no garret window in the wall projecting above the flat roof that is open a handbreadth in order that the defilement can leave from it.
שתי רגלים זו על גב זו – of two people, and the first placed his foot on top of the garret window in the wall and the foot of the second [person] is lying on the foot of the first [person], and afterwards, the defilement enters the house underneath the garret window in the wall near the roof, and after that, the first [person] removes his leg and it is found that the foot of the second [person] is placed on the garret window, and even though this second [foot] overshadows over he defilement when the first [person] removed his foot, the second [person] is ritually pure, because the foot of the first [person] preceded the defilement. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon nor according to Rabbi Meir.

Mishnah 3

כנגד ארובה – in the garret window in the wall projecting above the flat roof that doesn’t have an opening of a handbreadth.
וכנגד הטומאה טמא – that is it overshadows over the defilement.
כדי שתחלק – that there will be in the part of uncleanness a measure in order to defile the tent, that is, that there will be in all of it two olive’s bulk or more. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 4

ארובות זו על גב זו – as for example, here is a garret window in the wall projecting above the flat roof between the house and the upper chamber and there is another turret window in the roof of the upper chamber directed against it, and in each of them there is an opening of a handbreadth.
בין מלמעלה – in the upper garret window/aperture in the roof looking to the ground floor.
בין מלמטה – in the lower garret window/aperture looking to the ground floor.
הכל טמא – even what is in the upper chamber. Even though he placed [his foot] in the lower part and not the upper part, for since it is something that is susceptible to receive defilement, it does not interpose before the defilement in the house, and we see it as if it is placed in the mouth of the upper garret window in the wall projecting above the flat roof and mixing/combining the defilement.
ממנו ולמטן טמא – that it became a concealed tent and everything that is within it is impure.
ממנו ולמעלן טהור – and it interposes in front of the defilement.

Mishnah 5

אין טמא אלא התחתון – for since the defilement is in the house but not opposite the garret window, the defilement does not leave/go out with less than a handbreadth [of an opening], and the upper chamber is pure even though the garret window of the upper chamber is concealed.
הכל טמא – for since the defilement is opposite the garret windows and an impure thing does not interpose, we see it as if it is placed in the mouth of the upper garret window and it combines/mixes the defilement.

Mishnah 6

ארובה – that it sees the airspace.
וקדירה נתונה תחתיה – on the ground opposite the garret window. But it is not so wide that if it rises opposite the garret window that its rims would touch the garret window, but rather it goes out and enters with wide space.
טומאה בוקעת ועולה – but the house is ritually pure, and everything that overshadows it, which is not opposite the defilement is pure. But opposite the defilement is impure, for even though an earthenware vessel is not defiled from above it, here, that the defilement bursts forth within it is also impure, even though the defilement is below it. And all that is in the pot is impure, and even that which is not opposite the defilement.
תחתיה והבית טמא – that the pot overshadows over the defilement, since it is a handbreadth higher.
תוכה וגבה טהור – that the pot interposes in front of the defilement and protects with the walls of the tents.
בתוכה או על גבה הכל טמא – within it and on top of it and below it and the house. For the defilement that is upon it bursts forth underneath it, for it is a handbreadth higher, and further it doesn’t protect since the pot is impure.

Mishnah 7

היתה נתונה – it refers to the pot.
בצד אסקופה (at the side of the lintel/threshold, lower door-sill) – that it was placed on the threshold from the outside and stretched inwards so much that if you would ascend there is from it a handbreadth underneath the lintel. And as for example, that the pot was very wide from the bottom and narrow from the top towards its mouth, for when there exists a handbreadth underneath the lintel, still all of its mouth is outside.
טומאה תחתיה – it speaks of pressed ritual impurity (i.e., when there is less than a handbreadth between the corpse and the roof or covering, and the ritual impurity passes through the roof and rises upward indefinitely).
בוקעת ועולה – but the house is pure. And for example, that the defilement is from the lintel and outward. For if it was stretched a handbreadth inside, the house is impure.
תחתיה והבית טמא – since that there is a handbreadth from it inside that brings the defilement into the house.
תוכה וגבה טהור – that it (i.e., the inside and on top of it) is protected with the wall of the house.
הכל טמא – that the pot was defiled and it doesn’t interpose. But we view the defilement as if it is beneath it and that the house is impure.
מודבקת – that the pot is not underneath the lintel at all, but rather above it joined at the side of the lintel, and the width of its joining is not a handbreadth.
אין טמא אלא תחתיה – since there isn’t a handbreadth underneath the lentil, it doesn’t bring defilement to the house, and the house, and what is within it and what is above it, all are ritually pure.

Chapter 11



Mishnah 1

הבית שנסדק – the roof of the house that was divided on the face of all of it to two parts.
טומאה בחוץ – to the outer side where the opening is.
כלים שבפנים טהורים – for it is not the manner of defilement to enter but only to leave.
ובית הלל אומרים כל שהוא – In the Tosefta (see Tractate Ohalot, Chapter 12, Halakha 1) that “any amount” which is the opinion of the School of Hillel is like the [breadth of the] plumb-line. And the Halakha is according to the School of Hillel.

Mishnah 2

אכסדרה שנסדקה (a covered place in front of the house that was split) – the ceiling of the portico that was divided into two.
כלים שבצד השני טהורים – for the airspace of the split interrupts, and causes that the defilement does not pass to the second side.
עירב את הטומאה – because the airspace was closed/concealed.
בארץ – on the floor of the portico opposite the split that is in the ceiling.

Mishnah 3

סגוס (a coarse woolen blanket, mattress to sleep on) - a very thick woolen cloth.
וכוסת – a thick beam. Even though it is high, its thickness is more than a handbreadth.
אין מביאין את הטומאה – if he placed them on the ground opposite the split that is in the ceiling of the portico, unless there is underneath them a cavity of a handbreadth.
קפולין – like a folded cloak/Tallit. Many clothes are folded one upon the other.
עד שתהא העליונה גבוהה מן הארץ טפח – and even though that the clothes are placed underneath it, the upper one brings the defilement, since it is a handbreadth above the ground.
היה אדם נתון שם – on the ground opposite the split.
חלול – avity of the body is considered as a cavity, even though that his intestines are within it.

Mishnah 4

והאהיל על קוברי המת – that is that he overshadowed over the corpse.
בית שמאי אומרים אינו מביא את הטומאה – The School of Shammai according to its reasoning, that the cavity of is body is not considered an [empty] cavity. Therefore, it does not bring the defilement to the house. But the School of Hillel, according to its reasoning that considers it an [empty] cavity, therefore, even though that his body Is connected to the window, the upper side therein brings the defilements to the house, for there is the cavity of his body that is a handbreadth.
ומודים – The School of Shammai [agrees with the School of Hillel] concerning a person who is dressed.

Mishnah 5

היה מוטל על האסקופה – part of him was within the house and part of him was outside of the house.
אינו מביא את טומאה – for there is no cavity/empty space [here].

Mishnah 6

והאהילו עליו טהורים – on part of his body that is outside.
בית שמאי מטהרין – that the defilement that is in the house doesn’t come underneath him.
ובית הלל מטמאין – for they hold that a person is an empty cavity and the defilement comes underneath him, and those that overshadowed upon him outside were defiled.

Mishnah 7

ומת הכלב – for if it (i.e., the dog) lived, even if all of it was in the house, the house is pure, for absorbed defilement [found] in living creatures is not defilement.
ומוטל על האסקופה – and its neck is inside.
אם יש בצוארו פותח טפח – the width of the neck is a handbreadth. And they estimate it through a thread that surrounds the neck. For everything that is within the width of a handbreadth, there is in its circumference three handbreadths.
מביא את הטומאה – to the upper side that within it (i.e., the dog), it overshadows over the defilement and the defilement and conducts it into the house.
ואם לאו – that there isn’t an opening of a handbreadth.
אינו מביא את הטומאה – that concerning the matter of bringing the defilement we require an opening of a handbreadth.
רבי יוסי אומר רואים את הטמאה – we check the place of the defilement on the body of the dog. If it (i.e., the defilement in the belly of the dog) is from the lintel and inside, the house is impure even though its neck does not have the thickness of a handbreadth, for hidden defilement bursts forth and ascends, and it is found that the house overshadowed over the defilement. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yossi.
פיו לפנים – and the hole of his tail (i.e., the dog’s rectum) is from the outside.
הבית טהור – if the defilement is from the outside. For because of the conducting water through a channel, we do not defile him, for here is no path for the food to leave through its motuh, but rather through the hole in the privy.
פיו לחוץ – and through its lower part of the body/abdomen is on the inside.
הבית טמא – for this is the path of the small opening which was at its conclusion to exit.
בין כך ובין כך – whether its (i.e., the dog’s) mouth is inside or whether its mouth is outside, whether the defilement is opposite the lintel and inside or whether the defilement is outside, whether there is in its neck a handbreadth or whether there isn’t in its neck [the space of] a handbreadth, in every matter the house is impure, for the defilement goes whether through its entrance or whether through its exit.
כמה תשהה – the flesh of the corpse.
במעיו – of the dog prior to the dog dying and further would not defile because it would be considered as consumed.
שלשה ימים מעת לעת – from the time it (i.e., the dog) ate it. As we state in [Tractate Shabbat folio 155b] that it is revealed and known before the Holy One, blessed be He that the food of a dog is small, therefore, it leaves its food remains in its intestines for three days.
בעופות ובדגים – if they (i.e., birds and/or fish) ate from the flesh of the corpse, in order that it fall into the fire and be burned.
ר' יהודה בן בתירא אומר וכו' – And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira.

Mishnah 8

החדות (the cellar) – like [the word] דות/cellar, that is the same as a בור/cistern, and that is the same as a דות/cellar, but that the בור/cistern is something [made by] digging and דות/cellar is [something made] by building.
ומנורה בתוכה – within the cellar/דות.
והפרח של מנורה יוצא וכפישה נתונה עליו (the calyx/cup of the Menorah projects and its inverted vessel – divided into two compartments by the bottom - is put over it [that it would remain in position]) – we have the this reading. Meaning to say, on the calyx/cup/flower. And the cup/calyx is wide at the top of the Menorah that the candle sits upon it. And the כפישה/inverted vessel is a large basket that they press the olives in it in order to produce shrinking and maturing of the frits by underground storage or by exposure to the sun.
על פי חדות – that doesn’t fall into it.
טהור – that it is preserved with the walls of the tent, as we stated above in Chapter 5, [Mishnah 6].
המנורה טמאה – because of the calyx/flower that protrudes from the cellar, the inverted vessel does not protect it. But if you should say, since the Menorah is impure, how can the cellar be pure? For doesn’t it become defiled like the corpse itself that a sword is like that the slain person? One can say, that we are speaking as for example that there isn’t a corpse in the house but rather the sword that touched/came in contact with the corpse, and through it defiles the house and the Menorah, and we hold that the a vessel does not make another vessel something else as was explained in the first chapter (see Mishnah 2).
אף המנורה טהורה – for we follow after it (i.e., the Menorah) and not its calyx. And it (i.e., the Menorah) is within the cellar exists and is protected with the cellar.
הכל טמא- whether the cell or whether the Menorah, since if you take the Menorah, the inverted vessel falls into the cellar [and everything is unclean].

Mishnah 9

טומאה שם- within the cellar, even though the inverted vessel is on top of it.
הבית טמא – for there is no airtight fitting lid for defilement.
טומאה בבית – now we are speaking of the open cistern which lacks an inverted vessel divided into two compartments by the bottom between.
טהורים – the vessels [are pure]. Since there is in their place a cubic square handbreadth, that are protected there like a gutter/pipe which is bent/arched over under the house, as is taught in the Mishnah above in Chapter 3 [Mishnah 7] the defilement is in the house and what is within it is pure.
רחבים משל בית (if the walls of the cistern are wider than the walls of the house) – as for example that the cavity of the cistern is broader/extended continuously underneath the wall of the house and the wall of the cistern is built from outside of the wall of the house and the utensils are there.
בין כך ובין כך - even if there isn’t in their place a handbreadth by a handbreadth at the height of a handbreadth, they are pure.

Chapter 12



Mishnah 1

נסר שהוא נתון על פי תנור חדש – that was not heated/kindled, that is not susceptible to receive ritual defilement, And we are speaking of an oven that stands in the courtyard or in the garden.
בפותח טפח – that the board is wide and extends outward from the oven a handbreadth around it from all its sides.
שעל גביו – on top of the board.
טהורים – for since the oven is pure, the vessels are protected, and similarly, if defilement is on top of the board and the vessels are underneath the board.
ובישן – as for example, that the oven was heated that is susceptible to receive ritual defilement.
טמא – the oven [is impure]. The board does not protect it. And all the more so, thew vessels that are under the board and that are on the board. And the reason of our Mishnah is that vessels become tents to defile but not to purify, therefore, a new [oven] which is not a vessel protects. An old [oven] which is a vessel does not protect.
ור' יוחנן בן נורי – specifically with an oven. But regarding vessels, he (i.e., Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri) agrees that they are impure. And this is brought in the Tosefta (Tractate Ohalot, Chapter 13, Halakha 1).
נתון על פי שני תנורים – the head of the board on this oven and the other head of the board on the other oven and there is defilement between the two ovens, and we are speaking of old ovens. But the Rabbis go according to their reasoning and Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri according to his reasoning. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri.

Mishnah 2

סרידא (coarse web or matting/stuffed matting used for stoppers of stoves) – like a kind of earthenware lattice-work/grid/mesh. It is the Aramaic translation of (Exodus 27:4, 38:4): “a grating of meshwork”/מעשה רשת – making mesh. And it is smooth and the leftover is outside of the oven a handbreadth from every side.
הכל טמא – vessels that are underneath it and that are above it, except from vessels that are on top of it opposite the airspace of the oven, because the tent brings defilement underneath it all around the oven and returns and bursts forth above. But even the defilement that is above bursts forth downwards and it is stretched around and returns and bursts forth above.
כנגד אוירו של תנור טהור – for it is surrounded by an airtight seal and interrupts it.
כנגדו עד הרקיע טמא – but what is underneath it is ritually pure.

Mishnah 3

נסר – [a board] which is long and narrow, and when it is placed on the mouth of the oven, it extends outward a handbreadth from the east and a handbreadth from the west but from the south and the north it does not extend outward.
טומאה בצד זה – underneath the board in the east or in the west.
כלים שבצד השני טהורים – that there Is no room for the defilement to pass, for the board doesn’t have leftover from the north or from the south.
ורבי יוסי מטמא – for he holds that the oven does not form a partition. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.
הבטח (a hollow column-like receptacle of rain water near the house; Maimonides holds that it is a projection in front of the window to stand upon in climbing) – There are books that have the reading of אבטח, and it is a building that is made similar to a bathtub in bathhouses that they place water in them for washing, and a board is placed upon it for the ceiling and board has leftover from two sides. But if there is defilement from this side, it doesn’t go out to the other side because the hollow column-like receptacle of rain water near the house interposes.
היה בו זיז (if it had an attachment – a projection from the door frame serving as a shed over the entrance, or a molding projecting from a window-sill as a bracket) – there was a beam going out above from the hollow column-like receptacle of rain water from the east to the west.
רואין את הבטח כיאלו אינו – for even though the hollow column-like receptacle of rain water near the house interposes with the board, in connection with the attachment/a projection from the door frame serving as a shed over the entrance – it does not interpose. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehoshua.

Mishnah 4

סנדל של עריסה – the cradle of a baby that regularly is placed underneath its feet like a metal sandal for beauty or in order that it not rot/decay.
שפחתו בתוך הבית (that was broken through within the house) – that the roof of the upper chamber was broken through/reduced that the crib is placed upon it and the sandal of the cradle is seen within the house from the reduction that is in the roof, and defilement is within the house.
אם יש – in the place of the breach.
פותח טפח – it brings the defilement from the house to the upper chamber.
ואם לאו – that there isn’t there an opening of a handbreadth.
מונין בו כדברך שמונין במת – that the sandal and the crib are impure with a ritual impurity for seven days like the law concerning impure vessels that come in contact with vessels, but the baby is impure with ritual impurity until the evening, as it is taught in the Mishnah in the first chapter (Mishnah 2).

Mishnah 5

מעזיבה (concrete of stone chippings, clay, used for paving floors, pavement covering the ceiling of the lower story and serving as flooring of the upper story) – plaster and stones that they regularly place on top of the beams.

תחתיה טמא – and that which is on top of it is ritually pure, for the beam interposes. And these words [apply] when there the beams have an opening of a handbreadth when they are a handbreadth wide, but if they are not a handbreadth wide, they do not bring the defilement and they do not interpose, and it is like one that they don’t have it. And it is found that defilement is like it stands in the airspace.
ביניהן טמא – and that underneath the lower [beam] and on top of the upper [beam] they are pure, for both of them interpose.
כנגדו עד הרקיע טמא – for underneath all of them (i.e., the beams) it is ritually pure.
כבין התחתונות – opposite the airspace of the lower ones. And their widths is like the measure of the airspace that is between them, for if they should raise up the lower [beams] or lower he upper [beams], it is found that everything is concealed.
תחת כולן טמא – it is as if the ceiling was level, and on top of them is pure.

Mishnah 6

תחת כולה – all the vessels that are under it (i.e., the beam) are impure, for it brings defilement to everything. But on top of it is pure, for it interposes in the face of the defilement.
ואם לאו – that it (i.e., the beam) is not a handbreadth wide.
בוקעת ועולה – for if defilement is underneath it, the vessels that are on top of it opposite the defilement are impure.
בוקעת ויורדת – that if defilement is on top of it, the vessels that are under it opposite the defilement are impure.
היקפה שלשה טפחים – that all that there is in its width a handbreadth, there is in its circumference three handbreadths, for such we found in [The Second Book of] Chronicles [Chapter 4, Verse 2]: “He made the sea of cast metal ten cubits across from brim to brim, perfectly round; it was five cubits high, and its circumference thirty cubits.”

Mishnah 7

עמוד שהוא מוטל לאויר (a column which lay [on the ground] in the open air) – a round column that is cast on the ground and lies on its circle. In the open air, as for example, in the courtyard or in the garden. And from the middle of the circle it begins to overshadow on the ground and gradually becomes shortened from here and there until its bottom is next to/adjacent to the ground, and regarding the mater of bringing defilement we require a handbreadth by a handbreadth at the height of a handbreadth squared, but if there is here to the side that is outward from underneath the height of a handbreadth even though that which is below is adjacent/next to in the place of his lying down on the ground, the height is not a handbreadth completely which defiles in the tent, and it is judged like the sloping of tents. But the round pillar which has in its circumference twenty four handbreadths is found that its width is eight handbreadths, that all that has in its width a handbreadth there is in its circumference twenty-four handbreadths, and it is found that a person is able to make a quadrangle underneath his partition/wall that is from here to and from there a handbreadth by a handbreadth. At the height of a handbreadth, there is here a square of eight [handbreadths] by eight [handbreadths] if you make within it a circle of eight [handbreadths], it is found that the corners overlap eight-fifths [handbreadth] for each and every corner, for each cubit in a square is a cubit and two-fifths crosswise/in a diagonal line, it is found that the diagonal line is in excess of the width by sixteen-fifths, take from them half for this corner and half for that corner, there is for each one eight-fifths, and if you come to make in the corner that is outside of the circle a square of a handbreadth by a handbreadth, it is found that his diagonal line/crosswise is in excess over its width by two-fifths, and it is found that the measure of the diagonal line is seven-fifths, there would not remain for us more than the need other than one-fifth, but because the one-fifth is not exact. And furthermore, that each cubit in a square is a cubit and two-fifths in a diagonal line – which is not completely lying exactly in line, for it is missing a bit from it.

Mishnah 8

מודבק לאסקופה – that the threshold is wide and defilement is attached on the threshold from the arched gateway with posts and outward, Rabbi Eliezer holds that all of the threshold is like the house, therefore, it defiles the house. But Rabbi Yehoshua holds from he arched gateway with posts and outward, the threshold is not considered like the house. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehoshua.
ידון מחצה למחצה – from half of the threshold and inward is like inside, and the house is impure, from half and outward is like outside and the house is pure, half and half, the house is impure.
מודבק למשקוף – underneath the lintel from the arched gateway and posts outward.
הבית טמא – that even from the arched gateway and posts and outward it is considered a house.
ור' יוסי מטהר – for it is not considered to him like a house. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.
רבי אליעזר מטמא – that he considers all of the threshold like a house.
מטפח ולמטן טהור – for it is similar to the ground.
מטפח ולמעלן טמא – even though it is attached to the threshold, Rabbi Yehoshua purifies the house, here when then defilement is in the house, Rabbi Yehoshua declares impure the threshold from a handbreadth and higher, because it is the manner of defilement to leave and not to enter. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehoshua.

Chapter 13



Mishnah 1

העושה מאור ((he who leaves a light-hole/opening – in the wall – from the start – when building) – a window that is made for its light.
בתחילה – because they need to need the concluding clause: "שיירי המאור"/”remnants of the light,” it teaches in the first clause, “from the start”/"בתחילה".
מקדח גדול של לשכה (the full capacity of a large borer/drill of the chamber) – It is like the Italian Dupondium and like the Neronian Sela and it has the full capacity of a hole of a yoke/pole. If it has in the window like this measure, it brings the defilement to the other side.
שיירי המאור – if thee remains from the window that is not concealed.
חררוהו מים- that the cave was not made at the hand of a person but rather through the running water.
או שרצים – as for example the mole/weasel and the mouse.
או שאכלתו מלחת (or formed through corrosion produced by saline corrosion) – that the land is filled with saline corrosion and it burst forth on its own.
מלא אגרוף – the fist of Ben Battiah (see Tractate Kelim, Chapter 17, Mishnah 12 – Ben Battiah is the nephew of Rabban Yohanan ben Zakkai, one of the leaders of the terrorists during the siege of Jerusalem by the Romans) – a large person whose fist was like the large head of all people.
חישב עליו לתשמיש – a window that that the running waters or the reptiles made, that he gave thought to use it and to leave there his belongings.
למאור – to bring in light.
הסריגות (the lattice In the windows) – the partitions which are like net-work in zig-zag that they make in widows of storehouses.
והרפפות (loose lattice work with wide meshes – used for sheds) – partitions that are zig-zag that they make in windows of summer houses where they sit there to cool off.
מצטרפות כמלוא מקדח – the airspace that is between the lattice in the windows, even though there isn’t in one place like the breadth of a hole of a borer/drill, they combine amongst all of them to the size of a borer.
להביא את הטומאה ולהוציא את הטומאה – this is not referring to the dispute between the School of Shammai and the School of Hillel, but it refers to the measurements of the first clause of the Mishnah. And this is what he said: The size of the hole of the large drill/borer and the size of the fist [of Ben Battiah] and the opening of a handbreadth that we stated, all of these measurements, whether to bring in the defilement into the house or whether to remove the defilement from the house. But Rabbi Shimon disputes this, and holds, whether to bring in or whether to remove, for all of them their measurement is the opening of a handbreadth, and Shimon does not have the measurement of the size of the hole of the borer or the size of the fist at all. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.

Mishnah 2

חלון העשוי לאויר – o bring in the air of the world, that is the window that is made for its light. And because it was necessary to teach that he built a house outside of it, he went back and repeated the teaching.
בנה בית חוצה לה – opposite the window, and the airspace of the window was voided.
שיעורה בפותח טפח – like the window that is made for usage.
נתן את התקרה באמצע החלון – that the window is found half it of it above the ceiling and half of it below.
החלון התחתון בפותח טפח – like the law of the window made for usage, for here there is no air.
והעליון מלוא מקדח – that above from the ceiling is for the air.

Mishnah 3

החור שבדלת – in the middle of the door, that it is not made for the air.
שייר בו החרש – the artisan who prepared/fixed the door.
מלמטן – as for example that he left [a hole] near the threshold.
או מלמעלן – near the lintel.
הגיפה (he filled the hole out but not entirely)– he closed it.
ולא מירקה – but didn’t complete it.
או שפתחונו הרוח – meaning to say, or that he competed the closure but the wind came and opened it.
שיעורו מלוא אגרוף – for since it opened on its own, it is like the running water or reptiles. But in this concluding clause [of the Mishnah], Rabbi Tarfon does not disagree because the hole that is in the middle the carpenter made with intention, but not because he needs the hole but rather the boards were short and a door was made from them and he had the intention to place a hole/incision in the middle more than to place it below or above. And it is similar to someone who makes with intention, but when he placed it from below or from above, this is not like doing it with one’s hands, but rather because the boards are short, and the hole wasn’t filled.

Mishnah 4

העושה מקום – that he made a puncture going all the way through in the wall to place there a reed of the weavers.
ולאספתי (and for the executioner’s sword/weaver’s stave) – a sword in the Greek language they call ASPATI. And weavers have a vessel like the shape of a sword.
שעורו בכל שהוא – to bring in the defilement to the other side.
לזון את עיניו – to look out from there to the public domain or to the courtyard.
ולתשמיש – to hide there his belongings.

Mishnah 5

אלו ממעטים את הטפח – a window that its measure is when it is open a handbreadth, and one of all of these that is considered here is placed in it and it reduces the airspace from a handbreadth, it interposes, that the defilement doesn’t pass to the other side.
על ידי רובע עצמות – if there is in the house a quarter [KAB] of bones that defile in a tent, and less than an olive’s bulk from the flesh of a corpse that is placed in the window, it lessens it. And specifically, less than an olive’s bulk, for if it were an olive’s bulk, it itself defiles in a tent. And specifically, through a quarter [Kab] of bones. But if there is in the house an olive’s bulk of flesh from a corpse, nothing less than this olive’s bulk can lessen it, for on the contrary, flesh combines with flesh. And that is the reason also that specifically flesh reduces through bones, but not bones through bones, for bones with bones combine.
פחות מעצם כשעורה -but a bone like [the size of] a barleycorn does not reduce/lessen the size, because it defiles through contact and through carrying.
פחות מכזית מן המת – now [the Tanna/teacher of the Mishnah] has repeated his teaching, even though he taught it in the first clause [of the Mishnah] to inform us/teach us that he lessens/reduces [the size] through all that defile in a tent, such as a quarter [LOG] of blood and a spoonful of mass of earth from a grave containing parts of a decayed human body if of a certain quantity and all of those that are taught in Chapter Two [of Tractate Ohalot].
פחות מכזית מן הנבלה וכו' – all of these that are considered from here and onward, that they reduce whether through bones or whether through flesh.
ופחות מכביצה אוכלים – that foods less than an egg’s bulk do not defile others and are not susceptible to receive ritual defilement from the Torah, therefore it reduces and interposes in the face of the defilement.
והתבואה – that took root far from the wall and its foliage straightened and closed the window, for it is attached to the ground.
וככי שיש הן ממש (the web-like marrow of reeds/substantial spiderweb in which there is substance) – spider’s web that are called the web-like marrow of reeds. But I heard that they are a species of spider’s web that is found within the reed. And sometimes it is very thin and it is web-like marrow of reeds and there is no substance to them, and sometimes it is similar to the weaving of cloth and it is like a web-like marrow of reeds that has substance to it.
ונבלת עוף טהור שלא חישב עליה – that the carcass of fowl/birds is ritually pure and doesn’t defile until one considers it/given it thought for eating, and then it defiles with the ritual impurity of foods like an egg’s bulk and does not require certification [to be susceptible to ritual uncleanness].
נבלת עוף טמא שחשב עליה ולא הכשירה – for the carrion of an impure bird/fowl requires intention/though and requires certification [to be susceptible to ritual uncleanness, that is to say, that when water comes upon it or one of the seven liquids (i.e., dew, water, wine, olive oil, blood, milk and honey – see Tractate Makhshirin, Chapter 6, Mishnah 4), but if it is lacking thought/intention or certification of [to be susceptible to ritual uncleanness], it is pure and it reduces/lessens [the handbreadth] and interposes in the face of defilement.

Mishnah 6

ולא תבואה שבחלון – that actually took root in the window. Because it was his intention to remove it when it ruins the wall, and every thing that is his intention to remove, does not reduce in the window. But above (i.e., the previous Mishnah), it speaks about something that took root far from the wall, that now it is not his intention to remove it.
השתי והערב המנוגעים (but not – the warp and woof threads that have contracted leprosy) – that the warp and woof [threads] become defiled through plagues/leprosy, and something that is impure does not reduce/lessen.
ולא לבינה מבית הפרס – the brick is made from the dust of the an area in which uncertainty exists concerning the location of a grave or a corpse [surrounded by one-hundred cubits]. Rabbi Meir holds that it is impure just as the dust of an area in which uncertainty exists concerning the location of a grave or a corpse, therefore, it does not lessen in the window. But the Rabbis hold that they only defiled a clod/lump-like creature that comes from an area where in which uncertainty exists concerning the location of a grave or a corpse, and not the dust even after it was kneaded. And the Halakha is according to the Sages. And the measure of a clod/lump is like a large lump of sacks which is like the sealing clay as required for a seal on bags.

Chapter 14



Mishnah 1

הזיז שפניו למטה (the projection from the door frame serving as a shed over the entrance, or a molding projecting from a window-sill serving as a bracket --- the finished side of which faces the ground) – like a tablet/board that projects out from the wall outward and its head is bent to the land to side of the opening. Therefore, its tent combines with the opening and brings the defilement in any amount and it is considered as if it has an opening of a handbreadth, but if the defilement is underneath it, the house is impure, that we see its head bent downward as if it reached the ground and it brings defilement to the side of the house.
וגיזרה – that it faces upward. Its head is bent upward and its tent does not combine with the opening, therefore, it requires an opening of a handbreadth.
וגבלית (a Giblean balcony) – The Tosefta (Tosefta Ohalot, Chapter 14, Halakha 9) explains that it is vessel which sucks from (is girded to the wall on) both sides and left alone (without support) in the middle.
שנים עשר טפחים – for the measurement each נדבך/course of stones or tier/layer is four handbreadths, and a נדבך is a row of the stones of the building.
והעטרות (cornice, molding, wreaths -above the entrance) – stones arranged in a circle that protrude from the wall above from the opening similar to an archway for beauty.
והפתוחים (and the engravings -above the entrance)- that they make from stone on the opening or on the window for beauty, and sometimes they protrude from the window or from the opening a handbreadth or more.

Mishnah 2

זיז שעל גבי הפתח וכו' – here we are speaking where the opening is concealed. And because of this, we require that the projection will have an opening of a handbreadth. And this is implied in the Tosefta (see Tosefta Ohalot, Chapter 14, Halakha 9).
ושעל גבי החלון רום אצבעיים – that is to say, whether a window whose measure is a height of two fingerbreadths, such as the remnants of the light-hole (i.e., opening in the wall from the start – see Tractate Ohalot, Chapter 13, Mishnah 1) or whether its measurement is as large as the hole made with the [large carpenter’s] borer/drill, as for example, that makes the light-hole at the outset, the projection that on top of both of this is whatever the amount.
ורבי יוסי אומר מלואו (only if its height is of equal measure/of full capacity) – a window whose measure is a height of two fingerbreadths, its projection it’s measure is with two fingerbreadths. But a window whose measurement is as large as the hole made by a borer/drill, its projection we also estimate/assess to be as large as the hole made by a borer/drill. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 3

אפילו גבוה מאה אמה – even if the projection, the measurement of its height from the opening is twelve handbreadths, with a reed they were stringent because it is carried. But Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri holds that one should not be stringent with a reed more than with the wall projection, and higher than twelve handbreadths with an opening of one handbreadth. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri.

Mishnah 4

זיז – which is a handbreadth wide and surrounds all the walls of the house from the outside, and opposite the opening/door extends three fingerbreadths, but on the rest of the opening/door, there is no projection. For if there was an extension opposite the opening/door of a handbreadth, the house would be impure according to the words of everyone.
כלים שתחתיו טמאים – in this Rabbi Yehoshua does not dispute as he disputes in the concluding clause [of the Mishnah], because it is the manner of defilement to depart/go out.
רבי אליעזר מטמא את הבית – because the projection is stringent that it defiles in any amount, it brings defilement to the house with three fingerbreadths.
וכן בחצר שהיא מוקפת אכסדרה – but the covered place in front of the house/parlor extends three finger breadths, [if] defilement is in the house, vessels that are in the parlor are impure. [If] defilement is in the parlor, Rabbi Eliezer declares the house to be impure. But Rabbi Yehoshua declares it to be pure. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehoshua.

Mishnah 5

שני זיזין זה על גב זה – and they are corresponding this one opposite that one.
יש בהן פותח פתח – that each one of the wall projections – its width is a handbreadth by a handbreadth.
וביניהן פותח טפח – the bottom one is above from the ground a handbreadth and the upper one is a handbreadth above from the lower one.
וטומאה תחתיהן – underneath the bottom one. Everything that is below it is impure and what is above it is pure, for it interposes in the face of the defilement.
ביניהן – if defilement is between the bottom one (i.e., projection) and the upper one, everything that is between them is impure. But what is under the bottom one and that which is above the higher one, is pure, for they interpose.
על גביהן – on top of the upper projection. And what is opposite the defilement until the firmament, is impure. And all the rest is pure.
היה העליון עודף על התחתון וכו' תחתיהן וביניהן טמא – that whether the defilement is under the lower [projection] or whether that the defilement is between them, the very excess that the upper projection is greater than the bottom [projection] by a handbreadth combines the defilement in every place. But what is above the upper [projection] is pure, for it interposes.
על גביהן – on top of the upper [projection].
היה העליון עודף על התחתון וכו' טומאה תחתיהן – that is under the lower [projection].
תחתיהן וביניהן טמא – for that surplus combines/mixes the defilement and brings the defilement to what is below it.
ביניהן – if the defilement is between them or blow on the ground underneath the supplement, that is opposite the excess/surplus but not below the lower [projection].
רבי אליעזר אומר תחתיהן וביניהן טמא – for even though there isn’t a handbreadth in the surplus, it brings the defilement under the lower [projection], since the surplus is over it [as a tent].
ביניהן ותחת המותר טמא – what is between the two projections and what is underneath them on the ground opposite the surplus is impure.
ותחתיהן טהור – what is underneath the lower [projection], for since there isn’t in the surplus a handbreadth, the defilement does not come underneath the lower [projection]. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehoshua.

Mishnah 6



Mishnah 7

אין בהן פותח טפח – that the [wall] projection do not have the width of a handbreadth, therefore, whether the defilement is below or whether the defilement is above, it does not interpose at all.
וכן שתי יריעות שהן גבוהות מן הארץ בפותח טפח – and they higher than each other by a handbreadth, and their law is like that of two [wall] projections.

Chapter 15



Mishnah 1

סגוס עבה (a thick coarse woolen blanket) – This Mishnah was explained above (i.e., Chapter 11) in the chapter "הבית שנסדק"/The house that was split [Mishnah 3]. And since it is necessary to teach about boards/planks, it is taught once again here.
ואם היו של שיש – even if the larger one was a handbreadth above the ground, it is not considered a tent to bring the defilement, since the lower one reduces the airspace because they are considered like the ground. But boards/planks of wood are not considered like the ground at the time when the upper one is a handbreadth higher than the ground, even though the lower one reduces the airspace, the upper one brings the defilement.

Mishnah 2

טבליות של עץ – that are adjacent to one another and each of them are a handbreadth above the ground and touch at their corners – each other with its neighbor that is near it, and it is the manner of the corners of the boards that they are not a handbreadth wide, therefore, vessels that are underneath the first that the defilement is under it are impure, but that which is under the second are pure.
הנוגע בשניה טמא טומאת שבעה – and even though it is taught in the Mishnah in the first chapter [Mishnah 2] that: “Utensils which touch the corpse and utensils [which touch other] utensils are unclean with the uncleanness of seven [days]. The third, whether man or utensils, is unclean with the uncleanness [that passes at] evening.” But it is taught in the Mishnah there (i.e., at the conclusion of Mishnah 3): “The tent does not come under consideration.” Therefore, the board that the defilement is underneath it is not part of the count (i.e., is not included).
עד שיהא בו ריבוע בפותח טפח (until it has a squared handbreadth) – it is a kind of breached/broken-through chest that has four walls that they would make for a table when the table sits upon it, and that breached chest is called a square. And sometimes, that the table protrudes and extends outside from that square a handbreadth or less or more, and now it states that it needs that the table protrudes outward from that square with an opening of handbreadth, for just as what is within the square does not combine, if defilement is also within the square from the inside, the square interposes and prevents the defilement from passing to the outside.

Mishnah 3

חביות – many rows of jars [of clay], this one after that one and this over that one.
שהן יושבות על שוליהן – and their mouths are [facing] upward.
או מוטות על צדיהן – and their mouths are from the side.
באויר – in a garden or in a courtyard.
בפותח טפח – with the width of a handbreadth they touch one another.
טומאה בוקעת ועולה – to the sides it teaches [in the Mishnah]. That they lie on their sides, even facing the defilement, nothing is impure other than what is below them and on top of them, but what is within them is pure, since that an earthenware vessel does not become impure on top of it, it protects what is inside of it, and what is not facing the defilement, even that it is under them or above them, is pure. And when they sit on their rims, even what is within is not protected, because there is no interruption from the airspace inside it to the airspace that is outside of it, but the jar itself is defiled, and all of the vessels that are in it are defiled, and even if it is not facing the defilement, as we stated the reason at the conclusion of the chapter הכוורת/The Hive (Chapter 9 of Tractate Ohalot, Mishnah 16).
במה דברים אמורים בטהורות – for since they are pure, they are similar to boards of marble whose bottoms conceal the empty space/cavity of a handbreadth and the defilement bursts through and ascends.
אבל אם היו טמאות – even if they are not above the ground, the upper ones which are a handbreadth above the ground bring the defilement, for the lower ones do not conceal/stop up, since they are impure, this resembles the ones folded over/doubled on each other and boards on top of each other.
או גבוהות מן הארץ פותח טפח – they bring the defilement, and even the pure ones since they touch each other in a width of a handbreadth they are all considered like one tent.

Mishnah 4

שחצצו – that he made in it a partition (i.e., a room which one partitioned off with boards or tapestry on the sides – walls – or on the ceiling).
מן הצדדין – that the curtains and the boards were placed opposite/corresponding to the walls of the house.
או מן הקורות – that they were placed underneath the ceiling of the house.
כלים שבחצץ טהורים (vessels that are in the space between two partitions/the vacuum) – that the curtains and the boards interpose, and are considered like vessels that are on the roof and like vessels that are outside of the wall.
כלים שבבית טמאים – for there is no interposition for defilement, for this resembles an earthenware vessel that is surrounded with an airtight lid, for if the defilement that is in the house it protects over what is within it, but if the defilement is within it, there is no airtight lid for defilement.
כלים שבחצץ – the vessel that is with the defilement with in the partition.
אם יש פותח טפח – that there is an empty space/cavity which is a handbreadth wide.
ואם לאו טהורים – the vessels that are in the space between the two partitions/the vacuum [are pure]. But a house however is impure.

Mishnah 5

חצצו מארצו (if one partitioned it off from the floor - laying an additional floor with a vacuum between) – that he covered the bottom [of the floor] of the house with boards or curtains.
טומאה בחצץ – even if it has a handbreadth [in length] by a handbreadth [in width] at the height of a handbreadth [vessels that are in the house are impure].
כלים שבבית טמאים – like a gutter/canal that is arched over underneath the house, as is taught in the Mishnah above in Chapter 3 [Mishnah 7]: “If it is a handbreadth wide, and its outlet is not a handbreadth-wide, the uncleanness is in in it - the house is unclean. Uncleanness is in the house – what is in it is clean.”
שארצו של בית כמוהו – when it lacks an opening of a handbreadth.

Mishnah 6

טומאה בפנים- in the place of the straw.
שכנגד היציאה – a vacant place which is like the width of a cubit from the opening until the wall that is opposite it that they (i.e., people) enter and depart on that path there to remove the straw and to bring it in. But the vessels that are within the vacant space are impure, which resembles the defilement in the vacuum/space of the two partitions of the vessels that are in the house are impure.
טומאה בחוץ – that is in the vacant space from the opening until the wall that is opposite it.
כלים שבפנים – in the place of the straw.
אם יש במקומן טפח על טפח ברום טפח טהורים ואם לאו טמאים – that is in the space between two partitions/in the vacuum also if defilement is in the house, vessels that are in the vacuum where there isn’t in their place a handbreadth are impure.
ואם יש בין התבן ולקורות פותח טפח - that this straw was not nullified to be considered like a vacuum/space of the two partitions and it is like the rest of the belongings that are in the house. But it doesn’t protect on what is inside, whether there is in its place a handbreadth or whether there isn’t in its place a handbreadth [of space].

Mishnah 7

וכן כרי של תבואה – that they abandoned.
אפילו טומאה בצד הכלים – that the defilement was within the heap of stones, and vessels there were adjacent/near to the defilement within the heap but ae not touching the defilement.
טומאה בוקעת ועולה – but whatever is at its side is pure. And if there is in the place of the defilement a handbreadth [length) by a handbreadth [width] at a height of a handbreadth, it is indeed like a concealed grave and it defiles everything that is around it.

Mishnah 8

חצר הקבר – he courtyard that surrounds from its four directions four caves of graves.
טהור עד שיהא בה ארבע אמות – all the while that there are four cubits the person who stands in its midst is ritually pure. But less than four cubits, the person who stands in its midst is impure, but if there aren’t there other than three caves from three directions and the fourth direction of the courtyard is open to the airspace of the world, even if he isn’t is not distanced from the opening of the cave other than whatever the amount, he is pure, as long as he doesn’t touch the lintel of the opening of the cave. And these words [apply] when the courtyard of the grave is marked with a partition, but for a mere corpse [it takes only] four cubits for defilement.
גולל לקבר – a covering on the opening of the burial cave.
אלא כנגד הפתח (only the part directly opposite the opening) – of the burial crave. But a person who touches the end that is placed outside of the grave, is ritually pure.
עשה ראשה גולל לקבר – and behold it stands over the burial cave like a tree. A person who comes in contact with it at four handbreadths near the burial cave is impure because of the stone placed on top of a burial cave/top stone, but from four [handbreadths] and above, he is pure.
בזמן שהוא עתיד לגוד – to cut it off. And even though he did not cut it yet. [The word] לגוד is like (Daniel 4:20): “[The holy Watcher whom the king saw descend from heaven and say,] Hew down the tree [and destroy it].”
כולו חיבור – all he while that he did not cut it, and even though he will ultimately cut it down. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 9

הנוגע בה – all the time that it is a covering on the opening of a burial cave.
טמא טומאת שבעה – as it is written (Numbers 19:16): “And in the open, anyone who touches a person [who was killed or who died naturally, or human bone, or a grave, shall be unclean seven days],” including the stone placed on top of a burial cave/גולל and the frame supporting the movable stone of a tomb/דופק.
והחבית והמשקין טהורים – that an earthenware vessel that is surrounded with an air-tight lid is pure from being defiled in the tent of a corpse, as it states (Numbers 19:15): “And every open vessel, with no lid fastened down, shall be unclean,” but if it is has an air-tight lid upon it, it is pure, and an earthenware vessel that Scripture speaks of is not susceptible to receive defilement from outside it/above it.
רבי מאיר אומר וכו' – But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Meir, but rather even though you don’t have a thing that is a living, breathing creature and it defiles, outside of a human being, nevertheless, they defile because of the top-fitting cover all the while that they are top-fitting covers for a burial cave.

Mishnah 10

המאהיל על המת ונוגע בכלים – the vessels are impure for a period of seven days because of attachments, as for example, that at the time that he touched the corpse or overshadowed it, a person who touches likewise with vessels.
ואם יש בידיו פותח טפח טמאים – since his hands overshadow over the corpse and over the vessels, they bring the defilement in.
שני בתים – and their openings correspond with one another.
מביא את הטומאה – and they remained as two impure houses. For a tent of his hands combines the defilement as if two halves ae placed in this one (i.e., hand) and that one (i.e., hand).
ואם לאו – that there isn’t an opening of a handbreadth in his hands. A person, however, is impure, as it is taught in the Mishnah further on [Chapter 16, Mishnah 1] and on themselves with whatever amount, but the two houses are ritually pure.

Chapter 16



Mishnah 1

כל המיטלטלין מביאין את הטומאה – because of the tent. For if it overshadows its one head over the corpse and other head over the vessels, it brings the defilement.
כעובי המרדע (as thick as an ox-goad) – even if it lacks the width of a handbreadth but rather that it has in its circumference a handbreadth. For a thread of a handbreadth surrounds it, for they (i.e., the Rabbis) decreed on its circumference because of is thickness.
אקפח את בני (May I bury my children -an oath frequently used by Rabbi Tarfon) – I will bury them. [The word] קיפוח/deprivation – is the language of mutilation/excision or cutting. And it is an oath, “may I bury my children if this thing is not true” that this Halakha is forced/prevented, defected/lopped and cut piece-meal. For we require an opening of a handbreadth.
ששמע השומע – when the question was asked through an actual event/incident in the Bet Midrash/academy and he heard that they defiled and he did not know for what reason they defied it. They defiled the ox-goad because of the utensils that overshadow over the corpse, that the vessel itself that overshadows the corpse is impure regardless of the amount, for we don’t require an opening of a handbreadth other than to bring the defilement under its second head, and they defiled the farmer either because of either for the reason of connections or because he had vessels that touched the corpse and a person [who came in contact] with vessels and is impure for a period of seven days. But the listener erred to state that they defiled him for the reason that the ox-goad brings upon him defilement from the law of the tent.
שיהו דברי חכמים מקויימים (that the words of the Sages may endure) – that they say that the ox-goad brings the defilement.
על האדם הנושאן – there are times when a person who carries them does not have upon him anything other than defilement for one night, for his clothing interrupts between his shoulder and the ox-goat and it is for him “that he will offer with that he will offer to that he will offer,” (see Leviticus 21:17, 18 and 22:3) that a person who sees that they defile him a defilement of an evening will err to state that it is because of the tent that they defiled him, because it has a circumference of a handbreadth, and it comes to inform us that the defilement of a tent has naught other than the defilement of an evening. Therefore, they (i.e., the Sages) decreed upon him “like the thickness of an ox-goad” to defile for a period of seven days according to their words (i.e., of the Rabbis) because of the tent.
ועל עצמן בכל שהוא – for a vessel that overshadows over a corpse is impure, even of any amount.
ועל שאר אדם וכלים – that is underneath the ox-goad.
בפותח טפח – because they don’t defilement at all, it doesn’t belong to defile on its circumference because of its thickness.

Mishnah 2

כוש (reed used a spindle) – a spindle that women spin on. And even though they are flat wooden vessels, it is susceptible to receive Levitical defilement, because of the metal hook/curved pin that is fixed in it.
אע"פ שאינן מכוונין (even though they are not directly opposite one another)- for two halves of an olive’s bulk [of a corpse] are not directly opposite each other.
טמא – the spindle. That it brings the defilement upon itself with any amount.
הקדר – who sells pots.
והסל – the balancing pole/staff that he carries the pots. And in the Tractate Kelim (Chapter 17, Mishnah 16) they call it an איסל /pole or yoke carried on two, or more commonly, one shoulder and it is taught in the Mishnah there: "האיסל שיש בו בית קיבול מעות"/a carrying yoke in which there is a (hidden) receptacle for money.
ואם יש באיסל פותח טפח – it brings the defilement on the pots that are underneath it to the second side where they are suspended on it (i.e., the yoke).
התלוליות (the mounds) – it is the language of a תל/a hill.
הקרובות בין לעיר – that are adjacent/near to the cemetery.
בין לדרך – that is near the cemetery.
אחד חדשות ואחד ישנות – because that the women bury their non-viable births, that up to fifty cubits a woman goes alone and buries her non-viable birth. But the ones far away, a woman doesn’t go alone to bury [the non-viable birth] on the mound/hill, and since she needed a man that would go with her, she goes to the cemetery but doesn’t bury on the hill. And that which we defile the old ones and even the far-off ones, for we are concerned lest the near ones were from their beginnings and the city was destroyed and the matter would be forgotten.
ור' יהודה אומר כו' – And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 3

המוצא מת בתחלה – for it was not known that there was a graveyard there, and this what we say in the Gemara in [Tractate] Nazir [folio 64b]: "המוצא"/He who finds a corpse, but not that it was accessible; dead, excluding one that was killed, for a killed person has no ground which is pressed by a body in the grave (and which is considered the dead person’s property) and he lacked a neighborhood of graves, and this is what is derived.
מושכב – and not that he was sitting.
כדרכו – and not that his head was lying between his thighs. For all of these, we are concerned/worried lest they are heathens, for it is not manner of Israelites to bury their dead as such.
נוטלו ואת תבוסתו (if one finds in his field a body in the usual position of a buried man, the first time, he may remove it with the ground which it occupies – for burial in another place) – it is permissible to remove him from there and to bury him in another place. And he must take from the dust of the grave with him, the ground which is pressed by the body in the grave (and which is considered the dead man’s property), which is all the crushed, loose earth that is underneath him, and he digs in virgin earth three fingerbreadths as it is written (Genesis 47:30): “[When I lie down with my fathers,] take me up from Egypt and bury me in their burial-place,” for he didn’t need to say, “from Egypt”, but rather, this is what he said: “from the dust of Egypt take with me.” But Maimonides had the reading "תבוסתו"/his ground that is pressed by a body in a grave (as opposed to the reading in the Mishnah"תבוסתן"/their ground that is pressed by a body in a grave, the dust that is mixed from blood and the moisture/secretion of the corpse. It is the language of (Ezekiel 16:6): “[When I passed by you] and saw your wallowing in your blood, [I said to you: ‘live in spite of your blood.’].”
מצא שלשה. אם יש בין זה לזה מארבע אמות ועד שמונה – meaning to say, from the first grave until the third, there is no less than four cubits and not more than eight [cubits].
הרי זה שכונת קבורות (behold, this is a graveyard) – and it is recognized that to there burial is provided to them there, and it is prohibited to remove them, for they have acquired their place. And even,one corpse if it is known that to there burial was given to him, it is forbidden to remove him. But that for one or two we suspend [this view] that they were not buried there other than on a temporary basis and it was their intention to have them removed, but with three, it is proven that this is a special place for burials. And the length of the cave is its manner to be six [cubits] long and four [cubits] wide with a diagonal line of the surplus of two cubits which is eight. And because of this, it is taught [in our Mishnah]: “from four cubits and until eight.”
כמלוא מטה וקובריה – we don’t have this reading here.
בודק ממנו ולהלן עשרים אמה – that the cave is four cubits wide by six in length, and the courtyard and the caves are open to him from here and from there, six [cubits] by six [cubits], for this is what the Rabbis hold in [Tractate] Bava Batra, in the chapter: "המוכר פירות" /He who sells fruit (Chapter 6) [folio 101a, see also the Gemara on folio 102a], it is found that the length of two caves and a courtyard that is between them is eighteen cubits, and because that sometimes they dig one cave in a diagonal, and the diagonal of a cave has a surplus on its square of two cubits, they are found to be twenty cubits, eighteen of the first cave with a diagonal and six [cubits] of the courtyard that is between the two caves and six [cubits] of the second cave, for one diagonal we have stated, two diagonals we have not stated. And that is what is taught [in the Mishnah] regarding twenty. And further one needs to check from above and below twenty cubits, and that is forty cubits, for perhaps this is a cave that is in the eastern part of the courtyard and there still another [cave] that is opposite on the western side of the courtyard; alternatively, this one is on the western side of the courtyard and there is still another on the eastern part of the courtyard.
מצא מת אחד בסוף עשרים בודק הימנו ולהלן עשרים אמה – for who would say that from this cemetery there is this cave, perhaps there is another cave and another courtyard of another person, and one must also make to there all of the examinations mentioned above, for just as there is a grave there, just like this, there are others.
שרגלים לדבר – after that is found already in this field a graveyard.
שאילו מחלה מצאו – for this grave prior to his having found the first three, he removes it and its soil that it occupies, as it is taught in the first clause of the Mishnah: "המוצא מת בתחלה כו' נוטלו ואת תפוסתו"/a person finds a corpse in first instance, he removes it and the soil that is with it.

Mishnah 4

הבודק – that which is taught in the [previous] Mishnah: "ובודק הימנו ולהלן עשרים אמה"/And he examines [the ground] from it and onward for twenty cubits, there is no need to dig it all up, but rather, he digs a cubit by a cubit and leaves a cubit hat he doesn’t dig, and he does this until he reaches the end of twenty [cubits]. And that cubit that he digs he must dig until he reaches the rock or the virgin/untouched soil, which is ground that had never ever been dug.
המוציא את העפר ממקום הטומאה – from those cubits that he digs.
אוכל בדמאו – if he is a Kohen, he eats of his heave-offering. It is the language of (Exodus 22:28): “You shall not put off the skimming of the first yield of your vats.” But even though the Kohanim are not permitted to check, they are warned about the defilement, nevertheless, if the Kohen happens by chance to check, he is not forbidden to eat heave-offering where it is not under the presumption of defilement being there.
המפקח את הגל – of stones that fell upon a person and he died. If he was a Kohen, he does not eat of his doubtful heave offering. For since it is under the presumption that there is defilement there, we are concerned that perhaps [the corpse] was overshadowed, and even we are concerned even if he is doubtfully alive or doubtfully dead.

Mishnah 5

היה בודק- to complete the twenty cubits.
לנחל – river.
לשלולית (to a pool, pond, rivulet) – a rivulet/canal which imparts booty (alluvium) to its banks and other canals of what drink from it.
או לדרך הרבים – and they don’t bury the dead/corpse in it (i.e., the public road).
מפסיק - and he doesn’t examine further to complete the twenty cubits.
והכל טהור – and they don’t have the ground which it occupied (i.e., the earth surrounding the buried corpse), but rather he collects the bones alone and he doesn’t have to take more.
רבי שמעון אומר כו' – But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.

Chapter 17



Mishnah 1

יז
החורש. בית הפרס – a place where the defilement is separated and flattened/straightened there. But my Rabbis explained that [the word] פרס is "דבר פרוס ושבור" (see also the Bartenura commentary to Tractate Niddah, Chapter 7, Mishnah 5 where the same phrase appears) something that is broken and injured, that the bones of the corpse were broken/divided there. And from the mouth of others I heard that as a result that the feet of human beings are prevented from walking there because of the defilement.
מלא מענה (a furrow’s length) – of a plough. From the place of he grave that he began to plow until one-hundred cubits along the length of the field by one-hundred [cubits] in width, we are concerned lest the plough carries from him a [piece of human] bone the size of a barleycorn. But if he would continue ploughing outside of the one-hundred cubits, from one-hundred cubits and outward, it is ritually pure, for the plough does not carry bones of a grave other than up until one-hundred cubits.
בית ארבעה סאין (a space of four Se’ah) – one-hundred cubits in length by one-hundred cubits in width is the place of seeding four Se’ah. For the courtyard of the Tabernacle that was one-hundred by fifty is Bet Se’atayim, as we state in [Tractate] Eruvin [23b], it is found that one-hundred cubits by one-hundred cubits is a Bet Arbah Se’ah.
רבי יוסי אומר בית חמש – but the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.
ובמורד (and in descent) - meaning to say, this measure that we stated to the first Tanna/teacher [of the Mishnah] and to Rabbi Yossi, to him as he holds and to the other (i.e., Rabbi Yossi) as he holds, these words [refer to] when the plough carries in descent, that it [looks like he] is rolling it from afar, and the same law applies when the land is on a plain level. But in an ascent, when he plows and ascends, according to the words of the first Tanna/teacher, he gives a quarter of a Kab of vetches on the knee-shaped pole of the plough- as far as the knee of the plough enters the soil, which is a bent wooden cavity made like a knee that the plough is affixed to, and it makes in its rim/bottom of the vessel a small incision like the measure that went out from it one globule/stone or kernel of a stone fruit, nut from the globules of the vetches, and it brings the plough and the globules fall off bit by bit, and in a place where the vetches have run out, not much falls from them together other than three globules each one by the side of the other and there was completed the Bet HaPras (i.e., the place declared - unclean on account of crushed bones carried over it from a ploughed grave).

Mishnah 2

רבי יוסי אומר במורד ולא במעלה – they did not say the law of the Bet HaPras other than in descent, but when the plough ascends to at a height where there is no Bet HaPras at all, for immediately the hand of the plough is emptied and if there is a bone there it falls. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.
והטיח בסלע (and he struck – with the plough against the rock) – the plough hit the rock and through it, the plough emptied/poured out.
או שניער את המחרישה (or he shook off the plough) – from the dirt that was upon it. And it comes to teach us that we are not concerned that he did not shake it off well.
עד שם הוא עושה בית הפרס – and no further, and even within six cubits or five [cubits].
בית הפרס עושה בית הפרס – One who begins to plough at the end of a Bet HaPras or in the middle, he counts one-hundred cubits from the place that he began to plough, and it becomes a Bet HaPras as if he ploughed from the place of the grave.

Mishnah 3

חרש חצי מענה (he ploughed half a furrow) – fifty cubits form the place of the grave and he returned afterwards and ploughed from there another fifty cubits, all the one-hundred became/were made into a Bet HaPras. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehoshua.
מלטימיא (quarry; he who starts ploughing from a quarry – where chips of stones, bones, etc. are deposited, or from a deposit of bones) – like full of bones. The dig is filled with corpses one on top of the other. [The word] טמיא – in the Aramaic language are bones of corpses/dead people.
מצבירת העצמות (from a pile of bones) – from the place that the bones are piled up there. And this is a matter that is not accessible/frequent that a person will plough on a pit/dig that is filled with corpses and on the pile of bones they are revealed, and they (i.e., the Rabbis) did not decree other than with a grave that was ploughed that is a thing that is accessible.
ומשדה שאבד הקבר מתוכה – that this is a compound uncertainty, lest he did not plough in the place of he grave, and if you can say, he ploughed, but perhaps he did not carry from it a bone.
או שנמצא בה קבר- that he ploughed and afterwards it was found, that this is a Rabbinic Bet HaPras, and they did not fine him since he did not know.
החורש את שאינו שלו – the Rabbis did not fine him for the land is to be that of his colleague is the Bet HaPras. And similarly, regarding a heathen, a fine is not appropriate for him.

Mishnah 4

שאין בת הפרוס לכותיים – that is to say, that even on the Cutheans they (i.e., the Rabbis) did not fine, all the more so, that they didn’t fine the heathen.
על גבי טהורה – that the field of the Bet HaPras (i.e., the area in which uncertainty exists concerning the location of a grave or a corpse) is above and it is pure below.
אפילו אדומה – that the dirt of the pure area is red.
והלבינה – on account of the dirt of the Bet HaPras which was white.

Mishnah 5

אין עושין אותה בית הפרס – they (i.e., the Rabbis did not decree defilement other than on a clod/clump of earth in its natural condition, but they did not decree on dirt that was swept away with the water.
עליה טהורה -whichever way you turn, if the grave is within the house, the house is impure and the upper chamber is ritually pure. If the grave is under the threshold of the entrance of the house, the defilement enters the house and the upper chamber is ritually pure. But when the opening of the upper chamber is not corresponding opposite the opening of the house, we are concerned that perhaps the grave exists underneath the wall that is corresponding to the opening of the upper chamber, and the defilement bursts forth until it reaches to the opening of the upper chamber, and enters into upper chamber through the opening.
ועפר חוצה לארץ – that is to say, or the dirt of outside of the Land of Israel. For the Land of the Nations and the Bet HaPras together defile through touching and through lifting.
שבא ברק – as for example a bunch of greens that have many stalks/stems that were uprooted in their clods of earth, for in each stalk/stem on its own, there isn’t dirt like the seal of the packing bags (especially adapted for ship-loads) which is the measure of clods of earth to defile.
חותם המרצופין – leather bags, like sacks, that those who travel place their vessels into them and seal them with a seal of plaster.

Chapter 18



Mishnah 1

כסאה וכסאתים חותמות – of plaster. And this fact brings Rabbi Yehuda to the assistance of the Rabbis that they didn’t worry about a Se’ah or two Se’ah from the dirt that comes from outside the Land of Israel, for since there wasn’t the seal of one of them on its own like the seal of the leather bags. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
כיצד בוצרים בית הפרס (how do they cut grapes in an area in which uncertainty exists concerning the location of a grave or a corpse or crushed bones carried over it from a ploughed grave)- so that the grapes that grew in it would be ritually pure.
מזין על האדם ועל הכלים – on the third day [they would sprinkle].
ושונין – on the seventh day [they repeat it].
ומוציאין חוץ לבית הפרס – and even though that one cuts grapes for the vat for wine-pressing are fit for receiving Levitical uncleanness and this is one of eighteen matters that they decreed on the day [that Rabban Gamaliel was deposed as head of the Sanhedrin (see Tractate Berakhot 28a)], these words [refer to] defilement according to the Torah, but concerning the defilement of the a field where uncertainty exists concerning the location of a grave or corpse or crushed bones carried over it from a ploughed grave is Rabbinic, and we don’t consider it a fitness to become unclean. And because of this, it (i.e., the Mishnah) took [the term] and taught: “they sprinkle on the man and on the vessels [and repeat the process],” in order that they would be pure from defilement according the Torah (see Numbers 19:19, and even though they go back and become defiled in the field declared unclean on account of crushed bones carried over from a ploughed grave at the time of the harvesting of grapes, further, the grapes are not defiled through their contract because of the defilement of the field declared unclean on account of crushed bones carried over from a ploughed grave all the while that they did not have a complete fitness to become unclean.
ואחרים – who did not enter into the field declared unclean on account of crushed bones carried over from a ploughed grave.
מקבלין – from those who cut/harvest the grapes.
ומוליכין לגת – in other vessels. But those who cut/harvest the grapes do not bring them to the vat for wine-pressing, because the vat is filled with liquids and they are pronounced fit [for Levitical uncleanness] for a complete fitness.
ואם נגעו אלו באלו – those who cut/harvest the grapes came in contact with/touched the others who receive [the grapes].
טמאים – those who receive [the grapes] and they all of the grapes. For a person that is defiled in a field declared unclean on account of crushed bones carried over from a ploughed grave become a primary source of ritual defilement/ אב הטומאהand it defiles people and vessels [according to the School of Hillel].
בית שמאי אומרים אוחז את המגל – that they (i.e., the School of Shammai) holds that the person who harvests [grapes] in the vat becomes fit for Levitical uncleanness even for the defilement of a field declared unclean on account of crushed bones carried over from a ploughed grave, and because of this, he must hold on to a sickle wrapped in a fibrous substance/bast of a palm tree when he harvests that does not receive defilement.
או בוצר בצור (or he harvests with a flint) – and it is a sharp stone that is not a vessel.
ונותן לתוך הכפישה (places it into an inverted vessel/a vessel divided into two compartments by the bottom between) – a large vessel that one harvests olives in, that it doesn’t receive ritual defilement.

Mishnah 2

ומוליך לגת – even he himself. For since he is careful and he has recognition that he places it in an inverted vessel and hasn’t touched it.
במה דברים אמורים כברם הנעשה בית הפרס – that the vines and trees were planted in it prior to it becoming a field declared unclean on account of crushed bones carried over from a ploughed grave. But a person who touches it ab initio in the field declared unclean on account of crushed bones carried over from a ploughed grave [should sell them in the market].
ימכר לשוק – that we fine him, because he should not have planted in a field declared unclean on account of crushed bones carried over from a ploughed grave. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.
שלשה בית הפרס הן – that he considers them and leaves. A field in which a grave is ploughed up, and a field that lost a grave, and a field of mourners/tomb niches.
ניטעת כל נטע (planted with any kind of tree) – he plants in it all the trees that he wishes. But our Mishnah is not according to Rabbi Yossi who forbid this above (see Mishnah 1). But one can say that even Rabbi Yossi did not forbid other than to plant in it a vineyard alone, because the person who harvests grapes to the vat makes it susceptible [to receive ritual defilement], but not to the rest of the trees.
חוץ מזרע הנקצר – but seed that is uprooted with its roots, we are concerned/worried lest he bring a bone like the size of a barleycorn with the irt that comes up with the roots that are uprooted.
ואם עקרו – that seed that is sown.
צובר את גורנו לתוכו (heaps up the threshing floor in it) – into the midst of the field itself. And he threshes it there. And he does not brig it to the house until after threshing, so as to not increase the defilement.
וכוברו בשתי כברות (and he sifts it twice in two sieves) - one after another, lest a bone the size of a barleycorn become combined with it.
והקטנית בשלש – because the pulse has more dirt than does the grain, because of this they are more worried. But they are ritually pure, for they have not become fit for Levitical uncleanness. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
ושורף את הקש ואת העצה (and he burns the stubble and the pea-stalks) -within the field. Lest they have a bone the size of a barleycorn.
ואינה מטמאה באוהל – for all of its defilement is because of a bone the size of barleycorn, but the bone the size of a barleycorn does not defile in a tent.

Mishnah 3

נזרעת כל זרע – this is our reading in most of the books. But in the Tosefta (Tractate Ohalot, Chapter 17, Halakha 10), it teaches: אינה נזרעת כל זרע/no seed is sown there (i.e., this is the reverse of what is explicitly taught in our Mishnah). And such it is in my eyes.
ואין ניטעת כל נטע (and is not planted with any kind of tree) – and needless to say, we don’t plant ab initio. But even that which is planted will not endure/be preserved, so that people will not be accustomed to this, because the defilement in a tent is more stringent in it.
חוץ מאילן סרק – that it is permitted to plant in it. And what is aאילן סרק ? A tree which bears no fruit).

Mishnah 4

שדה בוכים – a place far from the cemetery that they place there the pier of the corpse and [people] gather there and weep.
לא ניטעת ולא נזרעת – in the first chapter of [Tractate] Moed Katan [5b] in the Gemara, it explains that because of the despair of the owners that came in contact with it, for since this is the situation, the owners despair from it and it is like he is in distress because many took possession/hold of it and it is forbidden to be upset over it. And specifically, when the owners became despaired that many took possession of it according to law. But if they did not despair, for now, it is not according to the law that they took possession of it, it is permissible to be upset over it.
ועפרה טהור – for we don’t presume defilement to it at all.
ועושים ממנו תנורים לקודש – which is not the case in the first two fields of crushed bones carried over from a ploughed area.
שבודקים לעושה פסח – it refers to a field that a grave was ploughed up. For if a person goes there, he needs to slaughter his Passover sacrifice, they examine it as it is explained in the concluding clause [of this Mishnah], but if there is not found there a bone the size of a barleycorn, he goes and makes his Passover sacrifice.
ואין בודקין לתרומה – that specifically for Passover that he relies upon this examination, because the defilement of a Bet HaPras/an area containing crushed bones carried over from a ploughed field which is Rabbinic. But the Sages did not stand by their words with regard to extirpation, for whomever does not offer the Passover sacrifice at the appropriate time is liable to extirpation. But regarding the heave-offering, that its consumption is not anything but a positive commandment, the Rabbis stood by their words in the place of a positive commandment and an examination is not effective to permit it for heave-offering.
ולנזיר – [and to a Nazirite] that went there.
בית שמאין אומרים בודקין – and if a bone the size of a barleycorn was not found there, he does not shave his head.
ובית הלל אומרים אין בודקין – that whether it (i.e., a bone the size of a barleycorn) is found or not found, he shaves his head and brings a sacrifice.
העפר שהוא יכול להסיטו – as for example, crushed, loose earth.
וממחה (and crumbles it) – make it very fine in his hand so that he can see if has a bone-fragment the size of a barley corn.

Mishnah 5

כיצד מטהרין בית הפרס – it (i.e., the Mishnah) refers to the first area of a square Pras declared unclean on account of crushed bones carried over it from a ploughed grave, which is a field in which a grave was ploughed.
נוטלין ממנו שלשה טפחים – like the measure of the depth of the plough that rolls/turns over the bones.
ר' שמעון אומר כו' – but the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.
הרוצף(if one paves) - the language of a floor of stones.
טהור – since he is not able to move them, for if he would walk on top of them and, and they would be moved, there is a concern regarding movement (even without actually coming into contact with it) of a human bone that is underneath them.
אף העוזק (even someone who beaks clods suspected of containing human bones – and levels it) – he who digs and casts away the stones, if he did this in all of the Bet HaPras/a square Pras declared unclean on account of crushed bones carried over it from a ploughed grave, it is pure. [The word] עוזק – is the language of (Isaiah 5:2): “He broke the ground, cleared it of stones.” But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.

Mishnah 6

המהלך בבית הפרס – in a field where a grave was ploughed up in it.
על אבנים שיכול להסיטן – as for example on top of stones that are not lodged/placed and affixed in the ground and they can be moved on account of passing over them, and a human bone the size of a barleycorn is shaken from its position of strength, or rides upon a person or an animal [which cannot endure pressure and walks/treads upon them, the rider is impure, for since the strength at the bottom is bad/poor, on account of the load above, it was moved and it is as if he shakes the bone. But if if the strength of the one being driven has a strong legal right, the rider is not considered as if he shaking the bone. But how is that to be understood – that a person has a weak legal right? All that ride it and his knees and the surrounding parts knock against each other. But an animal whose strength is weak, all that ride it cause it to empty its bowels.
בהרים ובסלעים – even though they don’t bury a corpse there.
טמא – because of the dust of the Lands of the Nations that is rolled there.
בים ובשונית טהור (on the sea and on the beach/rocky cliffs – from the defilement of the soil/ground. That they (i.e., the Rabbis) decreed on the soil of the Land of the Nations to burn the heave-offering and Holy Things that touched its dust, for we don’t burn heave-offering or Holy Things that came to the sea or to the beach/rocky cliffs, for we don’t bury a corpse there, but they have the defilement of the Land of the Nations, for they (i.e., the Rabbis) decreed upon its airspace to suspend, that heave-offering and Holy Things that entered into the airspace of the Land of the Nations and didn’t touch its soil, we don’t eat it nor do we burn it.
בזעפו – where the sea rages.

Mishnah 7

הקונה שדה בסוריא – Aram Naharayim and Aram Tzoba that David conquered. But its dust is impure like what is outside of the Land of Israel, but one is liable for tithes and Seventh Year produce like the Land of Israel (see also Tractate Demai, Chapter 6, Mishnah 11 and Second Samuel, Chapter 10 and Second Chronicles, Chapter 19 and Tractate Gittin folio 8a).
אם יכול להכנס לה בטהרה – for the Land of the Nations does not form a partition between that field that he bought to the Land of Israel.
בטהרה – that field. And even on its own clod of earth they did not decree, because it belongs to an Israelite, and because of this, it is taught [in the Mishnah]: "הקונה שדה"/a person who purchases a field. But if it had the width of a handbreadth from the Land of the Nations or from the cemetery, it interrupts between the Land of Israel and a field that he purchased in Syria, for now, he is not able to enter in ritual purity, the soil of that field is impure like outside of the Land of Israel.
מדורות הגוים (Gentile dwelling places) – that are in the Land of Israel.
טמאים – they bury their aborted fetuses in their homes.
ארבעים יום – like the measure of the creation of the embryo.
אע"פ שאין עמו אשה – lawless/unrestrained men in the towns and they bring women to their homes at night.
עבד – [slave] of an Israelite (i.e., a Canaanite slave that is in the hand of an Israelite – according to the commentary of Tiferet Yisrael).
או אשה – an Israelite [woman].
משמרין – the Gentile dwelling places, that they (i.e., Israelites) will not be buried there.

Mishnah 8

הביבין העמוקים (the deep drains) – water pipes/ducts that they cause a gushing forth [of water] that spills out to the public domain. And there are books where it is written in them הכוכים/sepulchral chambers, the language of a כוך/a cave that is underneath the ground.
ועפר התיחוח – for one can be concerned that on account of the abortion/non-viable birth that they buried there, the ground became crushed, loose earth.
חזיר וברדלס (pig and spotted beast/leopard, hyena) – it is their manner to dig and search underneath the ground. But if they would find an abortion/non-viable birth buried underneath the ground, they would remove it from there. ברדלס – is a beast that they call ALTZEBAH in Arabic.

Mishnah 9

אצטבא (portico/colonnade, balcony) -made for beauty in front of the houses. But they don’t bury there non-viable births.
עיר נכרים שחרבה – cities of the land of Israel where heathens liveג and they were destroyed/laid waste from the heathens.
אין בהן משום מדור עובדי כוכבים – that wild animals are found there and they remove all the aborted births that were buried there. But the Halakha is not according to Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel.
קברות – it is known that they are graveyards.
היה ספק – [there was doubt] if they are from the Land of the Nations, [or] if they are from the Land of Israel.
וטיהרוהו – They (i.e., the Sages) considered it like the Land of Israel. Alternatively, there was doubt there were graveyard there or not, and they (i.e., the Sages) made them pure/clean, since they testified that there were no graveyards there.
קיני – the name of a place. And they would have the practice there of defilement from doubt, until Rabbi [Judah the Prince] and his Bet Din decided/resolved upon it and made it pure.

Mishnah 10

אוהלי ערביים – they are not established/set up in one place, and because they are not set up, they don’t bury in it. Alternatively, because they travel and camp from place to place, they did not want to abet the defilement.
והסוכות – of those who guard/protect the fruit.
והצריפים – dwellings that do not have a roof. Rather the walls touch at their tops with each other. And they are dwellings of pain/disregard and not fixed.
בורגנין (keepers or residents of a station house) – huts made in the field to bring into the fruit because of the rains.
אלקטיות (sheds for stacks of grain in the field)- a roof that stands on four pillars to cool off in the summer when he wind lows in it from all of its sides. And the language אלקטיות, summer houses. It is the Aramaic translation of קיץ/summer. קייטא/summer. Fruit.
מקום החצים – a place where the people of the city place in it arrows to keep for the time of war.
מקום לגיונות – where the soldiers/legions of the king camp out.