Sichot Avodat Levi
שיחות עבודת לוי
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Sichot_Avodat_Levi
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Sichot Avodat Levi

Introduction







Section 1



Section 2



Section 3



Section 4



Section 5



Section 6



Section 7



Section 8



Section 9



Section 10



Section 11



Section 12



Section 13



Section 14



Section 15



Section 16



Section 17



Section 18



Section 19



Section 20



Section 21



Section 22



Section 23



Section 24



Section 25



Section 26



Section 27



Section 28



Section 29



Section 30



Section 31



Section 32



Section 33



Section 34



Section 35



Section 36



Section 37



Section 38



Section 39



Section 40



Section 41



Section 42



Section 43



Section 44



Section 45



Section 46



Section 47



Section 48



Section 49



Section 50



Section 51



Section 52



Section 53



Section 54



Section 55



Section 56



Section 57



Section 58



Section 59



Section 60



Section 61



Section 62



Section 63



Section 64



Section 65



Section 66



Section 67



Section 68









<b>The Virtue of Arranging the Benches</b>
Rabbi Yitzchak of Volozhin (cited in the gloss of the book, Ruach Chaim on Avot 1:1) explained the words of the Gemara in a different way, according to the words of the midrash in Bamidbar Rabbah (Parshat Pinchas 21:14), "The Holy One, blessed be He, said to him (in Prov. 27:18), 'He who tends a fig tree will enjoy its fruit.' Your sons sat [with] their own [concerns] and were not involved with Torah [study].  Joshua served you much and gave you much honor, and he would come early and leave late in your house of council, and he would arrange the benches and spread the mats. Since he served you with all of his strength, he is appropriate to serve Israel and not lose his reward -  'Take Joshua bin Nun,' to fulfill that which is stated, 'He who tends a fig tree will enjoy its fruit.'"
From the words of the midrash, it is explained that the main [reason for the] choice of Joshua was because Joshua had served Moses, our teacher. For he had arranged the benches in Moses' study hall and spread the mats. And behold others could have also done that which Joshua did; except that arranging the benches was a bother in the eyes of others. But in the eyes of Joshua, it was a great merit to be involved in the arrangement of the benches in the study hall of Moses, our teacher. So the Holy One, blessed be He, said that Joshua should should receive his reward with that which he would inherit the leadership of Moses, our teacher.

Section 69



















And with this, that which was explained above becomes clear - that idolatry and prophecy are in the category of 'this across from that' (forces balancing each other out). For idolatry is attachment to the forces of impurity that there are in the world; whereas prophecy is attachment to the forces of holiness and purity that there are in the world. So it follows that the level of the evil impulse for idolatry in the world must relate as, "this across from that,' to prophecy. Therefore when they killed the evil impulse for idolatry, prophecy was negated. And this is like the words of the Gra.

Section 70



Section 71



Section 72



Section 73



Section 74



Section 75



Section 76



Section 77



Section 78

<b>ESSAY 78 - FOR REJOICING IN THE LORD IS THE SOURCE OF YOUR STRENGTH</b>
<b>A) Whey did the people weep when they heard the Torah reading of Rosh Hashanah?</b>
It is written in the book of Nehemiah 8:2-3, "On the first day of the seventh month, Ezra the priest brought the Torah before the congregation, men and women and all who could listen with understanding. He read from it, facing the square before the Water Gate, etc." And it is clear from this verse that Ezra was reading from the Torah in front of the people on Rosh Hashanah. For behold, it is written in the verse that this was on the first day of the seventh month, which is Rosh Hashanah.
And there the verse[s] continue (Nehemiah 8:9-10), "Nehemiah the Tirshatha, Ezra the priest and scribe and the Levites who were explaining to the people said to all the people, 'This day is holy to the Lord, your God; you must not mourn or weep,' for all the people were weeping as they listened to the words of the Torah. He said to them, 'Go, eat choice foods and drink sweet drinks and send portions to whoever has nothing prepared, for the day is holy to our Lord. Do not be sad, for rejoicing in the Lord is the source of your strength.'"
And we learn from this that the Torah reading of Rosh Hashanah brought the people to weeping, whereas Ezra and Nehemiah told them that it was not correct to weep on this day. Just the opposite, they should rejoice on this day. 
And this requires explanation. What is written in the Torah reading of Rosh Hashanah that made them cry so much? Moreover, it should be asked that since Rosh Hashanah is the day of judgement, how could they then say to them that Rosh Hashanah is a happy day? And is it not true that since it is the day of judgement - how is it possible to rejoice on Rosh Hashanah?
<b>We learned from the Torah reading of Rosh Hashanah that the trait of kindness does not stand when there are sins.</b>
And it appears that [the following] can be said about this: Behold it is written in the Torah reading of Rosh Hashanah (Genesis 21:9-14), "Sarah saw that the son of Hagar, the Egyptian, whom she had born to Avraham, was jesting. She said to Avraham, 'Expel this slave-woman and her son, for the son of this slave-woman will not inherit with my son, with Yitzchak.' This thing was very wrong in the eyes of Avraham, on account of his son. And God said to Avraham, 'Do not consider this wrong in your eyes on account of the boy and your slave-woman. Regarding all that Sarah tells you, listen to her voice, etc.' Avraham got up early in the morning, and he took bread and a skin (pouch) of water, and gave it to Hagar; he placed it on her shoulder with the lad, and sent her away, etc."
And it is elucidated from these verses that Yishmael was "jesting" (and it is explained in [the works of] the Sages, may their memory be blessed, that he was involved with evil things, see Rashi there). And it is because of this that our father Avraham expelled him with [only] a little bread and water. But behold our father Avraham was a pillar of kindness - as is well-known - and we also depend on his merit on Rosh Hashanah. (As is explained in Rosh Hashanah 16a, "Blow a ram's shofar before Me, so that I will remember for you the binding of Yitzchak the son of Avraham." Note that we mention our father Yitzchak together with our father Avraham.) And nevertheless, he suppressed his trait of kindness and he became like someone cruel to his son. Form this it can be learned that the trait of kindness is not effective for someone who has committed sins, in the same way that it was not effective for Yishmael. 
From this we can easily understand why the people cried when they heard the Torah reading of Rosh Hashanah. As they gave up on meriting God's trait of kindness because of the sins they had with them.  
However according to this, we can wonder: If their weeping was fitting for the day of judgement of Rosh Hashanah, why did Ezra and Nehemiah tell them that they should not weep, but rather just the opposite, that they should eat, drink and rejoice?

Section 79



Section 80



Section 81



Section 82



Section 83














We must also know that a person's every speech makes a great impact. And so is it understood from the words of the Gemara in Chagigah (15b:11): Rabbah bar Sheila found Elijah the prophet. He said to him, "What is the Holy One, Blessed be He, doing?" He [answered] him, "He is saying teachings from the mouth of all of those Sages, but be he will not say [it, if it came] from the mouth of Rabbi Meir." He said to him, "Why?" [He replied,] "Because he learned teachings from the mouth of Acher." He said to him, "Why? R. Meir found a pomegranate and ate its contents while throwing away its peel." He said to him, "Now [God] is saying, 'My son, Meir, says.'" And it is understood from the Gemara that there was a prosecution in the Heavens against R. Meir because he had studied Torah with Elisha be Abuya (who was called, Acher [the other]). And that is why the Holy One, blessed be He, did not want to say a teaching in the name of R. Meir. But after Rabbah bar Sheila defended R. Meir, the Holy One, blessed be He, immediately changed his way and said a teaching in the name of R. Meir.
And behold, Rabbah bar Sheila [lived] many generations after R. Meir. So it comes out that there were already many years that the Holy One, blessed be He, did not say a teaching in the name of R. Meir. Nevertheless, the Holy One, blessed be He, immediately relented when Rabbah bar Sheila spoke in defense of R. Meir. And from here, it is understood how great the power of man's speech is. For it is in its power to change the way of the Holy One, blessed be He! 