Kessef Mishneh on Mishneh Torah, Kings and Wars
כסף משנה על משנה תורה, הלכות מלכים ומלחמות
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Kessef Mishneh on Mishneh Torah, Kings and Wars



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Halakhah 1



Halakhah 2



Halakhah 3



Halakhah 4



Halakhah 5

Six types of forbidden relationships, etc. There it is taught (Shemot 58b): "Therefore, a man shall leave his father and his mother" - Rabbi Eliezer says, his father's sister and his mother's sister. In other words, and all the more so, his sister from his father's side or his mother's side. Rabbi Akiva says, his father's wife, his father's mother, his mother's mother, in the literal sense. It clings and does not include the case of a male with his wife or with another man's wife. And they will be considered one flesh, etc. Domesticated animals and wild animals that do not become one flesh, and scales and fur. In the Gemara, they explained: His father's wife - this is his father's wife, and his mother's sister - this is his mother's sister. But if we say that his mother's sister is prohibited, it implies that his father's wife is also prohibited, meaning, his own wife or another man's wife. We say that it refers to a case after his father's death, etc. His mother's mother - this is his mother's mother in the literal sense, and it does not include a case after his father's death, meaning his father's wife. And despite all this, our Rabbi rules according to Rabbi Eliezer, because he derives it from the verse, and although Rabbi Akiva disagrees, we do not seek to reconcile their opinions, as there is room for dispute. However, I still have a point of inquiry, and it is this beraita that was brought there, where Rabbi Meir taught: There, with regard to any forbidden relationship among the Jewish court, a non-Jewish son is put to death for it, but he is warned about it. And Rabbi Meir holds this way, and it was taught, etc. Rashi explains, and so does Tosafos, that he asks from what was taught in that beraita that a non-Jewish son is warned about his father's wife and his mother-in-law, and we answer that it is not difficult. This is according to Rabbi Meir, according to Rabbi Eliezer's opinion, and the other is according to Rabbi Akiva's opinion. It was taught, etc. As I wrote above, and Rashi explains that with regard to any forbidden relationship among the Jewish court, a non-Jewish son is put to death for it, and he is warned about it. It supports Rabbi Akiva's opinion, for everything that can be derived from this verse includes capital offenses, and he will derive from them to all capital offenses. And now, according to our Rabbi, we rule according to Rabbi Akiva's opinion, that with regard to any forbidden relationship among the Jewish court, a non-Jewish son is put to death for it, and he is warned about them, since we do not find who disputes Rabbi Meir's opinion, saying that Rabbi Akiva does not hold this way. And this requires further investigation.

Chapter 10



Halakhah 1



Halakhah 2



Halakhah 3



Halakhah 4



Halakhah 5



Halakhah 6

.
A gentile who gave a Jew a blow etc. There (Sanhedrin 54b) [it says]: 'Rabbi Ḥanina says: A gentile who struck a Jew is liable to receive the death penalty, as it is stated (Exodus 2:12): “And he turned this way and that way" etc.' Our teacher holds that even though he is liable to death in hands of Heaven, he is not executed. [We can bring] proof for this from the back-and-forth in "Eilu Hein Hagolin" (Makkot 9a) as to whether a ger toshav (resident alien) who [unintentionally] killed a Jew is exiled or executed. Surely it should debate about one who damaged a Jew! Rather, it is certain that even though he is liable to receive the death penalty, he is not executed, and the verse "And he turned this way and that way" is only an asmachta.


Halakhah 7



Halakhah 8



Halakhah 9

A non-Jew who engages in Torah study, etc. There (Sanhedrin 59a), Rabbi Yochanan said: "A non-Jew who engages in Torah study is liable for the death penalty." The Talmud raises a challenge from a baraita that teaches that even a non-Jew who studies Torah is like a High Priest. The Talmud resolves this by explaining that the baraita refers to a non-Jew studying the seven Noahide laws.
Similarly, a non-Jew who observes the Sabbath, etc. There (Sanhedrin 58b), Reish Lakish said: "A non-Jew who observes the Sabbath is liable for the death penalty," as it is stated (Genesis 8:22), ‘Day and night shall not cease.’ The Talmud further explains that their prohibition (warning) is itself their punishment. Ravina added that this applies even if he observes Sabbath-like rest on a Monday. Rashi explains that a non-Jew who completely refrains from labor for an entire day is liable for the death penalty, as it is stated, ‘Day and night shall not cease,’ which is interpreted to mean that people (humanity) must not completely abstain from labor. Ravina further clarifies that one should not misunderstand Reish Lakish's statement as meaning that a non-Jew is liable only if he intends to rest on a specific day designated for rest (such as the Jewish Sabbath or Friday for Muslims). Rather, the prohibition applies in general: a non-Jew is forbidden from ceasing work entirely, even on a day that is not inherently a day of rest.
Why he is not actually executed: The reason he is not actually put to death is that the law follows the position that a non-Jew is only executed for violating one of the seven Noahide laws. Although the Talmud states that a non-Jew who studies Torah is guilty of theft (since the Torah is an inheritance exclusively for Israel) or, according to another interpretation, of illicit relations (if morasha—inheritance—is read as me’orasah, betrothed), our teacher (the Rambam) considers these to be mere textual supports (asmachtas), not actual legal derivations. Similarly, regarding a non-Jew who observes the Sabbath, the Talmud asks why this prohibition is not counted among the seven Noahide laws. It answers that the seven laws only include prohibitions that require refraining (shev ve’al ta’aseh), whereas this case requires an action (kum aseh). This implies that if it were counted, he would indeed be executed for it—just as for the other Noahide laws. However, our teacher (the Rambam) understands the Talmud’s discussion as merely indicating that these actions are forbidden, not that they warrant execution. For indeed, a non-Jew is executed only for violating the seven Noahide laws. And even regarding those laws, there is an opinion in Perek Arba Mitot that a non-Jew is not executed for all of them. Thus, it is logical to conclude that the law follows the opinion that a non-Jew is executed only for violating the seven laws, and we do not add additional prohibitions to that category. Any case where the Talmud states that a non-Jew is "liable for the death penalty" refers only to divine punishment, not execution by a human court. This is how our teacher (the Rambam) understood it.