Gur Aryeh on Devarim
גור אריה על דברים
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Gur Aryeh on Devarim



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Verse 1



Verse 2

The explanation is that he needs to give identifying signs for it. And according to this, "your brother," would be the object, as it is "your brother" that is investigated, that he not be a swindler; and "he/it" refers back to "your brother." And it is like (Exodus 2:6), "When she opened it, she saw him, the child" - wherein the noun comes with its pronoun. Although one is enough, [the noun] comes to add clarification. However it is difficult, as [here] the noun is mentioned before the pronoun - such that if had been written, "until he is investigated, your brother," it would have been fine. But since it is written, "your brother, him," it is difficult - [what is the need for] "him?" So it appears to me that this is the understanding [of Rashi]: But would it ever enter your mind that one could give it back before he inquires about it? But rather investigate him that he is not a swindler - meaning this is why it is written, "until your brother seeks it" - that he is seeking the lost object, and not that he is a swindler seeking to rob his fellow. As that is not seeking the lost object at all. And since it is difficult - how will he know if he is coming to rob his fellow or to seek his lost object, he said, "investigate him to see if he is a swindler or he is not a swindler." And that which Rashi explained, "investigate him," is not the language of the verse - "your brother seek it" - as the verse is certainly like its simple understanding. But rather he came to explain in what way he will know that he is seeking the lost object and is not a robber, about which he said, "investigate him to see if he is a swindler." So does it appear.