Midrash Tehillim
מדרש תהילים
Rabbi Mike Feuer, Jerusalem Anthology
https://www.sefaria.org

Midrash Tehillim



Psalm 1



Psalm 2



Psalm 3



Psalm 4



Psalm 5



Psalm 6



Psalm 7



Psalm 8



Psalm 9



Psalm 10



Psalm 11




“The Lord is in His Holy Temple. The Lord-His throne is in Heaven…” (Tehillim 11:4) When Israel does the will of the Makom ‘The Lord is in His Holy Temple,’ and when they do not do the will of the Makom ‘The Lord-His throne is in Heaven.’ R’ Elazar said: whether the Holy Temple is destroyed or not the Divine Presence doesn’t move from within it, as it says “The Lord is in His Holy Temple.” Even though His throne is in Heaven, His Presence is in the Holy Temple, as it says “…and My eyes and My heart shall be there at all times.” (Kings I 9:3) So too it says “…and He answered me from His holy mount to eternity.” (Tehillim 3:5) Even though it is just a mountain, it maintains its holiness. R’ Elazar said: see what is written “…for now you shall go forth from the city; and you shall dwell (shachantah) in the field…” (Micah 4:10) It is written as shechinati (My Presence), even though it is destroyed My Presence remains there. R’ Acha said: the Divine Presence never moved from the western wall, as it says “…behold, he is standing behind our wall…” (Shir haShirim 2:9) R’ Yanai said: when a king of flesh and blood enters his banquet hall, he does not know what is in the bed chamber. Not so the Holy One, rather ‘The Lord is in His Holy Temple. The Lord-His throne is in Heaven.’ He looks and sees the whole world, and no eye can grasp Him.

Psalm 12



Psalm 13



Psalm 14



Psalm 15



Psalm 16



Psalm 17



Psalm 18























“For by You I run upon a troop...” (Tehillim 18:30) R’ Chiyah said in the name of R’ Levi: when David went to wage war against the Jebusites, he began by saying “Whoever smites the Jebusites and reaches the tower…” (Shmuel II 5:8) and in another verse he says “Whoever smites the Jebusites first will be a chief (l’rosh) and an officer…” (Divre HaYamim I 11:6) So what did Yoav do? He brought a fresh cypress tree (brosh) and fixed it next to the wall of the city. He bent back the flexible head of the cypress, climbed up on to David’s head, grabbed on to the top of the tree and swung onto the top of the wall. David said “May a righteous man strike me with kindness and reprove me (yochicheni rosh)…” (Tehillim 141:5) What did the Holy One do? He lowered the wall and David went up after Yoav, as it says “…and by my God I scale a wall.” (Tehillim 18:30)

Psalm 19



Psalm 20



Psalm 21



Psalm 22


















... “He will save him because He delights in him.” (Tehillim 22:9) R’ Shimon ben Lakish said that the Holy One expressed His love for Israel with three languages of affection, with ‘cleaving,’ with ‘desiring,’ and with ‘wanting.’ With cleaving – “But you who cleave to the Lord your God are alive…” (Devarim 4:4) With desiring – “…did the Lord desire you…” (Devarim 7:7) With wanting – “…for the Lord wants you…” (Yeshayahu 62:4) We learn all of these from that wicked one of the story of “And Dinah went out…” (Bereshit 34:1) With cleaving – “And his soul cleaved to Dinah…” (Bereshit 34:3) With desiring – “My son Shechem his soul desires your daughter.” (Bereshit 34:8) With wanting – “…because he wanted Jacob's daughter…” (Bereshit 34:19) R’ Aba bar Elisha added two more, with love and with speaking to the heart. With love, as it says “I loved you, said the Lord…” (Malachi 1:2) With speaking to the heart, as it says “Speak to the heart of Jerusalem…” (Yeshayahu 40:2) We learn these also from the story of that wicked one – “…he loved the girl and spoke to the girl's heart.” (Bereshit 34:3) “He will save him because He delights in him.”

Psalm 23



Psalm 24








“You gates, lift your heads…” (Tehillim 24:7/9) You find that at the time when Shlomo built the Holy temple he wanted to bring the ark into the Holy of Holies, but the gate was too small. It was five cubits long and two and a half cubits wide, while the ark was one and a half cubits long, one and a half wide and one and a half tall. Can’t one and a half cubits fit into two and a half?! Rather, at that moment the gates cleaved to one another. Shlomo said twenty four songs of joy and was not answered, he said ‘you gates lift up your heads’ and was not answered. He tried again and said “You] gates, lift your heads…so that the King of Glory may enter. Who is this King of Glory?” (Tehillim 24:7-8) He was not answered. Once he said “O Lord God, do not turn back the face of Your anointed one; remember the kind deeds of David Your servant,” (Divre HaYamim II 6:42) immediately the gates lifted up their heads, the ark entered and fire descended from heaven. Why did Shlomo suffer all of this? Because he was filled with pride and said “I have surely built You a house to dwell in…” (Melachim I 8:13) Since all of Israel saw this, they immediately said ‘it is certain that the Holy One has given atonement for that sin of David.’ Immediately their expression turned black like the bottom of a pot and they were ashamed. This is what is written “Grant me a sign for good, and let my enemies see [it] and be ashamed, for You, O Lord, have helped me and comforted me.” (Tehillim 86:17) ‘Helped me’ in this world and ‘comforted me’ in the world to come.


Psalm 25



Psalm 26



Psalm 27



Psalm 28



Psalm 29



Psalm 30



Psalm 31



Psalm 32



Psalm 33



Psalm 34



Psalm 35



Psalm 36



Psalm 37



Psalm 38



Psalm 39



Psalm 40



Psalm 41



Psalm 42



Psalm 43



Psalm 44



Psalm 45



Psalm 46



Psalm 47



Psalm 48



Psalm 49



Psalm 50

... “From the rising of the sun until its setting…” (Psalms 113:3) When flesh and blood wants to make an image, it begins with the head and ends with the feet or begins with the feet and ends with the head. Not so the Holy One! When He makes man, He shapes him all at once, as it says “…for He is the One Who formed everything…” (Jeremiah 10:16) This is ‘from the rising of the sun until its setting.’ And from where do we learn that He created it from Zion? As it says “From Zion, the finery (miclal) of beauty…” (Psalms 50:2) From out of (m’clal) the beauty of the world. What does ‘appeared’ mean? Illuminated. Appearance always refers to light, as it says “…and causes the light of His cloud to appear.” (Job 37:15) From where do we learn that this is speaking of the world? It says here miclal and it says elsewhere “Now the heavens and the earth were completed (vay’chulu)…” (Genesis 2:1) And when He destroys it, He will start from Zion, as it says “And I will make Jerusalem heaps of ruin…” (Jeremiah 9:10) and afterwards “All the land shall be a desolation…” (Jeremiah 4:27) And it says “And the land shall become desolate with its inhabitants…” (Micah 7:13) And at the time when the Holy One renews His world He will renew it from Zion, as it says “…the mountain of the Lord's house shall be firmly established at the top of the mountains…” (Isaiah 2:2)

Psalm 51



Psalm 52



Psalm 53



Psalm 54



Psalm 55



Psalm 56



Psalm 57



Psalm 58



Psalm 59



Psalm 60



Psalm 61


“…when my heart becomes faint…” (Psalms 61:3) Unto what point must one stand in prayer? R’ Yehudah says: until his heart becomes faint, as it says “A prayer for a poor man when he faints and pours out his speech before the Lord.” (Psalms 102:1) This is ‘when my heart becomes faint’. 
“…on the rock that is higher than I…” (Psalms 61:3) Which is this? This is Jerusalem, as it says “And it became wider and it wound higher…” (Ezekiel 41:7) Therefore ‘on the rock that is higher than I.’ Knesset Yisrael said before the Holy One: Master of the World! I do not want to dwell with the enemy, but rather “I shall dwell in Your tent to eternity…” (Psalms 61:5) And so it says “O Lord, I love the dwelling of Your house and the place of the residence of Your glory.” (Psalms 26:8) So too it says “For a day in Your courts is better than a thousand; I chose to sit on the threshold of the house of My God rather than dwell in tents of wickedness.” (Psalms 84:11)

Psalm 62



Psalm 63



Psalm 64



Psalm 65

“For the conductor, a psalm of David, a song. Silence is praise to You, O God in Zion…” (Psalms 65:1-2) This is what Scripture says “I was silent from time immemorial; I am still, I restrain Myself. Like a travailing woman will I cry…” (Isaiah 42:14) And it says “Concerning these will You restrain Yourself, oh Lord…”(Isaiah 64:11) He said to them “I have no wrath…” the aspect of judgment dictates that I stay silent, “…would that I were thorns and brier in war!” (Isaiah 27:4) Thus said the Holy One: I am able to act, but the aspect of judgment constrains Me to silence. This is why it says ‘silence is praise to You’. You are able to hold silent and everyone praises You for being silent for that which was done to You in Zion and for the voice that was raised against Your Sanctuary, as it says “…they raised a clamor in the House of the Lord, as on a day of a festival.” (Lamentations 2:7) What voice did they raise? They said “Our hand was triumphant!” (Deuteronomy 32:27) and “Then He will say, "Where is their deity, the rock in which they trusted.” (Deuteronomy 32:37) This is ‘silence is praise to You’. You are silent and I am silent, as it says “Sit silent for the Lord and hope for Him…” (Psalms 37:7)    

Psalm 66



Psalm 67



Psalm 68



Psalm 69



Psalm 70



Psalm 71



Psalm 72



Psalm 73



Psalm 74



Psalm 75



Psalm 76


His tabernacle was in Shalem, and His dwelling place in Zion. R’ Brachia said: from the beginning of the creation of the world the Holy One made a tabernacle (sukkah) in Jerusalem. He, so to speak, would pray in it: ‘may it be willed that My children will do My will in order that I not destroy My house and sanctuary, [and once sin had caused it what was written? “And He stripped His Tabernacle like a garden, and laid in ruins His meeting place…” (Eicha 2:6) The place where he would make Himself known in prayer]. Since it was destroyed He prays ‘may it be willed from before Me that my children repent that I bring nearer the building of My house and sanctuary, this is ‘His tabernacle was in Shalem.’ You find that the Temple is called Shalem as it says, “Malchitzedek king of Shalem” (Bereshit 14:18) and he is Shem the son of Noach as it says “and he was a priest to the Most High Gd” (ibid.) It is written, “May God expand Japheth, and may He dwell in the tents of Shem…” (Bereshit 9:27) that he dwelled in His tent implies that he served Him as they translate into Aramaic ‘and he was a priest to the Most High Gd’ as ‘and he served before the High Gd,’ this was Shem. Avraham called the Temple yireh as it says “And Abraham called that place, The Lord will see (yireh)…” (Bereshit 22:14) HaMakom (Gd) said – if I call it Shalem as Shem did, I will nullify the words of Avraham who loves me who called it yireh. And if I call it yireh I will nullify the words of Shem the righteous who called it Shalem. What did the Holy One do? He combined what the two of them called it: Avraham called it yireh, Shem called it Shalem and the Holy One called it Yerushalayim, this is ‘His tabernacle was in Shalem’ what is it? Jerusalem, yireh and Shalem. Another thing: when will Gd be known in Yehudah? (Tehillim 76:2) When that tabernacle is erected of which you said , “On that day, I will raise up the fallen tabernacle of David…” (Amos 9:11), this is ‘His tabernacle was in Shalem.’

Psalm 77



Psalm 78



Psalm 79



Psalm 80



Psalm 81

... Another explanation. Why does the verse (Psalms 81:2) mention Yaakov and not all of the forefathers? Our rabbis taught: a man is measured with the measure by which he measures, as it says “In that measure (b’saseah), when they sent them out, it strove with it…” (Isaiah 27:8) A seah with a seah. I only know seah, from where do I learn tirkav and a half tirkav, kab and a half kav, rovah and a half rovah, a tuman and an uchlah? Scripture says “For every victory shout (s’on soein) sounds with clamor…” (Isaiah 9:4) Here there are many measures. I only know about something which comes by measure, from where do I learn little bits that add up to a large amount? Scripture says “…adding one to another to find out the account.” (Ecclesiastes 7:27) This is like a king who had three people that loved him, and sought to build himself a palace. He brought the first one and said to him: I want to build a palace for myself. His love replied to him: I recall that it was a mountain in the beginning. He called to the second love and said to him: I want to build a palace for myself. He replied: I recall that it was a field in the beginning. He called to the third love and said: I want to build a palace for myself. He replied: I recall that it was a palace in the beginning. He said to him: by your life! I will build that palace and call it by your name. So too Avraham, Yitzchak and Yaakov were lovers of the Holy One. Avraham called the Holy Temple ‘mountain,’ as it says “On the mountain, the Lord will be seen.” (Genesis 22:14) Yitzchak called it field, as it says “…the fragrance of my son is like the fragrance of a field…” (Genesis 27:27) Yaakov called it ‘house’ even before it was built, as it says “This is none other than the house of God…” (Genesis 28:17) The Holy One said to him: by your life! You called it a house before it was built and I will call it by your name, as it says “Come, let us go up to the Lord's mount, to the house of the God of Jacob…” (Isaiah 2:3) So too Jeremiah said “So said the Lord: Behold I am returning the captivity of the tents of Jacob…” (Jeremiah 30:18) So too Asaf decorated his words and only recalled the God of Yaakov with a trumpet blast, as it says “…sound the shofar to the God of Jacob.” (Psalms 81:2)

Psalm 82



Psalm 83



Psalm 84



Psalm 85



Psalm 86



Psalm 87




“Glorious things are said about you, the city of God, forever.” (Psalms 87:3) This refers to Hezekiah, as it says “…and how he made the conduit and the pool, and he brought the water into the city…” (Kings II 20:20) Hezekiah sealed up the waters of the Gihon spring and it says ‘he brought the water into the city’ because he was a collector of traditions and this verse is actually referring to words of Torah, which are compared to water, as it says “Ho! All who thirst, go to water…” (Isaiah 55:1) It also says “Come, partake of my bread…” (Proverbs 9:5) What would Hezekiah do? When he saw that it was well ordered, he brought it to the city; that it was well taught, he brought it to the city. This is what is written “These too are Solomon's proverbs, which the men of Hezekiah, king of Judah, maintained.” (Proverbs 25:1) Another explanation. ““Glorious things are said about you…” (Psalms 87:3) R’ Huna said in the name of R’ Idi: why did Israel express Gd’s name explicitly in the Holy Temple and use a cognomen outside of the Temple bounds? Because it is written “…to fear this glorious and awesome name, the Lord, your God.” (Deuteronomy 28:58) This is ‘glorious things are said about you.’ And where is it said? In the city of God, in the city of Zion. And where? “…the city of God, forever.” (Psalms 87:3)

Psalm 88



Psalm 89



Psalm 90






“O Lord, You have been our dwelling place throughout all generations.” (Tehillim 90:1) R’ Yitzchak said ‘from that which the Scripture says “…which are the abode for the God Who precedes all…” (Devarim 33:27) we could not know if the Holy One is the dwelling place of the world, or if the world is His abode, until Moshe came and explained it ‘You have been our dwelling place throughout all generations.’ R’ Yosi bar Halifta said ‘we could not know if the Holy One is dependent on His world or His world is dependent on Him, until the Holy One came and explained “…Behold, there is a place with Me…” (Shemot 33:21) This means that He is the place of the world and the world is not His place, therefore the world is dependent on Him and He is not dependent on His world. R’ Huna said in the name of R’ Ami ‘why is the Holy One called ‘place’? Because He is the place of His world, as it says “…Behold, there is a place with Me…” (Shemot 33:21) Avraham called Him ‘place,’ as it says “And Abraham named that place, The Lord will see…” (Bereshit 22:14) Yaakov called Him ‘place,’ as it says “And he was frightened, and he said, "How awesome is this place!” (Bereshit 28:17) Moshe called Him ‘place,’ as it says “…Behold, there is a place with Me…” (Shemot 33:21) [Another explanation -  why is He called ‘place’? Because anywhere the righteous are standing, there He is found with them, as it says “Wherever I allow My name to be mentioned, I will come to you and bless you.” (Shemot 20:21) So too it says “And he arrived at the place and lodged there…” (Bereshit 28:11)

Psalm 91





... Another version. The Rabbis said the minimum number that the word ‘stones’ can refer to is two, and Yaakov woke up in the morning and found that they were one. He was in great fear and said ‘the house of the Holy One is in this place and I was not conscious of His Presence’ as it says “And he was afraid and said, How dreadful is this place! This is no other than the house of Gd…” (Bereshit 28:17) From here they said that anyone who prays in Jerusalem is as if they pray before the Throne of Glory, because the gate of heaven is there; and an open door to hear prayer, as it says “…and this is the gate of heaven. (ibid.) Yaakov went back to gather the stones and he found that they were one stone. Yaakov took the stone and placed it as a monument in the midst of the place and oil descended from heaven for him and he pour it out on the stone, as it says “…and he poured oil on top of it.” (Bereshit 28:18) What did the Holy One do? He took its right foot, sank it to the deepest depths and made it a keystone for the earth, like a man who places a keystone in an arch. Therefore it is called foundation stone, because there is the navel of the world and from there the world was opened out. And upon it is the palace of Gd, as it says “And this stone, which I have placed as a monument, shall be a house of God…” (Bereshit 28:22) And Yaakov fell to the ground before the foundation stone, praying before the Holy One, and said ‘Master of the World! If you bring me back to this place in peace, then I will sacrifice before you whole offerings and thanksgiving offerings!’ as it says, “And Jacob uttered a vow, saying…” (Bereshit 28:20) He vowed and he fulfilled his vow. From there he picked up his feet (to go) and there he left the well, because the well had been going before him, and in the blink of an eye came to Haran as it says, [“Now Jacob lifted his feet…” (Bereshit 29:10)] “And Jacob left Be’er Sheva, and he went to Haran.” (Bereshit 28:10) About him the tradition says, “When you walk, your step will not be constrained, and if you run, you will not stumble.” (Mishle 4:12) R’ Abahu said in the name of R’ Yochanan – the angels carried him as it says, “On [their] hands they will bear you…” (Tehillim 91:12) Ya’akov’s steps were not constrained and his strength did not falter and like a mighty man he rolled back the stone from off of the mouth of the well. Then the well rose up and overflowed and the shepherds were astounded because all together they were unable to roll off the stone and he did it alone as it says, “…that Jacob drew near and rolled the rock off…” (Bereshit 29:10)

Psalm 92




... The first man was driven out of the Garden and settled on Mount Moriah, because the gates of the Garden of Eden are close by Mount Moriah. From there He took him and to there He returned him to the place from which he was taken, as it says “Now the Lord God took the man…” (Bereshit 2:15) From where did He take him? From the place of the Holy Temple, and he settled outside of the Garden of Eden on Mount Moriah, as it says “…to till the soil, whence he had been taken.” (Bereshit 3:23)…