Pesach Haggadah
הגדה של פסח
Times of London, 1840


Pesach Haggadah

Kadesh

<small><i>On their return from synagogue the master of the house says the sanctification of the Passover; they then drink the wine of the sanctification, leaning on the left side, after which they wash their hands; the master of the house then takes some parsley or chervil, and dips it into the vinegar or salt water, and distributing some to every one at the table, and before they eat it, says the following grace:–</i></small>




“Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God, King of the universe, Creator of the fruit of the earth.”

Urchatz



Karpas



Yachatz


<small><i>The master then breaks the middle cake in the dish, and, leaving one half of it there, he lays the other half by for the offering, which is nothing more nor less than a piece of the Passover cake, and it is that which it is said human blood forms a portion of.</i></small>

Magid

Ha Lachma Anya


<small><i>He then takes the bone of the lamb and egg off the dish, and all at table lay hold of the dish and say,</i></small>
“Lo, this is the bread of affliction, which our ancestors also ate in the land of Egypt, let all who are hungry, enter and eat thereof, and all who are penurious come and celebrate this Passover. At present we celebrate it here, but the next year we hope to celebrate it in the land of Israel. This year we are servants here, but next year we hope to be freemen in the land of Israel.”

Four Questions

<small><i>They then fill the cup with wine a second time, when the youngest in company asks–</i></small>
“Wherefore is this night distinguished from all other nights?<br>On all other nights we may eat either leavened or unleavened bread, but on this night only unleavened bread;<br>on all other nights we may eat any species of herbs, but on this night only bitter herbs;<br>on all other nights we do not dip even once, but on this night twice;<br>on all other nights we eat and drink either sitting or leaning, but on this night we all lean.” (which is considered as a mark of grandeur and freedom.) 

We Were Slaves in Egypt

<small><i>They then put the dish down on the table, and the whole company answer–</i></small>
“because we were slaves unto Pharaoh in to Egypt, and the Eternal, or God, brought us forth from thence with a mighty hand and outstretched arm, and , if the Most Holy (blessed be He) had not brought forth our ancestors from Egypt, we, and our children, and our children’s children had still continued in bondage to the Pharaohs in Egypt; therefore, although we were all wise, all of us men of understanding and experience, all of us having knowledge in the law, it nevertheless is incumbent upon us to discourse of the departure from Egypt, and all those who largely discourse of the departure from Egypt are considered praiseworthy.

Story of the Five Rabbis

And thus it is related by Rabbi Eliezer, Rabbi Joshua, Rabbi Elazar, the son of Azariah, Rabbi Akeba, and Rabbi Trapon, that they once met (on the night of Passover, in a place inhabited by Jewish proselytes, said to be descended from Haman) and continued discoursing of the departure from Egypt all that night till their disciples came, and said, ‘Instructors, it is time to read the morning prayer.’
“Rabbi Elazar said, ‘Verily, I am a man of 70 years of age, and have hitherto not been able to prove that the narration of the departure from Egypt ought to be related at night till expounded by the son of Zoma; after this manner it is said that thou mayest remember the day of thy going forth from the land of Egypt all the days of thy life.’ From whence he observed that the expression signifies the days only; but all the days of thy life denotes the nights also. But the sages say, the days of thy life denotes this life only; but all the days of thy life denotes even all the time of the Messiah.

The Four Sons

“Blessed he the Omnipresent; blessed is He who hath given the law to his people Israel; blessed be He whose law speaketh distinctly of four children of different dispositions, the wise, the wicked, the simple, and he who hath no capacity to inquire.
“The wise son thus expresses himself–‘what mean those testimonies, statutes, and judgments which the Lord our God hath commanded us’ Then shalt thou instruct him in all the laws of the Passover; also, that we must not have a desert brought to table after the Paschal lamb, (became the Paschal lamb was the last thing eaten on that night, in commemoration of which, we at present eat a piece of Passover cake at the end of the meal.)
“The wicked son expresses himself thus:–‘What mean you by this service?’ By the expression ‘you’ it is clear he doth not include himself, and, as he hath withdrawn himself from the collective body of the nation, it is proper that thou retort on him, and therefore answer him thus, ‘This is done because of that which the Eternal did for me when I went forth from Egypt,”–I.e. for ‘me,’ but not for ‘him,’ for had he been there, he would not have been thought worthy to be redeemed.
“The simple son artlessly observes, ‘What is this?’ Thou shalt then answer him, ‘For with a strong hand the Eternal brought us out of Egypt, from the house of bondage.’
“But as for him who has not the capacity to inquire, thou must begin the discourse as it is said, and thou shalt show thy son on that day, saying, ‘This is done because of that which the Eternal did for me when I went forth from Egypt.’

Yechol Me'rosh Chodesh

“Possibly you may think that he (the Father) is bound to explain this from the first day of the month Nissan, therefore it is said, ‘On that day.’ Yet as it says ‘on that day,’ it might be inferred that it must be whilst it is day; but as it is said, ‘This is done because of that,’ from which is to be inferred, at no other time but when the unleavened cake and bitter herbs are placed before them.

In the Beginning Our Fathers Were Idol Worshipers

“Our ancestors were anciently idolaters; but at present the Lord hath brought us near to his service, as it is said, ‘And Joshua said unto all the people, Thus saith the Eternal, the God of Israel, your ancestors dwelt on the other side of the river (Jordan) in old time, even Terah, the father of Abraham, and the father of Nachor, and they served other gods.’ 
‘And I took your father Abraham from the other side of the flood, and led him throughout all the land of Canaan, and multiplied his seed, and gave him Isaac; and I gave unto Isaac Jacob, and Esau; and I gave unto Esau Mount Seir for his possession; but Jacob and his children went down into Egypt.
“Blessed be he who strictly preserveth his promise unto Israel; blessed be the Most Holy, who premeditated the end of the captivity, that He might perform what He had promised to our fathers between the parts (the covenant made with Abraham when he was commanded to divide the heifer, goat, and ram; through which a smoking furnace and flaming lamp passed, by which the covenant was made between God and Abraham, and is therefore called the covenant made between the parts), and He said unto Abraham, ‘Know for certain that thy seed shall be strangers in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve them, and they shall afflict them 400 years. And also that nation whom they shall serve will I judge, and they shall afterwards go forth with great substance.’”

“And it is the same promise which hath been the support of our ancestors, and of us also; for not one only hath risen up against us to annihilate us, but the Most Holy (blessed be He) hath delivered us out of their hands.”

First Fruits Declaration


“Search and inquire what Laban, the Syrian, intended to do to our father Jacob; for Pharaoh decreed the destruction of the males only; but Laban intended to root out the whole; as is said, a Syrian nearly caused my father to perish, and he went down into Egypt and sojourned there with few persons, and there became a great, mighty, and populous nation.
“And he went into Egypt (compelled thereto by the word of God) and sojourned there, by which we are taught that he did not go down to settle there, but only to sojourn, and they (Joseph’s brethren) said unto Pharaoh ‘to sojourn in the land we come, for thy servants have no pasture for their flocks, for the famine is sore in the land of Canaan; now, therefore, we pray thee, let thy servants dwell in the land of Goshen.’ 

“And he there became a nation (but with a few persons, Deut. x, 22), by which we are informed that the children of Israel were distinguished, even in Egypt, as a peculiar nation.

“And the Egyptians ill treated us, afflicted us, and laid heavy bondage upon us and the Egyptians ill treated us” (Exod. i, 10. 11)
and they afflicted us–set over them task-masters to afflict them with their burdens, and they built for Pharaoh store cities Pithom and Ramases,
and they laid heavy bondage upon us, and the Egyptians made the children of Israel serve with rigour.

“And we cried, unto the Eternal, the God of our ancestors, and HE heard our voices, and observed our affliction, our labour, and our oppression.



“And our grievousness denotes the destruction of the male children (Exod. i, 22); every son that is born you shall cast into the river, but every daughter he shall save alive. 

“And the Eternal brought us forth from Egypt with a strong hand and an outstretched arm with great terror, and with signs and wonders. (Exod. xii, 12)

The Ten Plagues




“’It may be explained thus: ‘With a strong hand,’ denotes two plagues; ‘With an outstretched arm,’ two plagues: ‘With great terror,’ two plagues; ‘With prodigies,’ two plagues’ and ‘with wonders,’ two plagues.
“These are the 10 plagues which the Most Holy (blessed be He) brought on the Egyptians in Egypt,

blood,
frogs,
vermin,
murrain,
a mixture of noxious beasts,
boils,
hail,
locusts,
darkness,
and slaying the first-born.

“Rabbi Jose, the Galilean, saith, from whence art thou authorized to assert that the Egyptians were afflicted with 10 plagues in Egypt, and upon the sea they were smitten with 50 plagues? To which he answers, in Egypt it says, and the magician said unto Pharaoh this is the finger of God; but at the sea it says, and Israel saw the mighty hand wherewith the Lord smote the Egyptians, and the people feared the Lord, and believed in the Lord and His servant Moses.<br>“Now, Rabbi Jose argues thus:–If by the finger only smitten with 10 plagues, and at sea they were smitten with 50 plagues. (This is founded on this argument:¬ In Egypt, they said this is the finger of God, but at seas it is said “And they saw the mighty hand.” If by the finger only they received 10 plagues, they must, of course, have received 50 by the hand, as it contains five fingers.)
“Rabbi Eliezer saith from whence can it be proved that every plague which the Most Holy (blessed be He) brought upon the Egyptians in Egypt consisted of four different plagues? From what is said He sent forth against them, the fierceness of his anger, wrath, indignation, and trouble; also by sending evil angels amongst them. Now wrath is one, indignation two, trouble three, sending evil angels four. Hence it is deducible that in Egypt they were afflicted with 48 plagues, and at the sea they were smitten with 200 plagues.

Dayenu

“What abundant favours hath the Omnipresent conferred on us, 
for if He had but brought us forth from Egypt, and had not inflicted justice on the Egyptians, it would have been sufficient.
If He had inflicted justice upon them, and had not executed judgment on their gods, it would have been sufficient.
If He had executed judgment on their gods, and had not slain the first-born, it would have been sufficient.
If he had slain their first-born, and had not bestowed their wealth on us, it would have been sufficient.
If he had given us their wealth, and had not divided the seas for us, it would have been sufficient.
If he had divided the seas for us, and had not caused us to pass through on dry land, it would have been sufficient.
If he had caused us to pass through on dry land, and had not plagued our oppressors in the midst thereof, it would have been sufficient.
If he had plagued our oppressors in the midst therefore, and had not supplied us with necessaries in the wilderness (40 years), it would have been sufficient.
If he had supplied us with necessaries in the wilderness (40 years), and had not fed us on manna, it would have been sufficient.
If he had fed us with manna, and had not given us the Sabbath, it would have been sufficient.
If he had given us the Sabbath, and had not brought us near to Mount Sinai, it would have been sufficient.
If he had brought us near to Mount Sinai, and had not given us his law, it would have been sufficient.
If he had given us his law, and had not brought us to the land of Israel, it would have been sufficient.
If he had brought us to the land of Israel, and had not built the temple, it would have been sufficient.
“How much, then, are we indebted for the manifold favours of the Omnipresent conferred on us. He brought us forth from Egypt, executed judgment on the Egyptians and their gods, slew their first-born, gave us their wealth, divided the sea for us, caused us to pass through on dry land, plunged our oppressors in the midst thereof, supplied us with necessaries in the wilderness 40 years, gave us manna to eat, gave us the Sabbath, brought us near to Mount Sinai, gave us the law, brought us into the land of Israel, and built the chosen holy temple for us, to make atonement for our sins.

Rabban Gamliel's Three Things

“Rabbi Gamlieh saith, that whosoever doth not make mention of three things used in the Passover hath not done his duty (Christian’s blood is not mentioned): the paschal lamb, the unleavened cake, and bitter herbs.
“The paschal lamb, which our ancestors ate during the existence of the holy temple, what did it denote? It denoted that the most Holy (blessed be He) passed over our fathers’ houses in Egypt, as is said, (Exod. xii, 27,) and ye shall say it is the Lord’s Passover, because he passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians and delivered out houses. And the people bowed their heads and worshipped.”
<small><i>The master of the house then takes hold of the cake in the dish, and shows it to the company as a memorial of their freedom, and then says,</i></small>
“These unleavened cakes, wherefore do we eat them? Because there was not sufficient time for the dough of our ancestors to leaven before the Holy Supreme King of Kings – blessed is he – appeared unto them and redeemed them.” (Exod. xii. 39)
<small><i>The master of the house then takes hold of the lettuce and shows it to the company as a memorial of their servitude.</i></small>
“This bitter herb, wherefore do we eat it? Because the Egyptians embittered the lives of our ancestors in Egypt.” (Exod. i. 14)
“It therefore is incumbent on every Israelite in every generation to look upon himself as if he had actually gone forth from Egypt (Exod. ciii. 8): And thou shalt declare unto thy son, in that day, saying, this is done because of that which the Eternal did for me, when I came forth from Egypt. It was not our ancestors only that the Most Holy (blessed be He) redeemed from Egypt, but us also did he redeem with them; and he brought us out from there, that he might bring us in to give us the land which he swore unto our fathers.

First Half of Hallel


“We, therefore, are to duty bound to thanks, praise, adore, glorify, extol, honour, bless, exalt, and reverence Him, who wrought all these miracles for our ancestors and us; for he brought us forth from bondage to freedom, from sorrow to joy, from mourning unto holy days, from darkness to great light, and from servitude to redemption, and therefore let us chant unto Him a new song. Hallelujah.

“When Israel went forth from Egypt, and the house of Jacob from a barbarous people, Judah became his sanctuary, and Israel his dominion. The ocean beheld it and fled; Jordan retreated, mountains skipped like rams, and the hills like lambs. What ailed thee, O ocean, that thou didst flee? Thou, O Jordan, that thou didst retreat? Ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams? It was from the presence of the Lord! Quake, thou earth, from the presence of the God of Jacob, who turned the rock into a pool of water, the flint-stone into a fountain of waters.”

Second Cup of Wine




“Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God, King of the universe, Creator of the fruit of the earth.”

Rachtzah



Motzi Matzah


<small><i>After offering a blessing for the fruit of the vine they all wash their hands, and the master of the house then takes the whole cakes and the broken one in his hand together and breaks the upper cake, but he must not eat thereof till he breaks a piece of each to every one at table, who joins in the blessing, and eat both pieces together.</i></small>
“Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the Universe, who bringeth forth bread from 
“Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, Kind of the Universe, who hast sanctified us with thy commandments, and commended us to eat unleavened cakes”

Maror


<small>The master of the house then takes some bitter herbs, and dips them into the mixture of almonds and apples, and gives every one at table a small portion, when they say–</small>
“Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God, King of the Universe, who hath sanctified us with thy commandments, and commanded us to eat bitter herbs.”

Korech


<small><i>The master of the house then takes some bitter herbs, and dips them into the mixture of almonds and apples, and gives every one at table a small portion, when they say–</i></small>
“Thus did Hillel, during the time the holy temple stood, he took the unleavened cake and bitter herb and eat them together, that he might perform what is said, ‘With unleavened cake and bitter herbs shall they eat it.’”

Shulchan Orech


<small><i>They then eat supper, after which they say grace.</i></small>

Tzafun


<small><i>They then read portions of their customary prayers, (their monthly and Sabbath prayers), which occupy frequently so a late hour at night. They then retire. The second night the ceremony is just the same. After the ceremony they are prohibited from eating or drinking anything except water, tea, or coffee.</i></small>

Barech

Birkat Hamazon



Third Cup of Wine



Pour Out Thy Wrath



Hallel

Second Half of Hallel



Songs of Praise and Thanks



Fourth Cup of Wine



Nirtzah

Chasal Siddur Pesach



L'Shana HaBaa



And It Happened at Midnight



Zevach Pesach



Ki Lo Na'e



Adir Hu



Sefirat HaOmer



Echad Mi Yodea



Chad Gadya

