Sefer Yetzirah Gra Version
ספר יצירה נוסח הגר"א
Sefer Yezirah, trans. by Isidor Kalisch. New York, 1877
https://archive.org/details/sketchoftalmudwo02kali

Sefer Yetzirah Gra Version



Chapter 1

Yah, the Lord of hosts, the living God, King of the Universe, Omnipotent, All-Kind and Merciful, Supreme and Extolled, who is Eternal, Sublime and Most-Holy, ordained (formed) and created the Universe in thirty-two mysterious paths of wisdom by three Sepharim, namely: 1) סְפָר S'for; 2) Sippur סִפּוּר; and 3) Sapher סֵפֶר which are in Him one and the same.
They consist of a decade out of nothing and of twenty-two fundamental letters. He divided the twenty-two consonants into three divisions : 1) three אִמּוֹת mothers, fundamental letters or first elements ; 2) seven double ; and 3) twelve simple consonants. 
The decade out of nothing is analogous to that of the ten fingers (and toes) of the human body, five parallel to five, and in the centre of which is the covenant with the only One, by the word of the tongue and the rite of Abraham. 
Ten are the numbers out of nothing, and not the number nine, ten and not eleven. Comprehend this great wisdom, imderstand this knowledge, inquire into it and ponder on it, render it evident and leadthe Creator back to His throne again. 
The decade out of nothing has the following ten infinitudes : 1) The beginning infinite; 2) The end infinite; 3) The good infinite; 4) The evil infinite; 5) The height infinite; 6) The depth infinite; 7) The East infinite; 8) The West infinite; 9) The North infinite; 10) The South infinite,and the only Lord God, the faithful King, rules over all from His holy habitation for ever and ever. 
The appearance of the ten spheres out of nothing is like a flash of lightning, being without an end, His word is in them, when they go and return ; they run by His order like a whirlwind and humble them- selves before His throne. 
The decade of existence out of nothing has its end linked to its beginning and its beginning linked to its end, just as the flame is wedded to the live coal; because the Lord is one and there is not a second one, and before one what wilt thou count? 
Concerning the number ten of the spheres of existence out of nothing keep thy tongue from speaking and thy mind from pondering on it, and if thy mouth urges thee to speak, and thy heart to think about it, return! as it reads: "And the hving creatures ran and returned," (Ezekiel 6, 14) and upon this was the covenant made. 
The following are the ten categories of existence out of nothing : 1) The spirit of the living God, praised and glorified be the name of Him who lives to all eternity. The articulate word of creative power, the spirit and the word are what we call the holy spirit.
2) Air emanated from the spirit by which He formed and established twenty-two consonants, stamina. Three of them, however, are fundamental letters, or mothers, seven double and twelve simple consonants; hence the spirit is the first one. 
3) Primitive water emanated from the air. He formed and established by it Bohu (water, stones) mud and loam, made them like a bed, put them up like a wall, and surrounded them as with a rampart, put coldness upon them and they became dust, as it reads: "He says to the snow (coldness) be thou earth." (Job 37, 6.) 
4) Fire or ether emanated from the water. He established by it the throne of glory, the Seraphim and Ophanim, the holy hving creatures and the angels, and of these three He formed His habitation, as it reads : "Who made His angels spirits. His ministers a flaming fire." (Psalm 104, 4.)
He selected three consonants from the simple ones which are in the hidden secret of three mothers or first elements: א"מ"ש air, water and ether or fire. He sealed them with spirit and fastened them to His great name and sealed with it six dimensions. 5) He sealed the height and tnmed towards above, and sealed it with יהו. 6) He sealed the depth, turned towards below and sealed it with היו 7) He sealed the east and turned forward, and sealed it with ויה  8) He sealed the west and turned backward, and sealed it with והי 9) He sealed the south and turned to the right and sealed it with יוה 10) He sealed the north and turned to the left and sealed it with הוי. 
These are the ten spheres of existence out of nothing. From the spirit of the living God emanated air, from the air, water, from the water, fire or ether, from the ether, the height and the depth, the East and West, the North and South.  

Chapter 2

There are twenty-two letters, stamina. Three of them, however, are the first elements, fundamentals or mothers, seven double and twelve simple consonants. The three fundamental letters א"מ"ש have as their basis the balance. In one scale is the merit and in the other criminaHty, which are placed in equilibrium by the tongue. The three fundamental letters א"מ"ש signify, as מ is mute like the water and ש hissing like the fire, there is א among them, a breath of air which reconciles them. 
The twenty-two letters which form the stamina after having been appointed and established by God, He combined, weighed and changed them, and formed by them all beings which are in existence, and all those which will be formed in all time to come. 
He established twenty-two letters, stamina, by the voice, formed by the breath of air and fixed them on five places in the human mouth, namely: 1) gutturals, א ה ח ע 2) palatals, ג י נ ק 3) linguals, ד ט ל נ ת 4) dentals, ו ש ס ר ץ 5) labials, ב ו מ ף 
He fixed the twenty-two letters, stamina, on the sphere like a wall with two hundred and thirty-one gates, and turned the spheres forward and backward. For an illustration may serve the three letters, ע נ ג There is nothing better than joy, and nothing worse than sorrow or plague. 
But how was it done? He combined, weighed and changed : the א with all the other letters in succession, and all the others again with א; ב with all, and all again with ב; and so the whole series of letters. Hence it follows that there are two hundred and thirty-one formations, and that every creature and every word emanated from one name.
He created a realty out of nothing, called the nonentity into existence and hewed, as it were, colossal pillars from intangible air. This has been shown by the example of combining the letter א with all the other letters, and all the other letters with Aleph (א). He predetermined, and by speaking created every creature and every word by one name. For an illustration may serve the twenty-two elementary substances by the primitive substance of Aleph (א). 

Chapter 3

The three first elements, א"מ"ש are typified by a balance, in one scale the merit and in the other the criminality, which are placed in equilibrium by the tongue.
These three mothers, א"מ"ש are a great, wonderful and unknown mystery, and are sealed by six rings, or elementary circles, namely: air, water and fire emanated from them, which gave birth to progenitors, and these progenitors gave birth again to some offspring. 
God appointed and estabhshed the three mothers א"מ"ש combined, weighed and changed them, and formed by them three mothers א"מ"ש in the world, in the year and in man, male and female. 
The three mothers א"מ"ש in the world are: air, water and fire. Heaven was created from fire or ether ; the earth (comprising sea and land) from the elementary water ; and the atmospheric air from the elementary air, or spirit, which establishes the balance among them. 
The three mothers א"מ"ש produce in the year: heat, coldness and moistness. Heat was created from fire, coldness from water, and moistness from air which equalizes them.
The three mothers אמ"ש produce in man, male and female, breast, body and head. The head was created from fire, the breast from water, and the body from air, which places them in equilibrium. 
First Division. God let the letter Aleph (א) predominate in primitive air, crowned it, combined one with the other, and formed by them the air in the world, moistness in the year, and the breast in man, male and female ; in male by א"מ"ש and in female by א"ש"ם
Second Division. He let the letter Mem (מ) predominate in primitive water, and crowned it, combined one with the other, and formed by them the earth, (including land and sea) coldness in the year, and the belly in male and female ; in male by א"מ"ש in female by מ"ש"א 
Third Division. He let the letter Sheen (ש) predominate in primitive fire, crowned it, combined one with the other, and formed by them, heaven in the world, heat in the year, and the head of male and female. 

Chapter 4

The seven double letters, בגד כפרת with a duplicity of pronunciation, aspirated and unaspirated, namely: בּב, גּג, דּד, כּכ, פּפ, רּר, תּת serve as a model of softness and hardness, strength and weakness.
Seven double letters, ,בגד כפרת shall, as it were, symbolize wisdom, wealth, fruitfulness, life, dominion, peace and beauty.
Seven double letters serve to signify the antithesis to which human life is exposed. The antithesis of wisdom is foolishness; of wealth, poverty; of fruitfulness, childlessness; of life, death; of dominion, dependence ; of peace, war ; and of beauty, ugliness. 
The seven double consonants are analogous to the six dimensions : height and depth, East and West, North and South, and the holy temple that stands in the centre, which carries them all. 
The double consonants are seven, בגד כפרת and not six, they are seven and not eight ; reflect upon this fact, inquire about it, and make it so evident, that the Creator be acknowledged to be on His throne again. 
The seven double consonants, stamina, having been designed and established, combined, weighed, and changed by God, He formed by them: seven planets in the world, seven days in the year, seven gates, openings of the senses, in man, male and female.
The seven planets in the world are: Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon. Seven days in the year are the seven days of the week; seven gates in man, male and female, are: two eyes, two ears, two nostrils and the mouth. 
First Division. He let the letter ב predominate in wisdom, crowned it, combined one with the other and formed by them: the moon in the world, the first day in the year, and the right eye in man, male and female. 
Second Division. He let the letter ג predominate in wealth, crowned it, combined one with the other, and formed by them : Mars in the world, the second day in the year, and the right ear in man, male and female. 
Third Division. He let the letter ד predominate in producibility, crowned it, combined one with the other, and formed by them : the sun in the world, the third day in the year, the right nostril in man, male and female. 
Fourth Division. He let the letter כ predominate in life, crowned it, combined one with the other, and formed by them : Venus in the world, the fourth day in the year, and the left eye in man, male and female. 
Fifth Division. He let the letter פ predominate in dominion, cro-v\aied it, combined one with the other, and formed by them : Mercury in the world, the fifth day in the year, and the left ear in man, male and female. 
Sixth Division. He let the letter ר predominate in peace, crowned it, combined one with the other, and formed by them : Saturn in the world, the sixth day in the year, and the left nostril in man, male and female. 
Seventh Division. He let the letter ת predominate in beauty, crowned it, combined one with the other, and formed by them: Jujpiter in the world, the seventh day in the year, and the mouth of man, male and female. 
By the seven double consonants, בגד כפרת were also designed seven worlds (αιωνες), seven heavens, seven lands, (probably chmates,) seven seas, (probably around Palestine,) seven rivers, seven deserts, seven days a week, seven weeks from Passover to Pentecost, there is a cycle of seven years, the seventh is the release year, and after seven release years is jubilee. Hence, God loves the number seven under the whole heaven. (In the whole nature.)
Two stones build two houses, three stones build six houses, four build twenty-four houses, five build one hundred and twenty houses, six build seven hundred and twenty houses and seven build five thousand and forty houses. From thence further go and reckon what the mouth cannot express and the ear cannot hear. 

Chapter 5

The twelve simple letters ה"ו"ז ח"ט"י ל"נ"ס ע"צ"ק symbolize, as it were, the organs of speaking, thinking, walking, seeing, hearing, working, coition, smelling, sleep, anger, swallowing and laughing.
The twelve simple consonants ה"ו"ז ח"ט"י ל"נ"ס ע"צ"ק symbolize also twelve oblique points: east height, north east, east depth, south height, south east, south depth, west height, south west, west depth, north height, north west, north depth. They grew wider and wider to all eternity, and these are the boundaries of the world. 
The twelve simple letters  ה"ו"ז ח"ט"י ל"נ"ס ע"צ"ק stamina, having been designed, established, combined, weighed and changed by God, He performed by them : twelve constellations in the world, twelve months in the year, and twelve leaders (organs) in the human body, male and female.
The twelve constellations in the world are : Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagitarius, Capricornus, Aquarius and Pisces.
The twelve months of the year are : Nisan, lyar, Sivan, Tamus, Ab, Elul, Tishri, Marcheshvan, Kislev, Teves, Schevat and Adar.
The twelve organs of the human body are : two hands, two feet, two kidneys, gall, small intestines, liver, gullet or esophagus, stomach and milt.
First Part. First Division. God let the letter ה predominate in speaking, crowned it, combined one with the other, and formed by them : Aries (the Ram) in the world, the month Nisan in the year, and the right foot of the human body, male and female. Second Division. He let the letter ו predominate in thinking, crowned it, combined one with the other, and formed by them: Taurus (the Bull) in the world, the month lyar in the year and the right kidney of the human body, male and female. Third Division. He let the letter ז predominate in walking, crowned it, combined one with the other, and formed by them: Gemini (the Twins) in the world, the month Sivan in the year, and the left foot of the human body, male and female.
Second Part. First Division. He let the letter ח predominate in seeing, crowned it, combined one with the other, and formed by them : Cancer (the Crab) in the world, the month Tamus in the year, and the right hand of the human body, male and female. Second Division. He let the letter ט predominate in hearing, crowned it, combined one with the other, and formed by them : Leo (the Lion) in the world, the month Ab in the year, and the left kidney of the human body, male and female. Third Division. He let the letter י predominate in working, crowned it, combined one with the other, and formed by them : Virgo (the Virgin) in the world, the month Elul in the year, and the left hand of the human body, male and female.
Third Part. First Division. He let the letter ל predominate in coition, crowned it, combined one with the other, and formed by them : Libra (the Balance) in the world, the month Tishri in the year, and the gall of the human body, male and female. Second Division. He let the letter נ predominate in smelling, crowned it, combined one with the other, and formed by them: Scorpio (the Scorpion) in the world, the month Marcheshvan in the year, and the small intestines of the human body, male and female. Thied Division. He let the letter ס predominate in sleep, crowned it, combined one with the other, and formed by them : Sagittarius (the Archer) in the world, the month Kislev in the year, and the stomach of the human body, male and female.
Fourth Part. First Division. He let the letter ע predominate in anger, crowned it, combined one with the other, and formed by them : Capricornus (the Goat) in the world, the month Teves in the year, and the liver in the human body, male and female. Second Division. He let the letter צ predominate in swallowing, crowned it, combined one with the other, and formed by them : Aquarius (the Waterman) in the world, the month Schwat in the year, and the esophagus of the human body, male and female. Thibd Division. He let the letter ק predominate in laughing, crowned it, combined one with the other, and formed by them : Pisces (the Fishes) in the world, the month Adar in the year, and the milt of the human body, male and female. He made them as a conflict, drew them up like a wall ; and set one against the other as in warfare. 

Chapter 6

These are the three mothers or the first elements, א"מ"ש from which emanated three progenitors ; primitive air, water and fire, and from which emanated as their offspring, three progenitors and their offspring, namely: the seven planets and their hosts, and the twelve oblique points. To confirm this there are faithful witnesses ; the world, year and man, the twelve, the Equipoise, the heptade, which God regulates like the Dragon, (Tali) sphere and the heart.
The first elements א"מ"ש are air, water and fire; the fire is above, the water below, and a breath of air establishes the balance among them. For an illustration may serve, that the fire carries the water is the phonetic character of מ which is mute and ש is hissing like fire, there is א among them, a breath of air which places them in equilibrium. 
Dragon (Tali) is in the world like a king upon his throne, the sphere is in the year like a king in the empire, and the heart is in the human body like a king in war.
God has also set the one over against the other; the good agamst the evil, and the evil against the good ; the good proceeds from the good, and the evil from the evil ; the good purifies the bad, and the bad the good ; the good is preserved for the good, and the evil for the bad ones. 
There are three of which every one of them stands by itself; one is in the affirmative, the other in the negative and one equalizes them. There are seven of which three are against three, and one places them in equilibrium. There are twelve which are all the time at war ; three of them produce love, and three hatred, three are animators and three destroyers. The three that produce love are the heart and the ears ; the three that produce hatred are the liver, the gall and the tongue ; the three animators are the two nostrils and the milt ; and the three destroyers are the mouth and the two openings of the body ; and God, the faithful King, rules over all from His holy habitation to all eternity. He is one above three, three are above seven, seven above twelve, and all are linked together.
There are twenty-two letters by which, the I am, Yah, the Lord of hosts, Almighty and Eternal, designed, formed and created by three Sepharim, His whole world, and formed by them creatures and all those that will be formed in time to come. 
When the patriarch Abraham comprehended the great truism, revolved it in his mind, conceived it perfectly, made careful investigations and profound inquiries, pondered upon it and succeeded in contemplations, the Lord of the Universe appeared to him, called him his friend, made with him a covenant between the ten fingers of his hands, which is the covenant of the tongue, and the covenant between the ten toes of his feet, which is the covenant of circumcision, and said of him : "Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee." (Jer. I, 5.) 