Bartenura on Mishnah Tahorot
ברטנורא על משנה טהרות
Bartenura on Mishnah, trans. by Rabbi Robert Alpert, 2022
sefaria.org

Bartenura on Mishnah Tahorot



Chapter 1



Mishnah 1

שלשה עשר דבר. צריכה מחשבה – that he would intend upon it for human consumption. For all foods that are permitted do not require intention/thought. But this because it is prohibited for eating requires intention and afterwards it defiles. And especially in villages where there aren’t a multitude of people, but in the markets, it does not require intention/thought, for since there are a multiple of people that come to the market, there are a lot [of people] who eat the carrion of a clean bird. And this is explained sin in the last chapter of [Tractate] Utkzin [Mishnayot 1 and 3].
ואינה צריכה הכשר (but does not require fitness/preparation) – but defiles the ritual impurity of foods like all other foods that came in contact with/touched a creeping animal which are made first-degree of ritual impurity, but they don’t require that water or other liquids come upon them and that they don’t come in contact with a creeping animal, for their rendering produce susceptible to ritual impurity is with seeds, as it is written (Leviticus 11:38): “But if water is put on the seed, etc. [i.e., and any part of the carcass falls upon it, it shall be impure for you],” and we (i.e., through the Rabbis) expound that just as seeds whose end is not to become defiled with a grave defilement requires preparation/fitness, even all whose end is not to become defiled with a grave defilement, that it defiles humans and garments in the esophagus, that does not require preparation.
ומטמאה טומאת אוכלין בכביצה (and renders unclean with food uncleanness when it is the size of an egg) – that is like the size of an egg from it that came in contact with ritually pure foods they were defiled.
וכזית בבית הבליעה – a person who ate from it an olive’s bulk is defiled, and his garments were defiled when it reached the esophagus, as it is written (Leviticus 17:15): Any person, whether citizen or stranger who eats what has died or has been torn, etc. [i.e., shall wash his clothes, bathe in water, and remain impure until evening; then he shall be pure].” And the verse is speaking of someone who consumes that carrion of a clean bird,’ and it is written, "תאכל"/”who eats”. But there is no consumption less that of an olive’s bulk.

וחייבים עליה על ביאת המקדש – like the rest of all of the defilements, as it is written regarding the defilement of the Sanctuary and its Holy Things (Leviticus 5:4): “[Or when he touches human impurity] – any such impurity whereby one becomes impure” and we expound to include swallowing the carrion of a clean bird.
ושורפין עליה את התרומה (and they burn heave-offering on its account) – if the carrion of a clean bird touched heave -offering, it is burned, that when it is not in the esophagus, it has the law of first degree of ritual impurity and it defiles the heave-offering through its contact to become second-degree of ritual impurity.
והאוכל אבר מן החי ממנה סופג את הארבעים - and even if the limb was less than an olive’s bulk. But the anonymous Mishnah is not according to Rabbi Meir, for if it were according to Rabbi Meir, we would learn of it from the end of the [chapter] of “The Sciatic Nerve”/גיד הנשה (Chapter 7 of Tractate Hullin, folio 102a and see Mishnah 6) as he said that the [the law of a] limb from a living animal does not apply other than with pure cattle alone.
שחיטתה ומליקתה מטהרת את טריפתה (slaughtering it and wringing its neck render it no longer unclean even if it is Terefah) – and removes it from [the status] of a carrion that it would not defile. For the wringing/pinching of the neck permits the inside to the Kohanim, as the ritual slaughter permits the outside. And just as its ritual slaughter purifies it, so its pinching/wringing of the neck purifies it. And the ritual slaughter that purifies the torn animal/Terefah from the status of a carrion we derive from Scripture, as it is written (Leviticus 11:39): “If an animal [that you may eat] has died, anyone who touches its carcass shall be impure [until evening],” there is what from the animal that defiles and there is that which does not defile, excluding the torn animal/Terefah that was slaughtered, and the same law applies to the torn bird.
ר' יהודה אומר אינן מטהרות – that we don’t derive the torn bird from the torn cattle/animal.
רבי יוסי אומר שחיטתה מטהרת ולא מליקתה – and the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 2

מיטמאות (become susceptible to uncleanness) – if a creeping animal touched them (i.e., the large feathers and down) they are defiled. And if they are impure, and the large feathers and down touched pure foods, they are defiled. For they are considered a handle to bring in and to remove/take out, and anything which is a handle becomes susceptible to becoming defiled and defiles.
ולא מצטרפות (but they do not join together) – if the food was less than an egg’s bulk, the large feathers and the down do not combine to complete it to an egg’s bulk to defile through the ritual impurity of foods, as is taught in the beginning of [Tractate] Uktzin (see Chapter 1, Mishnah 1 – as it is not considered a protective part of the plant).
הנוצה מצטרפת – for it is considered like a protective part of the animal. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yishmael.
החרטום (nose/beak) – that the bird gnaws/bites it.
ראשי אגפים הראש הזנב (tips of the wings and the tip of the tail)- that remain attached to the body after it plucks off the down, and it is customary to cut/sever them and cast them away for they are not appropriate for eating. But on the fattened birds, we leave them and eat them with the bird, and that is what it states [by Rabbi Yossi at the conclusion of the Mishnah]: "שכן מניחים בפטומות"/”for so they are allowed to remain on fattened birds.” But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi. And these thirteen matters that are considered in our Mishnah, in the first section, there are night, for its ritual slaughter and its pinching/wringing of the neck are considered one, and both of them are pure for its torn animal, and the large feathers and the down and the nose/beak and the nails a, these [make up] the thirteen matters.

Mishnah 3

נבלת עוף טמא – that its end is not to defile a stringent defilement/uncleanness which does not defile humans and garments.
צריכה מחשבה – that he will intend to eat/consume it.
והכשר (and preparation)– of water or the rest of the liquids [for susceptibility to defilement], and afterwards it will come in contact with a creeping animal.
לפסול את הגויה (to render the body unfit) – if it had been defiled, and he ate from half a loaf’s bulk, which is an egg and a half [of an egg], his (i.e., that of a Kohen) body is made unfit to eat heave-offering until he immerses [in a Mikveh].
ואין בה כזית בבית הבליעה – as it is written (Leviticus 22:8): “He shall not eat anything that died or was torn by beasts.” He whose prohibition is because of the food of a carrion defiles through eating in the esophagus, excluding this whose prohibition is not because of eating carrion but rather because of eating anything that is impure/
והאוכלה אין טעון הערב שמש – the person who consumes half of a loaf of it after it was defiled, for he invalidates the body to eat heave-offering, if he immersed [in a Mikveh] after he consumed it, he is permitted [to consume] heave-offering immediately, and does not require [the arrival of] a sunset.
ואין חייבין עליה על ביאת מקדש – if he ate one-half a loaf of carrion of an impure bird and entered into the Sanctuary, it is defilement of the Rabbis, and even though that burn heave-offering upon it.
והאוכל אבר מן החי ממנה סופג את הארבעים – and even though that eat an olive’s bulk whether it is flesh or sinews and bones, for now even according to the one who holds that [eating] the limb of a living animal requires an olive’s bulk for eating is written regarding it, here there is an olive’s bulk, nevertheless, he does not receive forty (really, thirty-nine) lashes. But because of something impure, he is not obligated, for there isn’t an olive’s bulk of flesh.
ואין שחיטתה מטהרתה (for slaughtering it does not render it clean) – for eating. For a son of Noah who is permitted [to consume] an impure bird but is prohibited from [consuming] the limb of a living animal, but if he slaughtered it and it is moves convulsively/kicks, his slaughtering of it does not purify it for eating until it dies. Even though that with a clean [animal] even it is convulses, the slaughter is permitted for a son of Noah, in consequence of that it would be fit for an Israelite (i.e., the legal status required for its legitimacy might have easily been obtained). And this is how our Mishnah is explained at the end of the chapter, “The Sciatic Nerve”/גיד הנשה (see Talmud Tractate Hullin 102a).

Mishnah 4

ובבהמה העור והרוטב – all of this Mishnah is explained in Tractate Hullin, in the Chapter "העור והרוטב"/The Hide and the Fat/Juice (Chapter 9 of Tractate Hullin, Mishnah 1).

Mishnah 5

מצטרפין זה עם זה לטמא – if there isn’t in one of them the equivalent of an egg’s bulk, they combine to the measurement to defile according to the lighter/lenient of the two of them, for if it came in contact with/touched heave-offering, it invalidated it, according to the law of food that was defiled by the offspring of uncleanness that invalidates the heave-offering but does not defile it.
כחצי ביצה וכו' – that they mixed this one with that one.
שני – this mixture/combination has the law of second degree [of ritual impurity] upon it and it invalidates the heave-offering.
שלישי – and invalidates the Holy Things.
ראשון – and makes [through] its contact, second-degree [of ritual impurity]. For there is a measurement that first-degree [of ritual impurity] on the body to grant defilement.
חלקן זה שני וזה שני – for in each of them is half of the measurement of the first, and half the measurement of the second. And it is taught in the Mishnah above (see this Mishnah, Tractate Taharot, Chapter 1, Mishnah 5) that first-degree [of ritual impurity] and second-degree [of ritual impurity] combine to the lighter of the two of them.

Mishnah 6

(all of these sections/segments are simple.) And every place where I am able to suspend that there is the bulk of an egg, it is the more severe of this one and that one, we follow after the more severe/stringent. But if not, we follow after the lenient/lighter.

Mishnah 7

מקרצות (pieces of dough – separated from the main dough in the trough) – pieces of dough. It is language of (Jeremiah 46:20): “[Egypt is a handsome heifer] A gadfly from the north is coming, coming!.”
נושכות זו את זו (stick to one another) – that they are attached to each other and it is impossible to separate them unless they are stuck together.
כולן תחילה – for they are considered as one and is if they touched all of them
פירשו (if they were separated) – the pieces, this one from that one.
במשקין כלן שניות – for as liquids they were first-degree [of ritual impurity] and they make [other things] second-degree [of ritual impurity].
בידים כלן שלשיות – for hands are second degree [of ritual impurity] and make heave-offering third-degree [of ritual impurity].

Mishnah 8

מקרצת – a piece of dough that was first degree [of ritual defilement] and he attached to it other pieces.
כולן תחילה – and one who has contact with the others is like one who touches the first degree [of ritual defilement], and it is considered connection/junction. And similarly, also, if it was second degree [of ritual defilement], they are considered connection/junction, for after if they separated, the defilement remains in them. But if it was third degree [of ritual defilement], if they separated, they don’t have defilement, for [something] third degree [of ritual defilement] does not make heave-offering fourth degree [of ritual defilement], even if they didn’t separate, they are not considered a connection/junction, and they are ritually pure.

Mishnah 9

ככרות הקודש – as, for example the two loaves (brought as a communal offering on Shavuot – see Leviticus 23:27 – which were leavened, resembling that of the shewbread which, however was unleavened, together with two lambs, ceremonially waved, and afterwards, divided among the priests and eaten in the Temple courtyard) and the shewbread (see Leviticus 24:5-9 – describing the twelve shewbread loaves that were placed on the sacred table in the Sanctuary each Shabbat; the bread of the previous week was divided among the priests and eaten; it was placed on the table in two arrangements of six loaves with frankincense placed between them or atop them) and similar kinds of things.
שבתוך גומותיהן מים המקודשים (that within their indentations is preserved water in cleanness fitting for Holy Things)- that there were within the indentations that are on top of the loaf water that was made on the purity of Holy Things, and one loaf was defiled by a moving creature/unclean reptile, and the loaf that was defiled touched something that was second degree [of ritual impurity] , and the second [touched] that which was third degree [of ritual impurity] and even if they are one-hundred, all of them are ritually impure, and even though they didn’t touch the water that was in the loaf but rather all of the loaf touched/came in contact with its neighbor/fellow [loaf], all of them were defiled, for the honor in which sacred objects are held makes them [fit for Levitical uncleanness (even without contact with liquids)], as if the liquid that is within each loaf that is made first degree [of ritual impurity]that which touched the loaf and defiled it. But heave-offering is not such, but rather, the first loaf [of heave-offering] that is defiled by a moving creature/unclean reptile alone defiles its neighbor/fellow loaf to become second degree [of ritual impurity], and the second-degree invalidates the third-degree, but not further, and we don’t worry about the liquid that is within the hole/indentation.
אם יש בין הככרות משקה טופח אף תרומה כולן טמאות (if there is between the loaves dripping liquid, even in the case of heave offering, the whole is ritually unclean) – that the liquid dripping that is between each and every loaf returns to become first degree [of ritual impurity], and defiles the loaf that it touches to make it second degree [of ritual impurity], and similarly, forever. Another interpretation: Holy loaves that are placed on a plank/board that are made with indentations/holes, and each loaf is placed within its hole/indentation. But the מים המקודשים/preserved water in cleanness fitting for Holy Things, we have the reading, meaning, and similarly, the preserved water in cleanness fitting for Holy Things that are placed in a vessel that is made with indentations/holes, if one of them is defiled by a moving insect/unclean reptile, all of them are defiled, for the vessel combines/joins what is within it to the Holy Things. But not for heave-offering, for heave offering does not defile other than first degree [of ritual impurity] and second degree [of ritual impurity] and invalidates third-degree [of ritual impurity] where they touched one another, but the vessel does not combine/join. But if there is dripping liquid between the holes/indentations, everything is ritually impure, for the loaf which is second degree [of ritual impurity] makes the liquid first-degree [of ritual impurity] and returns and defiles another loaf, and similarly all of it.

Chapter 2



Mishnah 1

האשה – we are speaking of a ritually pure woman.
שהיתה כובשת ירק (that was pickling/pressing vegetables) – of heave offering in a pot and that vegetable was not susceptible to receive ritual defilement, but rather in the manner of those who pickle that they cut/sever the vegetable without liquid and salt it and place them in a pot or in a jar and afterwards place upon them wine or vinegar or oil (and that leaf is made susceptible to receive ritual defilement).
ונגעה – with unwashed hands which make the heave-offering/priest’s due unit/invalid.
בעלה – [on the leaf] of a vegetable that is half in the pot with the liquids and half outside of the pot dry, and she touched it in the dry place.
אע"פ שיש בו כביצה – which is the measurement to defile foods.
הוא טמא – that leaf [is impure].
והכל טהור – the rest of the vegetable and the liquids that are in the pot, for this leaf part of which is in the pot does not come defile it, for the hands are second degree [of ritual impurity] and the leaf is third degree [of ritual impurity], but something that is third-degree does not make something fourth-degree in regard to heave-offering.
נגעה – for mere hands are second degree [of ritual uncleanness].
במקום משקה – that is to say, in a place where the leaf is not dried, the liquid that is upon it (i.e., the leaf) becomes first degree [of ritual defilement], for everything that invalidates the heave-offering defiles liquids to become first degree [of ritual defilement], and the liquid makes the leaf second-degree [of ritual defilement. Therefore, when there is on a leaf an egg’s bulk, that is the the measure to defile other things.
הכל טמא – even the pot itself [is ritually impure], for part of the leaf that is in the pot makes the liquid that is in the pot first degree [of ritual defilement] and it (i.e., the leaf) returns and defiles the pot, as is brought in the first chapter of [Tractate] Shabbat [see the Bartenura commentary to Mishnah 4] concerning food and vessels that were defiled by liquids.
אין בו כביצה הוא טמא – that leaf that she touched [is ritually impure].
והכל טהור – for less than an egg’s bulk it does not defile other [things].
חזר לקדירה – that place that liquid touched it (i.e., the leaf).
הכל טמא -even though there isn’t on the leaf an egg’s bulk [of liquid], for the liquid that touched it returned and defiled all that was in the pot, and even the pot itself.
היתה מגע טמא מת – this woman who is pickling the vegetables, for the woman is first-degree [of ritual impurity] and the leaf that she touched is second degree [of ritual impurity], therefore, if there is an egg’s bulk on it, everything is ritually impure.
היתה טבולת יום מנערת את הקדירה (if one who had immersed herself on that same day was emptying (or stirring) the pot) – for now the woman has two defilements: one – that she is someone who had immersed herself that day, and the other – that hands are second-degree of ritual impurity, as it is taught regarding unwashed hands, and both of them are necessary [to teach in the Mishnah] because of the concluding clause. [The word} מנערת – that she empties out what is within the pot (another version), מנערת – she stirs with a spoon that is in her hand that which is in the pot.
ספק מן הקדירה נתזו (doubt whether it – the liquid had splashed from the pot) – and what is within the pot is not defiled.
ספק שהקלח (a doubt whether the jet/the stalk) – which is completely filled with liquid and it is within the pot touched her hand.
הירק פסול – because of doubt of being someone who immersed that day, but not because of doubtfulness of [the status] of her hands, as is taught in the Mishnah in Chapter 2 [Mishnah 2] (regarding the stringency of whether her hands were unclean or not), there is a greater stringency regarding someone who immersed that day for the doubtfulness concerning [whether] a person who immersed that day invalidates the heave offering/priest’s due, but the hands are doubtfully pure.
והקדירה טהורה – because a person who immersed that day did not defile it (i.e., the pot) even it is she certainly touched the liquids, for a person who immersed that day does not make liquids first degree [of ritual impurity], as is taught in the Mishnah [Tractate Parah, Chapter 8, Mishnah 7]: “All who renders the priest’s due/heave offering unit defiles the liquids to be first-degree [of ritual impurity] except for a person who had immersed that day.” But if it is because of [her] hands, she does not defile it, for since there is a doubt lest it (i.e., the liquid from the pot) splashed upon her hands, from doubt the pot is ritually pure, for hands that are doubtfully impure are pure.

Mishnah 2

האוכל אוכל ראשון – his body is made first degree [of ritual impurity] so that his contact is second-degree [of ritual impurity]. And the person who eats food that is second-degree [of ritual impurity], his body is made second-degree [of ritual impurity], but if he came in contact with heave-offering/priest-due, he invalidated it, these are from the eighteen matters that were decreed on that self-same day (i.e., when Rabban Gamaliel was deposed as President of the Sanhedrin described in Talmud Berakhot 28a – see the Bartenura commentary to Tractate Shabbat, Chapter 1, Mishnah 4 for the full list of the eighteen decrees). And specifically, that he consumed half of a loaf, which is an egg and a half worth according to Maimonides and two eggs’ worth according to Rashi. And this is the measurement of food to make the body unfit.
רבי יהושע אומר האוכל אוכל ראשון ואוכל שני נעשה גופו שני – for he holds that we don’t compare for him the one who eats to be like the food itself. For that which compares the person who consumes second-degree [of ritual impurity] food to be second degree [of ritual impurity] and not third-degree [of ritual impurity, because since we found that second degree [of ritual impurity] makes someone second-degree [of ritual impurity] through liquids, for the liquids which were defiled by someone with second-degree [of ritual impurity] are made first degree [of ritual impurity] and a person who comes in contact with them is second-degree [of ritual impurity], but if we would compare to him who consumes food that is second-degree [of ritual impurity] becomes third-degree [of ritual impurity], it would not invalidate the heave-offering/priest’s due, for something that is third-degree [of ritual impurity] does not make something fourth-degree [of ritual impurity] regarding heave-offering/priest’s due, but the Sages decreed on someone who consumes food that is second degree [of ritual impurity] that he would invalidate the priest’s due/heave offering, because sometimes he consumes ritually impure foods and casts liquids of heave-offering into his mouth while the ritually impure foods are in his mouth and invalidates them, therefore, even though that when eating foods that are first-degree [of ritual impurity], we don’t compare him to one who eats like the food itself, that by consuming food that is second-degree [of ritual impurity] we compare him to be second-degree [of ritual impurity] like the food, in order to invalidate the heave-offering/priest’s due.
שלישי שני לקודש – a person who eats food hat is third-degree [of ritual impurity], his body becomes second-degree [of ritual impurity] for Holy Things, and he makes third-degree [of ritual impurity] and fourth degree [of ritual impurity] with Holy Things.
ולא שני לתרומה – for if he came in contact with heave-offering, he did not invalidate it, but however, he is prohibited to consume heave-offering, and this is proven in the Gemara in Chapter Two of [Tractate] Hullin [folio 37a].
בחולין שנעשו על הרת תרומה – meaning to say this food is food of first-degree [of ritual impurity] and one who consumes food of second-degree [of ritual impurity] and third-degree [of ritual impurity] that we taught in our Mishnah, we are speaking about unconsecrated produce that was made on the purity of priest-due/heave offering, for mere unconsecrated produce does not have a third-degree [of ritual impurity].

Mishnah 3

הראשון שבחולין טמא ומטמא – [defiles] heave-offering/priest’s due, that a loaf of heave-offering that came in contact with first-degree [of ritual impurity] of unconsecrated foods, becomes second-degree [of ritual impurity] and makes third-degree [of ritual impurity] unfit/invalid.
והשני שבחולין – makes heave-offering unfit/invalid but does not defile, for third-degree [of ritual defilement] of heave-offering does not make something fourth-degree [of ritual defilement], therefore third-degree [of ritual defilement] of heave-offering is not considered defiled, but rather unfit/invalid.
והשלישי של חולין – this is what he said and if there is in those unconsecrated foods third-degree [of ritual impurity] as, for example, that they became through the purification of heave-offering/priest’s due.
נאכל בנזיד הדמע (is consumed in a pottage of Holy Things)- in a cooked dish [that heave-offering] is mixed in, for the heave-offering/Terumah is called דמע/Holy Things (i.e., another name for Terumah) , as it is stated (Exodus 22:28): "מלאתך ודמעך לא תאחר [בכור בניך תתן-לי]"/You shall not put off the skimming of the first yield of your vats. [You shall give to Me the first-born among your sons],” and in the second chapter of [Tractate] Hullin (folio 34b), it proves that specifically, when there isn’t in the pottage of Holy Things an olive’s bulk of heave offering incidentally for consuming a certain quantity of bread (i.e., a piece, which is defined by the Tosefta Negaim, Chapter 7, Halakha 10 as half a loaf of which three make a Kab) that permits him to eat food which is third-degree [of ritual impurity], but if there is an olive’s bulk of heave-offering incidentally for consuming a certain quantity of bread (i.e., half a loaf), it is prohibited, for we hold that a person who consumes that which is third-degree [of ritual impurity] from unconsecrated food, that was made through the purification of Terumah/heave-offering, his body is made unfit from consuming heave-offering.

Mishnah 4

הרביעי נאכל בנזיד הקודש (And [heave offering] in the fourth degree of ritual impurity is eaten in a pottage of Holy Things) – that is to say, that if there is in that heave offering fourth degree [of ritual impurity], as, for example, that was prepared in conditions of cleanness pertaining to Holy Things, and similarly the fifth degree [of ritual impurity] that is eaten in a pottage of Holy things, as is taught further on (in Mishnah 5 of this chapter) , this is how what he said: and if there is that Holy Thing fifth-degree [of ritual impurity] as, for example, that it was prepared in conditions of cleanness of a sin-offering of the ashes of the Red Heifer, as we stated, the clothing of those who consume Holy Things are [ritual impurity imparted] through treading (usually by someone with gonorrhea, a woman with an issue, a woman after childbirth and/or a menstruating woman) for a sin-offering is eaten in a pottage of Holy Things, it is permissible to combine in it a cooked dish of pure Holy Things.

Mishnah 5



Mishnah 6

השני שבחולין מטמא משקה חולין – for all that invalidates/renders unfit the heave-offering/priest’s due defiles liquids to become first-degree [of ritual impurity] (see Tractate Parah, Chapter 8, Mishnah 7).
מטמא משקה קודש – that all which invalidates/renders unfit Holy Things defiles (holy) liquids to be first degree [of ritual impurity] for Holy Things.
שנעשו על טהרת הקודש (that was prepared in conditions of cleanness pertaining to Holy Things) – meaning to say, that which we said, that heave offering of third-degree [of ritual purity] makes unfit/invalidates but does not defile foods of Holy Things, these words apply when they were prepared in conditions of cleanness pertaining to Holy Things. But if it they were prepared in conditions of cleanness pertaining to heave offering/priest’s due, that it was not protected/guarded in conditions of cleanness pertaining to Holy Thins, the third-degree [of ritual impurity] defiles the second degree and makes unfit/invalidates first-degree [of ritual impurity] of Holy Things. For the ritual purity of heave-offering is impure next to Holy Things, for it is considered third-degree [of ritual impurity] of heave offering next to the Holy Things as if it was defiled by a moving creature/unclean reptile itself.

Mishnah 7

ר' אליעזר אומר שלשתן שוין – as he explains further on, for Rabbi Eliezer does not hold the purity of heave-offering which is Levitical uncleanness next to Holy Things.
השלישי שבכולן – third-degree of [ritual defilement] is not found with unconsecrated foods unless they were made through the purity of heave-offering. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer.

Mishnah 8

האוכל אוכל שני לא יעשה בבית הבד – he should not engage in the making of [olive] oil in the olive press, for Rabbi Yehoshua above (in Mishnah 2 of our chapter) agrees with Rabbi Eliezer that a person who consumes food that is second degree [of ritual impurity] he himself becomes second degree [of ritual impurity and invalidates the heave offering and defiles liquids to be first degree [of ritual impurity] (that is the oil).
על גב הקודש – on the purification of Holy Things.
הרי אלו כחולין – and they don’t come into the category of third-degree [of ritual impurity].
הרי אלו כתרומה – and they do have a third degree [of ritual impurity]. And these Tannaim/Mishnaic teachers both of them (see the previous Mishnah) hold that unconsecrated foods that were made through the purification of Holy Things are not similar to Holy Things, for there isn’t anything that makes fourth degree [of ritual impurity] other than Holy Things from Holy Things alone. And they dispute with the Mishnah above (i.e., the previous Mishnah) that teaches that “third degree [of ritual impurity] spoils foods of Holy Things”/"השלישי שבכולן ...פוסל לאוכלי קודש".

Chapter 3



Mishnah 1

הרוטב והגריסין שהן משקה טופח (the broth/juice/jelly of meats, and the pounded beans which moisture dripping on them/running liquid) – they are so moist when they have on them enough to moisten other objects.
הרי הן תחילה -that they are considered as a liquid.
קרשו הרי אלו שניים (if they became congealed, they are second-degree [of ritual impurity]) – for since they congealed they are considered like edibles that came in contact with liquids.
חזרו ונמוחו כביצה מכוון טהור (if they once again dissolved – if they are the volume of an egg exactly, it is pure) – that the status of food left from them and the status of liquid descended upon them, and their defilement blossomed when they were changed, but there isn’t to this liquid anything that will defile it, for when the first drop departed, the food was reduced from that of the size of an egg’s bulk, and less than an egg’s bulk it doesn’t defile others, but more than an egg’s bulk it is impure, as the reason is explained [in the Mishnah] , for when the first drop departed , that drop was defiled with an egg’s bulk of impure food, and when all of it dissolved afterwards, the drop returned and defiled everything.

Mishnah 2

השמן תחילה לעולם – and even though it congealed it doesn’t depart from the status of liquid.
ר' שמעון שזורי אומר אף היין – [wine] that congealed does not depart from the status of liquid. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon Shezuri.
וגוש של זיתים (lump/clod of olives) – many olives that are attached together. And we are speaking about an impure lump/clod.
בביצה מכוון טהור – the oven [is pure], for food does not defile a vessel. But liquid that comes out from the clod/lump on account of heating, it has nothing for what that it defiles, for since the first drop [of liquid] departed [upon heating], it is missing from an egg’s bulk, but when there is in the clod/lump more than an egg’s bulk, when the first drop exudes there still remained in the clod/lump the equivalent of an egg’s bulk, and when the drop in the clod/lump is defiled, and it returned to being first-degree [of ritual impurity], the drop defiled the oven, for liquids defile a vessel.
אם היו פירודים – if the olives were separate that they are not a lump/clod.
אפילו הן מאה – meaning to say even if they are the measurement of one-hundred eggs, they do not combine to be an egg’s bulk to defile the oil that exudes to become first-degree [of ritual defilement].

Mishnah 3

ובלבד שלא יגע במשקין – as for example, that he pressed them with flat wooden implements that do not become defiled , for now there is nothing here that would defile the liquids other than the husk/pomace of grapes that someone defiled by a corpse had touched , for he was not careful regarding their contact other than when liquid exudes, and when the liquids come in contact with the husks/pomace of grapes there is already missing the measurement of an egg’s bulk. But food does not defile with less than an egg’s bulk.
יותר מכביצה טמא - that since the first drop had exuded, it became defiled with the equivalent of an egg’s bulk, for even though the liquid that is absorbed in the food is not susceptible to receive ritual defilement with it, it completes its measurement. For like it, we find adjacent (in the next Mishnah) regarding an olive’s bulk from a corpse or from a carrion that had been reduced/shrank in the sun and he placed them in the rain and they swelled up, for the rains that are absorbed/swallowed up complete to make up the measurement.

Mishnah 4

הרי אלו טהורים – an egg’s bulk they consume and it is referring to an olives’ bulk from a corpse and an olive’s bulk from a carrion and a lentil’s bulk from the a creeping insect/reptile.
הניחן בגשמים ונתפחו טמאין – for all of the measurement that we follow are after their size/greatness. And from here, we hold that there is no suspension/removal of an object from its purpose regarding prohibitions.

Mishnah 5

אם טמאות טמאות – like that which is taught further on in the Mishnah in the Chapter "השרץ והצרפדע" [Tractate Taharot, Chapter 5, Mishnah 7]: “If one touched someone at night, and it is not known if he is alive or dead, and in the morning he arose and found him dead,… the Sages declare unclean….for all unclean things [are adjudged] as they are at the time that they are found.” And specifically, in the place where they are found, to exclude if he touched someone at night in this corner and on the morrow found him dead in another corner and other things similar to it.
אם מכוסות מכוסות – as, for example, an earthenware vessel that is surrounded by an airtight lid , we don’t say that perhaps at the time that the corpse was in the tent, it was uncovered and now it is covered, or if they found it uncovered, we don’t say that perhaps at the time that the corpse (was in the tent) it was covered and surrounded by an airtight lid.
מחט שנמצאת מלאה חלודה (a needle that was found filled with mold/rust) – that prevents the sewing, for mold/rust like this purifies it from its defilement.
או שבורה טהורה - and we don’t say that perhaps that it when it was whole it was defiled, and when he would repair it and it would return whole, it would return to its earlier/older defilement, and this is the explanation – that if they are pure, they are pure, as is taught above.

Mishnah 6

בחזקת טהרה – for even though that regarding doubtful ritual impurity in the private domain is considered as doubtfully impure and this alleyway is the private domain, nevertheless since the doubt is in a matter where it the temperament/disposition [of the participants] is lacking to be able to be asked, as for example, a deaf-mute, imbecile and/or a minor child, he is considered pure in his status of doubt, for this we derive from Scriptural verses, as it is written (Leviticus 7:19): “Flesh that touches anything impure shall not be eaten.” This implies that something that is definitely impure shall not be eaten; if it is doubtfully impure it may be eaten, as it is written (Leviticus 7:19): “Only he who is pure may eat such flesh.” Someone who is definitely pure may eat it, but if he is doubtfully impure/doubtfully pure, he shall not eat it. But is it not that we learn from it here that when he has awareness/understanding to be interrogated, [as opposed to] when he doesn’t have awareness/understanding to be interrogated.
וכל הפקח – that he has awareness/understanding to be interrogated. If he does not know if he walked in a place of defilement or not, he is under the presumption of defilement. For someone of doubtful defilement in the private domain, his [presumption of] doubt is impure which we derive from [the case of] the Sotah/woman suspected by her husband of being unfaithful, and there is a doubt if she is defiled or not and this doubt is in a place of a married woman’s hiding with a man under suspicious circumstances, that is, in the private domain, and the All-Merciful stated (Numbers 5:13): “and she keeps secret the fat that she has defiled herself without being forced,” but a woman suspected by her husband of being unfaithful has awareness/understanding to be interrogated if she has been defiled or not.

Mishnah 7

ואין השושנים אלא במקום טומאה – for it is impossible that he (i.e., the young child) would take the lilies unless he entered into the cemetery.
טהור – since it is possible to be placed beside him by another [person], perhaps another child picked/gathered them and gave them to him, for a child lacks awareness/understanding to be interrogated and anything where there is suspicion] of doubt [concerning him] is ritually pure.
וכן חמור – that was standing in a place of ritual purity and we do no know if it entered into the place of defilement.
כליו טהורים – because it lacks awareness/knowledge to be interrogated.

Mishnah 8

תינוק שנמצא בצד עיסה – a ritually impure child that is found at the side of started dough and a piece of this started dough was in his hand.
ר' מאיר מטהר – Rabbi Meir according to his reasoning who took into consideration the minority (i.e., the possibility of the rarer cases) and held that the majority of small children slap the started dough, and perhaps he himself took the risen dough and defiled the started dough, but the minority [of young children] do not slap but perhaps a ritually pure person took it and gave it to him, this started dough remains in the presumption of ritual purity, for this minority is near to a presumption and the majority was impaired/weakened, and it was half-and-half and that is ritually pure regarding a young child who lacks the awareness/knowledge to be interrogated.
וחכמים מטמאים – according to their rationale that they are not concerned about a minority, for most young children slap [the dough]. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
נקירת – there are small incisions/pickings in the started dough on account of the hens that pecked in it.
שינגבו את פיהן בארץ – it is the manner of hens after they drank [water], they dry their mouths on the ground. Therefore, if there is land that forms a partition between the liquids to the loaves [of dough] in order that they can dry their mouths on it after they drank, the loaves [of dough] are ritually pure. But if not, they are impure, for they were defiled with impure liquids that were in the mouths of the hens. But even though that when the land forms a partition, we are doubtful if their mouths were dried or not, this is a doubtful defilement in a matter that there isn’t awareness/knowledge to be interrogated, and its doubt is [nevertheless deemed] ritually pure.
שהוא פיקח – for it is not his manner to drink all the time that he finds food [to consume]. For he (i.e., Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov) says that whenever liquids are found but food is not always found. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov.

Chapter 4



Mishnah 1

הזורק. ככר לבין המטפחות – there is no difference whether he threw a ritually pure loaf among ritually impure keys, or whether he threw impure keys among the [ritually pure] loaves, and it is not known if the loaf came in contact with/touched the ritually impure keys, the loaf is ritually pure, for the [anonymous] Tanna/teacher of this Mishnah holds that someone who throws is like one who lacks the awareness/knowledge to be interrogated.
ר' יהודה אומר ככשר לבין המפתחות טמא – for Rabbi Yehuda holds that a person who throws (whether impure keys or loaves) has awareness/knowledge to be interrogated, and his [status of] doubt makes him ritually impure. However, when he threw [a ritually impure key among the loaves], it (i.e., the loaf) is ritually pure, since the defilement does not come to rest in a place but rather passes over the ritually pure [loaf], its doubt is [presumed to be] ritually pure. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda. And the [ritually pure] loaf and the [ritually impure] keys that our Mishnah uses, the same law applies for all the rest of the things that are thrown, but because it is the practice of people to throw a loaf and keys one to the other, because of that, [the Mishnah] took this [example].

Mishnah 2

ספק נגע ספק לא נגע ספיקו טהור – and even in the private domain, and even regarding an individual who has awareness/knowledge to be interrogated who is holding the defilement/defiling object, because the defilement has no place that it rests upon, for all the while that it is in the mouth of the weasel or in the mouth of the dog it is not considered to be resting in any place, but rather it is passing defilement, therefore, its matter of doubt is deemed to be ritually pure, and even if the one who is holding the defilement/defiling object has awareness/knowledge to be interrogated.

Mishnah 3

היו מנקרין בהן – if the weasel cast off the creeping animal or the dog [cast off] the carrion that is in their mouths onto the ground and they would peck at it, there is a place for the defilement and its manner of doubt is ritually impure.

Mishnah 4

ספק אדם – there is doubt if it (i.e., the raven with an olive’s bulk of a corpse in its mouth) overshadowed over a person.
טמא – for he has awareness/knowledge to be interrogated, and he is not ritually pure for the reason that the defilement [of the olive’s bulk of a corpse] is in the mouth of the raven and it is passing defilement , and everything that overshadows is considered that there is defilement in the palce, and even that which is thrown.
ספק כלים – there is doubt whether it (i.e., the raven) overshadowed [with the olive’s bulk of a corpse in its mouth] over the vessels.
טהור – for they lack awareness/knowledge to be interrogated.
הממלא בעשה דליים – one after another.
ונמצא שרץ באחד מהן הוא טמא וכלן טהורים – and these words [refer to the situation] where [the bucket] lacks basins, all of them are ritually impure, for perhaps the creeping animal was the first [inside], and that which didn’t fall in with the water, we state that the basins prevented it.
העליון טהור – [but we are not concerned that perhaps it was from the upper one] it (i.e., the creeping animal) fell to the lower one (i.e., vessel).

Mishnah 5

על ספק בית הפרס - heave offering/priest’s due that entered into an area in which uncertainty exists concerning the location of a grave or a corpse, that this is a field in which a grave was plowed up and it is doubtful if there within a bone a barley-corn’s bulk from the corpse.
ועל ספק עפר הבא מארץ העמים – that dust that comes from the lands of the nations, we have doubts regarding the mass of earth from a grave containing parts of a decayed human body. And it is taught concerning the land of the nations/ארץ העמים and the area in which uncertainty exists concerning the location of a grave or a corpse/בית הפרס, they (i.e., the Rabbis) decreed that they would defile through contact and through lifting.
ועל ספיקן של בגדי עם הארץ – for regarding all of them we are in doubt if his menstruating wife sat upon them.
ועל ספק כלים הנמצאים – for we don’t know if they are ritually impure.
ועל ספק רוקין – for perhaps they are of a person with gonorrhea or a woman with flux, or that of a menstruating woman or someone who just gave birth.
מי רגלי אדם שהן כנגד מי רגלי בהמה – it teaches us a noteworthy point, and we don’t say that since these (i.e. urine) are from beasts, those also are from beasts, and even though there are two doubts (i.e., a compound uncertainty) for a leniency, the doubt regarding beasts [and] the doubt regarding a human being, and even if you can assume that [both] are from a human being, perhaps, the person is pure. And Maimonides explains through reference to the Tosefta (see Tractate Makhshirin, Chapter 3, Halakha 13 and Tractate Taharot, Chapter 5, Halakha 2), as for example, that the urine of a ritually impure man was mixed with the urine of a beast in equal measure, and this is nearby the urine of cattle, and we have a doubt if the appearance of the human urine was nullified and that all of them are ritually pure, or that they weren’t nullified and all of them are ritually impure.
על ודאי מגען שהוא ספק טומאתן (because of certainly touching them which is a manner of doubt in respect to their [imparting] uncleanness)- he knows with certainty that priest’s due/heave offering came in contact with them, but he doesn’t know if they are ritually impure or not, as we have explained the doubt in all of them.
וחכמים אומרים ברשות היחיד תולין – on the doubt of their contact, and we don’t burn them because it is a compound uncertainty which is ruled as a leniency, there is a doubt whether it touched and there is a doubt whether it did not touch, and even if you can assume that it came in contact, there is doubt of whether they are ritually impure or ritually pure. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi who stated that on doubt of their contact we burn them [in the private domain].

Mishnah 6

אחד טמא – it is not definitively impure that it is known that it (i.e., the two drops of spittle) are from a person with gonorrhea or of a woman with a flux, for if so (i.e., that it is definitely known that it is impure), in the private domain, it is burnt like the other things that are doubtfully impure, but rather, one is ritually impure from mere spittle and one is pure for it is known that it is from a ritually pure person, and since that even if definitely touched the impure [spittle],that which is mere spittle is not [impure] other than according to the Rabbis, here where there is doubt of whether it touched the pure [spittle], we suspend it in the private domain, whether through contact or whether through carrying or whether through movement , whether it is moist or dry. But not so dry that one is not able to return and to permit it as it was, for this is completely pure even if it (i.e., the spittle) is definitely from someone with gonorrhea, but that it is able to be return and to be permitted in the form that it was.
ועל מגען ברה"ר בזמן שהן לחים – it is impossible that something from them would not cleave/attach a little bit on the body of the one who touches them, and it leaves from the status of doubtfully impure in the public domain, and it has the law of the private domain when it is attached a little bit on the body of a person. But dry spittle which is not attached, if he touched it, it is doubtful impurity in the public domain, where his manner of doubt is considered ritually pure.
ועל משאן בין לחין בין יבשין - when the defilement becomes detached in the public domain and is carried by a person, it is not considered any longer as defilement in the public domain, but it is defilement in the private domain as we have stated.
היה רוק יחידי- from the spittle that is found, it is doubtful whether it is of a ritually impure person or of a ritually pure person.
ונגע בו ונשאו והסיטו – even in the public domain, and afterwards it touched heave offering/priest’s-due.
שורפין עליו את התרומה – as is taught in the first clause of the Mishnah, if it had definite contact which is doubtful defilement, we burn the priest’s due/heave-offering.

Mishnah 7

ספק מים שאובים – it is doubtful if the drawn waters fell into this Mikveh/ritual bath and invalidated it or they didn’t fall, or that we saw that drawn waters fell into it, that there is a doubt if there were three LOG which is the measure to invalidate the Mikveh, or that there weren’t in them according to this measure. And all of the rest of the doubts are explained further in [the Mishnayot] in our chapter.

Mishnah 8

ספק טמאה צפה על פני המים – there is a doubt if it (i.e., the water) touched the uncleanness floating on the surface of the water or it didn’t touch it.
בין בכלים בין בקרקע – whether the water was in vessels or whether the water was on the ground, it is ritually pure, for it is considered as if there is no place for uncleanness.
בכלים טמא – for they are considered as if there is a place for uncleanness. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.
ספק ירידתו טמא (if the doubt has to do with his descent into the water) – for it is manner of a person when he descends to a pond of water that everything that is in the water comes upon him, on account of the movement that when he begins to wash himself. But when he ascends from the water, the things that are in the water distance themselves from him and go to the sides of the pond.
אפילו אין שם אלא מלא האדם והטומאה – that the place is narrow in the path for it is impossible for him that he wouldn’t touch it, nevertheless he is ritually pure, for he (i.e., Rabbi Yossi) holds that the uncleanness that floats does not defile. Such is what I found. But Maimonides explains that all the while that he didn’t know with certainty that he touched uncleanness, he is ritually pure. It appears that if he was on the path where it is impossible for him that he doesn’t touch it, he is ritually impure.

Mishnah 9

ספק משקים ליטמא – ritually pure liquids that a doubt appeared on them if they were susceptible to receive defilement or not, their doubt is ritually impure, as we will explain further on.
לטמא טהור – and if the liquids are ritually impure and we have a doubt if they defiled the ritually pure thing or not, its manner of doubt is that it is ritually pure.
וזרקה לבין הככרות כו' ספיקו טהור – as for example that we had a doubt if after the staff came to rest the liquids touched the loaves [of bread] or didn’t touch them. For if it was at the time of throwing, it had defilement that has no place, and even with a creeping animal according to the Torah, its manner of doubt is ritually pure, since the defilement is thrown. But if you say that yet I will derive (that it is ritually pure) even with a creeping animal because it does not have awareness/knowledge to be interrogated. But one can say, that it is possible to establish that our Mishnah is dealing with a case when a person is holding the loaves.

Mishnah 10

ספק משקין אוכלין טמא – for Rabbi Yossi holds that defilement of liquids to defile others according to the Torah, for he expounds on the Biblical verse (Leviticus 11:34): “as to any liquid that may be drunk, it shall become impure if it was inside any vessel,” to defile others, therefore, something that is a matter of doubt in respect to liquids, if it has to do with foods, it is impure.
ולכלים טהור – for the defilement of liquids to defile vessels is according to the Rabbis, from the eighteen matters that [the Sages] decreed on that day (when Rabban Gamaliel was removed as head of the Sanhedrin – see Tractate Berakhot 28a – see the Bartenura commentary on Tractate Shabbat, Chapter 1, Mishnah 4). For the first Tanna/teacher that disputes on that of Rabbi Yossi who expounds (Leviticus 11:34): “as to any liquid that may be drunk, it shall become impure if it was inside any vessel” but not to defile others, for the defilement of liquids to defile foods and liquids is according to the Rabbis, therefore a matter of doubt of the defilement of liquids to defile others is ritually pure. And the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 11

ספק ידים ליטמא - a person whose hands were ritual pure and it was doubtful if they touched ritually impure foods or ritually impure liquids and his hands were defiled, and it is doubtful if he didn’t touch and his hands were not defiled.
ולטמא – his hands were ritually impure, it is a matter of doubt if he touched foods and liquids and defiled them, and it is doubtful that he did not touch them.
וליטהר- his hands were ritually impure and he purified them, it is doubtful if they were purified properly or not, in all of these matters of doubt, their doubt is deemed ritually pure.
ספק רשות הרבים – it is matter of doubt of defilement in the public domain, they are considered ritually pure, for such we found concerning a community that makes the Passover sacrifice in ritual defilement, if it is definitive defilement, it was permissible to the community, as an a fortiori inference it a manner of doubt of defilement.
ספק דברי סופרים - as for example, all of these that are considered, and all of them are from the eight things that they (i.e., the Sages) decreed on that day (i.e., the day when Rabban Gamaliel was deposed as head of the Sanhedrin -see Tractate Berakhot 28a, and they are explained in Tractate Shabbat in the first chapter [Mishnah 4 – see the Bartenura commentary).
אבל דבר שהוא אב הטומאה והוא מדברי סופרים – as for example, דם תבוסה/blood that flows from a person at the time of his death or afterwards (the legal status of this blood is that of a corpse itself and is therefore an ultimate primary source of ritual impurity) and heathens that made themselves like those with gonorrhea, and similar things to this, if there is a doubt if he touched them or did not touch them.
ספיקו טמא – but however a primary source of ritual impurity that is from the words of the Scribes (i.e., Rabbinic) that it itself is from doubt, as for example the בית הפרס/area in which uncertainty exists concerning the location of a grave or corpse (i.e., a field containing a grave that was unintentionally plowed and the bones may have been strewn throughout the field, and a grave containing a grave the location of which is unknown), if there is in it a bone the bulk of a barleycorn or not. In this, it is taught in the Mishnah above (see Mishnah 5) that when their contact is definite, we burn them, but on their doubtful contact we don’t burn them, for this is a ספק ספיקא/compound uncertainty [which is ruled with leniency].

Mishnah 12

זו טהרת פרישות – as it is taught in the Mishnah [Tractate Hagigah, Chapter 2, Mishnah 7]: “The clothing of those who are not careful in their observance of the laws of ritual purity/עם הארץ is in the status of מדרס/Levitical uncleanness arising from a person with gonorrhea immediate contact caused by treading, and the clothing of Pharisees are considered Midras with regard to those who consume heave offering.” But if there is doubt regarding one of the Pharisees who consume [their unconsecrated food] in ritual purity, if he came in contact with the clothes of a person who is not careful in his observance of the laws of ritual purity or didn’t come in contact with it, and similarly, a person who eats heave-offering (i.e., a Kohen) and there is doubt if he had contact with the clothing of the Pharisees and the heave-offering was defiled, their manner of doubt is considered ritually pure.
ספק שרצים – he cast a creeping animal between the loaves [of bread], it is doubtful if it touched the loaves at the time that it passed over them, it is doubtful that it did not touch [them]. If he found it that it didn’t touch [the loaves], behold the loaves are like the time that he found them, and their matter of doubt is ritually pure.
עד שלא נזקק לטומאה (before it had been subjected to a ruling of uncleanness) – In Chapter Five of [Tractate] Negaim (Mishnayot 4-5) it explains how [this is the case].
ספק נזירות – as, for example, that he said: Behold I am a Nazirite if there is in this heap/pile one hundred KOR, if he went and found that it had been stolen or that he lost it, it is doubt that it had it [and it is doubtful that it didn’t have it, it is permitted [for him] to drink wine and to become defiled with corpses.
ספק בכורות – it is doubtful if it (i.e., the child or the animal) is the firstborn [of its mother] or not.
אחד בכורי אדם – except from giving five Selaim (i.e., coins) to a Kohen.
ואחד בכורי בהמה טמאה – the first born of a donkey
שהמוציא מחבירו עליו הראיה – that he said to the Kohen: “Bring proof that he is a first born and pay the head-tax.

Mishnah 13

ספק קרבנות – how so? The woman who has a doubt of five miscarriages that were in doubt. מביאה קרבן אחד – a sin-offering of a fowl that comes for a doubt.
ואוכלת בזבחים – that this sacrifice comes to compete her ritual purity and it is like ritual immersion, for if the woman was defiled several defilements, one ritual immersion counts for all of them, even this sacrifice as well.
ואין השאר עליה חובה – the Sages did not require her to bring them (the other sacrifices), for even the one, with difficulty, they permitted to bring a doubtfully pinched unconsecrated offering to the Altar, but in order to make for her an ordinance to be ritually pure to eat Holy Things.

Chapter 5



Mishnah 1

השרץ (creeping thing) – the creeping animal defiles through contact but not by lifting (see Tractate Kelim, Chapter 1, Mishnah 1 as well as Leviticus 11:29-30).
צפרדע – a ritually pure [frog], but since it is similar to a species of lizard and they (i.e., the Rabbis) erred concerning it, because of this, it (i.e., the Mishnah) took [the word] צפרדע/frog.
כזית מן המת -defiles in a tent. But a carrion does not defile in a tent.
עצם מן המת – [a bone from a corpse] defiles through movement, but the bone of a carrion is ritually pure.
גוש מבית הפרס וגוש מארץ העמים – they defile through contact and by lifting/carrying but do not defile in a tent.
שני שבילין אחד טמא – that one of them is a grave lying width-wise and fills all of it, and he doesn’t pass through it so that he will not be overshadowed.
האהיל על אחד מהן – we are referring to on an olive’s bulk of a corpse or on an olive’s bulk of a carrion.
הסיט אחד מהם – [on a bone from the corpse or a bone from the carrion, and similarly] a clod of earth from a ritually pure land and a clod of earth from an area in which uncertainty exists concerning the location of a grave or a corpse/בית הפרס and a clod of earth from the land of the nations (i.e., outside the Land of Israel), that defile through movement.
ר' עקיבא מטמא – for Rabbi Akiba holds that defilement in the public domain – its manner of doubt is pure – these words apply when he made/prepared pure things, since they lack any remedy when they are defiled. But concerning a person who is caused to need ritual immersion [in a Mikveh] and sprinkling [of ashes], he holds that he requires ritual immersion and sprinkling, lest today or tomorrow the matter becomes verified that he was defiled.
וחכמים מטהרים – for even a person who has a remedy, we don’t we require him to undergo ritual immersion and sprinkling. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 2

אחד שאמר נגעתי בזה – it refers to the frog and the creeping animal of the first clause [found in Mishnah 1 of this chapter], for the frog is similar to a species of lizard and they (i.e., the Rabbis) erred concerning it.
שדרך בני אדם להלוך – that it is impossible for a person to prevent himself that he should not walk in the public domain, therefore a manner of doubt regarding pathways is ritually pure. But [regarding] touching/contact it is possible for a person not to touch it, therefore, if he has doubt whether he touched it or not, his manner of doubt is ritual impurity. But the Halakha is neither according to Rabbi Akiba or Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 3

הזה ושנה – he sprinkled on the third [day] and repeated it on the seventh [day].
אלו ואלו תלויות – even though that in the two [paths] that they walked, we establish that each one is in the presumption of ritual purity, as is taught in the Mishnah further on (Mishnah 5), here concerning one [person] in two times, it doesn’t belong to ritually purify with those which remain, for even with two when they came to interrogate him at the same time, they are ritually impure. And the other, even with one after the other is considered like at the same time.
השניות ישרפו – for certainly it was ritually impure when they were made.

Mishnah 4



Mishnah 5

אם נשאלו – each of by the Sages on his manner of doubt by himself, no Jewish court is able to defile them, for we hold that regarding a manner of doubt in the public domain, his manner of doubt is ritually pure, but if they came at one time, since that with one decision we are able to say, “you [both] are ritually impure or “you are [both] ritually impure, it is impossible for us to say “you [both] are ritually pure” since one is definitely impure.
ר' יוסי אומר בין כך ובין כך טמאין – Rabbi Yossi and Rabbi Yehuda did not disagree when they came to be interrogated at the same time, for everyone states that they are ritually impure. But when they came to be interrogated one after another, everyone states that they are ritually pure. On what did they disagree? One when one comes to be interrogated him and on his fellow, for Rabbi Yehuda compares this to one coming after the other, whereas Rabbi Yossi comes it to simultaneously. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 6

אכל אחד מהן – it (i.e., the Mishnah) taught defilement according to the Torah and it [also] teaches defilement according to the Rabbi. And the dispute of Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Yossi here also is when one comes to be interrogated upon and on his neighbor, like the dispute above (in Mishnah 5). And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 7

על רוקו שורפים – that on the spittle that is found, we burn the heave-offering/priest’s due as it is taught in the Mishnah in our chapter above (Tractate Taharot, Chapter 4, Mishnah 5), and even though they are a matter of doubt, we don’t follow after the majority.
ועל בגדיו הולכים אחר הרוב - if the majority of the people of that city are people with gonorrhea/זבים and זבות/women with a flux, we burn [the priest’s due/heave-offering].
כליו טמאין מדרס – although that when he sat and another came and tread, we go after the majority. Sleeping is different, for we are concerned that perhaps the majority of people tread on his clothing and one of them was a man with gonorrhea or a woman with a flux.
וחכמים מטהרין – since there was a doubtful defilement in the public domain, he is ritually pure, perhaps no one tread at all.
נגע באחד בלילה – we are speaking specifically in the public domain.
וחכמים מטמאין – if he saw him from the evening even though he came in the morning and found that he had died, the Sages agree with Rabbi Meir that he is ritually pure, but if he saw him living, there is a dispute. But the Halakha is according to the Sagesץ

Mishnah 8

שוטה אחת בעיר – and specifically a woman imbecile, but not a male imbecile. For a woman is regularly in a menstruating status, whereas a male is not normally having a flux.
או נכרית – and the same law applies regarding a heathen/gentile, for according to the Torah, there is no distinction between a male and a female, and all of them are ritually pure, but the Rabbis decreed upon them that they would be like those with a flux. And similarly, regarding a female Cuthean (i.e., a member of the sect of Samaritans), there is no distinction between a male Cuthean to a female Cuthean according to the one who says that Cutheans are lion-proselytes (i.e., proselytes from mere fear – referring to II Kings, Chapter 17, verse 25), and even today, they (i.e., the Rabbis) decreed concerning them that they would be like heathens regarding all their matters.
כל הרוקין שבעיר טמאים – for it is their manner to walk throughout the city.
או שישבה עמו בספינה – that she defiles through treading/leaning (i.e., Midras – Levitical uncleanness arising from a person with gonorrhea’s immediate contact) even though her clothing does not touch, as is taught in the beginning of the third chapter of [Tractate] Zavim (Mishnah 1).
אם מכירתו שהוא אוכל בתרומה כליו טהורים – that if she was a menstruating woman or a woman with a flux she would not tread on his clothing nor enter with him on the ship.

Mishnah 9

ר' מאיר מטמא – that if two [witnesses] brought him to a grave death [as punishment], they would not bring him to [bring] the lenient sacrifice (see also the reasoning of Rabbi Meir in Tractate Kritot, Chapter 3, Mishnah 1).
וחכמים אומרים אדם נאמן על פי עצמו – that we provide the answer through his word. What is “I was not defiled” that he stated? I didn’t stand in my defilement but rather I ritually immerse, and since this is the case, a person is believed concerning himself.
ברה"י טמא ברה"ר טהור – that he is considered like the rest of merely doubtful matters of defilement.

Chapter 6



Mishnah 1

מקום שהיה רשות היחיד ונעשה רשות הרבים – as, for example a valley, plane, that in the rainy season it is the private domain, and in the days of summer heat it is the public domain.
המסוכן – a person who fainted/swooned and it is not known from him if he is living or dead.
והחזירוהו לרה"י – and there they saw him that he died.
כשהוא ברה"י ספיקו טמא – and we declare him impure, from doubt every person and vessels that were with him in the private domain when he was there at first. But people and vessels that were with him in the public domain after they removed him from the private domain are ritually pure. For it is manner of doubtful defilement in the public domain and his manner of doubt is ritually pure.
ר' שמעון אומר רשות הרבים מפסקת (the public domain intervenes) – since we consider him as living after they removed him from the private domain to the public domain, and we declare ritually pure vessels and people that were with him in the public domain for perhaps he is alive, how can we consider him dead retroactively before he left from the private domain, by force we are not able to defile from doubt a person or vessels that were with him in the private domain originally, since the public domain that they eventually took him out there intervenes and you must consider him as living and purify a person and vessels that were with him. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.

Mishnah 2

הטמא עומד – a leper stands underneath the tent or underneath the tree.
וטהור עובר – on the path there, it is doubtful if he touched [the impure leper] or didn’t touch, or it is doubtful if the tent overshadowed him or the tree [overshadowed] over both of them and the ritually pure person was defiled, [and] it is doubtful if it didn’t overshadow and he wasn’t defiled. Or the ritually pure person was standing and the leper was passing. Another explanation, as for example, the creeping animal is in the mouth of the weasel or the carrion in the mouth of the dog passed between the ritually pure individuals or the ritually pure individuals passed between them, the Sages declare ritually pure if there is doubt if he touched or a doubt that he didn’t touch, because the defilement doesn’t have a place, as is taught above in the Chapter "הזורק טומאה" /He who throws defilement [Tractate Taharot, Chapter 4, Mishnah 3] (see also Tractate Negaim, Chapter 13, Mishnah 7). But according to this explanation, if he doubtfully overshadowed or doubtfully did not overshadow, it is impossible to establish to this first clause [of the Mishnah] that the impure person is standing and the ritually pure person is passing by, for regarding the defilement of a tent, there is no distinction between whether there is a place for defilement or whether there isn’t place for defilement, as we proved above in the chapter "הזורק טומאה"/He who throws defilement (Tractate Negaim, Chapter 13, Mishnah 7).
טומאה ברה"י וטהרה ברה"ר – as for example, a store that is open to the public domain, it is doubtful whether he entered or whether he didn’t enter.
ר' יהושע מטמא – for he holds that doubtfully in the private domain and many are engaged with him, we follow after the private domain and his manner of doubt is ritually impure. But the Rabbis hold that we follow after the public domain and his manner of doubt is ritually pure. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehoshua.

Mishnah 3

עלה לראשו – [he ascended] to the top of the tree, which is considered the private domain.
הכניס ידו לחור שיש בו טומאה – the hole is considered the private domain, and even though the person is standing in the public domain, since he put his hand into the hole, it is like he is standing in the private domain. But although the tree and the hole were not the private domain regarding Sabbath [law], they are the private domain regarding ritual defilement.
חנות שהוא טמא ופתוח לרה"ר – it would the entirety of all of the store is like the defilement that is placed in the public domain, and just as if there was a creeping animal in the public domain, it is doubtful if he touched it, doubtful if he didn’t touch it, his manner of doubt of ritually pure, here also, if he doubtfully entered into this store or doubtfully didn’t enter into it, his manner of doubt is ritually pure. But if there were two stores, one ritually pure and one ritually impure, it is doubtful whether he entered into the impure store or whether he entered into the ritually pure one, his manner of doubt is ritually impure, for it would be him a doubtful defilement in the private domain.

Mishnah 4

ספק ביאה טהור – because we require something similar to the woman accused of being unfaithful to her husband (i.e., Sotah), for certainly she keeps it secret, but rather if he doubtfully touched it, or doubtful did not touch [the defiling agent], for we don’t know if she was defiled, and the All-Merciful calls her defiled, as it is written (Numbers 5:13): “and she keeps secret the fact that she has defiled herself,” but a case of doubt concerning entry is considered ritually pure.

Mishnah 5

בקעה – fields belonging to many people, and in the rainy reason when they are plowed and sown, it has the law of being the private domain, because people are careful from walking on the seeds so that they don’t become destroyed.
ר' אלעזר מטהר – for this is for him doubtful entry, and not all valleys are considered like one field, because the fields are divided with their narrow boundaries.

Mishnah 6

עד שיאמר לא נגעתי – not exactly that he would say it is evident to me that I did not touch it, and the same law applies where there is a matter to compare to him that he didn’t touch it.
שבילי בית גלגול (pathways of a field full of hills and depressions) – a round place that ascends and descends, and most of the people are not able to walk on these pathways.
רשות היחיד לשבת – it is not actually the private domain, but they are a Karmelit (an intermediate domain – between a private domain and a public domain – any open area larger than four square handbreadths that is not a public thoroughfare – including fields, seas, rivers, alleyways and lanes). But why call it a private domain? Because it is not the public domain, as will be taught in the Mishnah shortly, the valley during the dry season is the private domain regarding Shabbat, but it is not actually a private domain, but rather a Karmelit. But now all of these paths are taught in the Mishnah here are the public domain, we are speaking, for example, that they lack three [people] at the time that the doubt emerged, and even here, since many are found there, it is like the public domain. For if there are three [people] at the time that the doubt emerged regarding, even in the innermost of rooms, he is ritually pure, as we derive from the Sotah/the wife suspected of unfaithfulness towards her husband, it is a private domain, because there aren’t there other than two [people], the male initiating intercourse (i.e., the adulterer) and the woman having sexual intercourse.

Mishnah 7

רשות הרבים לטומאה – for during the dry season many people are found and they go in it to reap and to thresh and to plow the ground, to seed it for the coming year.
בימות הגשמים – that it is sown, a person doesn’t enter into it.

Mishnah 8

בסילקי (basilica, a building with colonnades for holding courts, meeting place for merchants, exchange) – a large wide street/open place. And this is what we said in Chapter two of [Tractate] Yoma [folio 24b] the chamber of hewn stones was like a large basilica/building with colonnades for holding courts.
ורואה את הנכנסים ואת היוצאים- for when he sees those who enter and those who leave it is considered more a private domain. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 9

הפרון (a building with a gateway leading from street to street/forum) – it is similar to a basilica. And it has two openings directly opposite each other.
וכן הצדדין – from here and from there to the building with a gateway leading from street to street/forum. It is also considered the public domain, because many use those sides.
ר' מאיר אומר הצצדין רשות היחיד – the middle of the forum alone is made for many people to use and not the sides. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Meir.

Mishnah 10

האסטוונית (a system of colonnades, colonnade with double rows) – a narrow place like a cubit wide, four or five handbreadths high, standing in front of the stores where the merchants sit there.

Chapter 7



Mishnah 1

הקדר שהניח את קדרותיו (the potter who left his pots) – a person who sells pots who is a Haver/a member of the order for the observance of Levitical laws in daily intercourse, who left his pots in the public domain, and they would customarily place large stones or pegs on the sides of the public domain to distance the wagons so that the walls would not damage them, and since these pegs press/squeeze the public domain, and this person who left his pots near them also pressed the path more, and the passers-by rub themselves on it and their clothing passes over their airspace, and the clothing of those who are not careful in their observance of Levitical laws of ritual purity/the עם הארץ/commonfolk are impure and defile the outermost ones.
במה דברים אמורים במותרות (under what circumstances – when they are untied)- when those who pass by and return shake them.
אבל באגודות (but when they are tied up) – that it is impossible to shake them, everything is ritually pure. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.
שלא מסר לו אלא שמירת המפתח – for he did not rely upon him to enter, because he would be arrested/made responsible as a thief.

Mishnah 2

ישן ומצאו ער הבית טמא – everything that is in the house is ritually impure, for we are concerned that perhaps when he woke up from his sleep he touched utensils that are in the house for he didn’t see them initially when he was asleep, for it is the manner of people to touch/feel and check that which they had never seen. But someone who is awake and he was found awake, we are not concerned, for he already saw everything that is in the house while he was awake.
עד מקום שהוא יכול לפשוט את ידו – all the vessels that he is able to reach them when he stretches forth his hand from the place where he was sleeping, we are concerned lest he touched them, but we are not concerned that perhaps he walked in the house and touched vessels. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 3

המניח אומנים וכו' – because artisans rely upon touching/feeling everything that is in the house, and I might think that in this, the Sages agree with Rabbi Meir that the entire house is ritually impure, it comes to tech us that even with artisans, the Rabbis dispute him and state that there is no impurity other than up to the place where they are able to stretch forth their hands and to touch. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 4

אשת חבר – who is trustworthy on matters of ritual purity for the wife of a Haver is like a Haver.
שהנייה לאשת עם הארץ – who is not trustworthy, for the wife of a commoner/who is not careful regarding the Levitical laws of ritual purity and tithes and his children are like hi, until they accept upon themselves the words of those who are careful with the observance of the Levitical laws of ritual purity and tithing.
פסקה רחים – she completed her grinding and stopped milling. For all the time that she is busy with her work on the millstones, she does not go and examine about the house.
וחכמים אומרים וכו' – And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 5

בזמן שהוא רואה – at the time when the owner of the house is able to see those who enter the house and those who depart from the house.
האוכלין והמשקין וכו' טמאין – for we are concerned that perhaps this guard touched them since he is a commoner/not careful in his observance of the laws of Levitical impurity and tithing.
אבל המשכבות והמושבות וכו' טהורין – for a commoner does not perform acts of lying or sitting and doesn’t defile through shaking, for they (i.e., the Rabbis) did not decree other than on the defilement of his contact alone.
ולא את היושבים – even though that if he stands he sees him, since he doesn’t see the person who is sitting, everything is ritually impure.
אפילו מובל (even someone immobilized) – even if this guard/watchman who is a commoner/not careful in his observance of the laws of Levitical purity and tithing is immobilized, that he is unable to walk unless they carry him.
ואפילו כפות – and tied up.
הכל טמא – for we don’t defile them because of the lying or sitting of a commoner, but rather because we are concerned that perhaps a heathen or a menstruating woman enters there and she sat or shook something and defiled everything.

Mishnah 6

הגבאים שנכנסו לבית (of Israelites) -they are tax collectors of the king to collect from the hand of an Israel the money of their capitation tax and the taxes and taxes from crops and other farmer’s produces delivered in kind, and they are commoners/not careful in the observance of the laws of Levitical purity and tithing, and they entered into his house to seize his pledge.
הבית טמא – all the vessels of the house are ritually impure because they search throughout the house.
אם יש עמהן גוי נאמנים לומר לא נכנסנו – and all the more so if there isn’t a heathen with them, they are more and more believed to state, “we have not entered.” But because of the concluding phrase of the clause of the Mishnah, it (i.e., the Mishnah) took it (i.e., these words), as it is taught: “but they are not believed to state – we entered, but didn’t touch,” for specifically if there is a heathen with them they are not believed, for they are frightened/trembling from the heathen lest he punish them if they don’t search through the entire house, and by force they feel touch/handle everything that is in the house. But if there is no heathen with them, they are believed even in this to state, “we entered but we didn’t touch [anything].”
אם יש עמהן גוי או אשה – that they (i.e., the Rabbis) decreed on the heathens to be like people with gonorrhea/זבים for all of their matters. And the woman, perhaps she is a menstruating woman/נדה or a זבה/woman with a flux.

Mishnah 7

אודיארין (store-keeper) – a bathing attendant – who receives a small coin as a fee/keeper of the clothes at the baths, the owners of the bathhouses which have many windows/apertures and anyone who enters to the bathhouse places his clothes in a window and he (i.e., the bathing attendant) locks them up with a door that is in the aperture/window.
רבי אליעזר בן עזריה מטהר – from the time that he looks the door in front of the window/aperture. And we are not concerned that perhaps a ritually impure person will touch there, after he is seized as a thief.
עד שיתן לו המפתח – and even though he places the key in the hand of the bathing attendant who is a commoner/not stringent in the observance of the Levitical laws of purity and tithes, for it is taught in the Mishnah (a text which I could not find) above (note: we have a teaching in the Tosefta Tractate Taharot, Chapter 8, Halakha 1 that teaches the reverse: "המוסר מפתח לעם הארץ הבית טמא"/He who gives over the key to a commoner, the house is ritually impure – the exact reverse of what the Bartenura commentary is pointing out and which agrees with the view of the Sages): “He who gives over the key to a commoner, the house is ritually pure.
או עד שיעשה לו סימן – to recognize that no person touched there. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
המניח את כליו – vessels that he cut grapes with in ritual purity in this year, he leaves them to cut grapes with them in ritual purity in the following year.
בנכרי כליו טהורין – we have this reading, meaning to say, if he left them with a heathen, there is no prohibition of wine poured as a libation/יין נסך associated with them, for we are not concerned that perhaps a Canaanite took them without the knowledge of the Israelite to make [wine] with them in the vat for wine-pressing.
ובישראל – for he worries/is concerned about them because of defilement through contact, they are ritually impure if his attention was diverted from them, until he says: It was my intention (literally, in my heart) to guard them. But there are books in which we do not have the reading [of the word]: "בנכרי"/with a heathen, but rather a person who leaves a vessel from this vintage to the next vintage, his vessels are ritually pure, and we are dealing with a Kohen who purchases wine of heave-offering/priest’s due from a commoner/who is not careful in his observance of the laws of Levitical purity or tithes and leaves his vessels with him in order that he can purchase from him during the next vintage, for since the vessels belong to a Kohen, the commoner trembles and doesn’t touch them. But if the vessels are of an Israelite who desires to make his wine in a state of ritual purity, a commoner is not all that careful with them, and we are concerned that perhaps a ritually impure person touched them, if his attention was diverted from them, until he states: “it was my intention to guard them.”

Mishnah 8

מי שהיה טהור – a Kohen who was ritually pure to consume heave-offering and his mind was diverted/he was discarding from his mind to consume any more heave-offering.
שדרך טמאים פרושים ממנו – the ritually impure people that know of him that he is ritually pure, separate from him, therefore, we are not concerned that he came in contact with a ritually impure person and he defiled him.
וחכמים מטמאין – for after his mind was diverted/he was discarding from his mind [to consume any more heave offering]. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
היו ידיו טהורות – in this Rabbi Yehuda agrees that even if he said: “I know that I was my hands were not ritually defiled.”
ידיו טמאות – and they ritually defile the heave-offering, for after he diverted his mind/discarded from his mind to eat [any more heave-offering], because the hands are busy/preoccupied and they touched [impure things] unintentionally.

Mishnah 9

גרגניות (unable to resist temptation/gluttonous) – they despise/disregard and are desirous for food. It is the Aramaic translation of (Lamentations 1:11): “How abject/what a glutton I have become.” I have become a glutton/bibber like a lion. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Chapter 8



Mishnah 1

הדר עם עם הארץ. מוקפות צמיד פתיל – they are ritually impure because his wife is a menstruating woman, lest she shook it and sat and defiled everything.
ר' יהודה מטהר בתנור – because it is impossible to shake it, for it is merely attached a bit, and they make it secondary to attach it to the ground. But the one who defiles it (i.e., Rabbi Yossi) holds that we make the degree that something attached is because of that which is not attached. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 2

המפקיד כלים אצל עם הארץ טמאים טמא מת – and requiring sprinkling on the third and seventh days (see Numbers 19:19).
אם מכירו – if the commoner recognizes the depositor that he is a Kohen who consumes heave-offering/priest’s due, he is careful regarding his deposit that it will not be defiled by a corpse, and it doesn’t require sprinkling [on the third and seventh days].
אבל טמאים מדרס – because his wife is a menstruating woman, lest she sat upon them, for he is not careful from the defilement of his wife.
בזמן שהיא רוצצת (at the time when it is tightly packed) – that the covering presses the clothing on account of the fact that it is too full.
טמאים מדרס – the clothes [are defiled through treading]. For when his wife sits upon the box [full of clothing] or leans upon it, she weighs down upon the clothing.
אם אינה רוצצת טמאין מדף (if it is not tightly packed, they are unclean with indirect contact for conferring ritual impurity) -meaning to say, a lighter defilement, to defile foods and liquids, like on top of a person with gonorrhea who does not defile clothing.
אע"פ שמפתח ביד בעלים – for we are concerned lest he shook it.

Mishnah 3

המאבד ביום ומצא ביום טהור – for something undefined if a person would find it and touch/come in contact with it, he would lift it up, in the manner that he finds a lost object. But at night, even for one hour that he can’t see it, we are concerned lest a ritually impure person touched it and he did not see it. But our Mishnah is dealing with the public domain, and its manner of doubt is assumed to be ritually pure but even so at night, they are ritually impure by Midras/ritual impurity through treading or by someone defiled by a corpse. But in the private domain, its manner of doubt is ritually impure, whether during the day or whether at night, and this is brought in the Tosefta (Tractate Taharot, Chapter 9, Halakha 10).
ברשות הרבים טהורים ברשות היחיד טמאים – We don’t have here other than a manner of doubt, lest a heathen or a commoner/who is not careful in his observance of the laws of Levitical purity or tithing touched them. Therefore, in the public domain, where there is a matter of doubt of it being ritually pure, it is ritually pure, whereas in the private domain, where there is a matter of doubt of it being ritually impure, they are ritually impure.
מפני שהונח ברשות עם הארץ – and everything that is in the house of common is considered having corpse defilement and requires sprinkling [on the third and seventh days – see Numbers 19:19].

Mishnah 4

מפני שהיו גנבים – meaning to say, since they left it locked and found it open, certainly thieves were there and opened it, and that we don’t defile him, for it is stated that they changed their mind and went away and didn’t touch anything that was in the house. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 5

שנכנסה שלא ברשות – out of trembling that she will not be caught like a thief and she runs to leave, and even though she entered for the need of his (i.e., the Haver/the member of the order for the observance of Levitical laws in daily intercourse) son or the beast of the owner of the house.

Mishnah 6

כל המיוחד למאכל אדם – as, for example, mere/undefined foods.
טמא – the ritual impurity of foods [is impure] until it becomes invalid/unfit from being the food for a dog.
עד שייחדנו לאדם – that there is a separation between removing defilement from it and bringing defilement to it.
גוזל שנפל לגת – when it didn’t fall into the vat, thee is no dispute [between] Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri and the Rabbis. For the carrion of a ritually pure bird in the cities that doesn’t require intention to declare it food, because there a lot of people with those who come to the marketplace and consume the carrion of a pure bird. But in the villages where there isn’t a lot of people, it requires intention, as is explained in chapter 1 (see Mishnah 1). Where they disagree is where it (i.e., the bird) fell into the vat and died in the cities, the Rabbis hold that even though that in the cities it doesn’t require intention/giving thought to it, where it fell into the vat, his vat made it detestable and it is not appropriate/fit and requires intention/giving thought to it, whereas Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri holds that his vat did not make it rejected, and it is like the rest of the carrion of ritually pure birds that don’t require intention/giving thought to it in the cities. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri.
חישב עליו חרש שוטה וקטן – to feed it to Canaanites.

Mishnah 7

אחורי כלים שנטמאו במשקין – that [the Mishnah] took/used the term, "אחורי כלים"/the outer sides of utensils, is because they were lenient, for a vessel whose outer part was ritually defiled with ritually impure liquids, its outer sides are ritually impure, but its inside – its handles, its rims/borders and its hands are ritually pure because the ritually impurity of liquids to defile vessels is from the Rabbis, they were lenient concerning it. But if its inside was defiled by impure liquids, all of it is defiled.
מטמאים את המשקין – even that which is non-consecrated [liquids].
ואין פוסלין את התרומה – and even that of heave-offering.
ר' יהושע אומר מטמאין את המשקין ופוסלין את האוכלים – Rabbi Yehoshua derives (in Tractate Niddah 7b) that the outer sides of utensils defile foods of heave-offering through an a fortiori/Kal VaHomer from the law of a person who immersed himself that day/טבול יום. Just as a person who immersed himself that day does not defile liquids and the Sages did not decree on a person who immersed himself that day that he defiles the liquids, nevertheless, he defiles the foods of heave-offering, as it is written (Leviticus 22:7): “As soon as the sun sets, he shall be pure; and afterward he may eat of the sacred donations, [for they are his food],” for he is not ritually pure to eat heave-offering until his sun has set, for the Biblical verse is speaking about heave-offering/Terumah. The outer sides of vessels that defile the liquids, does it not follow that they would invalidate the heave-offering? But Rabbi Eliezer did not concern himself with this a fortiori/Kal VaHomer, because the outer sides of utensils that are defiled by liquids is according to the Rabbis, and the person who immersed himself that day/טבול יום is from the Torah, and that which is Rabbinic, we don’t make an a fortiori [argument] on something from the Torah.
שמעון אחי עזריה – because Azariah dealt with practical maters and he would supply food to his brother Shimon who engaged in Torah study, therefore he is called by the name of Azariah, his brother.
לא כך ולא כך – we do not defile unconsecrated liquids nor do we invalidate/make unit food of heave-offering, but we do defile liquid have-offering, and those liquids of heave-offering, we defile at first degree of ritual impurity with foods of heave-offering that became second-degree of ritual impurity, and those foods invalidate/make unit other foods of heave-offering. And this is that we state that foods of heave-offering to liquids of heave-offering, “things that defile you do not defile me,” meaning to say, “the outer sides of a vessel that defiled you do not defile me, for they do not invalidate foods of heave offering, bur you defile me.” But the Halakha is according to Rabbi Eliezer.

Mishnah 8

שהיא קטפרס ([a kneading trough] that lay on an incline/sloping downward) – that one side is low, similar to a slope.
משקה טופח מלמטן (running liquid is from below) – on the low side, that is the [unclean] dough that its mixture is soft and its liquid drips, but from above, its mixture is thick and its liquid doesn’t drip.
שלש חתיכות – between the three [pieces of dough] is like an egg’s bulk, one dripping and two that do not drip, they are arranged one next to the other, and the one that drips is below, and now the middle one touches the dripping one and the upper one touches the middle one.
אינן מצטרפות – to be an egg’s bulk to defile the liquid that is flowing from below and the liquid returns and defiles the kneading trough, for contact does not connect the dough unless they stick together as is taught in the Mishnah in the First Chapter [of Tractate Taharot] (Mishnah 7)"מקרצות נושכות זו את זו" /pieces of dough – separated from the main dough in the trough - stick to each other.
שתים מצטרפות – if there weren’t other than two pieces of dough, the bottom one that has liquid flowing and the one that is above it that touches it, and if there is between of them an egg’s bulk, they combine to defile the liquid and return and defile the kneading trough.
אפילו שתים אין מצטרפין אא"כ היו רוצצות משקה – always the liquid does not connect until the liquid will be pressing and standing between the two pieces [of dough]. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Meir.
ואם היה משקה עומד (and if it was standing liquid) – meaning to say, there wasn’t a sloping/inkling, but rather a cavity for the reception of water/a pond, and the liquid stands between the pieces of dough, even all the measure of an the egg’s bulk that is in the dough are thin crumbs similar to the mustard seed that are separated one from the other, the standing liquid attaches them and combines them to be an egg’s bulk, and defiles the liquid and the liquid returns and defiles the kneading trough.
אוכל פרור – food that is divided into thin crumbs does not combine, for the liquid does not attach them. And the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Dosa.

Mishnah 9

כיון שהשיקה למקוה – since the end of one of the sticks was attached in the Mikveh, even though he didn’t immerse all of it, he purified all the impure liquids that are on the other head, for the incline/sloping is an attachment.
עד שיטביל את כולה – for the Rabbis hold that an incline/sloping is not an attachment/connection.
הניצוק (an uninterrupted flow of a liquid – poured from vessel to vessel) – the continuous flow/jet of a water pipe/spout that comes from above to below with erection like a pillar.
קטפרס – water from above to below through the sloping of a high hill.
ומשקה טופח – it doesn’t have moistness to moisten other objects, for it doesn’t have in it so much liquid for if he struck his hand in them, liquid would come up that would be able to moisten something else.
אינו חיבור לא לטומאה - for if the liquids are detached and an impure thing came in contact with the bottom part, the top part is ritually pure. And similarly for flowing liquid, and even in a smooth place, if there are liquids from here and liquids from there and liquid flowing in the middle, if an impure person touched with flowing liquids, the liquids from here and from there are ritually pure, even though they are attached/connected to it.
ולא לטהרה – as for example, a hole that doesn’t have forty Seah and an uninterrupted flow of a liquid or flowing liquid that is attached to this hole/indentation or to a Kosher ritual bath/Mikveh, it is not a connection, for a person who immerses in this hole/indentation, his immersion did not count for him.
אשבורן – a deep place where water is gathered.
חיבור לטומאה ולטהרה – for if part of them were defiled, all of them were defiled, and similarly, if part of them were attached to a Mikveh/ritual bath and they were purified, all of them were purified.

Chapter 9



Mishnah 1

זיתים מאימתי מקבלין טומאה – to be fit for Levitical uncleanness with the oil that is coming out from them.
זיעת המעטן (the – intended - exudation produced by lying in the vat/exude the sweat of the vat) – a vessel that they place the olives in and they shrink by effect of the heat there in order to the appropriate to remove the oil. The language of (Job 21:24): “His pails are full of milk.”
אבל לא זיעת הקופה (but not the – unwelcome – exudation originating in the pile or basket) – for the basket does not hold the liquids, for the basket that comes out from hem goes to waste and it is not appropriate for him, and it doesn’t make the seeds susceptible to receive ritual impurity other than liquid that is appropriate for it, as it is written (Leviticus 11:38): “but if water is put on the seed”/"וכי יתן-מים על-זרע" – is written יתן (defectively), but we read it as "יותן"/”yuttan” (written fully), [the word] יותן is similar to יתן. Just as "יתן" is satisfactory, so also ”יותן" is satisfactory.
שיעור זיעה שלשה ימים (the measure/prescribed time of sweat is three days) – for liquid that goes out within three days is not considered oil but rather a mere thin secretion and doesn’t make it susceptible [for ritual impurity], for they don’t make it susceptible to receive ritual impurity other than the seven liquids (see Tractate Makhshrin, Chapter 6, Mishnah 4) alone, and they are wine, water, olive oil, honey, milk, dew and blood.
משיתחברו שלשה זה לזה – for it is the manner of olives that are attached one to another when they remain in the vat.
משתגמר מלאכתן (after the work of preparing them is completed) – the work of bringing them. For all the time that it is intention to bring in more olives from another place to add to these, the sweat does not make them susceptible [for receiving ritual impurity], because it is not satisfactory for him. But when the work of preparing them is completed, even of that day, it makes it susceptible [to receive ritual impurity], even for that one day, it makes it (i.e., the olives) susceptible [to receive ritual impurity]. And the Halakha is according to Rabban Gamaliel, for the Sages state according to his words.

Mishnah 2

גמר מלמסוק – from harvest his olives.
אבל עתיד ליקח – to purchase olives from the market and to add on to these.
גמר מליקח – that he doesn’t have any intention to purchase more olives, but wishes to borrow olives from others and to add on to these.
אירעו אבל או משתה – and therefore he didn’t add to them, but it is his intention to add [to them] when the mourning period will pass.
טהורין – because they were not made fit for Levitical uncleanness. According to Rabban Gamaliel (see previous Mishnah) who stated: “After the work of preparing them is completed.”
אין טמא אלא מקום מגען – it is not fit to receive Levitical uncleanness other than the place of the falling liquid. Another explanation: if they (i.e., the water) on these olives whose work of preparing them was not completed the liquids are impure, nothing is defiled from them other than the olives that the impure liquids them alone.
המוחל היוצא מהן (the thin secretion that exudes from them) – the water that exudes from the olives prior to their work of preparing them being completed, they do not have the status of law of liquids, and they do not make eatables susceptible [to receive ritual defilement], and they themselves do not receive ritual defilement. And because just as the thin secretion/sap that exudes from the olives is ritually pure until the work of preparing them is completed because he doesn’t desire their existence.

Mishnah 3

נפלו עליהן משקין טמאין – after the work of preparing them is completed and they are susceptible to receive ritual defilement, all of the olives are ritually impure and even those that the impure liquids did not touch, for the liquid that exudes from them after the work of preparing them is completed for through it, they became susceptible to receive ritual defilement he combines with those impure liquids and receives defilement from them, and afterwards they defile all of the rest of the olives.
המוחל היוצא מהן – (the thin secretion/sap that exudes from them) from the olives whose work of preparing them has been completed.
ר' אליעזר מטהר – for he (i.e., Rabbi Eliezer) does not consider the thin secretion/sap a liquid neither to make susceptible the seeds [to receive ritual defilement] and not to receive defilement like the rest of the liquids (see Tractate Makhshirin, Chapter 6, Mishnah 4).
וחכמים מטמאין – for the thin secretion/sap is considered a liquid whether to make susceptible [to receive ritual defilement] or whether to defile when it exudes from the olives after the work of preparing them is completed.
המוחל היוצא מן הבור – after they remove the oil from the cistern, there remains a thin secretion/sap on the floor of the cistern like water, and as Rabbi Shimon states that it is upon this that Rabbi Eliezer and the Rabbis disagree, Rabbi Eliezer does not consider it liquid, but the Rabbis hold that since it is not possible to have a thin secretion/sap on the floor of the cistern without dilution of oil, it is considered liquid like the oil. And the Halakha is according to the Sages, and like the first Tanna/teacher [of the Mishnah] and not like Rabbi Shimon explained it.

Mishnah 4

הגומר את זיתיו – after the time of the vats and the olive press have passed. For at the time of the vats and the olive press, it is taught in the Mishnah in [Tractate] Hagigah, Chapter 3, Mishnah 4 that everyone is believed [that in Judea] regarding the heave-offering/priest’s due at the time of the vats and olive presses.
ושייר (and left aside) –[one must say, "ישייר" /and there should remain, and similarly it is found in old manuscripts].
קופה אחת – in order that he would separate heave-offering from it and [first-tithe] from it in ritual purity [and give it in the presence of the Kohen, that the Kohen] himself will see that he now has finished working with his olives, for if he doesn’t give it in the presence of the Kohen, he will not be believed to state that he guarded them in ritual purity, since the time of the vats and olive presses have passed. But there are books where we have the reading "לעני הכהן"/to a poor person who is a Kohen, because small amounts of heave-offering like this that he separates after [the time has passed] of the vats and the olive presses, it is not customary to give it other than to an indigent Kohen, because of this, it (i.e., this manuscript of the Mishnah) teaches: "כהן עני"/an indigent/poor Kohen, and the same law applies when he is able to give to a wealthy Kohen.
יוליך לו את המפתח מיד – and we believe him with what he says that now he has completed [working with] his olives.
ר' שמעון אומר מעת לעת – of the completion of his harvesting of the olives, if he brought him the key, we believe him. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehudah. But in the Tosefta (Tractate Taharot, Chapter 9, Halakha 10) in implies that when Rabbi Yehuda said "מיד"/immediately, that is all of the entire day.

Mishnah 5

המניח זיתים בכותש (he who places olives in a basket in which olives are kept for softening) – We have the reading. And it is is a large basket that they place the olives into to shrink them.
שימתונו – that they will be softened and they will be moist. And there are books where we have the reading of "בכותש"/in an olive basket, that we place them in a cavity for many days in order that they will become loose and soft and they will be easy to press.
הרי אלו מוכשרים – with thin secretion/sap that exudes from them, for the work of preparing them is completed. 
The School of Hillel states that they are not susceptible [to receive ritual defilement] for the work of preparing them is not yet completed.
הפוצע זיתים (he who crushes olives)- he who crushes them with unwashed hands.
טימאן- for unwashed hands invalidate/make unfit the heave-offering, and all who invalidate the heave-offering defiles liquid to be first-degree [of ritual impurity]. And they are made fit for Levitical uncleanness through their crushing, for it is satisfactory for him with liquid that drips on them, and through this, they increase the taste.

Mishnah 6

לגרגרם – to make of them shriveled olives. Meaning to say, to make that each and every berry will wither in the sun and dry out.
אפילו הן רום אמה – that when the upper ones wither, the lowest ones from the moisture and the moistness of the liquid, nevertheless, since it is his intention that they dry out, they are not made fit for Levitical uncleanness . And there are those who explain "לגרגרן"/to shrivel them, to sweet them in the sun in order that make an incision in them with salt and to consume them. And because they all do not become sweet at once, because of this, it (i.e., the Mishnah) takes [the term]: "לגרגרן"/to make of them shriveled olives, that is to say that he takes the shriveled olives that sweeten one by one and consumes them, and we have the reading: "אפילו הן רום אמה"/even if they are piled a cubit in height, they are fit for Levitical uncleanness, meaning to say, even that they are a cubit high for now those lowest ones are sweetened, they are made fit for Levitical uncleanness by liquids that exude from them. For it is satisfactory for him that they sweat there, that it appears better for consumption.
שילקו (that they might putrefy) – that they will be crushed and will be burst.
לעתיד להעלותן לגג – afterwards to sweeten them there in the sun.
נתנן בגג שיפתחם – that the olives will burst open and will salt them.
הרי אלו מוכשרים – for all these it is satisfactory to him with the sweating of the oil that is saved.
עד שישמר – that he will prepare to guard it on its roof. He covers it from reeds and straw that they make at the top of the roof to sit there to guard.
אינן מוכשרים – for it is not satisfactory to him with the moisture that exudes from them.

Mishnah 7

רצה ליטול מהם בד אחד (If he wanted to take – enough from – them for a single pressing) – olives which had completed their work of preparation and they were not fit for Levitical uncleanness as for example, that it was his intention to purchase and to add upon them as is taught in the Mishnah at the beginning of our chapter (Mishnah 2), and he comes to take from them a small/minute measure that they place in the olive press on one occasion, or two presses and make [olive] oil from them, and leave from them a lot in the vat/pit where olives are packed until they form a viscid mass.
בית שמאי אומרים קוצה בטומאה (let him set them apart in a state of uncleanness)- he cuts off what he wants to cut off from the cluster of olives that are in the vat where the olives are packed until they form a viscid mass, a single pressing or two pressings in defilement, since they had not completed their work of preparation and were not fit for Levitical uncleanness.
ומחפה בטהרה (and cover up in a state of ritual purity) – when he finished taking what he wanted to take, he covers the remainder that is in the vat in purity as if it was made fit for Levitical uncleanness, for his taking of what he takes is defrauded to consider the remainder as if he completed his work of preparation.
אף מחפה בטומאה – for even that which remains is not fit to receive Levitical uncleanness, since their work of preparation had not been completed and it was his intention to add upon them. But however, if he uprooted all the olives that were in the vat in order to make them in the olive press, they were fit to receive Levitical uncleanness according to the House of Hillel.
ר' יוסי אומר חופר בקרדומות (Rabbi Yossi says he digs out with metal axes/hatchets) – and uproots all of the olives that are in the vat.
ומוליך לבית הבד בטומאה – because they are not fit to receive Levitical uncleanness, and it (i.e., the Mishnah’s) use of the word קרדומות, it is a noteworthy point because they are vessels of iron and they are prepared for the defilement through a corpse more than other vessels. And the Halakha is according to the School of Hillel.

Mishnah 8

בריחים (in the millstones) – that they grind/mill the olives before placing them in the olive press and afterwards they place them in the olive press and mill them with a beam.
ואם היה משקה – the liquid is defiled by the [dead] creeping thing, and all of the olives are defiled through connection of the liquid.
נמצא על גבי העלים – if the [dead] creeping thing is found on top of the leaves that cover the olives, and the leaves are not receptacles of defilement.
ישאלו הבדדים (ask the olive press workers) – commoners who are not careful in their observance of the laws of Levitical purity and tithing whom the owner of the oil purified to work on his olives in ritual purity, and they are believed to state: “we have not touched the creeping thing that is on the leaves and we were not defiled.
ואם היה נוגע באום – if the creeping thing left from the leaves that cover the olives and touched the cluster/mass of olives.
אפילו וכו' – one hair from the creeping thing touches the cluster/mass [of olives].
טמא – all of the cluster/mass [of olives is ritually impure], for it is considered attachment/joining. [The word] אום/cluster, mass, the olives that are collected together and attached each with another in the vat are called an אום.

Mishnah 9

נמצא על גבי פרודים (if [the insect] was found on top of the broken olives) = after he inserted a peg in the cluster/mass of olives to separate the cluster to several separate parts, and in each clod of earth from these parts from the cluster, there are olives that are attached.
והוא נוגע בכביצה (and it touches an egg’s bulk) – that if he came to combine the olives that the creeping insect touches that have an egg’s bulk.
טמא – all of the clod of earth [is impure] even though the clod of earth is attached from when inserted the peg in the mass/cluster to separate them, nevertheless, since there is in this clod of earth impure olives like the appropriate measure to defile others, which is like an egg’s bulk, it becomes attached to defile all the rest of the olives in it.
פירודים על גבי פירודים (broken-off blocks on top of other broken-off blocks) – there are clods of earth on top of clods of earth that the creeping inspect is on the uppermost clod.
אע"פ שהשרץ נוגע בכביצה – of that clod of earth.
אין טמא אלא מקום מגעו – of the creeping insect [only what it touched through contact is impure], that is to say, that clod of earth that the creeping insect touched, but the rest of the clods of earth are ritually pure.
נמצא – the creeping insect [is found]
בין כותל לזיתים טהור - and we are not concerned that perhaps it (i.e., the creeping insect) was on the olives.
נמצא בגג – that one brings up olives from the vat to the roof and the creeping insect is found afterwards in the olives that are on the roof.
המעטן טהור – meaning to say that the olives that are in the vat are ritually pure, and we don’t say with the olives that were brought and were in the vat.
נמצא במעטן – olives that he brought up on the roof, are ritually impure, for before he brought the the olives to the roof the creeping insect was in the vat.
נמצא שרוף (if it found burned – and clean on the olives) – but a burnt creeping insect does not defile, as it is written (Leviticus 11:31): “whoever touches them when they are dead [shall be impure until evening],” similar to their being dead. And when it is found burnt on top of ritually pure olives, we are not concerned that perhaps it touched them before it was burned.
מהוהא (tattered, scorched) – a cloth that was burned by fire and became like a kind of קורי עכבים/an impeding beam, and it no longer is susceptible to receive ritual defilement.
טהורה – and we don’t say that perhaps it was ritually impure from the outset before it was singed/burnt.
בשעת מציאתן – whether or leniency or whether for stringency (see Tractate Taharot, Chapter 3, Mishnah 5 where this principle is enunciated – at the time when they are found).

Chapter 10



Mishnah 1

הנועל בית הבד מפני הבדדין – commoners who are not careful in their observance of Levitical uncleanness and tithing who do work in the olive press, the owner of the olives purified the in order that they would make the [olive] oil in ritual purity, and locked the olive press in their faces so that commoners should not enter there and they should not leave and be defiled through the contact of their commoner colleagues.
והיו שם – within the olive press.
כלים טמאין מדרס – which is a primary source of ritual impurity an they defile humans whether by contact, whether by carrying or whether by shaking.
ר' מאיר אומר בית הבד אמא – for we are concerned that perhaps these ritually pure commoners were defiled and they returned and defiled everything, for they are not concerned about being careful on [matters of] defilement.
רבי יהודה אומר בית הבד טהור – for they are careful on definitive defilement, since this member of the order for the observance of Levitical laws in daily intercourse purified them for this.
ר' שמעון אומר אם טהורים להם – these are the vessels. As for example, that the wife of a commoner sat upon them or that they belonged to a commoner, that in their eyes were ritually pure.
בית הבד טמא – for the workmen in the olive press are not careful from touching them, and one has to be concerned that perhaps they were defiled.
ואם טמאין הן – as, for example, that they knew that a menstruating woman or a woman with a flux sat upon them.

א"ר יוסי – like Rabbi Meir, he (i.e., Rabbi Yossi) holds that the olive press is ritually impure, but the reason of Rabbi Meir is because the olive press workmen are not concerned about defilement, whereas Rabbi Yossi holds that they are concerned about contact but they are not expert in [questions of] shaking, and they think that they are pure all the tine that they didn’t touch it. Therefore, the olive press is ritually impure, for we are concerned that perhaps they shook it, even though they didn’t touch them. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 2

ומשקין טמאין בתוך בית הבד – and they are spilled on the ground and the olive press workmen tread upon them and they (i.e., the liquids) become attached to their feet and they return those liquids and defile the olives when the olive press workmen ascend and tread upon the olives unless there is land between the liquids and the olives in order that they can dry their feet from the impure liquids through their treading/walking on the land. But when there aren’t shoes on their feet and the impure liquids that are on their feet dried through their treading on the land, furthermore, the olives do not become defiled when they tread on them, for ritually impure liquids defile vessels but do not defile humans.
הבדדין והבוצרין – surely that it (i.e., the Mishnah) did not use [the language] of those who harvest olives and those who cut grapes/"המוסקים והבוצרים" , because they (i.e., the Sages) made a degree on the cutting of grapes that it should be done [in a state of] ritual purity, but they didn’t make a decree on those who harvest olives, and the reason is explained in the first chapter of [Tractate] Shabbat (17a), for sometimes a person goes to his vineyard to know if his grapes have arrived [at the proper time] to cut them or not, and he takes a cluster of grapes and wrings them out and sprinkles them over the grapes, and at the time of the cutting of the grapes liquid still flows upon them and they have been made fit to be susceptible to receive ritual defilement. And this reason does not belong with the harvesting of olives.
נאמנים לומר לא נגענו – and as for example, that a member of the order for the observance of Levitical laws in daily intercourse/חבר stands with them in the olive press, and we are not concerned that perhaps they touched it but it was not the intention of the member of the order for the observance of Levitical laws in daily intercourse.
התינוקות – olive press workmen who brought their children with them, and purified them for this, and when their sons want to defecate, their fathers exit outside with them and they defecate beyond the wall, and we are not concerned that perhaps he touched defilement, and it was not the intention of the member of the order for the observance of Levitical laws in daily intercourse/חבר.

Mishnah 3

כיון שנכנסו לרשות מערה – that they ritually immerse there [in the cavern], like narrow pits, lengthy ditches and spacious cavities/caverns.
דיו – and we are not concerned that perhaps they would not ritually immerse or that they would not immerse the vessels and they would say, “we ritually immersed and we ritually immersed [the vessels].”
צריך לעמוד עליהן. לפי שאין בקיאין בדין טבילה וחציצה (this section is not found in the printed editions of the Mishnah and is a reading of the Bartenura commentary on this Mishnah)
טהורים להם – as, for example, the vessels of another commoner who is not careful in the observance of the laws of Levitical uncleanness and tithing, that in their eyes these are ritually pure vessels because they are not warned/careful against the contact of a commoner. And Rabbi Shimon is according to his reasoning that we have explained above (in Mishnah 1 of this chapter). And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 4

הנותן מן הסלים ומן המשטיח של אדמה (he who puts in the press grapes collected in baskets or as such as were spread on the ground) – grapes that were cut from the beginning for consumption and were not fit to be susceptible to receive ritual defilement, for they (i.e., the Rabbis) did not decree other on the person who cut the grapes from the beginning to [bring them to] the vat for wine-pressing and afterwards changed his mind regarding them and took them from the baskets or from the ground that he had spread the grapes upon them and placed them in the vat for wine-pressing.
בית שמאי אומרים נותן בידים טהורות – since he came to placed them in the vat for wine-pressing, he is as if he cut them from the beginning [to bring them] to the vat for wine-pressing, and he needs to bring them to the vat for wine-pressing in ritual purity.
ואם נתן בידים טמאות טמאן – but even though mere hands are second-degree [of ritual impurity], and nothing that is second-degree [of ritual impurity] can make something third-degree [of ritual impurity] with non-consecrated produce, perhaps they thought that what is ritually immersed for heave-offering is like heave-offering itself, alternatively, we are dealing with hands that first-degree [of ritual impurity]. And this is the opinion of Rabbi Shimon ben Eleazar as it is brought in the second chapter of [Tractate] Hullin [folio 33b].
ובית הלל אומרים נותן לגת בידים טמאות ומפריש תרומתו בטהרוה – because they were not fitted for Levitical uncleanness since they were cut from the outset for consumption.
מן העביט ומן המשטיח של עלים (from the large basket, strapped on the carrier’s back, in which the grapes are carried during the vintage and/or from the grapes spread out on leaves) – the עביט is a vessel that they place the grapes in it that they cut to bring to the vat for wine-pressing. And the grapes spread out on leaves on the face of the ground, and now the matter is proven that the person who cuts these grapes from the outset, he cut them for the vat for wine-pressing and not for consumption, therefore, the School of Shammai and the School of Hillel are in agreement in this that one brings them with ritually pure hands, for this that [the School of] Hillel is silent in the first chapter of [Tractate] Shabbat (Mishnah 4) and agrees him with the person who cuts grapes for wine-pressing in the vat is fitted for Levitical uncleanness.

Mishnah 5

האוכל – [he, (who is ritually unclean) eats] grapes.
מן הסלים ומן המשטיח של אדמה – for they were cut, undefined, for consumption. Even though his hands were ritually impure and the grapes were dripping wine into the vat.
הרי הגת טהורה – for those drops do not have the status of liquid, since they were cut for consumption, and it was not satisfactory to him with what it drips. But a person who eats from the large basket, strapped on the carrier’s back, in which grapes are carried during the vintage or from the gapes spread on leaves, even though the grapes are not split and they are not flowing in drops, if there fell from him a single berry and there isn’t the oblate side of a berry to which the stalk is attached for that berry, that is, in the place where the peduncle/stalk is on the mouth of the berry there is a kind of oblate side of a berry to which the stalk is attached and that oblate side of the berry to which the stalk is attached closes/conceals the mouth of berry so that liquid does not exude, and when the peduncle/stalk is uprooted with the oblate side of a berry to which the stalk is attached, liquid exudes and even though he took them to consume them, they have the status of liquid, since from the outset, he cut them for the vat and that liquid was defiled with his ritually unclean hands, and when it fell to the vat, it became defiled. And these words apply when he touched it with his hands in the place of the oblate side of the berry to which the stalk is attached, but if he didn’t touch in the place of the oblate side of the berry to which the stalk is attached, the vat was not defiled, for his hands didn’t touch the liquids in order that the liquid would return and defile the vat.
נפלו ממנו ענבים – meaning to say a cluster of grapes, that the berries are attached to the cluster and the liquid does not exude, and they were defiled by his ritually impure hands, and they were made fit for Levitical uncleanness because it was cut for the vat.
ודרכן במקום המפונה (and one trampled them in an empty part) – an empty/vacant place in the vat where there is nothing – not wine nor grapes and he trampled them ritual purity.
כביצה מכוון טהור (if there was exactly an egg’s bulk there – it is pure) – the vat, for a food does not defile a vessel and when it exuded the first drop, it was missing from an egg’s bulk and food does not defile other food with less than an egg’s bulk. It is found that there is no defilement for this drop other than on account of the defilement that it received when it was food, therefore now also that it became a liquid, it lacks the strength other than as a food. But more than an egg’s bulk, it is ritually impure, for the egg’s bulk defiles the first drop according to the law of liquids, and the drop returned and defiled the vat, for the liquid defiles a vessel.

Mishnah 6

וניתזה צנורא (and spittle splashed forth) – spittle splashed forth from the mouth of a commoner who is speaking, and the spittle that exits from the mouth of a commoner defiles people and vessels according to the Rabbis, and all the more so food and liquids.
פסיקו טהור – for we said that the edge of a cistern collected the ejection of spittle and prevents it from descending into the wine. And our Mishnah is speaking about a plastered cistern that does not receive ritual defilement. But in the Tosefta [Tractate Taharot, Chapter 11, Halakha 12] they stated that the cistern of [olive] oil is ritually impure, because the oil smoothens the edge of the cistern and [the ejection of spittle] smoothens and descends below to the oil that is in the cistern.

Mishnah 7

הזולף את הבור (if one empties the pit- of wine/oil) – he removes the wine or oil that is in the cistern/pit, and because he doesn’t remove all of it at once but rather bit by bit, it (i.e., the Mishnah) calls it זולף/pours, drips.
ונמצא שרץ בראשונה – that he brought in a jug into the cistern and filled it, and similarly and second and similarly a third, and afterwards found a creeping insect in the jug that he filled first.
כולן טמאות that from the first, everything that was in the cistern was defiled, whether the creeping insect was in the cistern or whether it was in the jug.
באחרונה היא טמאה וכולן טהורות – for from it (i.e., in the last jug) was the creeping insect but not from the cistern, and even if t was from cistern, perhaps it fell into the cistern after all the first [jugs] had been filled.
אימתי בזמן שהוא זולף – when he brings in the jugs themselves into the cistern and fills each of them one at a time.
אבל היה זולף במחץ (but if he emptied the pit/cistern by using a ladle – to pour into the vessels) – that the jugs stand outside of the cistern, and he fills them through the ladle, and it is an earthenware vessel that is made/used to fill wine with it.
נמצא שרץ באחת מהן היא טמאה בלבד – for I could say that the creeping insect was within the jug and not in the cistern.
אימתי בזמן שהוא בודק – [when he examines] the ladle and the jugs, that he examined them that were wasn’t in them a creeping insect before he placed [olive] oil into tit, but he did not cover neither the cistern/pit nor the jugs all the time that he was bringing the ladle from this one to that one, for I could say that while he was walking the creeping insect fell into the jug, and similarly, if he covered it and did not examine also, perhaps it (i.e., the creeping insect) was in the jug beforehand.
אבל היה בודק ומכסה – that he examined the jugs, and on every occasion that he would bring the ladle from one to another he would cover whether the pit/cistern or whether the jug, and whichever way you turn, this creeping insect was in the cistern from the outset, whether it was found in the jug or whether it was found in the pit, or whether it was found in the ladle.

Mishnah 8

העגולים לזגים (the space between the molds and the deposit of grape shells) – An עיגול is a kind of large millstone that they would put on the grape shells after they tread on the grapes by foot, in order that they wring out and all of the wine exuded that remained in them, and as a result of its weight and size of this mold/roller, they need many people to raise it on the pile of grape shells that are made like a kind of pile and to lower it, therefore it is considered the public domain to ritually purify a matter of doubtful defilement, because man are found there.
כרם שלפני הבוצרים רשות היחיד (that [part of the] vineyard that is in front of the grape gatherers is the private domain) – for people are fearful to enter there, because he will be arrested/seized like a thief.
אחר הבוצרים רשות הרבים (that which is behind the grape gatherers is public domain) – for there is a domain for all people to enter.
כלי בית הבד של גת – meaning to say, and of (i.e., belonging to) the vat, for the olive press is for [olive] oil and there is a vat for wine.
והעקל (and a bale of loose texture containing the olive pulp to be pressed) - it is made like a kind of knit box similar to a net, and after they have squeezed/wrung out the olives, they place the olive peat in that bale of loose texture containing the olive pulp to be pressed and place upon it something heavy to remove the remainder.
מנגבן – but prior to this the ritually immersion is not benefitting/effective if they were defiled before the ritually impure liquids exuded from them that had been attached to them.
חולטן (scalds them in hot water) – pours upon them hot water and afterwards ritually immerses them.
בשבולת הנהר (in a rapid stream/ the current of the river) – a place where the waters flow/run, in order to remove the liquid that is attached on them. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.