Haggai
חגי
Rabbi Mike Feuer, Jerusalem Anthology
https://www.sefaria.org

Haggai



Chapter 1



Chapter 2

In the seventh [month], on the twenty-first of the month, the word of the Lord came through Haggai the prophet, saying: 
Say now to Zerubbabel the son of Shaltiel, the governor of Judah, and to Joshua the son of Jehozadak the High Priest, and to the remnant of the people, saying
Who among you is left, who saw this house in its former glory? And as you see it now, is it not as nothing in your eyes? 
And now, be strong, Zerubbabel, says the Lord; and be strong, Joshua the son of Jehozadak the High Priest; and be strong, all the people of the land, says the Lord. And (for I am with you, says the Lord of Hosts) do 
the thing that I set up with you when you left Egypt. And My spirit stands in your midst; fear not. 
For so said the Lord of Hosts: [There will rise] another one, and I will shake up the heaven and the earth and the sea and the dry land [for] a little while. 
And I will shake up all the nations, and they shall come [with] the precious things of all the nations. And I will fill this House with glory, said the Lord of Hosts. 
The silver is Mine, and the gold is Mine, says the Lord of Hosts. 
The glory of this last House shall be greater than the first one, said the Lord of Hosts. And in this place I will grant peace, says the Lord of Hosts. 
On the twenty-fourth [day] of the ninth [month], in the second year of Darius, the word of the Lord came to Haggai the prophet, saying: 
So said the Lord of Hosts: Now ask the priests the Torah, saying: 
"Should a man carry contaminated flesh in the skirt of his garment, if it touches in his skirt the bread and the pottage and the wine and the oil, or any food, will it [the food] become contaminated?" And the priests replied and said, "No." 
And Haggai said, "If the contamination of a dead body touches all these, will it become contaminated?" And the priests replied and said, "It will become contaminated." 
And Haggai replied and said, "So is this people, and so is this nation before Me, says the Lord; and so is all the work of their hands, and whatever they sacrifice there is contaminated. 
And now, consider from this day and before-before placing a stone upon a stone in the Temple of the Lord 
so that they should not come to a heap of twenty measures, and there would be ten; [similarly,] when one would come to the wine-vat to draw off fifty press-measures, and there would be twenty. 
I smote you with blast and with yellowing and with hail in all the work of your hands, and you are not [returning] to Me, says the Lord. 
Pay attention now, from this day and before-from the twenty-fourth [day] of the ninth [month]- from the day that the Temple of the Lord was founded, pay attention. 
The seed is still in the granary, and the grapevines, the fig trees, the pomegranate trees, and the olive trees have not yet borne [fruit]-from this day I will bless." 
And the word of the Lord came to Haggai a second time on the twenty-fourth of the month, saying: 
Say to Zerubbabel, the governor of Judah, saying: I am shaking up the heaven and the earth. 
And I will overthrow the throne of the kingdoms, and I will destroy the power of the kingdoms of the nations. And I will overthrow the chariots and their riders; and the horses and their riders shall come down, each one by the sword of his brother. 
On that day, says the Lord of Hosts, I will take you, O Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, My servant; says the Lord, and I will make you as a signet; for I have chosen you, says the Lord of Hosts.