Teshuvot Rashi
תשובות רש"י
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Teshuvot Rashi



Teshuva 1



Teshuva 2



Teshuva 3



Teshuva 4



Teshuva 5



Teshuva 6



Teshuva 7



Teshuva 8



Teshuva 9



Teshuva 10



Teshuva 11



Teshuva 12



Teshuva 13



Teshuva 14



Teshuva 15



Teshuva 16



Teshuva 17



Teshuva 18



Teshuva 19



Teshuva 20



Teshuva 21



Teshuva 22



Teshuva 23



Teshuva 24



Teshuva 25



Teshuva 26



Teshuva 27



Teshuva 28



Teshuva 29



Teshuva 30



Teshuva 31



Teshuva 32



Teshuva 33



Teshuva 34



Teshuva 35



Teshuva 36



Teshuva 37



Teshuva 38



Teshuva 39



Teshuva 40



Teshuva 41



Teshuva 42



Teshuva 43



Teshuva 44



Teshuva 45



Teshuva 46



Teshuva 47



Teshuva 48



Teshuva 49



Teshuva 50



Teshuva 51



Teshuva 52



Teshuva 53

This question was asked in front of our rabbi, R. Yitzchak bar Yehudah: And also on the day of a circumcision that comes out on a public fast, like the 17th of Tammuz or the 3rd of Tishrei, what is [the law about] praying verses of mercy and forgiveness, confession, and "God of lasting patience"; and whether we we recite a blessing over the wine and the one who recites the blessing drinks it or whether the child [does]; and what is the amount?
And he answered: This is the practice in our place on the day of a circumcision - we pray penitential prayers and the confession; but we do not say, "And He is merciful" or supplications. And the custom of our ancestors is Torah. And the commandment of circumcision was accepted with joy and we still do it with joy, as it is written (Psalms 119:162), "I rejoice in Your word." Hence we are not accustomed to say, "And He is merciful" or supplications. And it is enough for me that we leave a little, such that we do not have to completely interrupt the penitential prayers, the confession and "God of lasting patience?" And the prayer leader recites a blessing over the wine, but he does not taste it. And the custom of our ancestors is Torah - that he does not need to taste it on a fast day, and he does not give it to the child, since he will come to be drawn in [to sin when he is older], but he rather leaves it until the evening. And the infant's mother does [not] drink it, as she needs to continue the fast. For [otherwise], even though we say that the one who recites the blessing needs to taste, it is fine when an other will taste it. As we ask [in the Talmud] about Yom Kippur, "Let him say [the blessing on] time over a cup [of wine] like on other holidays and let him give it to a child," and we answer, "Since he will come to be drawn in." The reason is that he will be drawn in. But where there is no concern for being drawn in, it is fine when an other tastes [it]. And we do not recite the blessing over time over a cup [of wine], like on other holidays when it must be drunk for the kiddush of that day. And it cannot be said that he should leave it until the evening of the conclusion of Yom Kippur, as it is not possible. 
And that which you asked, what is the amount of tasting: Concerning the one who says kiddush, he needs a cheek-full. And nevertheless, it is forbidden for him to taste [it] on a fast day. And even though we say that a woman who continues the fast may taste a cooked food and there is no [concern] about this, that is with a simple taste without swallowing. And so even if there is a little swallow, there is no [concern] about this. But here the one who recites the blessing needs to drink a cheek-full. And it is a cheek-full that restores him. As we say concerning Yom Kippur, [only] if he drank a cheek-full, he is liable.  