Malbim on Zechariah
מלבי"ם על זכריה
merged
http://www.sefaria.org/Malbim_on_Zechariah
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-http://www.sefaria.org
-Rabbi Mike Feuer, Jerusalem Anthology
-http://www.sefaria.org

Malbim on Zechariah



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Verse 1



Verse 2



Verse 3

‘So said the Lord: I will return to Zion,’ My intention is to return to Zion that My Presence be established there as it was before. Also ‘and I will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem’ among the people, that My Presence will be within them and that prophecy, holiness and all the desirable things which they had in days of old will return to them. However, this is on condition – if Jerusalem will be called the city of truth because of the true justice they will administer there between people and the truth and faithfulness with which they speak, and if the mountain of the Lord of Hosts is called the holy mountain because its priests are sanctified to their Gd. I already mentioned above in Zechariah 7:3 in the name of R’ Yitzchak Abravanel that Israel was afraid then that they would be once again sent into exile because of seven things and this prophecy comes to remove them one by one, as the Rav explained. On the first source of concern, which was the fear they felt once they saw that the Divine Presence did not return to the Second Temple, the prophet said that it is possible He will return His Presence to Zion if they improve their actions, to do what is true and to walk in holiness.

Chapter 9



Verse 1



Verse 2



Verse 3



Verse 4



Verse 5



Verse 6



Verse 7



Verse 8



Verse 9



Verse 10



Verse 11



Verse 12



Verse 13

like a bow; I filled [the hand of] Ephraim – This is describing the war of Yehudah in the time of the Hasmoneans, because yehudah is the bow in the hand of Gd and Gd draws him. Because even though there was a miraculous element to this war, nevertheless the war itself was in a natural fashion. It was as if Gd shot His arrows from a distance by means of the bow who is Yehudah, drawn to fire into the heart of the Greeks. About this it says ‘and I will arouse your children, O Zion’ because Gd aroused and strengthened their hearts for war. It also describes the future war of Ephraim, because they are like the sword of the mighty warrior in the hand of Gd, which kills up close. About this it says ‘I will make you as the sword of a mighty man,’ and the drawing of the bow is given to Ephraim hims, as it says ‘like a bow I filled…’