Derech Chaim
דרך חיים
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Derech_Chaim
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Derech Chaim

Author's Introduction







Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Mishnah 1



Mishnah 2



Mishnah 3



Mishnah 4



Mishnah 5



Mishnah 6



Mishnah 7



Mishnah 8



Mishnah 9



Mishnah 10



Mishnah 11



Mishnah 12



Mishnah 13



Mishnah 14

Rebbi Elazar says: "One should be diligent in learning Torah such that he can answer a heretic." Rebbi Elazar is giving Mussar on the Torah , which is the purpose of man, and man vis-a-vis himself was not created except to toil in Torah.  And this is like was written (Job: 5,7) that "Man was born to toil", as we explained above at length (Mishna 8), that the creation of man rests on toiling in Torah.  Therefore it says "be diligent in learning Torah" because if you are not diligent in learning Torah, then it will not be considered that you are toiling in Torah, but rather only that you are learning Torah "for leisure time"... And it says after this that your Torah should be such that you can answer a heretic.  Which is to say that just like there is a Mitzvah for a person to learn Torah and to acquire the Torah, which is the Torah of Truth (Malachi: 1, 6), so to it is fitting that a person nullifies 'false belief systems' from the world such that Truth increased in the world.  For if Falsity is left to be in the world, the end is that Falsity, God Forbid, will cause Truth to be lost and nullify it such that Falsity dominates the world, and therefore, take much care that you do not give any foothold for Falsity, rather that you know what to answer to a heretic.  And it says after this and 'in front of who you toil in Torah' corresponding to the massive exertion that  is thrown upon him.  As it says 'be diligent in learning Torah', that he should strive to know how to answer a heretic, and un this point we say 'know in front of who you stand and trustworthy is your boss to pay the reward of your work'.  If you toil in Torah extensively, the reward given to you will be plentiful.    And if this matter is not recognized by a person, it's possible that he will end up in laziness. Now consider if a person is already careful that (Pirke Avos: 1,3) 'one should not work for the sake of receiving reward', which we said means that this kind of person's service is based on serving Hashem on the condition that we receives a reward [which is suboptimal].  But this idea here is speaking to awakening a person, because a person has a body and the nature of physicality doesn't really listen to the service of God, and needs an awakening!  Much like a young child needs an awakening in his learning, so we give him a treat so that he will learn, so too does a man need to be awakened.  And if he awakens himself through thinking about the massive reward that there is to a person, this person would not be called somebody who 'serves for the sake of receiving a reward' since he is doing so only for the self-awakening such that he shouldn't be blocked from his service (of God).  Therefore this (piece of Mussar) counteracts to the Evil Inclination that desires to lessen a person that he shouldn't toil in Torah, and to prevent against laziness tin this toiling.  And even though a person might act from a place of love and not 'on the condition of receiving a reward', a person has to be careful that perhaps he will end up in laziness because he doesn't not believe (deeply) in his soul. [Which is to say that a person will want to act without incentivizing himself, but rather from a place of pure love, and in trying to act from a higher level than he is on, fall short and end up lazy].  And for this reason, it says 'know in front of who you toil and trustworthy...' and through this laziness should not reach his toiling.  But certainly the purpose of his learning cannot be the reward, but this idea can strengthen him so that he shouldn't end up in the hands of laziness - about which one should one.  And it should be clear to you that in all five of these Sages, each one says three things which are related one to the next.   
But you must know further, in what there is to learn by each individual (of the five students) saying specifically three things.  We can infer from the Tannaic author of the Mishna using the phrase (Mishna 10) 'And they (the five students) said three things', that these Sages were complete people, and therefore intended to complete man, each Sage through the three pieces of Mussar.  Because man is made up of different parts which are ever-changing, there isn't to man one fixed part, but there are different parts.  And therefore, these words of Mussar that come to complete man, need to be more than just one piece of Mussar.  Because an idea which gives Mussar to (addresses) a singular topic [i.e. the body], doesn't give Mussar to (address) the second topic [i.e. the soul]; and that which gives Mussar to (addresses) the second [i.e. the soul], doesn't give Mussar (address) the first[i.e. the body].  And further consider there are how many needs to a person, and they all require words of Mussar -- and somehow they (our mishnayot here) include and head these with only three aspects.  There is to man three aspects: the first aspect is in respect to the capacities of his soul; the second aspect is in respect to the capacities of his body; the third aspect is in respect to man as a whole entity, because these [the capacities of the soul and body] are only disparate pieces, and therefore this third aspect of a person as a whole person includes the body and the soul which comprise a person.  The general rule: in such that a person needs Mussar for the capacities of his body, and needs Mussar for the capacities of his soul, and for his being as an entire entity which includes his different parts.  And therefore, these Sages came in their words of Mussar to complete man in everything, because each and every (of these three parts of a person), needs customized Mussar.  And each and every one of these [5] Sages adds on to the one before him to fix up a person on the totality of these three paths, until the final one will fix up the person totally, in such that a person is fitting on the parts of a person which we mentioned.  Even if he won't be as close as the one before him, as we will explain.  And you must understand this very, very much, that these three things which each Sage mentions is a fixing of Man, which includes that from the right, and the left, and the middle.  And upon this,  everything is founded, and understand this.  And you must know, that which is said by Rebbi Eleazar 'Let the honor of your friend as dear to your as your own' is a hugely important issue foundation for bringing a person to Olam Haba.  In Perek Tefillot Hashachar (Berachos: 28, Amud B) 'When Rebbi Eleazar got sick, his students entered by his side and said to him 'Rebbi, teach us the ways of life so we will merit the world to come'.  He said to them 'Be careful in the honor of your friends....'.  Behold that Rebbi Eleazar says over here 'Let the honor of your friend be as dear to you as your own'. it means to say that this concept will bring a person to life in Olan Haba.  And lest you ask a Kasha (challenging question): why does this concept bring a person to the world to come? Because this concept, you must understand was spoken about by the Chachamim (Bava Metzia: Daf 59, Amud A) 'Anybody who embarrasses the face of his friend, there is no portion to him in Olam Haba'.  And from this understand that the opposite would be being careful with the honor of your friend, this is the path to life in Olam Haba, like we will explain later on more clearly.  Because when one sensitizes oneself that the honor within a person, who is made in the Image of God (B'tzelem Elokim), because Man was created in the Image of God (Genesis: Chapter 1, Verse 27), because of this man is fitting to Olam Haba. Because man is not fitting to Olam Haba, except due to the Image of God which bestowed to man from upon High, like it says in the verse (Genesis: Chapter 1, Verse 26): "Let us make man in our image, in our likeness".  And because of this, man is fitting for life in Olam Haba.  And therefore it says that one should be careful in the honor if your friends, and this is regarding the aspect man was made in the Image of God,  and one should not - God forbid - embarrass this image, for within it depends Olam Haba.  And similarly it says in the Sifri 'Do not ascend in steps upon the alter' (Exodus: Chapter 20, Verse 26). Rebbi Yishmael says behold from these words we can make a logical deduction: in such that stones which have within them no knowledge, not for evil, not for good, the Omnipresent says do not accustom yourself to treat them with disrespect, your friends who is in the Image of He who spoke and the world was created, certainly you should not accustom yourself to treat him disrespectfully!  [end quote].'  Behold the warning of a one's friend is because he is created in the Image of God, because this is the greatest attribute a person can have, and because of this, the level of man he merits the loftiest heights: to life in Olam Haba.  And therefore it says (Gemara-Berachos just quoted) that this is the 'way sof life to Olam Haba', to bring a person from Olam HaZeh, which is a world of physicality, to the Olam Hanivdal (The World of Distinction) which is Olam Haba.  And says Rebbi Eleazar also here (in our Mishna) 'Let the honor of your friend be as dear to you as your own' to teach a person the ways of life, that in it he will arrive in Olam Haba.
And it says after this 'Do not be comfortable to anger'.  Because since this (first clause about honor) is the path to the ways of life which channel a persons strength to reaching the world to come, (now) we examine man that he should be guarded from the path that will make him lose his Olam Haba.  And this (is why we now say) 'Do not be comfortable to anger', because anger is that which brings a person to the hands of personal deficiency (usually translated as Sin, but actually means a personal lack), until it causes a person to lose his world to come as we will explain.  Because a possessor of anger is a the possessor of a personal deficiency, and therefore the anger will precipitate the bringing of a person into the hands of deficiency and he will have been lost from Olam Haba.  For this reason, (the Mishna) begins with 'Let the honor of your friend be as dear to you as your own' because this is the path to bring a person to Olam Haba - as was stated (explicitly) by Rebbi Eleazar in Berachos, and (only) after this do we warn a person against the thing which will cause our Olam Haba to be lost, so (then the Mishna) says 'Do not be comfortable to anger'.  And the intention is to say that if you are lacking, and "there is not Tzadik in the land who does (only) good and doesn't sin (isn't lacking)" (Koheles: 6,20), then 'one should be careful to do every single day Teshuva' (Shabbat: 153, Aleph).  And because of this there will be to his life in Olam Haba in Completion.  And in such that Rebbi Eleazar didn't mention (in the Aggadah from the Gemara we mentioned before) in the Chapter Tefillot Hashachar (Berachos 28, B) these three things (from our Mishna) but only one of them, which is 'be careful with the honor of your friends'.  It is because they (his students) only asked him about 'the ways to life', and this (be careful in the honor of your friends) are 'ways to life' which bring a person to Olam Haba.  And here (in our Mishna) (Rebbi Eleazar) elucidates in order to complete every person according to three aspects: that there should be to him an Olam Haba, and that he should come to lose his Olam Haba [which contains within it two components - the two latter clauses of the Mishna], and this explanation is clear.  And we already said that these three aspects complete a person from all angles.  In such that it says 'let the honor of your friend be as dear to you as your own', it is Mussar relevant to a person in the aspect of a person as a whole entity, that there is to honor the Image of man in such that he is Man.  As if when it says that you must honor your friend it is saying that your friend is was created in the Image of God.  And if a person is unable to perform this matter (honor his friend), but instead is simply not critical of his friend because he (his friend) was made in the Image of God, it teaches on the lowliness and lack within that (original) person.  Because if a person was the possessor of elevation (in character) like is fitting for a person who is made in this Image, he would be honoring his friend [in an active way, not merely passively NOT being critical] in such that he was made in the Image of God.  And therefore we have this enactment, to fix up a person from the respect of the totality of being a human being.  So we say afterwards 'Do not be comfortable to anger', which corresponds to the distinguished [as opposed to connected - see 5 components of soul above in Mishna 9] capacity of the soul, for anger is aligned with the soul, an according to this it says that one should not be a possessor of anger, because if one does this he will have a lack in his soul (M'Ayin on the Lashon here - See R' Hartmann).  Further it's said corresponding to the body 'Return one day before your death', because due to the fact that a person is the possessor of a body the idea of Teshuva [repentance, or return] is relevant to him, because if man was not the possessor of a body, the concept of Teshuva wouldn't be found by him, accordingly say the Chachamim (Pirke Avos: 4, 18) 'Beautiful is one moment of Teshuva and Good Deeds in Olam Hazeh' as we will explain with the Help of God, take a look there.  And corresponding to this it says 'return one day before your death'.  And understand these things which are hinted at here, for they are matters of Chochmah and Emes [wisdom and truth], with no doubt, not through the power of reason or estimation, but only Truth.  It's merely not possible to explain these matters according to what they seem, but only to deeply comprehend the wisdom, the continual wisdom and knowledge [Daat], and behold Rebbi Eleazar joined these three things together because they complete a person as we said.  And so too, Rebbi Yehoshua says also his words of Mussar to complete a person.  As we already said, due to man containing within him three aspects: the first - his body, the second - his soul; these are the pieces.  And the third is Man as a total entity, which subsumes the two (pieces), as we explained.  And therefore, an Evil Eye removes a person from the world, due to the entanglement with the capacity of the soul which is Evil, there is no doubt that a person will be brought to a loss through this Evil, because it (Evil Eye) is a lack that entangled in his Soul, which is the an Evil Eye.  Therefore, an Evil Eye removes a person from the world.  Stated after this is the Evil Inclination, which is an evil lack entangled within the capacity of the Body, because the Evil Inclination is enmeshed in the Body.  And the proof to this is that even an animal is there is an Inclination, as it says in the first chapter of Bava Kama: that an animal also has an Evil Inclination.  But an Evil Eye an animal does not have, because an animal doesn't have a distinguished capacity of the soul - this is only found in Man - because the Soul of an animal is only considered like it's Body.  And the source of the Evil Inclination is in Arayos (Improper Sexual Relations), which is relevant to the Body, and this matter is obvious.  And in such that the Evil Inclination, which is Evil, entangles within the body of a person, and takes a person out of the world, after Emptiness, which is Evil, enmeshes within this part (the body).  And so too with Baseless Hatred (Sinas Chinam), because creations are (refer to) Man, and if you hate Man in as much as he is a person, there is a lowliness and lack  in the person (the hater) in respect to his entity as a person.  Because if he were a complete person, he would not hate creations - which are Man - rather there exists within him lowliness in the respect to himself as a person.  And therefore, this concept will remove a person from of the world.  In such that a person should not depart from this until he stands on the source, so it says 'Evil Eye, Evil Inclination, and Hatred of Creations, remove a person from the world, there is to understand that death is brought about to a person because he deviates from the center upon which man was created, and he leans towards one of the edges, in this a person reaches Death.  And this matter is clear, because all Death is an End, but balance and centeredness are Life, like we we explained at length in the introduction (to Pirke Avos), have a look there.  
And understand that this world which was created by the Blessed One, was created in balance and does not leave the center as we explained that there is Kiyum (Existence), because the Center has Existence exceedingly.  This is taught in what that creation was in six days (Exodus: 20, 11).  Because the letter Vav teaches about balance, and this can be understood by the form (of the letter) which stands like a straight stick in balance, only a little of it curves at the top, even so one cannot find this in any of the other letters.  And also in it's pronunciation, it's pronounced Vav -  balanced in its pronunciation [The pronunciation of the letter Vav is palindromic, which is to say that it's the same sound, a V, pronounced twice, with a small vowel in the middle.].  And also in it's numerical status [The Gematria of Vav is 6] which is balanced exceedingly, as it is written in Rabbi Avraham Ibn Ezra, may he remembered for blessing, in Parshas Shemos on the letter Vav, that the number is balanced [equal] in all of the single digit numbers, and you will not find a single digit number which has balance like the number six, for the three factors which six is divisible are six (when added together), because divided by two one gets three, and divided by three one gets two, and divided by six the factor is one, and all of them added together is six. [Aside from the 6 itself, the factors of 6 are: 3, 2, and 1. When these factors are added, one gets 3+2+1 which equals 6].  Behold when when it's pieces are joined they are equal to the whole.  And this is not found in any other single digit number: because four split into two is two, and in fourths is one, and they are three together.  And the number eight split into two is four, and fourths is two, and eighths is one, behold that's seven.  And it's not found any single digit number which is balanced like the number six.  And because the world was created in balance, it was created in six days, in which the number teaches to the balance found in this world.  And there is not creation found amongst the creation which is more balanced than Man, and therefore man was created on the sixth (day) (Genesis: 1, 27), which teaches to the balance which exists within man.  And this balance, which is that Man is made up of Body and Soul, needs to stand in balance, that one should not lean towards the edge in which Man is totally Body, nor should he lean towards the powers of the Soul such that he is entirely Soul, but rather he must stand in this balance.  Therefore it is not fitting that man should be in opposition to himself [referring back to Hatred of Creations, or Sinas HaBriyos], in which he leans towards Emptiness entirely. And this that it says 'Evil Eye, Evil Inclination, and Hatred of Creations remove a man from the world'.  When a person possess an Evil Eye, the power of his Soul is overactive, until he burns everything with his gaze, and this is an powering of the Soul more than is fitting, and through this he leaves [center] to one edge.  Because a person was only created to balance his Body and his Soul, and in such that he leans towards an edge he entangles in Emptiness, as we explained.  Therefore, it (this lack of center) removes a person from the world.  And so too if a person leans to the power of his Body, the physical Evil Inclination, he entangles in the body as if he is all body.  And this is a leaving towards the edge, and the edge is connected there to Emptiness, which is intself an edge, and this matter will remove him from the world.  Because it's fitting that man should stand without leaning towards an edge. And understand what is said in that 'remove him from the world', because this world is a world of balance, for Hashem created it in balance.  And leaning from balance towards a side entirely, that is removal from the world, and connection to total Emptiness.  And these two things are to a person from the aspect of leaving [the center] towards one side, that through this a person enmeshes in Emptiness, and is removed from the world.  Really, the third thing, which is Hatred of Creations, because Hatred of Creations removes a person from the world, because he contradicts his own essence, that behold by Creations we mean Man himself, which Hashem created in the world.  And in such that there is Hatred of Creations, a person is in opposition to Man in his essence through his Hatred of Creations [in general], and through this leans towards total Emptiness, because Hatred of Creations is a hatred of them until man will not exist, this is total Emptiness [That which a person hates, he wants to destroy, so the end of Hatred of Creations is the destruction of Man, which is the epitome of creation].  And how is it possible that he should exist in the world, in such that he opposes his very self, and he leans towards Emptiness, in such that he Hates Creations, behold he is opposing his very self, because Creations are really Man [Man is the epitome of Creation, so in hating Creation, one essentially hates Man].  And so too if Creations hate the person (the subject), for when it says 'Hatred of Creations' understand there are two faces" they are if he (the subject) hates the creations, or if he causes that other creations hate him.  And this is because there is within a person opposition and objections to himself, and in this he leans towards total Emptiness.  Because opposite of Man, which is Reality, is the Emptiness within him.  
And by now it should be clear to you that which is said here 'Evil Eye, Evil Inclination, and Hatred of Creations removes a person from the world' because when a person leaves the world it's through his leaving towards an edge, for through this a person enmeshes with Emptiness, and this is a departure from the world.   And so too when a person opposes his very self, he leans towards Emptiness.  Now understand how Evil Eye is a departure from the left side, and Evil Inclination is a departure from the right side, and Hatred of Creations is a departure from a human being in it's essence, which is the middle, as we explained.  And understand this that these matters are deep in their wisdom.  Now behold look with your eyes, that Revvi Yhoshua gave Mussar to all of the parts of Man: That behold it begins in the Soul and its capacities, for from it is Evil Eye.  Afterwards Mussar is given to the Body, for within it is the Evil Inclination, as we explained above.  After this Mussar is given to a person in respect to him as a whole entity, that he shouldn't Hate the Creations, and shouldn't be hated (by others) either.  For if one hate creations, or is hated by creations, one is not considered a Person.  For if one was indeed a Person, one wouldn't be opposed to one's own self, and this is sliding towards Emptiness.  On this point Mussar was given to Man in all these aspects of his makeup, as we mentioned.  Now clarify for yourself these great matters, true matters, in which there is no doubt in any of what we said.  And we explained this matter with differing aspects from one to the next, so that one could stand on what is correct.  For even with these differing aspects, everything (said above) comes from one true source, without doubt at all to anybody who understands.  
And so too are the words of Rebbi Yosi, who says 'Let the money of your friend be as dear to your as your own...', it comes to give Mussar in which 'Let the money of your friend be as dear to you as your own', for this is due to the virtue of man, that even his (his friend's) money should be considered important in his eyes, all the more so the person himself should be considered important in his eyes, as was explained above in the statement of Rebbi Eleazar.  Corresponding to this it's said 'Let the money of your friend be as dear to your as your own'. And to the point of completing a person from the aspect of a person being the possessor of a body, who is not prepared for the Torah, he says that one should prepare and rectify himself for the Torah, because the Torah isn't an inheritance for a person, because as we said he's the possessor of a body, as we explained, and therefore he needs to prepare himself with all of his capacities to learn Torah.  And in that it says 'All your deeds should be for the Sake of Heaven', this is Mussar to the Soul, for in it (the Soul) is dependent all of the creations and actions of a person, for the Soul is the Creator, and therefore the creations come from the Soul.  Therefore it says corresponding to this (fixing the Soul) 'And all of your deeds should be for the Sake of Heaven.  And Rebbi Yosi comes to give Mussar to a person in consideration of all his parts, and this matter is clear.  It's only that the words of Rebbi Yosi are further from what Rebbi Eleazar said, for Rebbe Eleazar said 'Let the honor of your friends be more dear to you than your own' and Rebbe Yose added 'Let the money of your friend etc..'  And so too with what Rebbi Yehoshua gave in his Mussar to the Body to distance oneself from the Evil Inclination, which is within the body, Rebbi Yosi comes to add on further that one should be worked upon for the words of Torah, that behold one shouldn't go after the interests of the body, and (in doing so) turn towards meaninglessness, which is what is said in 'Fix yourself to learn Torah for it will not be an inheritance to you'.  For man in such that he is Man it the owner of a body, and Torah is not his, which wouldn't be the case if he didn't have a body, for then Torah would be by him from his essence [I believe what the Maharal is alluding to is that Torah is a totally Spiritual/Intellectual "Sichli" entity.  Therefore, if Man, which is half Body (guf) and have Spirit/Intellect (Sechel) were to not have his bodily component, he would therefore be entirely Spiritual/Intellectual and in some way inherently an inheritor of the Torah].  And so too does he add further to fix the Soul, that one should create all of his actions for the Sake of Heaven, and not create but one thing that is not for the Sake of Heaven.  