Derech Chaim
דרך חיים
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Derech Chaim

Author's Introduction







Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Mishnah 1



Mishnah 2



Mishnah 3



Mishnah 4



Mishnah 5



Mishnah 6



Mishnah 7



Mishnah 8



Mishnah 9



Mishnah 10



Mishnah 11



Mishnah 12



Mishnah 13



Mishnah 14

Rebbi Elazar says: "One should be diligent in learning Torah such that he can answer a heretic." Rebbi Elazar is giving Mussar on the Torah , which is the purpose of man, and man vis-a-vis himself was not created except to toil in Torah.  And this is like was written (Job: 5,7) that "Man was born to toil", as we explained above at length (Mishna 8), that the creation of man rests on toiling in Torah.  Therefore it says "be diligent in learning Torah" because if you are not diligent in learning Torah, then it will not be considered that you are toiling in Torah, but rather only that you are learning Torah "for leisure time"... And it says after this that your Torah should be such that you can answer a heretic.  Which is to say that just like there is a Mitzvah for a person to learn Torah and to acquire the Torah, which is the Torah of Truth (Malachi: 1, 6), so to it is fitting that a person nullifies 'false belief systems' from the world such that Truth increased in the world.  For if Falsity is left to be in the world, the end is that Falsity, God Forbid, will cause Truth to be lost and nullify it such that Falsity dominates the world, and therefore, take much care that you do not give any foothold for Falsity, rather that you know what to answer to a heretic.  And it says after this and 'in front of who you toil in Torah' corresponding to the massive exertion that  is thrown upon him.  As it says 'be diligent in learning Torah', that he should strive to know how to answer a heretic, and un this point we say 'know in front of who you stand and trustworthy is your boss to pay the reward of your work'.  If you toil in Torah extensively, the reward given to you will be plentiful.    And if this matter is not recognized by a person, it's possible that he will end up in laziness. Now consider if a person is already careful that (Pirke Avos: 1,3) 'one should not work for the sake of receiving reward', which we said means that this kind of person's service is based on serving Hashem on the condition that we receives a reward [which is suboptimal].  But this idea here is speaking to awakening a person, because a person has a body and the nature of physicality doesn't really listen to the service of God, and needs an awakening!  Much like a young child needs an awakening in his learning, so we give him a treat so that he will learn, so too does a man need to be awakened.  And if he awakens himself through thinking about the massive reward that there is to a person, this person would not be called somebody who 'serves for the sake of receiving a reward' since he is doing so only for the self-awakening such that he shouldn't be blocked from his service (of God).  Therefore this (piece of Mussar) counteracts to the Evil Inclination that desires to lessen a person that he shouldn't toil in Torah, and to prevent against laziness tin this toiling.  And even though a person might act from a place of love and not 'on the condition of receiving a reward', a person has to be careful that perhaps he will end up in laziness because he doesn't not believe (deeply) in his soul. [Which is to say that a person will want to act without incentivizing himself, but rather from a place of pure love, and in trying to act from a higher level than he is on, fall short and end up lazy].  And for this reason, it says 'know in front of who you toil and trustworthy...' and through this laziness should not reach his toiling.  But certainly the purpose of his learning cannot be the reward, but this idea can strengthen him so that he shouldn't end up in the hands of laziness - about which one should one.  And it should be clear to you that in all five of these Sages, each one says three things which are related one to the next.   
But you must know further, in what there is to learn by each individual (of the five students) saying specifically three things.  We can infer from the Tannaic author of the Mishna using the phrase (Mishna 10) 'And they (the five students) said three things', that these Sages were complete people, and therefore intended to complete man, each Sage through the three pieces of Mussar.  Because man is made up of different parts which are ever-changing, there isn't to man one fixed part, but there are different parts.  And therefore, these words of Mussar that come to complete man, need to be more than just one piece of Mussar.  Because an idea which gives Mussar to (addresses) a singular topic [i.e. the body], doesn't give Mussar to (address) the second topic [i.e. the soul]; and that which gives Mussar to (addresses) the second [i.e. the soul], doesn't give Mussar (address) the first[i.e. the body].  And further consider there are how many needs to a person, and they all require words of Mussar -- and somehow they (our mishnayot here) include and head these with only three aspects.  There is to man three aspects: the first aspect is in respect to the capacities of his soul; the second aspect is in respect to the capacities of his body; the third aspect is in respect to man as a whole entity, because these [the capacities of the soul and body] are only disparate pieces, and therefore this third aspect of a person as a whole person includes the body and the soul which comprise a person.  The general rule: in such that a person needs Mussar for the capacities of his body, and needs Mussar for the capacities of his soul, and for his being as an entire entity which includes his different parts.  And therefore, these Sages came in their words of Mussar to complete man in everything, because each and every (of these three parts of a person), needs customized Mussar.  And each and every one of these [5] Sages adds on to the one before him to fix up a person on the totality of these three paths, until the final one will fix up the person totally, in such that a person is fitting on the parts of a person which we mentioned.  Even if he won't be as close as the one before him, as we will explain.  And you must understand this very, very much, that these three things which each Sage mentions is a fixing of Man, which includes that from the right, and the left, and the middle.  And upon this,  everything is founded, and understand this.  And you must know, that which is said by Rebbi Eleazar 'Let the honor of your friend as dear to your as your own' is a hugely important issue foundation for bringing a person to Olam Haba.  In Perek Tefillot Hashachar (Berachos: 28, Amud B) 'When Rebbi Eleazar got sick, his students entered by his side and said to him 'Rebbi, teach us the ways of life so we will merit the world to come'.  He said to them 'Be careful in the honor of your friends....'.  Behold that Rebbi Eleazar says over here 'Let the honor of your friend be as dear to you as your own'. it means to say that this concept will bring a person to life in Olan Haba.  And lest you ask a Kasha (challenging question): why does this concept bring a person to the world to come? Because this concept, you must understand was spoken about by the Chachamim (Bava Metzia: Daf 59, Amud A) 'Anybody who embarrasses the face of his friend, there is no portion to him in Olam Haba'.  And from this understand that the opposite would be being careful with the honor of your friend, this is the path to life in Olam Haba, like we will explain later on more clearly.  Because when one sensitizes oneself that the honor within a person, who is made in the Image of God (B'tzelem Elokim), because Man was created in the Image of God (Genesis: Chapter 1, Verse 27), because of this man is fitting to Olam Haba. Because man is not fitting to Olam Haba, except due to the Image of God which bestowed to man from upon High, like it says in the verse (Genesis: Chapter 1, Verse 26): "Let us make man in our image, in our likeness".  And because of this, man is fitting for life in Olam Haba.  And therefore it says that one should be careful in the honor if your friends, and this is regarding the aspect man was made in the Image of God,  and one should not - God forbid - embarrass this image, for within it depends Olam Haba.  And similarly it says in the Sifri 'Do not ascend in steps upon the alter' (Exodus: Chapter 20, Verse 26). Rebbi Yishmael says behold from these words we can make a logical deduction: in such that stones which have within them no knowledge, not for evil, not for good, the Omnipresent says do not accustom yourself to treat them with disrespect, your friends who is in the Image of He who spoke and the world was created, certainly you should not accustom yourself to treat him disrespectfully!  [end quote].'  Behold the warning of a one's friend is because he is created in the Image of God, because this is the greatest attribute a person can have, and because of this, the level of man he merits the loftiest heights: to life in Olam Haba.  And therefore it says (Gemara-Berachos just quoted) that this is the 'way sof life to Olam Haba', to bring a person from Olam HaZeh, which is a world of physicality, to the Olam Hanivdal (The World of Distinction) which is Olam Haba.  And says Rebbi Eleazar also here (in our Mishna) 'Let the honor of your friend be as dear to you as your own' to teach a person the ways of life, that in it he will arrive in Olam Haba.
And it says after this 'Do not be comfortable to anger'.  Because since this (first clause about honor) is the path to the ways of life which channel a persons strength to reaching the world to come, (now) we examine man that he should be guarded from the path that will make him lose his Olam Haba.  And this (is why we now say) 'Do not be comfortable to anger', because anger is that which brings a person to the hands of personal deficiency (usually translated as Sin, but actually means a personal lack), until it causes a person to lose his world to come as we will explain.  Because a possessor of anger is a the possessor of a personal deficiency, and therefore the anger will precipitate the bringing of a person into the hands of deficiency and he will have been lost from Olam Haba.  For this reason, (the Mishna) begins with 'Let the honor of your friend be as dear to you as your own' because this is the path to bring a person to Olam Haba - as was stated (explicitly) by Rebbi Eleazar in Berachos, and (only) after this do we warn a person against the thing which will cause our Olam Haba to be lost, so (then the Mishna) says 'Do not be comfortable to anger'.  And the intention is to say that if you are lacking, and "there is not Tzadik in the land who does (only) good and doesn't sin (isn't lacking)" (Koheles: 6,20), then 'one should be careful to do every single day Teshuva' (Shabbat: 153, Aleph).  And because of this there will be to his life in Olam Haba in Completion.  And in such that Rebbi Eleazar didn't mention (in the Aggadah from the Gemara we mentioned before) in the Chapter Tefillot Hashachar (Berachos 28, B) these three things (from our Mishna) but only one of them, which is 'be careful with the honor of your friends'.  It is because they (his students) only asked him about 'the ways to life', and this (be careful in the honor of your friends) are 'ways to life' which bring a person to Olam Haba.  And here (in our Mishna) (Rebbi Eleazar) elucidates in order to complete every person according to three aspects: that there should be to him an Olam Haba, and that he should come to lose his Olam Haba [which contains within it two components - the two latter clauses of the Mishna], and this explanation is clear.  And we already said that these three aspects complete a person from all angles.  In such that it says 'let the honor of your friend be as dear to you as your own', it is Mussar relevant to a person in the aspect of a person as a whole entity, that there is to honor the Image of man in such that he is Man.  As if when it says that you must honor your friend it is saying that your friend is was created in the Image of God.  And if a person is unable to perform this matter (honor his friend), but instead is simply not critical of his friend because he (his friend) was made in the Image of God, it teaches on the lowliness and lack within that (original) person.  Because if a person was the possessor of elevation (in character) like is fitting for a person who is made in this Image, he would be honoring his friend [in an active way, not merely passively NOT being critical] in such that he was made in the Image of God.  And therefore we have this enactment, to fix up a person from the respect of the totality of being a human being....Top of Taf, Shin,Peh,Tet.  