Tafsir Rasag
תפסיר רס"ג
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Tafsir_Rasag
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Tafsir Rasag

Introduction

<b>An Explanation of the Torah in Arabic (<i>Tafsir at-Tawriyya Bi-'l-'Arabiyya</i>)</b>
In the Name of the LORD Shall We Act and Prosper.
[This is] an Exposition of the Torah by the Head of the Academy, Rabbi Saadia (Of Blessed Memory)
[Which] Brings Out the Meaning of the Holy Scriptures from the Prophetic Book Called
the "Torah" from the Sacred Language [of Hebrew] into the Contemporary Language 
that is Widespread in the Land of His Birth ([10th Century CE Egypt]).
<b>[Introduction to the Book]:</b>



Nevertheless, I authored this book because of a few seekers who requested that I simply break down the text of the Torah in a standalone book: one that does not get involved in discourses about philology, grammar, or syntax; one that does not enter quoting questions posed by atheists, and providing their rebuttal; nor one that delves into rational laws, or how to perform traditional laws; just that I would simply convey the meaning of the text of the Torah [itself]. Indeed, I saw it was fitting to request that the audience hear the meaning of the Torah, from the narratives to the imperatives...

Genesis



Chapter 1

As soon as God (<i>Allah</i>) created the heavens and the Earth -
And the Earth was deeply submerged, and darkness [was] on the surface of the depths, and <i>Allah</i>'s wind would blow on the surface of the water.
And <i>Allah</i> willed that there should be light, and then there was light.
Also, when <i>Allah</i> knew that the light was good, <i>Allah</i> divided between the light and the darkness.
And <i>Allah</i> named the time of the light "Daylight", and the time of darkness, He named "Night"; and then it went from the nighttime to daylight. Day one.
<i>Allah</i> willed that there should be a layer in the midst of the waters, and that there should be a separation between both waters.
And <i>Allah</i> made the layer, and divided between the water which was outside of it, and the water that was above it; and then it was so.
And <i>Allah</i> named the layer "Heavens", and then it went from the nighttime to daylight. Day two.
<i>Allah</i> willed that the waters should be gathered together from beneath the heavens into one location, and that the dry land should appear; and then it was so.
So <i>Allah</i> named the dry land "Earth", and the place of the water He named "Seas". Then <i>Allah</i> knew that this [was] good
And <i>Allah</i> willed that the Earth would sprout vegetation, and grasses that contain grain, and trees that have fruit which produce fruit according to the species of what was planted in the Earth; and it was so.
And the Earth produced vegetation and grasses that contain grain according to their species, and trees that produce fruit from what was planted according to their species; and <i>Allah</i> also knew that this was good.
And then it went from the nighttime to daylight. Day three.
<i>Allah</i> willed that there should be lights in the layer of the heavens, and that they should distinguish between daylight and nighttime, and that they should be [for] signals, and times, and days and years.
And there were lights in the layer of the heavens, to shine upon the Earth; and it was so.
And <i>Allah</i> made the two great luminaries: the larger luminary to shine in the daytime, and the smaller luminary to shine at night, and the stars.
And <i>Allah</i> set them in the layer of the heavens to shine upon the Earth.
And to shine in the daytime and at nighttime, and to distinguish between the light and the darkness; and <i>Allah</i> knew that this was good.
And then it went from nighttime to daylight. Day four.
And <i>Allah</i> willed that moving things that have a living soul would move among the waters, and that flying things would fly over the Earth, before the layer of the heavens.
So <i>Allah</i> created the great sea-reptiles and rest of the crawling living souls that move among the waters by their species, and all the flying things that have wings by their species; and <i>Allah</i> also knew this was good.

Chapter 2



Chapter 3

And the snake became wise among all the animals of the desert that God created. So He said to the woman, 'Surely, God said, 'Do not eat from all the trees of Paradise
The woman said to the snake, 'Let's eat from all the fruits of the trees of Paradise
So that you do not eat from the fruit of the tree that is in the midst, Allah said, 'Do not eat from it nor approach it, lest you both die
And he said to her, 'You both are not dying.'
Indeed, Allah is aware that you both, on a day, will eat from it, and your eyes will be opened, and you both will become like the angels, knowing the good and the evil
So when the woman saw that the tree was good for eating, appetizing in appearance and appealing to the mind, she took some of its fruit and ate it. She also gave some to her husband, and he ate with her
Then their eyes were opened and they knew that they were naked, so they sewed fig leaves together and made loincloths for themselves
So they heard the sound of God walking in the garden in the coolness of the day, and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of God among the trees of the garden
So God called Adam and said to him firmly, "Where are you?"
He said, "Indeed, I heard your voice in the garden, so I feared and thus I am naked, so I hid
He [Allah] said, "Who informed you that you are naked? From the tree that I commanded you not to eat from, you have eaten."
Adam said, "The woman whom You made with me, she gave me from the tree, so I ate."
Allah said to the woman, "What have you done?" She said, "The serpent deceived me, so I ate."
Allah said to the serpent, "When you did this, you did this with knowledge, then indeed you are cursed among all the cursed beasts of the desert. And upon your chest, you shall crawl, and dust you shall eat all the days of your life."
I will make enmity between you and the woman, and between your offspring and her offspring. He will strike your head, and you will strike his heel 
You shall not multiply from your toil and your labor with toil you shall bear children, and to your husband, your leadership shall be, and he shall have dominion over you by choice. 
He said to Adam, 'When you accepted the words of your wife and ate from the tree that I commanded you not to eat from, the earth is cursed because of you. With hardship, you will eat from it throughout the days of your life. 
Thorns and thistles shall grow for you, and you shall eat the plants of the wilderness 
By the sweat of your face, you shall eat food until you return to the ground from which you were taken; for you are dust, and to dust, you shall return 
And Adam named his wife Eve because she was the mother of all living, speaking beings 
And Allah created garments for Adam and his wife from a place and the sky 
Then Allah said, 'Here is Adam, he has become like one of us in the knowledge of good and evil, and now so that he does not stretch out his hand and take from the tree of life to eternity.' 
Allah expelled him from the Garden of Eden so that the earth prospers, the earth from which he was taken. 
And when Adam was expelled, he settled eastward of the Garden of Eden, and the angels were guarding the way to the tree of life with a revolving flashing sword.

Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10

And this is an expounding of the begettings of the sons of Noaḥ, Shem and Ḥam and Yefet, for they had sons after the flood.
The sons of Yefet: Turkey and Yaʾjūj and Media and Greece and China and Khorasan and Persia
The sons of Gomer: the Slavs and Franks and Burgundians.
And the sons of Greece: Cilicia and Tarsus and Cyprus and Adana.
From these dispersed the islands of nations – pertaining to their countries, each group to their language, to their clans and their nations.
And the sons of Ḥam: Ethiopia and Egypt and Tafath and Canaan.

Exodus



Leviticus



Numbers



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15

Then Allah spoke to Moses directly
Pass through the Children of Israel, and say to them: When you enter the land which I have bestowed upon you, do not deviate from the right path.


































And Allah entrusted to Moses, saying :
Pass through the Children of Israel, and say to them that they should make fringes for themselves on the corners of their garments, with a cord of blue, and they should put on the fringes of the corner a cord of blue
So it shall be a tassel for you to look at and remember all the commandments of God, and do them; and not follow after your own heart and your own eyes, which lead you astray
So that you may walk in His ways and always observe and obey all His commandments, and you shall be holy to your God
I am Allah, your Lord, who brought you out from the land of Egypt to be your God. I am the eternal and everlasting Allah, your Lord

Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19

Then Allah spoke to Moses and Aharon saying,
This is the prescription of the law that God commanded with it the children of Israel, that they bring to you a cow without blemish, sound, that which is not in it defect from what has not occurred upon it yoke.
And deliver it to El-'Azar the Imam (the leader/the priest), who will take it out outside the camp and slaughter it in his presence.
And he takes from its blood with his finger and he sprinkles opposite the face of the hiding place appointed for it, from it seven times. 
And he commands for its burning in his presence, its skin along with its flesh, and its blood and its dung.
Then the imam takes a stick of cedar and hyssop, and crimson dye, and he throws that amidst its burning.
And he washes his garments, this imam, and he cleanses his body with water, and after that, he goes to the camp.

Deuteronomy



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6

And these are the commandments, ordinances, and laws that Allah, your Lord ordered me [directly] to inform you all about so that you all perform it in the land which you are all seeking to possess   
So that you fear Allah you Lord and commit your memory to all of his terms and instructions which I ordered you to do, you and your son and the son of your son throughout your life so that your lifetime be long
So listen to this, O Israel. And commit your memory to it and act upon it so that you may fear Him so that you may greatly increase as God promised you and your forefathers, in a land flowing with milk and honey
Know Israel that Allah is our Lord, Allah is one 
Love Allah, your Lord, sincerely with all your heart, soul, and might
Let this be what I am commanding you today, in your soul
And narrate it to your children and teach it to them while sitting in your dwelling and during your journey, on your path, when you sleep and when you rise 
And bind them as a sign upon your hands and let them be frontlets between your eyes
and write them on the doorposts of your house and on your gates
And when Allah, your Lord, brings you into the land which He promised to your fathers, to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and to give it to you, with great and fine cities that you did not build
And houses filled with every good thing that you did not fill, and wells dug that you did not dig, and vineyards and olive trees that you did not plant, and you eat and are satisfied
So be cautious not to forget Allah, your Lord, who brought you out from the land of Egypt, from the house of servitude
Rather, fear your Lord, worship Him, and swear by His name sincerely
Do not pursue other deities among the deities of the nations around you
And you will not disappoint your Lord, Allah, as you have disappointed Him in times of adversity.
And do not abandon your Lord, Allah, as you have abandoned Him in times of hardship.
Rather, guard and preserve the commands, testimonies, and teachings of Allah, your Lord, which He has entrusted to you
And do righteous deeds and acts of goodness in His presence, so that you may be honored and enter and possess the prosperous land which Allah has allotted to your forefathers
And Allah will repel all your enemies before you, as He has promised
And if your son asks you in the future about the reasons behind the testimonies, statutes, and judgments that Allah, our Lord, has commanded you
So say to him: 'We were slaves to Pharaoh in Egypt, but Allah delivered us from it with a severe hand
And We [majestic plural] showed them great signs and proofs against Pharaoh and his assembly in Our [majestic plural] presence.
And He brought us out from there so that He may bring us in and give us the land which He had promised to our fathers
So Allah commanded us to observe these rites and to fear Allah, our Lord, that it may be well for us and that we may live long, as we do on this day.
And there will be rewards for us if we preserve and practice all these laws and regulations from Allah, our Lord, as He has commanded us.

Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11

So love Allah, your Lord, and keep what He has entrusted you with, including His rituals, commandments, and regulations, throughout time
And know from this day that the actions of your children who have not been taught or witnessed the manners of Allah, your Lord, His greatness, His strong hand, and His outstretched arm are not sufficient
And His signs and His works that He manifested in the midst of Egypt with Pharaoh and all his aides and the people of his land
And what He did with the army of Pharaoh and their horses and chariots, which He caused to drown in the sea, while they were still facing you. He destroyed them until this day
And what He did with you in the wilderness until you arrived at this place
And what He did with Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, the son of Reuben, when the earth opened its mouth and swallowed them, their households, and their tents, along with all the living creatures who were with them in the midst of Israel
Rather, your own eyes have witnessed all the great works that God has done.
So, preserve all the laws that I have commanded you today, that you may be strengthened, enter, and possess the land to which you are going
So that you may prolong your days in it, as God has promised to give it to you and to your descendants, as a land flowing with milk and honey
Indeed, the land to which you are heading to possess is not like the land of Egypt from which you have come, where you used to sow your seed and irrigate it with your foot like a vegetable garden
But the land to which you are crossing over to possess is a land of mountains and valleys that drinks water from the rain of the heavens
The land of your Lord is a land to be cherished, and His care for it is constant from the beginning of the year to its end
If you listen to the commandments that you have been given today, you will love Allah, your Lord, and worship Him sincerely with all your heart and with all your soul.
Rain has fallen on your land in its due time, and it has nourished your crops, filled your wells, and replenished your pastures, oils, and perfumes.
And it has caused vegetation to grow in your meadows, for your livestock to eat and be satisfied.
And beware that your hearts are not deceived, causing you to turn away and worship other idols and prostrate to them.
So the anger of Allah intensifies upon you, and the sky withholds rain, and the earth does not produce its crops, causing you to perish quickly from the good land that Allah has bestowed upon you.
And make this reminder firmly established in your hearts and in your souls, and bind it as a sign upon your hands, and let it be prominently displayed before your eyes.
And teach it to your children, and recite it when you sit in your home, and when you walk on your way, and when you lie down to sleep, and when you rise up
And write it on the doorposts of your houses and on your gates
So that your days and the days of your children may be prolonged in the land which God has allotted to your ancestors, as long as the heavens are above the earth
For if you keep all these commandments that I am commanding you today and follow them, loving the Lord your God, walking in all His ways, and holding fast to Him
God will drive out all these nations from before you, and you will dispossess nations greater and mightier than you
Every place on which the sole of your foot treads shall be yours: from the wilderness and Lebanon, from the river Euphrates to the western sea, shall be your territory
No man shall be able to stand against you; the fear and dread of you shall be upon them. The Lord your God will lay the dread of you and the fear of you on all the land that you shall tread, as He has promised you
Behold, I set before you today blessings and curses
So if you accept and abide by the commandments of your Lord, then you shall receive blessings
But if you do not accept the commandments of your Lord and deviate from the path that I have commanded you today, and you follow other idols that you do not know, then there shall be curses
So when your Lord brings you to the land which you are entering, seize the blessings by saying 'Quliy Jabal Ghurizim' and invoke the curses upon Jabal 'Ayyub
Except that they are on the side of the Jordan, behind the road of the setting sun, in the land of the Canaanites who dwell in the Jordan Valley opposite Gilgal, near the plains of Moreh
Because you are crossing the Jordan to enter and possess the land that your Lord God is giving you. So when you inherit it and settle in it
So keep and act upon all the customs and regulations that I am commanding you today