Derech Hashem
דרך ה'
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.org

Chapter 1

Introduction
A) The advantage of knowing matters in reference to their portions, their parts, format and order of their correlation with knowledge of  the differences between them, [ is similar to the] advantage of seeing the elegant garden- the garden with rows and rows ordered in its path and orchard, [in contrast to] seeing the cane and wild thicket in a forest. 

Chapter 2

Part One: Chapter I - The Creator, Blessed be his name

Chapter 3

Part One: Chapter II - Purpose of Creation

Chapter 4

Part One: Chapter III - the human race.

Chapter 5

Part One: Chapter IV - the situation of man in this world and the ways before him.

Chapter 6

Part One: Chapter V- parts of creation and their states.

Chapter 7

Part Two: Chapter I - concerning providence in general.

Chapter 8

Part Two: Chapter Two - cases of mankind in this world.

Chapter 9

Part Two: Chapter III - individual providence.

Chapter 10

Part Two: Chapter Four - regarding Israel and the nations of the world

Chapter 11

Part Two: Chapter Five - regarding the method of providence.

Chapter 12

Part Two: Chapter VI - regarding the order of providence

Chapter 13

Part Two: Chapter seven- influences of the stars.

Chapter 14

Part Two: Chapter Eight - particular distinctions of providence.

Chapter 15

Part III: Chapter I - regarding the soul and its operations.

Chapter 16

Part III: Chapter II - regarding the use of names of God and witchcraft.

Chapter 17

Part III: Chapter III - regarding Divine Inspration and Prophecy.

Chapter 18

Part III: Chapter IV -Cases of Prophecy. 

Chapter 19

Part III: Chapter the difference between prophecy prophets too that of Moses.

Chapter 20

Part Four: Chapter I - general practice.

Chapter 21

Part Four: Chapter II - Torah Study

Chapter 22

Part Four: Chapter III - Love and fear [of G-d]

Chapter 23

Part Four: Chapter IV -Shmea and its blessings

Chapter 24

Part Four: Chapter V- Regarding prayer.

Chapter 25

Part Four: Chapter VI - Order of the day and prayers.

Chapter 26

Part Four: Chapter Seven- Periodic observances.

Chapter 27

Part Four: Chapter VIII - Time bound commandments.

Chapter 28

Part Four: Chapter IX - blessings