Kedushat Levi
קדשת לוי
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.org

Parsha 1

Kedushat Levi on Ki Tisa
"When you take a census of the Israelite people according to their enrollment, each shall pay Hashem a ransom for himself on being enrolled." (Exodus 30:12) Behold: because of God's love for God's people people Israel, all of their sorrows are God's sorrow, and God gives them advice on how to escape from the grasp of hatred.
Here is the life-force of all the worlds, the exalted (נאצלים) and the created (נבראים) and the formed (יצורים) and the made (נאשים) and all of their hosts, the earth and all that is upon it: everything expresses the brightness of the blessed Creator, who contracted himself into all of the worlds and who enlivens them.
This verse shows that fullness: "And you enliven them all." (Nechemiah, 9:6) And even more so the children of Israel, a people who draw near to God, "For God has chosen Jacob unto himself, and Israel for God's own treasure." (Psalm 135:4) In them there is a fallen brightness and an illumination, as it is written: "O house of Jacob, come and let us walk in the light of God." (Isaiah 2:5)
And if we find -- God forbid -- that Jacob experiences a time of sorrow and constriction, then the spark of godliness in him which enlivens him also experiences that constriction, as it were. (We've already written about this in another place, that the root of evil is good from which the spark of divinity has been exiled.)
And this is the meaning of the verse "When you take a census of the children of Israel according to their enrollment (פקדיהם)" -- this speaks in terms of how "God will not make himself absent (נפקד) from them," as it is said: for the children of Israel want to be raised from their shortcomings. Which is to say: "from their sorrows" -- and each person will pay a ransom for himself, as it is said "that they will pray to God to redeem them from the grasp of hatred, and they will be redeemed from the grasp of enmity, and they will go forth from their precipices." That Adonai will take account of them, this means to say: their shortcomings are God's shortcomings, as it were, and this is the essence of their prayer to Adonai.