Ginzei Mitzrayim, Hilkhot Sefer Torah
גנזי מצרים, הלכות ספר תורה
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Ginzei_Mitzrayim,_Hilkhot_Sefer_Torah
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Oxford, 1897
-https://www.nli.org.il/en/books/NNL_ALEPH001109193/NLI

Ginzei Mitzrayim, Hilkhot Sefer Torah



Page 1



Page 2



Page 3



Page 4



Page 5



Page 6



Page 7



Page 8



Page 9



Page 10



Page 11



Page 12



Page 13



Page 14



Page 15



Page 16



Page 17



Page 18



Page 19



Page 20



Page 21



Page 22



Page 23



Page 24



Page 25



Page 26



Page 27



Page 28



Page 29



Page 30



Page 31



Page 32



Page 33



Page 34



Page 35



Page 36



Page 37



Page 38



Page 39



Page 40



Page 41



Page 42



Page 43



Page 44



Page 45



Page 46



Page 47



Page 48



Page 49

. . . May God requite this to me and to my (father the) Nagid, in the presence of whom I sat aforetime on several occasions, when I preached the word of the living God to the heads of the holy people on high days and festivals. And when Israel heard that I gave goodly words of the law which is our heritage, and that I could make clear that which was hidden and difficult, then they had reverence for me, for they saw that the Lord had given me the tongue of the learned that I should know how to sustain by a word him that is weary. Moreover, my God was with my mouth, and did teach me what to speak. Now know ye the measure of God’s kindness to me. Not alone did the Caliph, our gracious king, may his dominion be exalted, cause me to inherit the post of Nagid, and declared, "This is the man who shall rule over the people second to me." Nor hath he alone entitled me Nagid over his people, but before his time, many years ago, in the days of my (father the) Nagid, while he yet lived ami the spirit of the Lord was in him, I began to be called the crown of princes by our Nasi and prince (Daniel ibn) Chisdai, the Great Prince, Head of the Captivity of all Israel, to whom all faces turn from all corners of the earth, may his dominion be established, until kingdom come to the daughter of Jerusalem as of yore, and may his name be ns the name of the great ones of the earth. And from that day onward, the spirit of dominion hath flourished in me, and all my ways have prospered, and all Israel knew that the house of my (father the) Nagid is sure to be before the Lord for ever, and that I do rule the people of the Lord after him, with the sanction of our lord the Resh Golah, under whose rule we and all Israel come. We all remaining faithful to the God of truth, and to the Nasi, exalted be he. Moreover, our lord the Rosh Jesheeba of the Pleasant Land—may his rule continue! —followed his example and confirmed his words, and by his office lent support to mine, and confirmed me on the Nagid’s throne, and established my dominion on a rock, and guided my footsteps. This is the inheritance of the servants of the Lord and their righteousness, and this the cup of their reward. For thus saith the Singer, "Mark the simple man and watch the upright, for the end of that man shall be peace.” To you, O ye righteous congregation, in whom is found everything that is good and worthy of praise. May peace increase from sea to sea, and from the river to the ends of the earth. May God’s salvation be great! After we had sent this letter to our lords, our brethren there reached us from them an excellent letter of appointment.

Page 50



Page 51

. . . [The Caliph appointed runners] to go before me through the streets of the land of Egypt, and on that day we went out with a mighty procession of horses, and there was a sound of gladness throughout the land, and the little girls stood on the wall to see the state which had been granted me of my king, according to the hand of the Lord as it had been good to my father the Nagid, (and a copy of the mandate) which had been written in the name of the king was read out in the gates (of the land of Egypt), and the law was proclaimed that the (dignity of Nagid) should not pass away from me, and that all Israel under his dominion should come under my rule; and he commanded that I was to have a name as the name of great ones who are in the land, and was to hold dominion as Nagid even as did my father the Nagid, and for ray diet there was a continual diet to be given me of the king, month by month, all the days of his life. And all Israel rejoiced in me, and the land of Egypt was quiet. Then the poor sheep that watched me knew that the grace bestowed on my father the Nagid was a blessing onto me continually, in order that there should not be cat off from bis bouse a man to stand before him all the days; for (the Torah) the pleasure of the Lord prospered in his hand all the days of his life, and verily he gave up his soul to magnify the Law, and to adorn it. Thus did he divide him a portion with the great, and with the strong he divided the spoil, because he has poured out his pure soul unto death for his holy Iaw, and he was numbered with the transgressors, and he bare the sin of many. And the spirit of princedom (Nagiduth) which was upon my (father the) Nagid hath begun to come upon me, and it hath waxed strong within me, and hath caused roe to stand firm, and it hath strengthened me, and enabled me to stand within the Caliph's and to go out and come in before him, for all the needs of Israel and for all their affairs. [All this I owe to the merit of my father the Nagid] and the merit of the Gaon. And as regards the Gaon of the Pleasant Land, may his rule be established, behold his letter, which speaks clearly for itself, shows that even had the Caliph not confirmed me in my office of Nagid, the Gaon would nevertheless have lent me support and strength because of his love for my father, which wondrously exceeded even that of Jonathan for David. How much the more so, now that the Caliph’s own hand hath turned to wheel of dominion toward me in all due form, and the Gaon’s antliority hath followed his, in all its strength, and hath agreed with the royal decision. This also oomoth from the Lord of hosts, who is wonderful in counsel and excellent in working. Happy is he that rejoiceth in the blessing of a good father. Happy he who hath that on which he can be sustained. All that the Gaon, may he live for ever! hath commanded me and the wise men of the law [shall surely be performed].