Mishneh Torah, Human Dispositions
משנה תורה, הלכות דעות
Maimonides' Mishneh Torah, edited by Philip Birnbaum, New York, 1967
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH002108864

Mishneh Torah, Human Dispositions



Chapter 1

All human beings are characterized by many traits which differ from each other profoundly. One man is hot-tempered, constantly angry; another is self-possessed and never angry, or only slightly and rarely so. One man is excessively proud; another is excessively meek. One man indulges in appetites without being sufficiently gratified; another is pure of heart and does not crave even the few essentials that the body requires. One man is so greedy that all the money in the world would not satisfy him, as it is written: "A lover of money will never be satisfied with money" (Ecclesiastes 5:9); another, contented with very little, curtails his desires and does not strive to obtain all that he really needs. One man starves himself while hoarding up wealth, and does not enjoy anything for which he has to pay the least amount; another recklessly squanders all he has. And so it is with all human dispositions, such as hilarity and gloom, niggardliness and generosity, cruelty and compassion, cowardice and courage.


The right way is the middle course in each set of human traits, namely: the disposition which is equally distant from the two extremes. Hence, the ancient sages ordained that every person should always evaluate his dispositions and adjust them in the middle course, so that he may enjoy physical health. Thus a person should be neither hot-tempered and easily provoked to anger, nor should he be like a corpse that has no feeling, but average, getting angry only for a grave cause that rightly calls for indignation, in order to prevent anything similar from occurring again. Furthermore, he should desire only that which the body needs for its sustenance and cannot do without, as it is written: "The good man eats enough to satisfy his needs" (Proverbs 13:25). He should exert himself at his vocation only enough to obtain what is necessary for his livelihood, as it is written: "The little that a good man has is good" (Psalm 37:16). He should be neither tight-fisted nor too lavish, but give charity according to his means, and extend suitable loans to those who are in need. He should be neither hilarious nor gloomy, but always quietly cheerful. This applies to all other dispositions; it is the way of the wise. He who avoids extremes and follows the middle course in all things is a wise man.

The precept concerning walking in God's ways (Deuteronomy 28:9) has been interpreted by the sages to mean: "Be gracious even as he is called gracious; be merciful even as he is called merciful; be holy even as he is called holy" (Shabbath 133b). Thus the prophets described God by all kinds of attributes, "slow to anger and abounding in kindness, righteous and just, perfect and mighty," and so on, to inform us that these traits are good and right and man ought to adopt them for himself and thereby imitate God as much as he can.
How shall a man train himself in these traits so that they become ingrained in him? Let him keep practising time and again the actions that are prompted by the middle-course dispositions, repeating them continually, till they become easy for him rather than burdensome and work into his moral constitution. Now, since the Creator is referred to by these terms, that represent the middle path in which we are to walk, this path is called the <i>way of God</i>. Our forefather Abraham taught it to his children, as it is written: "Indeed, I have chosen him, that he may charge his children and his household after him to observe the way of the Lord, doing what is good and right." Whoever walks in this path secures for himself happiness and blessedness, as it is written in the same verse: "So that the Lord may fulfill for Abraham what he has promised him" (Genesis 18:19).

Chapter 2

Those who are physically ill make out bitter to be sweet, and sweet to be bitter. Some patients crave inedible things to eat, such as dirt and charcoal, and dislike wholesome foods, like bread and meat, depending on the severity of the malady. Similarly, people who are spiritually ill desire and love evil dispositions, and hate the way that is good and are too indolent to walk in it; they regard it as extremely difficult, in accordance with their illness. Of such people Isaiah says: "Woe to those who call evil good, and good evil, who change darkness into light, and light into darkness, who put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter" (Isaiah 5:20). Of them it is also written: "Who leave the paths of light to follow the ways of darkness" (Proverbs 2:13). Now, what is the remedy for those who are spiritually ill? Let them go to the wise who are healers of the spirit and they will cure their illness by instructing them until they restore them to the good path. As for those who realize that they possess evil traits and do not go to the wise to heal them, Solomon said: "Fools despise wisdom and instruction" (Proverbs 1:7).
By what method are they to be cured? If one is hot-tempered, he is told to train himself to the point that even if he is assaulted or insulted, he should pay no attention. He should follow this course a long time, until his fierce temperament has been rooted out. If a person is arrogant, he should deliberately humiliate himself by sitting below everybody and wearing old and ragged clothes that reduce one to contempt, and so on, until arrogance is rooted out from his mind and he has returned to the middle course which is the right way. After regaining the middle course, he should follow it the rest of his life. In this manner he should act with regard to all other dispositions. If he is inclined toward one extreme, he should move toward the opposite extreme, and keep to it for a long time till he has returned to the right path which is the middle course in each type of disposition.
There are some traits which must not be cultivated as a middle course only, but should be shunned to the extreme. Haughty pride is one of them. The right way is not merely being meek, but one should be of a lowly spirit to the utmost. Hence it is written of Moses our teacher that he was "exceedingly humble" (Numbers 12:3), and not merely "humble."— — Anger, too, is an extremely bad quality, and one should shun it to the utmost, training himself never to be angry, even about something that justly calls for anger.— — The life of angry persons is not worth living.— —
One should always assume the habit of silence, and speak only on subjects of wisdom or on matters of vital importance to one's physical being. It has been reported of Rav, disciple of our sainted teacher Rabbi Judah the Prince, that he never engaged in idle talk, in which most people indulge. Even on one's vital needs one must not talk garrulously. In this connection the sages asserted: "Whoever talks too much brings about sin." Moreover, it has been said: "I have found nothing better for a person than silence" (Ethics of the Fathers 1:17). So too, in discussing Torah and wisdom, a man's words should be few but full of meaning. Hence, the sages recommend, saying: "One should always teach students concisely" (Pesaḥim 3b). But where words abound and the meaning is trivial, it is foolery, of which it has been said: "The dream comes with much ado, and a fool's talking with many words" (Ecclesiastes 5:2).
"Silence is a fence to wisdom" (Ethics of the Fathers 3:17). Hence one should not be hasty in replying, nor talk too much. A teacher should teach his pupils calmly and gently, without shouting and without verbosity. Solomon said: "The words of the wise are heard in quiet" (Ecclesiastes 9:17).
One must not make a habit of using flattering speech and make-believe. One must not say one thing and mean another, but like heart like face; we should express in words of mouth only what we have in mind. We must not deceive people, not even a heathen. For example, one must not sell to a heathen non-kosher meat as if it were kosher meat.— — One must not urge another to join him at a meal though aware that the invitation will not be accepted and he will not eat. One must not overwhelm his guest with offers, knowing that he will not accept. One must not deceive a guest and make him believe that casks of wine are opened in his honor, when they are indeed opened for sale. Even a single word of make-believe and deception is forbidden. We should ever aim at truthful speech, an upright spirit, and a pure heart, free from all evil and mischief.
One should not be addicted to jesting and mockery, nor should one be sad and mournful, but cheerful.— — One should not be greedy, hastening after riches, nor lazy and idle, but contented.— — One should not be quarrelsome, envious, lustful, nor strive for honor. The sages said: "Envy, lust and vainglory shorten a man's life" (Ethics of the Fathers 4:28). The gist of the matter is: one is to follow the middle course to the point that all his traits are centered between the extremes. Solomon referred to this when he said: "Balance the course of your steps, so that all your ways be right" (Proverbs 4:26).

Chapter 3

One may possibly say: "Since envy and lust and the like are evil and shorten a man's life, I will keep clear of them excessively and withdraw myself to the other extreme." Such a person will not eat meat nor drink wine, nor marry nor live in a decent home, nor dress neatly, but will wear sackcloth and coarse wool like non-Jewish monks. This too is the wrong way, and must not be followed. Whoever takes this course is referred to as a sinner. The Torah says concerning the consecrated Nazirite, who was prohibited from using wine and cutting the hair: "Atonement should be made for him for the sin he has committed against the soul" (Numbers 6:11). The sages therefore asserted: "If the Nazirite who only kept away from wine stands in need of atonement, how much more so one who deprives himself of all legitimate enjoyments" (Ta'anith 11a). Hence, the sages ordained that one should refrain merely from things that the Torah has prohibited, and must not bind himself by vows and oaths concerning the use of things permitted. They said: "Are not the prohibitions in the Torah sufficient for you, that you are adding others for yourself?" Included in this are those who make a habit of fasting; they are not following the right way; the sages prohibited tormenting oneself by fasting. Concerning these and similar excesses Solomon charged, saying: "Be not over-good, be not over-wise; why expose yourself to trouble?" (Ecclesiastes 7:16).
A man should direct his mind and all his actions exclusively to knowing God. Whether sitting, rising, or talking— — all must be bent in this direction. For example, when engaged in a business or in some wage-earning, one's aim should not be only to hoard money; instead, one is to do these things in order to obtain his physical needs: food, drink, shelter and matrimony. Also, when he eats and drinks— — he should not do this only to gratify his physical needs, so that he is likely to eat and drink only what is sweet to the palate— — but should have in his mind that he eats and drinks for the sole purpose of maintaining his body and its organs in good health. Hence he will not eat everything that the palate desires, like a dog or a donkey, but will use foods which do good to the body, whether sweet or bitter, avoiding those that are harmful to the body even though they are sweet to the palate.— —

Chapter 4

Since by keeping the body in good health one follows the ways of God, for it is impossible to understand or know anything about the Creator when one is ill, it is a man's duty to shun whatever is harmful to the body and cultivate health-preserving habits. They are as follows: A man should not eat except when he is hungry, nor drink except when he is thirsty.— —
He should not gorge himself, but leave the table before his appetite is fully appeased, using one-fourth less food than what would completely gratify him. During a meal he should drink only a little water, mixed with wine.— — He should not eat before taking a walk to stimulate the body, or engaging in manual work, or doing some other exercise. The gist of the matter is: Strenuous exercise should be taken every day in the morning till the body begins to get warm. Then he should rest a little until he is refreshed, and eat. If he takes a warm bath after the exercise, so much the better. Following the bath, he should wait a little and then eat.
One should sit or recline on the left side during a meal; he should not walk, ride, exert himself, shake, or take a walk till the food is digested. Anyone who takes a walk immediately after his meal, or exerts himself, subjects himself to various forms of disease.
The day and night consist of twenty-four hours. Eight hours of sleep, being one-third of the twenty-four hour day, is sufficient. These hours should be in the latter part of the night, so that the period between retirement and dawn will embrace eight hours, thus one will rise from his sleep before sunrise.
One should not sleep face downwards nor on his back, but lying on his side.— — One should not go to bed immediately after a meal, but wait three or four hours. One should not sleep during daytime.








Another rule has been laid down regarding the healthy condition of the body: As long as a person takes plenty of exercise, does not overeat, and keeps his bowels regulated, he will contract no illness even though he eats inferior food.
Anyone who sits around idle and takes no exercise will be subject to physical discomforts and failing strength, even though he eats wholesome food and takes care of himself in accordance with medical advice. Overeating is like deadly poison to the human body. Most illnesses which befall man arise either from bad food or from excessive eating of good food. Solomon, in his wisdom said: "He who guards his mouth and his tongue keeps himself clear of trouble" (Proverbs 21:23). That is to say, he who guards his mouth from bad food and excessive eating, and keeps his tongue from unnecessary talk.

Chapter 5

Just as the wise man is noted for his wisdom and his moral traits, by which he is distinguished from the rest of the people, so he ought to be noted for his proper behavior, for his food and drink,— — for the manner of his speaking, walking, dressing, and the management of his affairs and transactions. All these actions should be decent and altogether proper. For instance, a wise man must not be a glutton. He should eat, but never to excess, the kind of food that is likely to sustain his physical health. He should not be eager to fill his stomach, like those who stuff themselves with food and drink till their bellies swell.— — They are the men who say: "Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die" (Isaiah 22:13). This manner of eating belongs to evil men.— — The wise man, on the other hand, eats one or two dishes sparingly, just enough to keep alive. Solomon alluded to this when he said: "The righteous man eats enough to satisfy his appetite" (Proverbs 13:25).
When the wise man eats the little food he properly needs, he should partake of it at home only, at his own table. He should not eat in a store or in the street, except when it is strictly necessary, so as not to incur popular contempt.




A wise man does not shout and scream when he speaks, but talks gently with all people and never raises his voice unduly. He gives everyone a friendly greeting, judges all men favorably, loves peace and strives for it, so that all are kindly disposed toward him. He dwells on the merits of his fellow man, without ever disparaging him. If he finds that his words are helpful and heeded, he speaks; otherwise, he keeps quiet. For example, he does not attempt to pacify his neighbor at the moment the latter has lost his temper, but waits till he has calmed down.— — When his neighbor is in disgrace, he looks away and does not show himself to him. He never misrepresents; he neither makes overstatements nor understatements, unless a matter of peace is involved. In brief, he only talks about wisdom and kindliness.
A wise man should not walk haughtily, with head held high, with mincing steps after the fashion of women, or arrogant men, as it is written: "They mince along as they walk, tinkling with their feet" (Isaiah 3:16). Nor should he run about in the street like a madman; nor should he stoop like a hunchback. The manner of a man's walking shows whether he is wise and sensible or foolish and ignorant. Solomon, in his wisdom, expressed this thought: "Even when a fool walks on the road, he lacks sense and says to everyone that he is a fool" (Ecclessiastes 10:3). He publicly advertizes himself as a fool.
A wise man should dress neatly, and should not wear clothes stained with grease and dirt. He should not dress flashily to attract attention nor shabbily so as to suffer disrespect. His garments should be modest and appropriate.— —
A wise man manages his affairs judiciously. He eats, drinks and supports his family according to his wealth and success. The sages recommend that one should spend less than his means on food, within his means on clothes, and more than his means on his wife and children (Hullin 84b).
Men of intelligence first acquire a livelihood, then a home, and then they marry. Fools, on the other hand, marry first, acquire a home if they can afford it, and then seek a trade, or else they appeal to charity.— —

A wise man is honest in all his transactions. When he says "no" he means no, and when he says "yes" he means yes.— — He does not encroach on another man's occupation, and never mistreats anyone. In short, he prefers rather to be among the offended than among the offenders. Isaiah refers to a man who acts in this manner: "He said to me: You are my servant, Israel, in whom I glory" (49:3).

Chapter 6

Man's natural instinct is to think and act like his friends and colleagues, and to follow the custom of his fellow countrymen. One should therefore associate with good and wise men that he may learn their practices, and shun evil men who walk in the dark that he may not learn their ways. Solomon alluded to this: "He who walks with wise men becomes wise, but the companion of fools will suffer harm" (Proverbs 13:20).
According to a biblical positive command, we should attach ourselves to wise men and their disciples in order to learn from their example, as it is written: "You shall hold fast to him" (Deuteronomy 10:20). But can a human being hold fast to the <i>Shekhinah?</i> The sages explained this precept to mean: attach yourself to the wise and their disciples. A man should therefore strive to win a scholar's daughter for a wife, and marry off his daughter to a scholar. He should eat and drink in the company of scholars, do business with them, and associate with them in all respects; for the Torah repeats this precept, emphasizing "holding fast to him" (Deuteronomy 11:22). So too, our sages recommended and said: "Sit at their feet in the dust, and drink in their words thirstingly" (Ethics of the Fathers 1:4).
Duty demands of every person to love his fellow man as himself, for it is written: "You shall love your neighbor as yourself" (Leviticus 19:18). Hence, we must speak of him in terms of praise and be careful of his property, just as one desires to preserve his own reputation and safeguard his own property. "Whoever glorifies himself by humiliating someone else has no share in the future world" (Yerushalmi Hagigah 2:1).


When a man sins against another, the offended person should not hate the offender and keep quiet, as it is told about evildoers: "Absalom said not a word to Amnon, good or bad, for Absalom hated Amnon" (II Samuel 13:22). But it is his duty to let him know and say to him: "Why did you do this to me? Why did you sin against me in this matter?" For it is written: "You must reprove your fellow man" (Leviticus 19:17). If he has repented and asked for forgiveness, he should be forgiven. The person who so forgives must not be cruel, as it is written: "Abraham prayed to God" [for the man who wronged him] (Genesis 20:17).
If one has noticed that a person has committed a sin or followed the wrong path, duty demands that he should restore him to the right path by pointing out to him that he is doing wrong to himself by his bad behavior.— — He should speak to him gently and tenderly, informing him that it is only for his own good that he is telling him this.— —
— — The sages declared: "Whoever shames a fellow man in public has no share in the future world" (Bava Metsia 59a). One should therefore be careful not to offend anybody in public, whether young or old. One must not call a person by a name of which he feels ashamed, nor tell in his presence anything that embarrasses him.— —
If an offended person is unwilling to criticize or say anything to the offender, who happens to be grossly vulgar or mentally disturbed, and heartily forgives him without resenting or rebuking him, he performs a saintly deed. The Torah only objects to bearing a grudge.
One ought to be especially cautious when dealing with orphans and widows, because they are particularly depressed and low-spirited, even though they may be wealthy. We are warned even with respect to the widow and orphans of a king, for it is written: "You shall not mistreat any widow or orphan" (Exodus 22:21). How should we behave toward them? One should address them with tender words only and be unfailingly courteous with them. One must not cause them pain physically through hard work or emotionally through harsh words. One should take greater care of their property than one's own. Whoever irritates or vexes them, hurts their feelings or tyranizes over them, or causes them financial loss, violates a prohibition; still more so, if one strikes them or curses them.— — There is no distinction between orphans bereft of either father or mother. Till when are they called orphans in this respect? Till the time when they are in no need of an adult person on whom to depend, who should bring them up and take care of them. When one of them can adequately care for himself like all other grown people, he is no longer considered an orphan.

Chapter 7

Whoever acts like a spy against his neighbor violates a prohibition, for it is written: "You shall not go about spreading slander among your people" (Leviticus 19:16). And although this does not entail flogging as a punishment, it is a flagrant offense which has brought about the death of many Jewish individuals. For this reason, the same verse includes the prohibition: "You shall not stand by idly when your neighbor's life is at stake." Consider, for example, what happened on account of Doeg the Edomite (I Samuel 22:6-19).
Who is a talebearer? One who carries gossip, going about from person to person and telling: "So-and-so said this; I have heard so-and-so about so-and-so." Even though he tells the truth, he ruins the world. There is a still worse iniquity that comes within this prohibition, namely: the evil tongue of the scandal-monger who speaks disparagingly of his fellow man, even if he tells the truth. But the one who disparages his neighbor by telling a lie is called a slanderer.— —


It makes no difference whether a man deals out gossip in the presence or the absence of the party concerned. Anyone who tells things that, if transmitted from person to person, are likely to cause physical or financial harm to a fellow man, or merely to distress or frighten him, is guilty of slander.— —
All these are scandalmongers in whose neighborhood it is forbidden to live; it is all the more forbidden to be in their company and hear their talk. The sentence was confirmed and sealed against our forefathers in the wilderness only for slandering.
He who takes revenge violates a transgression, for it is written: "You shall take no revenge" (Leviticus 19:18). And although this offense is not punishable with lashes, it stems nevertheless from an exceedingly bad disposition. One should rather be forebearing with regard to all worldly things which, in the opinion of the wise, are sheer vanity and nothingness; they are not worthy of vengeance. What is vengeance? If a person says to another: "Lend me your spade," and he replies: "I will not lend it to you." The next day, the second party has to ask a similar favor from the first and says to him: "Lend me your spade," and the other replies: "I will not lend it to you, just as you did not lend me your spade when I asked it of you." This means taking revenge. He should rather give it to him cheerfully when he comes to ask for it, and must not repay him for his mistreatment.— —
So too, whoever bears a grudge against a fellow Israelite violates a prohibition, for it is written: "You shall not bear a grudge" (Leviticus 19:18). What is meant by <i>bearing a grudge?</i> A said to B: "Rent this house to me," or: "Lend me this ox." B refused. After some time, B comes to A to borrow or hire something. A replies: "Here it is; I am lending it to you; I am not like you; I will not treat you as you treated me." Whoever acts like this transgresses the command: "You shall not bear a grudge." One should blot the thing out of his mind and not cherish a grudge. For as long as he cherishes a resentment and keeps recalling it, he may come to avenge himself. For this reason, the Torah objects to bearing a grudge, that one may obliterate the wrong from his mind and remember it no more. This is the right way of behavior, whereby civilization and social intercourse are made possible.