Mishneh Torah, Human Dispositions
משנה תורה, הלכות דעות
The Mishneh Torah by Maimonides. trans. by Moses Hyamson, 1937-1949
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH002108865

Mishneh Torah, Human Dispositions



Chapter 1

Every human being is characterised by numerous moral dispositions which differ from each other and are exceedingly divergent. One man is choleric, always irascible; another sedate, never angry; or, if he should become angry, is only slightly and very rarely so. One man is haughty to excess; another humble in the extreme. One is a sensualist whose lusts are never sufficiently gratified; another is so pure in soul that he does not even long for the few things that our physical nature needs. One is so greedy that all the money in the world would not satisfy him, as it is said, "He who loveth silver shall not be satisfied with silver". (Eccles. 5:9). Another so curbs his desires that he is contented with very little, even with that which is insufficient, and does not bestir himself to obtain that which he really needs. One will suffer extreme hunger for the sake of saving, and does not spend the smallest coin without a pang, while another deliberately and wantonly squanders all his property. In the same way, men differ in other traits. There are, for example, the hilarious and the melancholy, the stingy and the generous, the cruel and the merciful, the timid and the stout-hearted, and so forth.
Between any moral disposition and its extreme opposite, there are intermediate dispositions more or less removed from each other. Of all the various dispositions, some belong to one from the beginning of his existence and correspond to his physical constitution. Others are such that a particular individual's nature is favourably predisposed to them and prone to acquire them more rapidly than other traits. Others again are not innate, but have been either learnt from others, or are self-originated, as the result of an idea that has entered the mind or, having heard that a certain disposition is good for him and should be cultivated by him, one trained himself in it till it became part of his nature.
To cultivate either extreme in any class of dispositions is not the right course nor is it proper for any person to follow or learn it. If a man finds that his nature tends or is disposed to one of these extremes, or if one has acquired and become habituated to it, he should turn back and improve, so as to walk in the way of good people, which is the right way.
The right way is the mean in each group of dispositions common to humanity; namely, that disposition which is equally distant from the two extremes in its class, not being nearer to the one than to the other. Hence, our ancient sages exhorted us that a person should always evaluate his dispositions and so adjust them that they shall be at the mean between the extremes, and this will secure his physical health. Thus a man should not be choleric, easily moved to anger, nor be like the dead without feeling; but should aim at the happy medium; be angry only for a grave cause that rightly calls for indignation, so that the like shall not be done again. He will only desire that which the body absolutely needs and cannot do without, as it is said, "The righteous eats, to satisfy himself" (Prov. 13:25). He will only labour at his occupation to obtain what is necessary for his sustenance, as it is said, "A little that a righteous man hath is better [than the riches of many wicked"] (Ps. 37:16). He will not be tight-fisted nor yet a spendthrift, but will bestow charity according to his means and give a suitable loan to whoever needs it. He will be neither frivolous and given to jesting, nor mournful and melancholy, but will rejoice all his days tranquilly and cheerfully. And so will he comport himself with regard to all his other dispositions. This is the way of the wise. Whoever observes in his dispositions the mean is termed wise.
Whoever is particularly scrupulous and deviates somewhat from the exact mean in disposition, in one direction or the other, is called a saint. For example, if one avoids haughtiness to the utmost extent and is exceedingly humble, he is termed a saint, and this is the standard of saintliness. If one only departs from haughtiness as far as the mean, and is humble, he is called wise, —and this is the standard of wisdom. And so with all other dispositions. The ancient saints trained their dispositions away from the exact mean towards the extremes; in regard to one disposition in one direction; in regard to another in the opposite direction. This was supererogation. We are bidden to walk in the middle paths which are the right and proper ways, as it is said, "and thou shalt walk in His ways" (Deut. 28:9).
In explanation of the text just quoted, the sages taught, "Even as God is called gracious, so be thou gracious; Even as He is called merciful, so be thou merciful; even as He is called holy, so be thou holy". Thus too the prophets described the Almighty by all the various attributes "long-suffering and abounding in kindness, righteous and upright, perfect, mighty and powerful," and so forth, to teach us, that these qualities are good and right and that a human being should cultivate them, and thus imitate God, as far as he can.
How shall a man train himself in these dispositions, so that they become ingrained? Let him practise again and again the actions prompted by those dispositions which are the mean between the extremes, and repeat them continually till they become easy and are no longer irksome to him, and so the corresponding dispositions will become a fixed part of his character. And as the Creator is called by these attributes, which constitute the middle path in which we are to walk, this path is called the Way of God and this is what the patriarch Abraham taught his children, as it is said "For I love him, because he will charge his children and his household after him, that they may keep the way of the Lord" (Gen. 18:19). Whoever walks in this way secures for himsself happiness and blessing, as the text continues, "In order that the Lord might bring upon Abraham that which He spoke concerning him" (Gen. 18:19).

Chapter 2

To those who are sick in body, the bitter tastes as if it were sweet, and the sweet as if it were bitter. Among sick folk, some long and yearn for things unfit for food, such as earth and charcoal, and have an aversion to wholesome foods, like bread and meat—the perversity depending on the severity of the illness. Similarly, human beings whose souls are sick and love evil dispositions, and hate the way that is good and are too indolent to walk therein, and find it exceedingly irksome because of their sickness. And so Isaiah says of such people, "O, they that say of evil that it is good, and of good that it is evil, that turn darkness into light and light into darkness, who take bitter for sweet and sweet for bitter" (Is. 5:20). And of such it is also said, "Who forsake the paths of integrity to walk in the ways of darkness" (Prov. 2:13). What is the corrective for those that are sick in soul ? They should go to the wise who are physicians of the soul and they will heal their maladies by instructing them in the dispositions which they should acquire till they are restored to the right path. Of those who realise that their dispositions are bad and nevertheless do not resort to the wise to be cured, Solomon says, "Wisdom and discipline, fools despise" (Prov. 1:7).
What is the method of effecting their cure ? If one is irascible, he is directed so to govern himself that even if he is assaulted or reviled, he should not feel affronted. And in this course he is to persevere for a long time till the choleric temperament has been eradicated. If one is arrogant, he should accustom himself to endure much contumely, sit below every one, and wear old and ragged garments that bring the wearer into contempt, and so forth, till arrogance is eradicated from his heart and he has regained the middle path, which is the right way. And when he has returned to this path, he should walk in it the rest of his days. On similar lines, he should treat all his dispositions. If, in any of them, he is at one extreme, he should move to the opposite extreme, and keep to it for a long time till he has regained the right path which is the normal mean in every class of dispositions.
There are some dispositions in regard to which it is forbidden merely to keep to the middle path. They must be shunned to the extreme. Such a disposition is pride. The right way in this regard is not to be merely meek, but to be humble-minded and lowly of spirit to the utmost. And therefore was it said of Moses that he was "<i>exceedingly</i> meek," (Num. 12:3), not merely that he was "meek". Hence, our sages exhorted us, "Be exceedingly, exceedingly lowly of spirit" (Ethics of the Fathers 4:4). They also said that any one who permits his heart to swell with haughtiness has denied the essential principle of our religion, as it is said, "And thy heart will be proud, and thou wilt forget the Lord, thy God" (Deut. 8:14). Again have they said, "Under a ban be he who is proud, even in the smallest degree". Anger too, is an exceedingly bad passion, and one should avoid it to the last extreme. One should train oneself not to be angry even for something that would justify anger. If one wishes to arouse fear in his children and household, or in the members of a community of which he is the head, and desires to exhibit anger, so that they may amend their ways, he should make a show of anger before them, so as to correct them, but in reality, his mind should be composed like that of a man who simulates anger and does not really feel it. The ancient sages said, "He who is angry—it is the same as if he worshipped idols." They also said, "One who yields to anger, —if he is a sage, his wisdom departs from him; if he is a prophet, his prophetic gift departs from him." Those of an irate disposition—their life is not worth living. The sages therefore, charged us that anger should be avoided to such a degree that one should train oneself to be unmoved even by things that naturally would provoke anger; and this is the good way. The practice of the righteous is to suffer contumely and not inflict it; to hear themselves reproached, not retort; to be impelled in what they do by love, and to rejoice in suffering. Of them Scripture saith, "And they that love Him are like the going forth of the sun in his strength." (Judges 5:31).
One should always cultivate the habit of silence, and only converse on topics of wisdom or on matters of moment to one's existence. Of Rav, disciple of our sainted teacher (R. Judah, the Prince) it was said that throughout his life he never indulged in idle conversation, of which most people's talk consists. And even of our material needs, we should not speak much. In this connection, our wise men charged, "He who multiplies words causes sin" (Ethics of the Fathers, 1:17). They further said, "I have found naught of better service to the body than silence" (ibid.). So too, in discussing Torah and Wisdom, a man's words should be few but full of meaning. This, the sages express in their recommendation: "A man should always teach his disciples tersely". But where words are many and their meaning is small—that is folly, of which it is said, "For the dream cometh with much discussion, and a fool's voice with an abundance of words" (Eccles. 5:2).
"A fence to wisdom is silence" (Ethics of the Fathers, 3:17). Hence, a man should not be hasty in reply, nor talk much. He should teach his pupils gently and calmly, not shouting, and avoiding prolixity. Solomon said, "The words of the wise, spoken quietly, are heard" (Eccles. 9:17).
It is forbidden to accustom oneself to smooth speech and flatteries. One must not say one thing and mean another. Inward and outward self should correspond; only what we have in mind, should we utter with the mouth. We must deceive no one, not even an idolater. A man, for example, must not sell to an idolater flesh from a beast that has died naturally, as if it were meat of an animal ritually slaughtered. Nor should one sell a shoe, the leather of which came from the hide of a beast that met with a natural death, allowing it to be believed that the leather had come from the hide of a ritually slaughtered animal. One must not urge another to join one at a meal, when one is aware that the invitation will not be accepted. Nor should one press upon another any marks of friendship which one knows will be declined. So too, casks of wine, which must be opened for sale, should not be broached in such a way as to deceive a guest and make him believe that they had been opened in his honour, and so forth. Even a single word of flattery or deception is forbidden. A person should always cherish truthful speech, an upright spirit and a pure heart free from all frowardness and perversity.
One should not indulge in jesting and mockery nor be melancholy and mournful, but one should be cheerful. So our sages said, "Jesting and levity lead a man on to lewdness" (Ethics of the Fathers, 3:17). They further charged that a man should not give way to immoderate laughter, nor yet be sad and mournful but should receive everyone with a cheerful countenance. One should also not cherish large desires—hurrying to get rich, — nor be melancholy and idle, but should be contented, engage a little in secular occupation and devote oneself to the study of the Torah, and rejoice in the little one has as his portion. One should not be quarrelsome, jealous, or sensual; nor run after honour. Thus our wise men said, "Envy, lust and ambition take a man from the world" (Ethics of Fathers, 4:2). In fine, in every class of dispositions, a man should choose the mean so that all one's dispositions shall occupy the exact middle between the extremes. This is what Solomon expressed in the text, "Balance the course of thy steps, so that all thy ways may be right" (Prov. 4:26).

Chapter 3

Possibly a person may say: "Since envy, cupidity and ambition are evil qualities to cultivate and lead to a man's ruin, I will avoid them to the uttermost, and seek their contraries." A person following this principle, will not eat meat, nor drink wine, nor marry nor dwell in a decent home, nor wear comely apparel, but will clothe himself in sackcloth and coarse wool like the idolaters' priests. This too, is the wrong way, not to be followed. Whoever persists in such a course is termed a sinner. Of the Nazirite, it is said "He (the priest) shall make atonement for him, for the sin that he committed against the soul." (Num. 6:11). On this text, the Sages comment, "If the Nazirite who only abstained from wine stands in need of an atonement, how much more so one who deprives himself of all legitimate enjoyments." The Sages accordingly enjoined us that we should only refrain from that which the Torah has expressly withdrawn from our use. And no one should, by vows and oaths, inhibit to himself the use of things permitted. "Do not the prohibitions of the Torah", say our sages, "suffice thee, that thou addest others for thyself ?" In this condemnation, those are included, who make a practice of fasting; they too are not walking in the right way; our wise men prohibited self-mortification by fasting. And concerning this and similar excesses Solomon exhorts us, "Be not overrighteous, nor excessively wise. Wherefore shouldst thou be desolate?" (Eccles. 7:16).
A man should direct all his thoughts and activities to the knowledge of God, alone. This should be his aim in sitting, rising and conversation. How should this be caried out ? Whether engaged in commerce or in manual labour for profit, one's heart should not be solely set on the accumulation of wealth, but he should do these things in order to obtain therewith his bodily needs—food, drink, shelter, the demands of married life. So too, when he eats, drinks, or cohabits, his purpose should not be to secure physical gratification, in which case he would only eat and drink that which was pleasing to the palate, and cohabit for the sake of sensual pleasure, but he should have it in mind that he eats and drinks solely to maintain his body and its organs in health and vigour. He will then not partake of everything which the palate craves, like a dog or an ass, but will choose foods that are wholesome to the body, whether these be sweet or bitter; and will avoid eating things that are injurious to the body, even though they taste sweet. One, for instance, who is of a hot humour, will not eat flesh-meat or honey, nor drink wine, as Solomon said in a metaphorical sense, "It is not good to eat much honey". (Prov. 25:27). Such a person should rather drink an infusion of chicory, even though it is bitter. And so, since life is impossible without eating and drinking, he will be guided in his choice of food and drink by hygienic considerations, to recover and maintain sound health. Thus too, in married life, his purpose in cohabitation will be to preserve health or propagate his species. He will consequently not indulge in intercourse whenever the desire seizes him, but only when he is conscious that emission is hygienically necessary or when his purpose is to continue his race.
He who regulates his life in accordance with the laws of hygiene, with the sole motive of maintaining a sound and vigorous physique and begetting children to do his work and labour for his benefit, is not following the right course. A man should aim to maintain physical health and vigour, in order that his soul may be upright, in a condition to know God. For it is impossible for one to understand sciences and meditate upon them, when he is hungry or sick, or when any of his limbs is aching. And in cohabitation, one should set one's heart on having a son who may become a sage and a great man in Israel. Whoever throughout his life follows this course will be continually serving God, even while engaged in business and even during cohabitation, because his purpose in all that he does will be to satisfy his needs. so as to have a sound body with which to serve God. Even when he sleeps and seeks repose, to calm his mind and rest his body, so as not to fall sick and be incapacitated from serving God, his sleep is service of the Almighty. In this sense, our wise men charged us, "Let all thy deeds be for the sake of God." (Ethics of the Fathers 2: 17). And Solomon, in his wisdom, said, "In all thy ways know Him, and He will make thy paths straight." (Prov. 3:6).

Chapter 4

Since, by keeping the body in health and vigour, one walks in the ways of God—it being impossible during sickness to have any understanding or knowledge of the Creator—it is a man's duty to avoid whatever is injurious to the body, and cultivate habits conducive to health and vigour. These are as follows: One should not take food except when one is hungry; nor drink unless one is thirsty. One should not neglect the calls of nature for a single moment, but respond to them immediately.
Food should not be taken to repletion; during a meal, about one-third less should be eaten than the quantity that would give a feeling of satiety, and only a little water should be drunk—and that mixed with wine. After the process of digestion has commenced, water may be taken as needed. But even after food has been digested, it should not be drunk copiously. Before eating, careful attention should be paid to the functions of excretion. No meal should be taken without previously walking till the body begins to get warm, or engaging in manual labour, or tiring oneself with other activities. In short, strenuous exercise should be taken every day in the morning, till the body is in a glow. Then, there should be an interval of rest till one has recovered composure. The meal may then be taken. If the exercise is followed by a bath of warm water, so much the better. In this case too, there should be an interval for repose before the meal.
During a meal, one should sit or recline on the left side; but not walk, ride, take violent exercise, sway the body, or engage in sport, till the food is digested. Any one who engages in sport or violent exercise immediately after a meal, subjects himself to grave disorders.
The day and night consist of twenty-four hours. It is sufficient to sleep for a third of that period, namely eight hours. And these hours should be in the latter part of the night; that is to say, the period from retirement to dawn should be eight hours so that one will rise from his bed before dawn.
One should not sleep, face downwards, nor on one's back, but lying on the side; at the beginning, on the left side, and at the close of one's rest, on the right side. One should not go to sleep immediately after a meal, but only when three or four hours have elapsed. One should not sleep during the day.
Laxative foods, such as grapes, figs, mulberries, pears, watermelons, the various kinds of cucumbers or gherkins, should be taken before the meal. These, however, should not be mixed with the main dish that constitutes the meal. An interval should elapse till these have passed out of the stomach before the meal is taken. Immediately after, foods that tone up the digestive organs, should be eaten, such as pomegranates, quinces, apples and small pears;<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* See <i>Tifereth Israel</i> (Commentary) on <i>Mishnah Kilaim</i> 1:3, note 41.<br>See also Krauss' Lehnwörter II 566 <span>קרוסטמילׁ</span> K'rustmil, m., pl. <span>קרוסטמילׁן</span> crustuminum (sc. pirum) Paradies(?) birne, Baum u. Frucht. Under <i>crustuminum,</i> Harper's Latin Lexicon says that it is the adjectival form of Crustumeria, an Etruscan town. The adjective signified a kind of pear. Virgil, Georgics 2-88, speaks of pira crustumia. My esteemed friend, Mr. Moses Hadas called my attention to this derivation.</i> but even these fruits must not be indulged in too freely.
When it is desired to eat at the same meal poultry and the meat of cattle, the poultry should be eaten first. When eggs and poultry form part of the same meal, the eggs should be consumed first. When the meat of large and of small cattle are eaten at the same meal, the latter should come first. The lighter should always precede the heavier diet.
In the summer time, cold food should be consumed; one should be sparing with condiments; vinegar should be used. During winter, warm foods should be eaten; condiments should be liberally used with a little mustard and assafoetida. A similar plan should be followed in cold and warm countries. The diet, in every district, should be chosen to suit the climate.
Some foods are very injurious and ought never be eaten. For example, large salted stale fish; salted stale cheese; truffles and mushrooms; stale salted meat; <i>must</i> (fresh wine taken from the wine press); cooked food kept so long that it has lost its savour; any food that is malodorous or very bitter—all these are like deadly poison to the body. There are other kinds of food that are injurious but not to the same extent as those just mentioned. A little of them at a time may therefore be taken, but only at intervals of several days. One should not accustom oneself to make a meal of them or to eat them regularly with the meal. Examples of this class are large fish; cheese; milk, twenty-four hours after milking; the meat of big steers and big goats; beans, lentils, peas; barley bread; unleavened bread; cabbage; leeks, onions, garlic; mustard and raddish. All these are bad foods. They should be eaten very sparingly and only during winter. In the summer, they should not be eaten at all. Neither in summer nor in winter should beans or lentils be eaten as a separate dish. Gourds may be eaten in summer.
There are other kinds of food that are also bad, but not to the extent of those just mentioned. These are waterfowl, small young pigeons, dates, bread fried in oil or the dough of which was kneaded with oil, fine meal so completely sifted that not a trace of bran remained, meat juice, and brine of salted fish. These should not be freely used. A man who is wise and exercises self-control, who does not yield to his appetite and never partakes of the above named foods, unless he needs them as a medicine, is indeed a hero !
One should always be abstemious in regard to fruits which grow on trees. These should not be eaten freely, even when dried, and, needless to add, when they are fresh. Before they are quite ripe, thy are like daggers to the body. So too locust (St. John's bread) is always bad. All sour fruits are bad and should be eaten sparingly, and only during summer or in hot climates. But figs, grapes and almonds are always good to eat—whether fresh or dried and may be eaten as much as one needs; but they should not be eaten constantly, even though they are the best of the tree-fruits.
Honey and wine are bad for young children, but good for the aged, particularly in the winter. The quantity taken in the summer should be two-thirds of that consumed in the winter.
At every period of life, it should be one's care to secure free action of the bowels, approximating to a relaxed condition. It is a leading principle in medicine that if there is constipation or if the bowels move with difficulty, grave disorders result. How is a slight costive condition to be remedied ? If the patient is a youth, he should eat, every morning, salty foods well cooked and seasoned with olive oil, fish brine and salt, without bread. Or he should drink the liquid of boiled spinach or, St. John's bread, mixed with olive oil, fish brine and salt. An old man should drink, in the morning, honey diluted with warm water, and wait about four hours before taking his breakfast. This regimen should be observed for one day, or, if necessary, for three or four successive days till the bowels move freely.
Another great principle of hygiene, physicians say, is as follows: As long as a person takes active exercise, works hard, does not over-eat and keeps his bowels open, he will be free from disease and will increase in vigour, even though the food he eats is coarse.
But if one leads a sedentary life and does not take exercise, neglects the calls of nature, or is constipated—even if he eats wholesome food and takes care of himself in accordance with medical rules—he will, throughout his life, be subject to aches and pains and his strength will fail him. Over-eating is like a deadly poison to any constitution and is the principal cause of all diseases. Most maladies that afflict mankind result from bad food or are due to the patient filling his stomach with an excess of food that may even have been wholesome. Thus, Solomon, in his wisdom, said, "He who keeps his mouth and tongue, keeps his soul from troubles." (Prov. 21:23)—which text can be applied to the individual who guards his mouth from bad food and over-eating, and keeps his tongue from all speech except that which is necessary to obtain his needs.
The correct procedure in bathing is to take a bath once a week. One should not step into the bath directly after a meal nor when hungry, but only after digestion has begun. The entire body should be bathed in water that is warm but not scalding. The head alone may be washed with water hot enough to scald the body. The body should then be washed in tepid water, then in lukewarm water, and so on, gradually reducing the temperature, till the water finally used is quite cold. Water, either lukewarm or cold, should not be poured upon the head. In the rainy season cold baths should not be taken. Nor should one rinse the body before it has perspired and become supple. Nor should one stay too long in the bath, but as soon as one perspires and the body has become supple, one should complete the ablutions and leave. Before and after bathing, attention should be paid to the excretory functions, as also before and after eating a meal, before and after sexual intercourse, before and after physical exercise, before going to bed and on rising. There are thus altogether ten occasions on which this rule should be followed.
When one has come out of the bath, he should put on his clothes and cover his head in the outer chamber, so as to avoid catching cold. Even in summer, this precaution should be taken. After leaving the bath, a person should wait a while till he has recovered his composure, and his body is rested and cool. Then a meal may be taken. A little sleep, after leaving the bath and before the meal, is excellent. Cold water should not be drunk after bathing and certainly not while taking the bath. If, after the bath, one feels thirsty and cannot resist the desire to drink, the water should be mixed with wine or honey and then it may be drunk. During the winter, anointing the body with oil, after the final ablution, is beneficial.
One should not accustom oneself to being frequently bled. Recourse to this procedure should only be had in case of special need. One should not be bled in summer or in winter, and only to a slight extent in the month of Nissan and Tishri. After the age of fifty, this treatment should be entirely discontinued. A person should not be bled and take a bath on the same day or set out on a journey on the same day; nor should one be bled on the day when he has returned from a journey. On the day when one is bled, less food and drink should be taken than usual. On that day, he should rest, avoid exertion and violent physical exercise, and not take part in sport.
<i>Semen</i> constitutes the strength of the body, its life and the light of the eyes. Its emission to excess causes physical decay, debility and diminished vitality. Thus, Solomon, in his wisdom, said: "Give not thy strength unto women". (Prov. 31:3). Whosoever indulges in sexual dissipation becomes prematurely aged; his strength fails; his eyes become dim; a foul odour proceeds from his mouth and armpits; the hair of his head, eye-brows and eye-lashes drop our; the hair of his beard, armpits and legs grow abnormally; his teeth fall out; and besides these, he becomes subject to numerous other diseases. Medical authorities have stated that for each one who dies of other maladies, a thousand are the victims of sexual excess. A man should, therefore, be careful in this regard if he wishes to lead a happy life. He should only cohabit when he finds himself in good health and vigour, experiences involuntary erections which persist after he has diverted his mind to other things, is conscious of a heaviness from the loins downwards as if the spermatic cords were being drawn and his flesh is hot. Such a condition calls for cohabitation which then is conducive to health. One should not cohabit, when sated with food, nor when one is hungry but only after a meal has been digested. Before and after coition, attention should be paid to the excretory functions. Coition should not take place in a standing or sitting posture, nor in a bath house, nor on the day when one takes a bath or is bled, nor on the day when one sets out on a journey or has returned from a journey, nor on the day previous to any of such days or subsequent to them.
Whoever lives in accordance with the directions I have set forth, has my assurance that he will never be sick till he grows old and dies; he will not be in need of a physician, and will enjoy normal health as long as he lives—unless his constitution be congenitally defective, or he has acquired bad habits from his early childhood, or if the world should be visited by pestilence or drought.
All the useful rules here recommended are suitable to those who enjoy good health. But a person who is generally ailing or suffers from a local disorder, or has for several years been addicted to an evil habit, needs special treatment, according to the nature of his sickness—as is expounded in medical literature. "Change of mode of living is the beginning of sickness".
In a place where there is no physician, both those that are well and those that are ailing should not diverge from the methods prescribed in this chapter. The observance of every one of them will yield beneficial results.
No disciple of the wise may live in a city that is unprovided with the following ten officials and institutions, namely: a physician, a surgeon, a bath-house, a lavatory, a source of water supply such as a stream or a spring, a synagogue, a school teacher, a scribe, a treasurer of charity funds for the poor, a court that has authority to punish with stripes and imprisonment.

Chapter 5

Even as a sage is recognized by his wisdom and moral principles which distinguish him from the rest of the people, so ought he to be recognized in all his activities, in his food and drink, in the fulfillment of his marital obligations, in attention to his excretory functions, in his talk, walk, dress, management of his affairs and business transactions. All these activities should bear the mark of exceeding refinement and orderliness. For example, a scholar will not be a glutton but will eat food conducive to health; and of such food he will not eat to excess. He will not be eager to fill his stomach, like those who gorge themselves with food and drink till the body swells. Concerning such people, the Scripture saith, "I will spread dung on your faces" (Malachi 2:3). This text, our wise men say, refers to those who eat and drink and spend all their days as if they were holidays. They are the people who exclaim, "Eat and drink, for tomorrow we die". (Is. 22:13). This is how the wicked eat. They are reprobated in the verse, "For all tables are full of filthy vomit, and no place is clean" (Is. 28:8). The wise man, on the contrary, will only partake of one or two courses, of which he will consume as much as he needs to sustain him. Thus, Solomon said, "The righteous eateth to satisfy himself" (Prov. 13:25).
When the wise man eats the modest meal that is proper for him, he will consume it nowhere else than at home, at his own table. Except in extreme emergencies, he will not eat in a restaurant or in the street, so as not to incur popular contempt. He will not accept invitations to take meals with unrefined people, nor will he sit down at tables that are not clean. He will not make it a practice to take his meal in all sorts of places, even in the company of scholars. He will not eat at banquets where there is a large crowd. It is indeed improper for a scholar to accept an invitation to any banquet unless it partakes of a religious character, as for example, on the occasion of a betrothal or a marriage, and then only when the bridegroom is a scholar, and the bride, a scholar's daughter. The righteous and saints in ancient times never ate anywhere but at home.
When a sage drinks wine, he will only take enough to moisten the food which he has eaten. Any one who allows himself to become inebriated is a sinner and despicable, and loses his wisdom. If he becomes intoxicated in the presence of the ignorant, he has profaned the Name (of God). It is forbidden to drink wine at noon, in however small a quantity, unless it forms part of a meal; for, if it is then taken, it does not intoxicate. We have to be on our guard only in respect to wine drunk after the meal is over.
Although connubial intercourse with one's wife is always permitted, still this relation too should be invested by the scholar with sanctity. He should not be always with his spouse, after the manner of a rooster, but should fulfill his marital obligation on Friday nights, if he is in a physically vigorous condition. Cohabitation should take place not at the beginning of the night when one is satiated and the stomach is full, nor towards the close of the night when one feels hungry, but at midnight, when the food is digested. He should not indulge in excessive frivolity, nor defile his mouth with lewd talk, even when he is alone with his wife. For the text, "He declareth to a man what is his discourse" (Amos 4:13), was interpreted by our sages traditionally to mean that "a man will be called to account even for light conversation between him and his wife". When cohabiting, neither husband nor wife should be in a state of intoxication, lethargy or melancholy. The wife should not be asleep at the time. The husband is not to force her, if she is unwilling. Coition should take place with the consent of both, and while they are full of desire and joyousness. The husband should converse and jest with his wife for a little while, so as to put her in a pleasant frame of mind and then cohabit modestly and not shamelessly. After the completion of the act, he should at once separate from her.
Whoever observes this procedure not only hallows his soul, purifies his heart and refines his mind, but if he has children, they will be comely, modest, and disposed to wisdom and saintliness. One who follows the customs of the common people who walk in darkness, will have children like theirs.
Extreme modesty is cultivated by scholars. They will not do aught that might expose them to contempt. They will not bare their heads or body. Even when responding to a call of nature, the scholar will behave decently; not bare himself till he sits down, nor dry himself with his right hand; he will withdraw from all people to the most private part of his dwelling or of a cave; or if he relieves himself behind a fence, he will withdraw to a distance so that others may not hear him. If he relieves himself in an open plain, he will go so far away that nobody can see his bare body. While relieving himself, he will not talk, even if there be great need. And as he conducts himself decently by day, so will he behave at night. One should get into the habit of relieving oneself in the morning and the evening, so as not to have to traverse long distances.
A scholar, when speaking, will not shout or scream, like domestic cattle or wild beasts. He will not raise his voice unduly. His speech with all men will be gentle. But while speaking gently, he will be careful to avoid exaggeration which would make his speech sound affected, like the speech of the haughty. He will be the first to greet every one he meets, so that they will be well disposed towards him. He will judge every one favourably. He will dwell on the merits of others and never speak disparagingly of anybody. He loves peace and ensues it. If he feels that his words will be effective and heeded, he will speak; otherwise, he will remain silent. For instance, he will not attempt to appease his neighbour when the latter is exasperated, nor question him concerning his vows immediately after he has made them, but will wait till the man's mind has become cool and composed. He will not attempt to console the mourner while the dead still lies unburied; for till the body is interred, the mourner's mind is preoccupied. And thus he will behave in circumstances of a similar kind. He will not show himself in his neighbour's presence when that person is in disgrace, but will avoid meeting him. He will not deviate from the truth; neither add to it nor detract from it, except in the interest of peace or similar worthy aims. In short, he will limit his speech to topics of wisdom, benevolence, and the like. He will not enter into conversation with a woman on the street, not even with his wife, sister, or daughter.
The scholar will not walk with proud mien and outstretched neck—attitudes condemned in the text "They walk with outstretched necks and wanton eyes" (Is. 3:16). He will not walk mincingly and with short steps after the fashion of women and the haughty, as it is said "Walking mincingly as they go and making a tinkling noise with their feet" (Is. 3:16). He will not run in the street, after the manner of madmen, nor will he stoop, bent double like a hunchback, but will look towards the ground as one does when praying and will walk at the pace of a man busy with his affairs. A person's gait indicates whether he is wise and sensible or a foolish idiot. Thus Solomon, in his wisdom, said "Yea also, when a fool walketh by the way, his understanding faileth him, and he proclaimeth to every one that he is a fool" (Eccles. 10:3); that is, by his behaviour he advertises himself as a fool.
A scholar's dress will be becoming and clean. It is an offence for such a man if a stain or grease or the like is found on his garment. He should not put on robes befitting royalty, such as those embroidered with gold or purple, which attract universal attention; nor, on the other hand, shabby garments such as are worn by the poor, which bring contempt upon the wearer, but he will wear apparel suitable to the middle classes and that is neat. His flesh should not show under the clothing, as is the case with the extremely light linen fabrics manufactured in Egypt. His garments should not drag on the ground like those worn by the arrogant, but should only reach to the heels, while the sleeves may extend to the finger-tips. He should not let down his fringed garment—this being a mark of arrogance—except on Sabbaths, if he has no other change of garments. He should not, in summer, wear clouted shoes, with patch upon patch; but in winter, this is permitted if one is poor. He should not go forth into the street with his person or garments perfumed; nor should he apply perfume to his hair; but if he anoints his body with perfume, in order to remove unpleasant effluvium—this is permitted. So too, he should not go out at night alone, unless at the fixed hour when he has to attend a course of study. The object of all these rules is to save one from being suspected (of following evil courses).
The scholar manages his affairs with judgment and prudence; spends on food, drink, and maintenance of his household, in accordance with his income and the state of his finances. He will not put himself to excessive trouble (to be considered wealthy). The wise men recommended in their rules for right living, that a man should not eat flesh meat, unless he longs for it, as it is said "Because thy soul desireth to eat flesh" (Deut. 12:20). For a healthy individual it is enough to eat meat once a week, on Friday evenings. But, if one is rich enough to eat meat every day, he may do so. The sages charged that a person should eat less than he can afford; dress in accordance with his means and as befits his station in life; and spend on his wife and children more than he can afford in order to secure respect for them.
The sensible course is for a man first to choose an occupation that will give him a livelihood, then buy himself a home; and after that, take a wife; as it is said "And what man is there that hath planted a vineyard and not redeemed it ?…. What man is there that has built a new house and hath not dedicated it ?…. and what man is there that hath betrothed a woman and not taken her?…. (Deut. 20:6-5-7). But the foolish first marry; then if one of this sort can afford it, he purchases a house; and, last of all, towards the end of his life, he sets about seeking a trade or lives on charity. Thus it is said in <i>the Imprecations,</i> "A wife shalt thou betroth… a house shalt thou build… a vineyard shalt thou plant" (Deut. 28:30); that is, all your activities shall be in the reverse order of what they should be, so that you will not prosper in your ways. And a blessing is conveyed in the Scriptural text "And David had success in all his ways; and the Lord was with him" (1. Sam. 18:14).
A person is forbidden to declare all his property derelict or devote it to the sanctuary and thus become a public charge. He should not sell a field and buy a house with the proceeds; or sell a house and buy movables, or use the money in trade; but he may sell movables and buy a field. To sum up, he should make it his aim to employ his capital successfully (and convert the perishable into the durable<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* Not in the M. S.; but in the printed editions, there is added a Hebrew phrase <span>ולׁהחלׁיף הכָלָׁה בקַייָם</span> which may be thus rendered.</i>); and not to snatch a little pleasure for a while, or gain a little enjoyment and thereby incur a great loss.
The scholar conducts his business affairs honestly and in good faith. His nay is nay; his yea, yea. In his accounts, he is strict (in meeting his obligations). At the same time, when buying, he is liberal and does not drive a hard bargain. He pays promptly for his purchases. He declines to act as a surety or trustee; nor will he accept a power of attorney. In commercial matters, he acknowledges liability even where the law would not hold him liable; his principle being to keep his word and not change it. If others have been adjudged liable to him, he is considerate, and even forgives them the amount due. He grants benevolent<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* without interest.</i> loans and does favours. He will not encroach on another man's business, and throughout his life will not vex a human being. In short, he belongs to the class of those who are persecuted but do not persecute, who are reviled but do not revile. A man who acts thus is commended in the Scriptural text "And He said unto me, thou art my servant, Israel, in whom I glory" (Is. 49:3).

Chapter 6

It is natural to be influenced, in sentiments and conduct, by one's neighbours and associates, and observe the customs of one's fellow citizens. Hence, a person ought constantly to associate with the righteous and frequent the company of the wise, so as to learn from their practices, and shun the wicked who are benighted, so as not to be corrupted by their example. So Solomon saith "He that walketh with the wise, shall be wise; but the companion of fools shall smart for it" (Prov. 13:20). And it is also said "Happy is the man that hath not walked in the counsel of the wicked" (Psalms 1:1). So too, if one lives in a country where the customs are pernicious, and the inhabitants do not go in the right way, he should leave for a place where the people are righteous and follow the ways of the good. If all the countries of which he has personal knowledge, or concerning which he hears reports, fellow a course that is not right—as is the case in our times—or if military campaigns or sickness debar him from leaving for a country with good customs, he should live by himself in seclusion, as it is said, "Let him sit alone and keep silence" (Lam. 3:28). And if the inhabitants are wicked reprobates who will not let him stay in the country unless he mixes with them and adopts their evil practices, let him withdraw to caves, thickets or deserts, and not habituate himself to the ways of sinners, as it is said "O that I were in the wilderness, in a lodging place of wayfaring men" (Jerem. 9:1).
It is an affirmative precept to attach oneself to sages and their disciples, so as to learn from their example; as it is said, "And unto Him shalt thou cleave" (Deut. 10:20). But can a human being cleave to the <i>Shechinah</i> ? Our wise men explained this text thus: "Attach thyself to sages and their disciples". A man should, accordingly, strive to win a scholar's daughter for a wife, and should give his daughter in marriage to a scholar. He should eat and drink in the company of scholars; give them opportunities to do business, and cultivate their society in every relation, as it is said "And to cleave unto Him" (Deut. 11:22). So too, our sages exorted us "Sit in the dust of their feet, and drink their words thirstily" (Ethics of the Fathers 1:4).
It is incumbent on every one to love each individual Israelite as himself, as it is said "Thou shalt love they neighbour, as thyself" (Lev. 19:18). Hence, a person ought to speak in praise of his neighbour and be careful of his neighbour's property as he is careful of his own property and solicitous about his own honour. Whoever glorifies himself by humilitating another person, will have no portion in the world to come.
To love the proselyte who comes to take refuge beneath the wings of the <i>Shechinah</i> is the fulfilment of two affirmative precepts. First, because he is included among neighbours (whom we are commanded to love) (Lev. 19:18). And secondly, because he is a stranger, and the Torah said "Love ye therefore the stranger" (Deut. 10:19). God charged (us) concerning the love of the stranger, even as He charged us concerning love of Himself, as it is said "Thou shalt love the Lord, thy God" (Deut. 6:5). The Holy One, blessed be He, loves strangers, as it is said "And He loveth the stranger" (Deut. 10:18).
Whoever entertains in his heart hatred of any Israelite, transgresses a prohibition, as it is said "Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thy heart" (Lev. 19:17). The violation of this precept is however not punished with stripes, as no overt act is involved. The Torah, in this text, only warned against hatred in the heart. But any one who smites or reviles his neighbour, although he is not permitted to do so, is not infringing the precept "Thou shalt not hate thy brother".
When a man sins against another, the injured party should not hate the offender and keep silent, as it is said concerning the wicked "And Absalom spake to Amnon neither good nor evil, for Absalom hated Amnon" (2. Sam. 13:22). But it is his duty to inform the offender and say to him "Why did you do this to me ? Why did you sin against me in this matter ?" And thus it is said "Thou shalt surely rebuke thy neighbour" (Lev. 19:17). If the offender repents and pleads for forgiveness, he should be forgiven. The forgiver should not be obdurate, as it is said "And Abraham prayed unto God" (for Abimelech) (Gen. 20:17).
If one observes that a person committed a sin or walks in a way that is not good, it is a duty to bring the erring man back to the right path and point out to him that he is wronging himself by his evil courses, as it is said "Thou shalt surely rebuke thy neighbour" (Lev. 19:17). He who rebukes another, whether for offences against the rebuker himself or for sins against God, should administer the rebuke in private, speak to the offender gently and tenderly, and point out that he is only speaking for the wrongdoer's own good, to secure for him life in the world to come. If the latter accepts the rebuke, well and good. If not, he should be rebuked a second, and a third time. And so one is bound to continue the admonitions, till the sinner assaults the admonisher and says to him "I refuse to listen". Whoever is in a position to prevent wrongdoing and does not do so, is responsible for the iniquity of all the wrongdoers whom he might have checked.
He who rebukes another must not at first speak to the offender harshly so as to put him to shame, as it is said "And thou shalt not suffer sin because of him" (Lev. 19:17). Our Rabbis explained this text as follows: "Since it might have been supposed that you are to rebuke the sinner till he changes colour, therefore it is said "And thou shalt not bear sin because of him". Hence, the inference that it is forbidden to put an Israelite to shame, especially in public. Although one who puts another to shame is not punished with stripes, still it is a grave offence. And thus the sages said, "He who shames another in public has no portion in the world to come". One ought therefore to beware of publicly shaming anyone, whether he be young or old. One should not call a person by a name of which he feels ashamed, nor relate anything in his presence which humiliates him. This applies to matters between man and man. But in regard to duties to God, if an individual, after having been privately rebuked, does not repent, he should be shamed in public; his sin should be openly declared; he is to be reviled, affronted and cursed till he returns to the right course. This was the method followed by all the prophets of Israel.
If one who has been wronged by another, does not wish to rebuke or speak to the offender because the latter is a very common person or mentally defective, and if he has sincerely forgiven him, and neither bears him ill-will nor rebukes him—he acts according to the standard of saints. All that the Torah objects to is harbouring ill-will.
A man ought to be especially heedful of his behaviour towards widows and orphans, for their souls are exceedingly depressed and their spirits low. Even if they are wealthy, even if they are the widow and orphans of a king, we are specifically enjoined concerning them, as it is said "Ye shall not afflict any widow or fatherless child" (Ex. 22:21). How are we to conduct ourselves towards them? One must not speak to them otherwise than tenderly. One must show them unvarying courtesy; not hurt them physically with hard toil, nor wound their feelings with harsh speech. One must take greater care of their property than of one's own. Whoever irritates them, provokes them to anger, pains them, tyrranizes over them, or causes them loss of money, is guilty of a transgression, and still more so, if one beats them or curses them. Though no stripes are inflicted for this transgression, its punishment is explicitly set forth in the Torah (in the following terms) "My wrath shall wax hot, and I will slay you with the sword" (Ex. 22:23). He who created the world by His word made a covenant with widows and orphans that when they will cry out because of violence, they will be answered; as it is said, "If thou afflict them in any wise—for if they cry at all unto Me, I will surely hear their cry" (Ex. 22:22). This only applies to cases where a person afflicts them for his own ends. But if a teacher punishes orphan children in order to teach them Torah or a trade, or lead them in the right way—this is permissible. And yet he should not treat them like others but make a distinction in their favour. He should guide them gently, with the utmost tenderness and courtesy, whether they are bereft of a father or mother, as it is said "For the Lord will plead their cause" (Prov. 22:23). To what age are they to be regarded in these respects as orphans ? Till they reach the age when they no longer need an adult on whom they depend to train them and care for them, and when each of them can provide for all his wants, like other grown-up persons.

Chapter 7

Whoever tells tales about another person violates a prohibition, as it is said "Thou shalt not go up and down as a tale-bearer among thy people" (Lev. 19:16). And although no stripes are inflicted, it is a grave offence, and leads to the death of many souls in Israel. Hence, this precept is followed immediately by the sentence "Neither shalt thou stand idly by the blood of thy neighbour" (Lev. 19:16). For an example of the tragic consequence of this transgression, read what happened after Doeg's report concerning the priests of Nob. (I. Sam. 22:6-19).
Who is a tale-bearer ? One who carries reports, and goes about from one person to another and says "So-and-so said this"; "Such and such a statement have I heard about so-and so". Even if what he says or repeats may be true, the tale-bearer ruins the world. There is a still graver offence that comes within this prohibition, namely, the evil tongue.<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* A person with an evil tongue is the habitual scandal-monger.</i> This means talking disparagingly of anyone, even though what one says is true; but he who utters falsehood is called a slanderer. A person with an evil tongue is one who, sitting in company, says "That person did such a thing"; "So and so's ancestors were so and so"; "I have heard this about him"; and then proceeds to talk scandal. Of such a person, Scripture says "May the Lord cut off all smooth lips, the tongue that speaketh proud things". (Ps. 12:4).
The sages say "There are three offences for which one is punished in this world and forfeits his portion in the world to come. These are idolatry, incest and murder; but the evil tongue is equal to all the three put together". The sages further said "To indulge in evil speech is like a denial of the fundamental principle of religion, as it is said "Who said 'our tongue will we make mighty; our lips are with us; who is lord over us ?' " (Ps. 12:5). The sages also said "The evil tongue slays three persons: the utterer of evil, the listener, the one spoken about; and the listener will be punished worse than the speaker".
There are modes of speech that may be styled "dust of the evil tongue". Such are remarks like the following: "Who would have thought of so-and-so that he would be as he is now.<sup class="footnote-marker">**</sup><i class="footnote">** <i>Or,</i> “who can say of so-and-so that he will always be as he is now.”</i> Or "be silent about so-and-so. I do not wish to tell what happened, etc." To speak in a person's favour in the presence of his enemies, savours of the evil tongue. For it will provoke them to speak of him disparagingly. Referring to this, Solomon said "He that blesseth his friend with a loud voice, rising early in the morning, it shall be counted a curse unto him" (Prov. 27:14). For out of what had been said to his good, proceedeth evil. Such too is the case of one who indulges in evil speech jokingly and frivolously, and not out of hatred. And so, Solomon, in his wisdom, says "As one who mockingly casteth firebrands, arrows and death, and saith, am I not jesting?" (Prov. 26:18). Equally reprehensible is one who indulges in evil speech deceitfully, that is, speaks as it were in all innocence, as if unaware that what he says is an evil utterance, and when a protest is made, replies, "I do not know that this is evil speech, or that such is the conduct of so-and-so".
Whether one indulges in evil speech about a person in his presence, or in his absence, or makes statements which, if repeated, would tend to hurt him physically or injure him financially, distress or alarm him—all this is evil speech. If a statement of this character had been made in the presence of three persons, the subject matter is regarded as public and generally known, and if one of the three repeats it, he is not guilty of evil speech, provided he had no intention to give the story wider currency.
All such persons are scandal-mongers in whose neighbourhood it is forbidden to reside; and still more is it forbidden to cultivate their society and listen to them. The sentence passed upon our forefathers in the wilderness was confirmed, only because they were guilty of the sin of the evil tongue.
He who takes revenge, violates a prohibition, and it is said "Thou shalt not take vengeance" (Lev. 19:18). And although he is not punished with stripes, still such conduct indicates an exceedingly bad disposition. One should rather practise forbearance in all secular matters. For the intelligent realise that these are vain things and not worth taking vengeance for. What is "taking vengeance"? The following is a case. A neighbour says to one, "Lend me your axe". He replies "I will not lend it to you". The next day, the latter needs a similar favour from the neighbour and says to him "Lend me <i>your</i> axe", and receives the reply "I will not lend it to you, for you did not lend me your axe when I asked it of you". Any one who acts in this way is "taking vengeance." But when he comes to borrow aught, one should give what is asked cheerfully, and not repay discourtesy with discourtesy. And so in similar cases. Thus David, expressing his excellent sentiments, said "If I have requited him that did evil unto me, or despoiled mine adversary" …(Ps. 7:5).
So too, one who bears a grudge against a fellow-Israelite violates a prohibition, as it is said, "Nor bear a grudge against the children of thy people" (Lev. 19:18). What is "bearing a grudge ?" A said to B, "Let this house to me, or let me borrow this ox". B refuses. After a time, B comes to A to borrow or hire something. A replies "Here it is. I lend it to you. I am not like you. I will not treat you as you treated me". One who acts thus, transgresses the commandment "Thou shalt not bear a grudge". One should blot the thing out of his mind and not bear a grudge. For as long as one nurses a grievance and keeps it in mind, one may come to take vengeance. The Torah, accordingly, emphatically warns us not to bear a grudge, so that the impression of the wrong shall be quite obliterated and be no longer remembered. This is the right principle. It alone makes civilized life and social intercourse possible.