Mishneh Torah, Human Dispositions
משנה תורה, הלכות דעות
Yad-Hachazakah, edited by Elias Soloweyczik; London, 1863
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH002108866

Mishneh Torah, Human Dispositions



Chapter 1

The numerous dispositions of men severally vary, and are often extremely opposed to each other; some are passionate, and in a state of perpetual irritation; there are others whose mind is composed, and who are rarely irritated, and if they happen to be irritated it will be very slight and at very long intervals. Again, there are men who are of a very haughty spirit, and others of a very humble mind; some given to voluptuousness, whose cravings are never satiated; and others of a very pure heart, so that they do not desire even those few things which the body indispensably requires. Again, there are grasping dispositions which no money in the world can satisfy, as it is said: <i>He that loveth silver shall not be satisfied with silver</i>, (Eccles. 5. 10); and others who limit their desires; and are contented even with so little as is barely sufficient for them, and are not in eager pursuit after all they require. Again there are some who rather starve themselves in order to hoard up wealth, and do not spend the least coin of their own without considerable pain; and others who wilfully waste all their property. And thus it is with all other dispositions; as for instance, the mirthful and the desponding; the miser and the liberal man; the cruel and the merciful; the faint-hearted and the bold-hearted; and the like dispositions.
But between the extreme of these various dispositions there are intermediate dispositions, which likewise vary from each other. Now, with regard to dispositions in general some of them are innate to man, as being the consequences of his bodily constitution; and some of them are dispositions which the nature of certain men is more readily inclined to adopt than other dispositions; Again there are dispositions not innate to man; but acquired by example, or which are adopted, in consequence of some peculiar notion; or on account of information that such a disposition would be beneficial and worth pursuing; and thus man following the same till they become firmly fixed in their nature.
Neither of the two opposite extremes in these dispositions is the proper way, and it is unbecoming in man to pursue or habituate himself to them; if therefore he finds that his nature inclines towards one of them, or prone to one of them, or that he has already habituated himself to the pursuit of one of them, he should strive to mend his ways and tread in the path of the good which is the right path.
Now the right path consists in adopting the middle course in every one of the human dispositions; namely, that disposition which is equally remote from the two extremes, so that it is not nearer to the one than it is to the other. The sages of old have therefore directed, that a man should always estimate his dispositions, and that he should calculate and direct the same, towards the middle course, to the end that he may be perfect in his bodily constitution. For instance, he ought to be neither given to passion and irritation, nor yet like a dead man destitute of feeling; but he should keep between these two extremes; so as never to be irritated, except by some serious matter, such as ought to be resented, in order that the same thing may not be done a second time He ought likewise to desire such things only as the body stands in need of, and without which it is not possible to subsist, just as it is said:<i> The righteous eateth to the satisfying of his soul, </i>(Prov. 13. 25). Again, he ought not to toil too much in his business, unless it be to obtain those things which are necessary for his temporary life, just as it is said: <i>A little that a righteous man hath is better</i>, (Ps. 37. 16). Neither ought he to shut his hand, nor to be too lavish; but he ought to give alms in proportion to the means he possesses, and also to judiciously lend to him who stands in need of it. Moreover, he ought to be neither frivolous or over-mirthful, nor sullen or melancholy; but should always maintain a pleasing cheerfulness and a friendly countenance; and so it ought to be with regard to all his other dispositions; this way being the way of the wise.
But he who scrutinizes his conduct and removes somewhat from the middle course towards any of the good dispositions is termed <b>Chasid</b>, pious; and every man whose dispositions are altogether modified to the middle course is called <b>Chacham</b> a wise man. For instance, if one were to remove from haughtiness to the opposite extreme, so as to become exceedingly humble, he would deserve the title of <i>pious</i>, this being the degree of PIETY; but if he removes to the middle course only, so as to become meek, he would deserve the title of <i>wise</i>, this being the degree of WISDOM; and so it would be with all other dispositions. Now the pious men of old used occasionally to bend their dispositions from the middle course towards the two extremes; one disposition they would bend towards the lowest extreme, and again another disposition they would urge on towards the highest extreme, as the case might require; now this is said to be: <i>more even than [what] the line of justice would require.</i> With regard however to ourselves, we are commanded to walk in the middle course, which are the good and the upright ways; as it is said:<i> And thou shalt walk in HIS ways</i>, (Deut. 28. 9).
Thus the sages have taught us, in explanation of this commandment: “As He is called <i>gracious</i>, so be thou also gracious; as He is called <i>merciful</i>, so be thou also merciful; as He is called <i>holy</i>, so be thou also holy. And after this manner did the prophets call God by all these attributes; as for instance, <i>long-suffering, abundant in goodness, just and right, perfect, mighty</i> and <i>strong</i>, and the like; for the purpose of informing us, that these ways are good and right, and that a man is bound to conduct himself therein, and thus resemble Him as far as is in human power.
But how is man to accustom himself to these dispositions, so that they may be firmly established in his nature? He must several times repeat the conduct in which he is guided by the middle course of the various dispositions, and continually recur to them until the practice become quite easy, and not burthensome to him; and thus these dispositions will be firmly rooted in his mind. Now because these attributes, by which the Creator is called, imply that middle course in which we are bound to walk, this way was called the <i>way of the Lord</i>, and was also the one that Abraham, our father, taught to his children; for it is said: <i>For I know Him that He will command, etc.</i> (Gen. 18. 19); and he who walks in this way brings prosperity and blessings upon himself; for it is said: That the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which He hath spoken of him, (Gen. 18. 19).

Chapter 2

To those whose bodies are bodily ill, things which are bitter, will [sometimes] taste sweet, and things which are sweet, bitter; there are also some patients who long for food not fit to be eaten, as for instance, dust or coals; and who moreover dislike good food, as for instance, bread or meat; and all this is in proportion to the extent of the disease. So also will men of diseased minds contract a desire and liking for wicked dispositions, whilst they hate the good way, and are loath to walk in the same, as being exceedingly burdensome to them, in proportion to their unhealthiness of mind. And thus Isaiah says with regard to such men: <i>Woe unto them that call evil good and good evil; that put darkness for light and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet and sweet for bitter!</i> (Isai. 5. 20). And with regard to them it is also said: <i>Who leave the paths of uprightness, to walk in the ways of darkness, </i>(Prov. 2. 13). Now what remedy is there for those diseased minds that have infirm souls?—They must apply to the wise, who are spiritual physicians, and who will cure their infirmities by inculcating in their mind such dispositions as will lead them back to the good way. But as for those that are aware of their wicked dispositions, and yet do not have recourse to the wise for the remedy of them, Solomon says: <i>Fools despise wisdom and instruction, </i>(Prov. i. 7).
And how are they to be cured? If he is a man given to passion they direct him to accustom himself not to mind in the least, were he even to be abused or beaten. And that he should proceed in this way for a considerable time, until passion he uprooted from his heart. Again if a man happen to be of a haughty mind, they direct him to accustom himself to endure the greatest contempt; to occupy the lowest position when sitting in company; to put on inferior clothes, which reflect no respect on those who wear them; or such like things, until his haughtiness of mind be uprooted from within him, and he turns to the middle course, which is the good way; and having thus turned to the middle course he ought to proceed in the same all his days. According to this standard he ought to proceed with regard to all other dispositions; namely, if he happen to lean towards the one extreme, he ought to remove to the other extreme, and to train himself to it for a considerable time, until he returns to the good way, which is the middle course between the different dispositions.
Yet there are some dispositions, in regard to which it would not be commendable for a man to remain in the middle cause only, but rather to remove from one extreme to the other. Now this is the case with <i>haughtiness of mind;</i> for it is by no means the good way for a man to be <i>meek</i> only, but he ought really to be of a <i>humble</i> mind, and an exceedingly low spirit; and therefore it is said, with regard to Moses our Teacher, that he was not only meek, but very meek. Our sages have therefore strictly enjoined us: <i>Be ye of an exceedingly humble mind.</i> Again they say: that he who has a haughty mind, denies the radical religious principle; for it is said: <i>Then thine heart be lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God, </i>(Deut. 8. 14); and again they say: He ought to be held in contempt who is in the least disposed to an overbearing spirit. Again anger is a very evil propensity, and it becomes a man to remove from it to the opposite extreme, and to train himself so as not to be irritated at all, not even by a thing which is calculated to provoke anger; and if at times it is necessary to impress fear upon his children, his household, or even a whole congregation, namely should he happen to be their leader, and wish to show anger to them in order that they may mend their conduct, he might show himself before them as if he were angry, by way of reproving them; but he ought nevertheless to be composed within himself; just as a man who, when provoked, may feign to be angry, though in fact he be not angry. The sages of old said: He who gives vent to passion may ultimately sink into idolatry; and again they said: He who does not curb his passion—if he be a wise man, his wisdom departs from him, and if he be a prophet, his prophecy departs from him; moreover the life of passionate men can scarcely be called life. The sages have therefore directed that a man should remove from anger, and train himself so as not to take notice even of things provoking; this being the good way. Now the way of the righteous is this: They may be derided, yet they do not deride others; they hear themselves reproached, yet do not reply; they do every thing out of love to God, and are cheerful in affliction; and with regard to them Scripture says: <i>But let them that love Him be as the sun when he goeth forth in his might</i>, (Judg. 5. 31).
Man ought to accustom himself to silence, and not to talk, unless it be on intellectual subjects, or on things of physical necessity. It was said of Rav, the disciple of our pious teacher, that he never indulged in idle conversation all his days, which is the conversation of most people. Indeed even of things of physical necessity man ought not to talk too much; and it is with regard to this, that the sages directed us, saying: <i>He who multiplies words brings on sin;</i> and again they said: <i>I have not found any thing better for the body than silence. </i>Even in matters of the law, and in scientific matters, a man’s words ought to be few, but the subjects large; and this is what the sages directed [us], saying: <i>Man ought to teach his disciples in a succinct manner;</i> but if the words be many and the matter trifling it is folly. And with regard to this Scripture, says: <i>For a dream cometh through the multitude of business</i>, AND A FOOL’S VOICE IS KNOWN BY MULTITUDE OF WORDS, (Eccles. 5. 3).
Silence is a fence to wisdom; a man ought therefore not to be hasty in giving an answer, and not to talk too much; and moreover to teach his disciples in an edifying and pleasing manner, without shouting and without prolixity. This is what Solomon said: <i>The words of wise men are heard in quiet, </i>(Eccles. 9. l7).
It is not lawful for a man to accustom himself to flattering or seductive language; nor ought he to be otherwise in his speech than he is in his heart; but the inner man ought to be like the outer man, so that the thoughts of his heart are identically the words of his mouth. Moreover it is not lawful to practice deception upon the minds of another, not even on the mind of a Heathen. For instance, a man should not sell to a Heathen the meat of a beast which died of itself, for the meat of a slaughtered beast; or a shoe made of the hide of a beast which died of itself, for a shoe made of the hide of a slaughtered beast. Neither should he press his friend to eat with him, when he well knows that he will not eat with him; nor try to force on him gifts, when he well knows that he will not accept them; nor broach a barrel, which he actually wants to broach for sale, in order to persuade one that he has broached it out of respect for him; and similar matters. Even to utter one single seductive or deceptive expression is not lawful; but a man ought to have a lip of truth, an upright soul, and a heart pure from evil designs and mischief.
A man ought to be neither full of laughter and mocking, nor yet gloomy and melancholy, but cheerful. Thus the sages say: Laughter and levity accustom men to lewdness. And thus have they also directed, that a man should be neither excessive in laughter, nor dejected and mournful, but that he should receive every man with a friendly countenance. Also that he should be neither of a grasping mind, and over-anxious for wealth, nor dejected and remiss in his business; but that he should be of a kind disposition, that he should pursue more the study of the law than worldly affairs, and with regard to the little which is his portion, he should be contented therewith. Moreover a man ought not to be quarrelsome, nor of a jealous or lustful disposition; nor ought he to hunt for honour. Thus the sages say: Jealousy, Lust, and Ambition, bring men to an untimely end. To sum up the matter, a man ought to proceed in the middle course in every disposition; so that in all his dispositions he may lean towards the intermediate point; and this is what Solomon said: <i>Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be established</i>, (Prov. 4. 26).

Chapter 3

Suppose one should say: since jealousy, lust, ambition, and the like passions, are bad, and tend to bring men to an untimely end, I will withdraw from them altogether, and remove to the other extreme—and in this he might go so far as even not to eat meat, not to drink wine, not to take a wife, not to reside in a respectable dwelling house, and not to put on any proper garments, but only sackcloth, or coarse wool, or the like, just as the idolatrous priests do, we should object to this also as being an evil way, and unlawful to pursue, and he who walks in this way is called <i>a sinner;</i> for it is said with regard to the <i>Nazarite: And he shall make an atonement for him, for that he sinned against the soul.</i> On this the sages observe: “If the Nazarite who abstained from wine only, stands in need of an atonement, how much more does he require it, who abstains from every enjoyment.” The sages have therefore directed, that man should refrain from those things only, which the law forbids; but that he should not impose a self prohibition by vows or oaths, of such things as are lawful. Thus the sages say: “Is not that sufficient for thee, which the law has prohibited, that thou shouldest even impose upon thee restrictions of other things?” consequently, those who are constantly fasting, are not pursuing the good way. And the sages have declared it to be unlawful for a man to chasten himself with fasts; and with regard to these and the like things, Solomon has directed us and said: <i>Be not righteous over much; neither make thyself over wise; why shouldest thou destroy thyself? </i>(Eccles. 7. 16).
A man ought to direct his mind and all his actions solely towards knowing God, blessed be He! so that his sitting down, his rising up, and his conversation may altogether tend to this object. For instance, in his mercantile or mechanical pursuits, from which he expects remuneration, his object ought to be not merely that of accumulating wealth; but he ought to do these things, with the view of providing for his physical wants, such as meat, drink, a house to dwell in, or marrying. And in the same manner, when he eats or drinks, or indulging in other physical enjoyments his sole object ought not to be physical gratification, so that he should eat and drink that only which is pleasant to the palate, but his purpose, whilst eating or drinking, ought to be solely that of preserving his body and limbs in good health; and therefore he ought not to eat like a dog, or an ass, all that which is agreeable to the palate; but he ought rather to eat those things that are conducive to bodily health, whether they be bitter or sweet; and he ought not to eat things which are injurious to the body, although they be pleasant to the palate. For instance, he who is of a sanguine temperament ought neither to eat meat nor drink wine; as Solomon said, by way of allegory: <i>“It is not good to eat much honey, etc.”</i> (Prov. 25. 27) but he ought rather to drink water, prepared with bitter herbs, though it be bitter; and consequently he ought to eat and drink, by way of remedy merely, in order that he may be in good health, and that he may preserve his health unimpaired, as it is impossible for a man to live, without eating and drinking.
Again, he who lives according to sanitary rules, if his object be merely to preserve his body and his limbs unimpaired, this is not the right way either; but his object ought to be that of preserving his body whole and strong, to the end that his soul may be fit to know the Lord, blessed be He! it being impossible for him to study and acquire wisdom whilst he is hungry or ill, or whilst any one of his limbs is ailing. Consequently, he who walks in this way through the whole of his life, will be serving the Lord continually even in his mercantile and mechanical pursuits; because his object in doing all this, is to obtain that which is necessary for him, so that his mind may be perfect to serve the Lord. Nay at the time when he sleeps, (providing his object in going to sleep be, that both his mind and body may enjoy rest, so that he may not become ill, and consequently disabled from serving the Lord during his illness)—his very sleep will be found to be a means of serving God, blessed be He! And it is respecting this the sages have enjoined us and said: <i>And let all thy doings be for the sake of Heaven.</i> And this is also that which Solomon said in his wisdom:<i> In all thy ways acknowledge Him and he shall direct thy path</i>, (Prov. 3. 6).

Chapter 4

Since the preservation of physical strength and bodily health is to be considered as godly— because it is impossible for man to have any knowledge or understanding of the Creator, whilst he is bodily ill—it is necessary that man should carefully abstain from things which are detrimental to the body, but to accustom himself to the use of things, which are health preserving and invigorating: As for instance, man should not eat, except when he feels hungry, nor drink, except when he is thirsty; not to delay evacuation even for a moment.
Man should not indulge in eating to satiety, but leave part of his appetite unsatisfied, and drink at meals but a little water mixed with wine, but as soon as the food begins to digest, he may drink what he requires. But even then he is not to drink too much water. Man should not eat before he had some exercise in walking, so that the body becomes warm; or do some kind of work; or some other bodily exercise. In short, he shall every morning exert his physical powers with activity, so that his body becomes warm; rest a short while, until he is refreshed, and then partake of his meal; to take a hot bath after exercise, is also conducive to health, after that he is to wait a little before he eats.
One should always quietly sit down during meals, or incline on his left, not walk nor ride, nor exert himself to perspiration, nor walk about until the food becomes digested; but he who walks about or exerts himself directly after meals brings on himself evil and severe maladies.
Day and night being together twenty four hours, it is enough for men to sleep a third part thereof, which is eight hours: these should be towards the end of the night, so that there should be eight hours from the beginning of his sleep to sun-rise, thus he leaves his couch before the sun breaks forth.
Man should not sleep either lying on his face or upon his back, but on his side. At the beginning of the night on his left, and at the end of the night on the right side; nor should he sleep directly after meals, but wait about three or four hours; nor sleep in the day-time.
Things of relaxing nature, as for instance, grapes, figs, mulberries, pears, melons, all kinds of gherkins, man should partake of before meals, not mix them with the general food, but rest a little, and then eat. But things of a costive tendency, such as pomegranates, quince apples, tomatoes, he may eat directly after meals, but not to excess.
If one wishes to partake of poultry and meat at the same meal, he should eat poultry first; if he desires to partake of eggs and poultry, he should eat eggs first; lamb or mutton, and beef, he should eat lamb or mutton first; as a rule, he ought always to eat the lighter things first.
In summer time he should eat cooling things, not take too much spices, but he may use vinegar. In winter he should eat heating food, use much spices, and take a little mustard lazarwort; the same rules he should observe in hot or cold countries, according to each climate.
There are certain kinds of food which are extremely injurious, and which should be altogether avoided; for instance, large, salt, stale fish, salt stale cheese, mushrooms, and all things of a fungous nature; stale salt meat, wine just from the press, and cooked victuals that have lost their flavour. Likewise any food of a nauseous and extremely acid flavour, are to the body as a deadly poison; there are again some kinds of food which are injurious, though not to the extent as the former; therefore, one should partake but little of them, and at long intervals; but by no means should he use them as his daily food, or continually to eat them with his food; as for instance, large fish, cheese, and milk which has stood above twenty-four hours, meat of big bulls and rams, beans, lentils pulse, barley bread, unleavened bread, cabbage, leek, onions, garlick, mustard, radish, all these are injurious food, of which one should partake but very little, and only in winter, but in summer time one ought to avoid them altogether. Beans and lentils should not be eaten either in summer or winter, pumpkins, however, may be used in summer.
There are some kinds of food which are injurious, though not as much as those as stated above; for instance, water-fowl, young small pigeons, dates, bread roasted or kneeded in oil, fine wheaten flour, which has been so much sifted as to leave not even a particle of bran, fish-brine and acrid sauce; of all these, one is not to partake much, and he who is prudent to master his passions, not to be carried away by his appetite, and abstains altogether from these things, except if he requires them as medicine, he deserves to be termed a hero.
Man should always abstain from fruit of the trees, and shall not partake too much of them, even dried, much less fresh; but before they are entirely ripe they are to the body like daggers. Carobs are always injurious; also all sour fruits are bad, and should only be taken in small quantities in summer time and in hot climates. But figs, grapes, and almonds are always conducive to health either fresh or dried. Man may partake of them to satisfaction, yet he must not use them as his daily food, though they are healthier than all other fruit of trees.
Honey and wine are injurious to the young, but healthy for the old, especially in winter time. Man should eat in summer two thirds only what he is used to take in winter.

There is another rule to be observed regarding physical health: as long as a person works and takes plenty of exercise, does not eat to satiety, and his bowels are regular, he is sure to escape illness, and will find his strength increasing, even if he should happen to eat unwholesome food.
But any one who sits idle, taking no exercise whatever, or who delays evacuation, or who is of a costive nature, even if he takes the most wholesome food, and strictly living according to sanitary rules, will yet all his life be suffering and find his strength failing. Immoderate eating is to the body of any man like deadly poison and is the root of all diseases; indeed, most maladies which befall men arise either from unwholesome fruit, or from excessive eating even of wholesome food. To this, Solomon alludes in his wisdom: <i>Whosoever keepeth his </i>MOUTH <i>and his</i> TONGUE, <i>keepeth his soul from troubles, </i>(Prov. 21. 23) viz, he who keeps his mouth from eating unwholesome food or from gluttony, and his tongue from speaking, except that which he requires.
The following are rules for bathing: man ought to take a bath about once a week, not to be taken immediately after meals, nor when he is hungry, but when the food begins to digest. He should bathe the whole of his body in warm water, but not so hot as almost to scald the body, the head only in hotter water; after that he should bathe in lukewarm water, then some degrees cooler, and ultimately in cold water; the head, however, should not be immersed either in lukewarm or cold water. In winter one should not bathe in cold water at all, nor take the bath until the whole body is brought into perspiration, and the blood in circulation. He should not stay long in the bath, but as soon as his body perspires, and his blood is in circulation, he shall wash off and go out.
When he quits the bath, he should directly dress and cover his head in the outer place, so as to avoid taking cold; even in the summer time he must be careful. After leaving the bath he is to wait awhile till he has refreshed and rested himself, and the heat has subsided, and he may take his meal. If he can sleep a little on his leaving the bath, and before he takes his meals, it would be very desirable. He shall not drink cold water when he comes out of the bath, much less to drink in the bath; but if he is thirsty on his leaving the bath, so that he cannot resist drinking, then he is to take water mixed with wine or honey.
Man should not use himself to let blood, only in case of great urgency. He should not bleed either in summer or winter, but in spring or autumn. After fifty years of age one should not bleed at all; nor should one take a bath and bleed on the same day; nor bleed and go on a journey; nor on the day returning from a journey, and on the day of bleeding he should eat and drink less than usual; he shall rest on that day, neither work, exercise, nor walk.

He who conducts himself according to the rules which we have laid down, I guarantee him that he will not be visited will illness all his days, until he reaches a high old age, and dies from the decay of nature, nor will he need a physician, and always enjoy good and perfect health, except if he was constitutionally unhealthy from his birth, or if he gave way to evil habits from early youth, or by extraordinary calamities, such as pest or famine.
All these rules which we have mentioned above, are for the guidance of the healthy only; but persons who are ill, or suffering in one of their limbs, or led for many years an irregular life, have to follow others rules and prescriptions, according to the nature of their malady, as it is explained in the book on medicine; change of diet and the regular course of life is the root of illness.
In all places where there is no medical adviser, it behoves both the healthy and the sick not to depart from any of the rules mentioned in this chapter, inasmuch as each of them lead to beneficial result.
In a town where the following ten things are not to be found, no wise man ought to reside, viz.:—physician, surgeon, bath, public convenience, water ready for public use—as a river or a spring—a house of prayer, a teacher for youth, a scribe, an overseer of the poor, and a tribunal of power and authority.

Chapter 5

As well as the wise man may be known by his wisdom, by his knowledge which distinguish him from the generality of men, so he must alike be recognized by his habits, eating, drinking and in all his private affairs; by his speech, walk, dress, or by his prudent conversation, transactions; in short, all these deeds should be proper and well regulated. For instance, the scholar should not be a glutton, but to eat only such food as to sustain his health, and even of that he must not eat to excess, to which the prophet alludes in the verse <i>“Behold, I will spread dung upon your faces, even the dung of your solemn feasts,” </i>(Malachi 2. 3). On which our sages remark: that the prophet here speaks of persons who continually eat and drink, and make all their days like feasts, and those that say,<i> “Let us eat and drink for tomorrow we shall die.”</i> This is the feasting and banqueting of the ungodly, which Scripture justly condemns in the passage: <i>“For all tables are full of vomit and filthiness, so that there is no place clean,”</i> (Isaiah 28. 8). But the wise man partakes only of one or two dishes, sufficient to sustain life: <i>The righteous eateth to the satisfying of his soul,”</i> (Prov. 13. 25.)
When the wise eats that little which is suitable for him, he should partake of it only in his house and at his own table, and not in a public room or in the street, except in cases of urgency, so that he should not incur the disrespect of the public. He shall likewise not eat in company of the ignorant, nor at tables reeking with loathsome viands; nor should he indulge feasting in any place, even in the society of the wise; nor should he join the banquets of large assemblies, except on occasion of celebrating religious observances, for instance feasts on the occasion of betrothal or nuptials. The righteous and pious of yore never took meals at any house except their own.
When the wise man drinks wine, he should partake of it only for the benefit of his health; but whosoever drinks to intoxication he sins, draws contempt upon himself and loses his wisdom; if he gets drunk in the presence of the ignorant he profanes the Divine name. It is improper to drink wine at noon, even little, except during meals; for drinking at meals is not intoxicating, it is only wine after meals of which we should beware.

Whosoever conduct himself according to these rules of propriety, does not only promote his own cleanliness, holiness, and moral improvement, but if he is blessed with children, they will be agreeable and modest members of society, capable of wisdom and virtue; but he who follows the conduct of the vulgar that walk in darkness will have children equally degenerating.

The wise man should not be clamorous, noisy and irrational in his speech; nor should he even raise his voice too high, but his conversation with all people should be gentle. In the gentleness of his conversation he shall take heed not to carry it too far, so as to give it the appearance of reserved pride; he should also anticipate every man with his polite greetings, so that all should be pleased with him, he should judge every man favorably, speak only of the merits of his friends and not of his demerits; should he be a lover and follower of peace; if he perceives that his words might prove beneficial and people will listen to them, he should speak contrary, he should keep silence. For instance, he will never attempt to pacify his neighbour whilst the latter is in anger, and make no effort to absolve one from his vow at the moment when it was uttered, but should wait until the mind of him, who made the vow will become calm and composed; nor will he console the mourner, whilst the dead lies before him, because the mourner is too much afflicted before the burial, and such like; nor should he force his presence on his friend at the time of his misfortune or failings, but should withdraw his eyes from it; nor should he go off from his word, neither to add to it nor to diminish, except when it tends to establish peace. In short he makes it a general rule to converse only on wisdom, or to effect benevolence. He should not converse with females in public places, even with his own wife, sister or daughter.
The wise man should not walk ostentatiously and haughtily, as said by Isaiah: <i>And they walk with stretched forth necks and wanton eyes, </i>( Isaiah 3. 16). Nor should walk about with slow and affectedly measured steps as women and proud people, as the prophet says: <i>Walking and measuring as they go, and making a tinkling with their feet, (ibid);</i> nor should he run about in public roads like mad; nor should stoop as if he were deformed, but should incline his look downwards as one wrapt in prayer, and his gait in the street should be like a man occupied in business. From the manner of man’s walking, we may likewise discern whether he is a man of sense and intellect, or foolish and ignorant; so says Solomon in his wisdom: <i>Yea, also, when he that is a fool, walketh by the way, his wisdom faileth him, and he saith to every one that he is a fool, </i>(Eccles. 10. 3), viz., he himself will proclaim his folly.
The dress of a scholar should be decent and clean, he should beware of grease or any other spots soiling his garments. He should not dress either in costly garments decked with gold and purple, so as conspicuously to draw the public eye on him, nor in cloth too mean, which draws disrespect on the wearer, but in a respectable middle-class dress; nor should his naked body be seen through dresses of a very thin stuff, like the very fine linen garments made in Egypt; nor should his dress be dragging on the ground like that of the haughty, but should only reach to the heel and the sleeves to the tops of the fingers; nor wear his<i> Talith</i> (Fringed garment, worn at prayers), conspicuously long, so as to appear ostentatious, except on Sabbath, provided he has no other. He should not wear shoes with any patches in the summer, but if he is a poor man he may wear them in the winter time. He should not appear in the street perfumed, nor with scented garments, nor use any perfume for his hair, but he may apply them for the sake of cleanliness. He shall not go out alone at night, except when he has to attend an appointed time for his studies. All these rules should be observed to avoid suspicion.
The scholar should measure his words with judgment; he should eat and drink and maintain his household according to his means and prosperity, nor to encumber himself with unnecessary burdens. Our sages recommend that man should spend upon his table rather less than his means would allow, but dress fully up to his means, and expend in honor of his wife and children even somewhat beyond his means.
It is the proper way for rational men, first to determine upon some trade to maintain himself, then to take a dwelling house, and then to take a wife; for scripture says: <i>“And what man is he that hath planted a vineyard and hath not yet eaten of it?” </i>(Deut. 20. 6); then <i>“What man is there that hath built a new house and hath not dedicated it?”</i> (Ibid 5); and then: <i>“And what man is there that hath betrothed a wife and hath not taken her?”</i> (Ibid 7). But the irrational at first marry, then if they have the means, look for a dwelling house, and in old age they try to find a trade, or are compelled to live upon alms. Therefore, Scripture in the denunciations takes them in the following order: “Thou shalt betroth a wife; and thou shalt build a house; and thou shalt plant a vineyard;” signifying thy actions will be perverse, or that thou shalt not prosper in thy ways; whilst of prosperity, Scripture says: <i>And David behaved himself wisely in all his ways; and the Lord was with him</i>, (I Samuel 18. 14).
It is unlawful for man to lavish or to assign for sacred purposes all his property, so as ultimately he himself will become burthensome to the public; nor shall he sell a field in order to buy a house; nor sell a house and buy moveable property; nor to do business with the money obtained by the sale of a house; but he may sell moveable property in order to buy land. In short, his endeavours should be to secure his property, and to change the unsafe for that which is safe; but his desires should by no means be directed to momentary enjoyment, or to seek trivial enjoyment at considerable sacrifice.
All dealings of the wise men should be in truth and integrity. His nay—should be nay; and his yea—should be yea. He should in calculations of money matters be strict with himself, but liberal towards others. The purchase-money he should give at once, he should also enter in no security or responsibility for others, nor undertake the liability of a power of attorney; nor should he enter in the course of business in such obligations as the law has not imposed upon him, so that he should be able to abide by his word, and not flinch from it. If others are lawfully indebted to him, he should give them time; be forgiving; lend and be gracious with it; nor should he infringe upon the business of his fellow man, and should all his life vex none. As a rule, he should always be rather persecuted than persecute; rather offended than offend; and, as regards him who acts up to all these and similar virtues, Scripture says: <i>And (He) said unto me, thou art my servant, O Israel, in whom I will be glorified.</i> (Ibid 49. 3.)

Chapter 6

It is in the nature of man, that he is carried away in his dispositions and in his actions, by the example of his friends and companions, and to be guided by the customs of his countrymen. A man ought therefore to associate with the righteous, and to frequent the company of the wise, so that he may learn to imitate their actions: moreover he ought to keep at a distance from the wicked, who walk in darkness, lest he learn to imitate their actions. This is what Solomon says: <i>He that walketh with wise men shall be wise; but a companion of fools shall be destroyed, </i>(Prov. 13. 20). It is also said: <i>Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly, etc.</i>, (Ps. i. 1). Now if he happen to be in a country, the customs of which are wicked, and the inhabitants of which do not walk in the right way; he ought to go to a place, whose inhabitants are righteous men, who guide them selves in the way of the good. But if the in habitants of all the countries which he knows, and the report of which he has heard, happen to guide themselves in a way which is not the good one, (as there are many in our days); or if it be not in his power to proceed to a country the customs of which are good, in consequence of [hostile] troops or some other prevailing disease, he should keep solitary; just as it is said: <i>He sitteth alone and keepeth silence, </i>(Lam. 3. 28). And if they (his countrymen) happen to be so wicked and sinful, as not to suffer him to dwell in the country, unless he mix with them, and be guided by their wicked customs; he ought to proceed to caves, thickets, and deserts, rather than guide himself in the way of sinners, just as it is said: <i>Oh that I had in the wilderness a lodging place of wayfaring men</i>, (Jer. 9. 2).
It is a positive commandment to attach himself to wise men and to their disciples, in order that we may acquire their manners; just as it is said: <i>And to Him shalt thou cleave</i>,(Deut. 10. 20). Now is it possible for a man to cleave to the <i>Shechinah</i> (the Divine Glory)?—In explanation of the commandment the sages remark; Attach thyself to wise men and to their disciples. A man should therefore endeavour to marry the daughter of a scholar, and also to marry his daughter to a scholar; to eat and to drink with scholars; to trade with scholars, and to unite with them by every means of union; for it is said: <i>And to cleave unto Him</i>, (Deut. 11. 22). In like manner the sages have also enjoined us and said: “Embrace the dust of their feet, (i. e. the feet of the learned), and eagerly drinking their words.”
Every Israelite is commanded to love his fellow man like himself; for it is said: <i>But thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself; </i>(Lev. 19. 18). A man ought therefore to speak in his (<i>i. e.</i> his neighbour’s) praise, and to care for his money, just as he cares for his own money, and as he guards his own honor; and whosoever glories in the shame of his fellow man, has forfeited his claim to a future state.
Love for the stranger who comes and seeks protection (<i>i. e.</i> took refuge) under the wings of the <i>Shechinah</i>, is ordained by two distinct positive commandments. First—because he (the stranger) is included in the definition of <i>neighbour</i>, (whom we are commanded to love); and again—because he is a <i>stranger</i>, he is included in the commandment: LOVE <i>ye therefore the stranger</i>, (Deut. 10. 19). The Holy One, blessed be He! has enjoined upon us the love of the stranger, in the same terms as He has enjoined upon us the love of his own name; for it is said: <i>And thou shalt </i>LOVE <i>the Lord thy God</i>, (Deut. 6. 5); (so that the word LOVE is used in both instances). The Holy One, blessed be He! Himself loves strangers; for it is said: <i>And loveth the stranger</i>, (Deut. 10. 18).
An Israelite who hates his fellow man in his heart transgresses a negative commandment; for it is said: <i>Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart</i>, (Lev. 19. 17). Yet he is not subject to the infliction of stripes for transgressing this negative commandment, because no positive act has been committed. But the law has only cautioned against internal hatred, but striking or abusing his fellow-creatures, though unlawful, does not come under the category of the prohibition of “thou shalt not hate, etc.”
If a man is offended by another, he shall not bear any hatred towards him, as is said of the wicked: <i>And Absalom spake unto Amnon neither good nor bad; for Absalom hated Amnon, </i>(II Sam. 13. 22.); but he is commanded openly to remonstrate with him, and to say unto him: Wherefore hast thou done unto me so and so? and wherefore hast thou offended me by such a thing? for it is said: <i>Thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy neighbour, </i>(Lev. 19. 17); and if the other repent and ask his pardon, he should accede and not be unrelenting, for it is said: <i>So Abraham prayed unto God, </i>(Gen. 20. 17).
Whosoever sees his fellow man commit a sin, or walk in a way which is not good, is bound to endeavour to bring him back to the proper way, and to make known unto him, that by his wicked actions he sins against himself; for it is said: <i>Thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy neighbour</i>, (Lev. 19. 17). He, who rebukes another, either as regards matters between man and man, or between man and God, ought to rebuke him privately, to talk to him gently and in mild terms, and to make known unto him, that he tells him all this for his own good only, for the purpose of bringing him to the life of the world that is to come. Now if the other listens to him, the end is attained; and if not, he ought to rebuke him a second time; and a third time; and so he ought to rebuke him continually until the offender breaks out in violence against his person, and says in defiance: “I shall not listen.” But he in whose power it is to prevent others from sin, and yet does not prevent them, becomes himself responsible for their iniquities, because he might have prevented them.
He who rebukes his friend, ought at first not to use harsh expressions, so as to put him to shame; for it is said:<i> And thou shalt not suffer sin upon him</i>, (Lev. 19. 17). Thus the sages say: lest it should be supposed that the rebuke may be carried so far as to put him to the blush, scripture warns us: And thou shalt not overburden him with sin. Hence we know that it is not lawful for a man to put an lsraelite to shame, and least of all in public; for although exposing a fellow man to shame is not an offence punished with the infliction of stripes, still it is a great sin. Thus the sages say; He, who puts the face of his fellow man to the blush in public, forfeits his claim to a future state. A man should therefore be very careful with regard to this matter, not to put his fellow creature to shame in public, whether he be a man of importance or insignificant; not to call him by any name of which he may be ashamed, and that he do not relate in his presence any thing which may cast reproach on him. This however, applies only to matters between man and man; but as regards offences against heaven, if the offender has turned his back to private rebuke, we may put him to shame before a multitude, make his sins public, reprove him in his presence, abuse and denounce him until he turn for the better, as all the prophets did in rebuking Israel.
If a person has been offended by his fellow man, and yet does not wish to reprove him, or to take any notice of it, on account of the offender being too vulgar a person, or of a disordered mind, but has pardoned him in his heart, so that he neither hates nor reproves him—behold! this is the highest degree of piety, for the law is especially averse to internal hatred.
A man ought to be very careful in his conduct to orphans and widows, on account of their minds being already deeply dejected, and their spirits depressed, though they be possessed of wealth: should they even be the widows or the orphans of kings, we are still cautioned in our conduct towards them, for it is said: <i>Ye shall not afflict</i> ANY <i>widow, or fatherless child</i>, (Exod. 22. 22). Now, how should we behave to them? We should talk to them in no other than mild terms, and use them in no other than an honourable manner; we should neither afflict their bodies with hard work, nor their minds with hard words, and should even be more careful of their money than of our own. Whosoever irritates or provokes them, afflicts their minds, domineers over them, or wastes their money—trespasses against a negative commandment; and much more, one who smites or abuses them. Now as to the negative offence it is not punishable with stripes, yet its retribution is specified in the law, namely: <i>And My wrath shall was: hot, and I will kill you with the sword.</i> Indeed there is a covenant established respecting them by Him, who spake the word and the Universe existed, that whenever the oppressed cry unto Him in consequence of violence, they are listened to, for it is said: <i>If thou afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry, </i>(Exod. 22. 23). This again applies only to inflicting pain upon them from selfish motives. But if a master chastises them with the object of instructing them in religion or in a trade, or in order to guide them in the right way, this is lawful. However he must not, for all this, use them in the same manner as he would use other persons, but he ought to make some distinction with regard to them, and to lead them on with gentleness, with great consideration and respect, for it is said: <i>For the Lord will plead their cause</i>, (Prov. 22. 23), whether it be a fatherless or motherless orphan; and how long are they called orphans in this respect? —It is until they no longer stand in need of any adult person to support them, bring them up, and take care of them, but are themselves able to provide for their own wants, like all other adults.

Chapter 7

He who goes about as a spy against his fellow man trespasses a negative commandment; for it is said: <i>Thou shalt not go about as a tale-bearer, among thy people</i>, (Lev. 19. 16); and although this offence is not punishable with stripes, it is still a great sin, and may cause the destruction of a great many souls of Israel; and therefore it is followed immediately by the commandment: <i>Neither shalt thou stand against the blood of thy neighbour.</i> The evil consequences of the conduct of Doeg, the Edomite, may furnish an important lesson on slander.
Now what is the character of a tale bearer?—He that carries about news from one to another, and says: such and such a man said so and so; of such and such a man I have heard so and so.—Though it be true, yet it is pregnant with incalculable mischief to society. Now there is still another sin which is even much greater than this, and which is also comprehended in this negative commandment, namely that of calumny, which is, when one relates anything disgraceful of his fellow, though he speak the truth; but he who speaks falsehood, may be called: <i>one who maliciously spreads false reports against his fellow-man; </i>whereas by a man; of an evil tongue, we understand him who sits down and says: such and such a man did so and so; or, his parents have been so and so; using at the same time disgraceful expressions. Of such a one Scripture says: <i>The Lord shall cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that speaketh proud things</i>, (Ps. 12. 3).
The sages say: For three transgressions punishment is inflicted upon a man in this world, moreover he forfeits his claim to a future state, namely:<i> idolatry, adultery</i>, and <i>bloodshed;</i> but an evil tongue surpasses all these. Again the sages says: He who calumniates, is as if he denied the radical religious principle, as we read: <i>Who have said, With our tongue will we prevail, our lips are our own</i>, WHO IS LORD OVER US? (Ps. 12. 4). Moreover the sages say: An evil tongue destroys three persons: namely, him who utters it; him who listens to it; and him against whom it is uttered; but he who listens to it, is even more guilty than he who utters it.
Again there are expressions, which may be said to be <i>indirect slander</i>, for instance, if one were to say of a certain person, that he will remain as he is now; or, if he were to say: Do not speak of such an individual, I do not wish to make known what has happened, or what has taken place; and the like expressions. Also speaking <i>uncalled</i> for in favour of his fellow man before his enemies, is<i> indirect slander;</i> as this may cause his enemies to speak reproachfully of him. To such praise Solomon alludes: <i>He that blesseth his friend with a loud voice, rising early in the morning, it shall be counted a curse to him</i>, (Prov. 27. 14); because such laudation generally lead to detraction. It is the same with regard to him who indulges in calumny, by way of jest, or in a seemingly careless manner, as though he were not speaking this out of hatred. Now this is what Solomon said in his wisdom: <i>As a mad man who casteth firebrands, arrows, and death, etc. And saith: Am not I in sport?</i> (Prov. 26. 18, 19). And so it is also with him who utters calumny in a deceitful manner, namely, as if he spake at random, pretending not to be aware of its being slander, and who, when others want to prevent him from talking in this way, says: I did not know that this was slander, or that such was the conduct of such an individual.
Whether a person calumniates another in his presence or in his absence, or if things are spoken, the report of which is calculated to injure his fellow-man, in his body or property, or even to distress or frighten him, such is calumny. If such things have been spoken before three men, they have already obtained publicity, and therefore if one of the three report it again, it can no longer be considered calumny, provided his design be not to spread the report, and to propagate it still more.
Now all these are considered calumniators with whom it would even be unlawful to dwell in the same neighbourhood, much more to associate with them and listen to their words. Indeed the decree against our fathers in the wilderness, was not issued except because of the calumny.
Whosoever takes vengeance of his fellow-man trespasses against a negative commandment; for it is said: <i>Thou shalt not avenge</i>, (Lev. 19. 18); and although the offence is not punishable with stripes, it still shows a very wicked disposition; it being more becoming in a man to act with forbearance in all wordly concerns; for with intelligent men, all these are but vain and idle things, such as are not of sufficient consequence to call forth vengeance. Now what is vengeance? Suppose one says to another; Lend me thy sickle; Lend me thy hatchet; and the other says: I will not lend thee. To-morrow the other has need to borrow of the first, and so he says to him: Lend me thy hatchet; but he says: I will not lend it to thee, as thou didst not lend to me when I asked thee! such is vengeance; but rather when the other comes to request something of him, he ought to comply with a willing heart, and not retaliate; and so it is in similar cases. So David said respecting his own kind dispositions:<i> If I have retaliated upon him that paid me evil for good or I have stripped, etc. </i>
He who bears a grudge against any man of Israel, likewise transgresses a negative commandment; for it is said: <i>Nor bear any grudge against the children of thy people</i>, (Lev. 19. 18). Now what is bearing a grudge? Suppose Reuben says to Simeon: Let me this house for hire, or lend me this ox; and Simeon refuses. After some days, Simeon has need to borrow or to hire something of Reuben; and then Reuben says to him: There it is! I lend it to thee; I am not like thee; I will not retaliate—He who does so trespasses against the commandment: <i>Nor bear any grudge;</i> but as he should rather obliterate the thing from his memory, and not harbour any ill-feeling, because as long as he bears a grudge on account of the matter, and keeps it in his mind, he may go so far as to wreak vengeance. Therefore was the law particularly averse about bearing a grudge, enjoining a man to obliterate the matter from his mind, so as not to remember it at all; this being the right disposition by which social life may be consolidated.