Mishneh Torah, Murderer and the Preservation of Life
משנה תורה, הלכות רוצח ושמירת נפש
Maimonides' Mishneh Torah, edited by Philip Birnbaum, New York, 1967
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH002108864

Mishneh Torah, Murderer and the Preservation of Life



Chapter 1



Chapter 2

If anyone killed another with his own hand, as when he struck him down with a sword or a deadly rock, strangled him to death or burned him alive, he must be executed by the court, because at any rate he murdered a man by himself.
On the other hand, if a man hired a murderer to kill somebody, or sent servants to kill him, or tied him up and put him in front of a lion or similar beast and it killed him, and also if an individual attempted suicide, each of these is guilty of shedding blood and bears the crime of murder; he deserves to die by an act of God, but is not executed by the court.
How do we know that to be the law? It is written : "Whoever sheds human blood, by human hands shall his own blood be shed" (Genesis 9:6). This refers to one who commits murder himself and not through an agent. "I will require your lifeblood" (9:5) refers to suicide. "I will require it of any beast" refers to one who puts a man in front of a beast to devour him. "Of man I will require a reckoning for human life, of every man for that of his fellow man" (9:5) refers to one who hires others to kill his fellow man. The verb <i>require</i> is explicitly iterated in the three cases to show that the verdict is left with God.
Any of these and similar murderers, who are not sentenced to death by a court, might be put to death by a royal decree if a Jewish king desires this for the benefit of society.— —
If the king did not have them executed, if circumstances did not demand such a measure, the court must at any rate have them lashed to the point of death, and harshly imprisoned for many years, punishing them severely in order to terrify and frighten other criminals, so that this may not turn into a pitfall and a snare for others as to say: "I will arrange to kill my enemy indirectly as did so-and-so, and I will be acquitted."
Whether a man killed an adult or an infant of one day, male or female, he must be executed if he committed deliberate murder, or exiled if he killed unwittingly.— —
Whether a man killed a healthy individual or a sick man on the verge of death, or even a dying person, he must be executed.— —


Whether a man killed a Jew or a Canaanite slave, he must be executed on his account; if he killed him unwittingly, he must go into exile.

The difference between one's own slave and the slave of others is that he has the right to strike his own slave. Accordingly, if he struck him hard enough to kill, and he was on the verge of death for twenty-four hours and then died, he should not be put to death on account of his slave, even though he died as a result of the blow, for it is written: "If the slave survives a day or two, he shall not be punished, for the slave is his property" (Exodus 21:21). The phrase <i>day or two</i> means a day that is like two, namely: twenty-four hours.
But if a man struck a slave not his own, even if the slave died on account of the blow several days afterwards, the man is put to death, as in the case of any freeman, because he struck him hard enough to kill.
It seems to me, that if a man struck his slave with a knife or a sword, with a stone or a fist, and the like, and the slave was considered to be fatally wounded and then he died, the law concerning "a day or two" is not applicable to him ; even if the slave died after a year, his master should be put to death on account of him. For this reason it is written : "If a man strikes his slave … with a rod" (Exodus 21:20), because the Torah has permitted him to strike his slave merely with a rod or a stick or a strap, and the like, but not a murderous blow.

Chapter 3

If a man willfully struck a person with a stone or a piece of wood and killed him, we should appraise the object with which he knocked him down and the place on which he dealt the blow, to determine whether that object was or was not capable of killing by striking that vital organ.— —


The Torah has stated no minimal size for an instrument of iron, as it is written: "If he struck the person with an iron tool, so that he died, the man is a murderer" (Numbers 35:16), even if he used a needle.— —
If a man knocked a person down and killed him without a tool, if he struck him with his hand or foot, or bumped his head against him and killed him, we should appraise the strength of the assailant as well as the strength of the slain man, and the place of the blow. There is no comparison between pushing a person with a finger and kicking him with full might, between striking him in the heart and hitting him on the hip, between a weak person striking a robust and strong individual and a strong and healthy man striking a weak and sickly person.



If a man pushed a person into water or fire, the case should be evaluated : If the victim could have escaped, the offender is exempt from the death-penalty by the court; otherwise, he is held liable.— — The same applies to a man who put his hand over a person's mouth and nose and left him in convulsions and unable to live, or a man who tied another up and placed him in the cold or in the heat, so that he died, — — or one who put another into a cave or a house and filled it with smoke, so that he died.— — In each of these cases the culprit must be executed on account of the victim, since he is regarded as if he suffocated him with his own hand.

Chapter 4

If a man intended to kill A and killed B, he is exempt from a death-penalty imposed by the court, from payment of compensation, and from banishment. — — Accordingly, if a man threw a stone into a group of Jews and killed one of them, he is exempt from a death-penalty imposed by the court.

If a man struck a person with a stone or fist, or the like, an appraisal should be made. If it is considered likely that he will live, the offender pays compensation on five counts and is released. Even if the victim fell ill, took a turn for the worse and died from the blow, the offender is exempt. If, however, he is considered likely to die, the assailant must immediately be put into prison, while we wait for further developments. If the victim dies, the assailant is executed; but if he has improved and recovered completely, being able to walk along in the street like any other healthy individual, the assailant pays compensation on five counts and is released.
When the Torah says "upon his staff," it does not mean that he can walk leaning on his staff or on another person ; even a dying man is able to walk leaning on a staff. The phrase <i>upon his staff</i> only means that he can walk, leaning on his own strength, without requiring the strength of another person for support.

Chapter 5

Anyone who has killed inadvertently is banished from the town where he has slain to the cities of refuge. It is a positive command to banish him, as it is written: "There he shall remain until the death of the high priest" (Numbers 35:25). The court has been warned not to accept ransom from a man who has killed inadvertently, allowing him to stay in his own town, as it is written : "You must not accept ransom [in order to allow one to stay home] instead of his flight to a city of refuge" (35:32).
The man who killed inadvertently is not banished unless the victim died immediately. But if a man wounded a person inadvertently, even though the victim was judged to be fatally hurt and he fell ill and died, the man is not banished, because the victim may have hastened his own death.— —




Originally, a manslayer with or without intent would flee immediately to one of the cities of refuge, and the court of the town where he killed a person would send and fetch him from there and try him.— — If condemned to death, he was executed;— — if acquitted, he was set free;— — if condemned to exile, he was sent back to his place.— —



If he unwittingly left the limits of his city of refuge, whoever killed him was banished on account of him, whether blood-avenger or any other man. If a man killed him within the limits of his city of refuge, he was executed on account of him, even if he was a blood-avenger.

Chapter 6



Chapter 7

If a student was banished to a city of refuge, his teacher must be exiled with him, as it is written: "And he shall live" (Deuteronomy 19:5); that is, make it possible for him to live. Life without study is like death for scholars who seek wisdom. So too, if a teacher went into exile, his school must be exiled with him.





If a homicide was exiled to a city of refuge and its inhabitants wished to honor him, he must say to them: "I am a homicide." If they replied: "Nevertheless," he should accept the honor from them.
An exiled man must never leave his city of refuge, not even to fulfill a religious duty or bear witness in a civil or a capital case, — — not even if all Israel needs his help, as that of Joab ben Zeruiah; he must not leave the city until the death of the high priest. If he did leave, he surrendered himself to death [as an outlaw], as we have explained.




A homicide who returned to his town, after the death of the high priest, was regarded as any other man; if the blood-avenger killed him, he would be executed on account of him, having already obtained atonement in his exile.
Even though he had obtained atonement, he could never come back to public office held by him previously. He was deprived of his high office throughout his life, because such a dire mishap had occurred through him.

Chapter 8

The Torah commands to set aside cities of refuge, as it is written: "You shall set apart three cities" (Deuteronomy 19:7). The laws concerning the cities of refuge were observed only in Eretz Yisrael.
There were six such cities : three were set apart by Moses in Transjordan, and three by Joshua in the Land of Canaan.


The court is required to build direct roads to the cities of refuge, to keep them in repair and to have them made wide. All obstacles and obstructions must be removed from them — — in order not to delay an escaping person, as it is written: "You shall prepare the road" (19:3). <i>Refuge, refuge</i> was written on each crossroad, so that the homicides could know where to turn.



All the cities of the Levites offer asylum, each one being a city of refuge, as it is written: "In addition to [the six cities of refuge assigned to the Levites] you shall give forty-two cities ; all the cities which you give to the Levites shall be forty-eight" (Numbers 35:6-7). The Torah regards them all alike in terms of refuge.
What is the difference between the cities of refuge that were set apart as a refuge and the cities of the Levites? The cities of refuge afford asylum with or without consent, as soon as the homicide enters he is given asylum; but the other cities belonging to the Levites afford asylum only if he entered with their consent. Then, too, a homicide residing in one of the cities of refuge need not pay rent, but one who lives in a city of the Levites must pay rent to the landlord.

Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11

The Torah commands that one should make a parapet for his roof, as it is written: "You shall make a parapet for your roof" (Deuteronomy 22:8). This law applies only to a dwelling house; but a storehouse, a stable, or the like, does not require it. Any house less than four square cubits is exempt from the need of a parapet.


There is no difference between a roof or anything else that is dangerous and likely to cause death to a person who might stumble. If, for instance, one has a well or a pit in his courtyard — — he must build an enclosing ring ten handbreadths high, or put a cover over it, so that a person should not fall into it and die. So too, any obstruction that is a danger to life must be removed as a matter of positive duty and extremely necessary caution.
The sages have prohibited many things because they are dangerous to life. If anyone disregards them and says : "What claim have others on me if I risk my own life?" or: "I do not mind this," he should be lashed for disobedience.
The rules are: A person must never put his mouth to a pipe spouting water and drink; he must not drink from rivers or ponds at night, for fear that he might swallow a leech without seeing; he must not drink uncovered water, for fear that a snake or any other reptile drank it, and he might die.







Even if nine people drank from an uncovered jar and did not die, a tenth one may not drink from it. The sages have reported a case where a tenth person drank and died, since the poison of a snake sinks to the bottom. There is a poison of venomous reptiles that floats on the top and another that remains suspended in the liquid. For this reason, all of it is forbidden, even if the liquid has been passed through a strainer. So too, if nine ate of an uncovered melon and did not die, let not a tenth person eat of it.

Chapter 12




One must not put small change or denars into his mouth, because they may bear the dry saliva of one who suffers from a skin disease or leprosy; they may bear perspiration, and all human perspiration is deadly poison, except that which comes from the face.







It is forbidden to sell arms of any kind to heathen ; one should not sharpen their weapons; one should not sell them a knife — — or anything that is likely to be a public danger. Shields, however, may be sold to them, since they are used only for defense.
Just as the sages have prohibited the sale of arms to a heathen, so have they prohibited selling the same to a Jew who sells to a heathen. On the other hand, weapons may be sold to the local citizens' force, since they protect the Jewish population.
Whatever must not be sold to a heathen must not be sold to a Jewish bandit, since this will encourage a criminal and misdirect him. So too, anyone who misdirects a person, blind on any subject, by giving him wrong advice, or encourages a criminal, who is blind and cannot see the way of truth because of his greedy lust, is transgressing a prohibitive command, as it is written: "You shall not place a stumbling block before the blind" (Leviticus 19:14), meaning that if a man comes to you for advice, you should give him an advice fitting his needs.

Chapter 13

If, on the road, one meets a person whose animal is lying helpless under its load, he must help to release the animal whether or not the load is more than it can carry. This is a positive command, as it is written: "You must help him" (Exodus 23:5).


This is the general rule: In any case where, if the animal were his own he would load or unload it, he must load or unload it when it belongs to another person.— —
If he unloaded and reloaded an animal and it fell down again, he must load and unload again, even a hundred times, as it is written: "You must help him. You must help him raise it" (Deuteronomy 22:4; 23:5). Accordingly, he should help the owner pull the animal as much as a Persian mile, unless he tells him: "I do not need you."







If a person encountered two animals, one crouching under its load and the other in need of help in reloading it, he should help unload first to prevent the animal from suffering, and then load the other. This rule applies only where the owners are both enemies or both friends of the person in question. But if one is an enemy and the other a friend, he is required to load for the enemy first, in order to subdue his evil impulse.
The enemy mentioned in the Torah (Exodus 23:5) is of Jewish origin, and not a foreign enemy.— — If one finds him aghast with his load, one must help him load or unload and not leave him there to die. He may possibly stay on because of his property and be exposed to danger, and the Torah insists on saving Jewish lives, whether they are wicked or upright, since they are attached to the Lord and believe in the principles of religion, as it is written: "Tell them: By my life, says the Lord God, I have no desire for the death of the wicked man, but for him to live by giving up his evil course" (Ezekiel 33:11).