Mishneh Torah, Murderer and the Preservation of Life
משנה תורה, הלכות רוצח ושמירת נפש
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Mishneh Torah, Murderer and the Preservation of Life



Chapter 1

Anyone who kills a human being has violated a ban, as is written: "You shall not murder" (Ex. 20, 12; Deut. 5:16). If someone deliberately commits murder, in the presence of witnesses, he is executed by the sword; for it is written: "This will be avenged" (Ex. 21:20), with which tradition indicates is the execution by the sword. Even if the murderer did his deed by iron or fire, his execution is always carried out with the sword.
It is a commandment for the redeemer of blood [to kill the murderer] as it says, "The redeemer of blood shall kill the murderer (Numbers 35:19)."  And everyone who is worthy to inherit, he is the redeemer of blood.  If he does not want to be the redeemer of blood or if he is unable to kill him or if there is no redeemer of blood, the court kills the murderer by decapitation.
In the case of a father, who killed his son, if the victim had a son, he kills his father's father, because he is the redeemer of blood. If, however, he doesn't have a son, none of his brothers becomes the redeemer of blood obliged to kills his father, but the courts execute him instead. The same law applies to men and women in cases of redeeming of blood.
And the court is warned not to take a ransom from the murderer, even if they give all of the money in the world, and even if the redeemer of blood wishes to exempt them. For the life of this person who was killed is not the possession of the redeemer of blood but rather the possession of the Holy One Blessed be He as it says, "Do not take a ransom for the life of a murderer." And there is nothing that the Torah is more exacting about than bloodshed as it says, "You shall not pollute the land..." (Numbers 35:33) "...for blood pollutes the land...".
When a murderer kills willfully, he should not be killed by witnesses or observers until he is brought to court and sentenced to death, as implied by Numbers 35:12 "A murderer should not be put to death until he stands before the congregation in judgment." This law applies to all those liable for execution by the court, who transgressed and performed the forbidden act. They should not be executed until their trial is completed by the court.
When does the above apply? When the person has already transgressed and performed the transgression for which he is liable to be executed by the court. When, however, a person is pursuing a colleague with the intention of killing him - even if the pursuer is a minor - every Jewish person is commanded to attempt to save the person being pursued, even if it is necessary to kill the pursuer.
What is implied? If the rodef was warned and continues to pursue his intended victim, even though he did not acknowledge the warning, since he continues his pursuit he should be killed. If it is possible to save the pursued by damaging one of the limbs of the rodef, one should. Thus, if one can strike him with an arrow, a stone or a sword, and cut off his hand, break his leg, blind him or in another way prevent him from achieving his objective, one should do so. If there is no way to be precise in one's aim and save the person being pursued without killing the rodef, one should kill him, even though he has not yet killed his victim. This is implied by Deuteronomy 25:11-12, which states: "If a man is fighting with his brother, and the wife of one... grabs the attacker by his private parts, you must cut off her hand; you may not show pity."
There is no difference whether she grabs "his private parts" or any other organ that imperils his life. Similarly, the rodef may be a man or a woman. The intent of the verse is that whenever a person intends to strike a colleague with a blow that could kill him, the pursued should be saved by "cutting off the hand" of the rodef. If this cannot be done, the victim should be saved by taking the rodef's life, as the verse continues: "you may not show pity."
This, indeed, is one of the negative mitzvot - not to take pity on the life of a rodef. On this basis, our Sages ruled that when complications arise and a pregnant woman cannot give birth, it is permitted to abort the fetus in her womb, whether with a knife or with drugs. For the fetus is considered a rodef of its mother. If the head of the fetus emerges, it should not be touched, because one life should not be sacrificed for another. Although the mother may die, this is the nature of the world.




Anyone who can save and does not save transgresses 'do not stand by the blood of your neighbour'. So too one who sees his friend drowning in the sea, bandits attacking him or a bad animal attacking him and he is able himself to save him or he could hire others to save him but he does not; one who hears idol worshippers or informers plotting harm for him or laying a trap for him and he doesn't tell his friend and inform him; or if he knows that an idol worshipper or a thug are on their way to his friend and he could appease them on behalf of his friend to change their intention and he doesn't appease him; and so too any similar case; One who does any of these transgresses 'do not stand idly by your neighbour's blood'.
The one who sees a pursuer going after his friend to kill him or after a woman to rape her and is able to save [the pursued] and does not, this one has cancelled a positive commandment: "and cut off her hand" (Deut. 25:12) and has transgressed two negative commandments: "do not turn away your eyes" (Deut. 25:12) and "do not stand idly by your neighbor's blood" (Lev. 19:16).
And even though we do not give lashes on negative commandments because there are no "deeds" in them, nevertheless they are very serious, since every person who kills a soul from Israel is considered as having destroyed the entire world, and every person who sustains/establishes one soul from Israel is considered as having established the entire world.

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4






[If] ten people strike him [the victim] with ten sticks and he dies, whether they struck him one after the other, whether they struck him at the same time, they are all exempt from execution by the court, as it says (Leviticus 24:17) "all the soul of man" until one [alone] killed the entire soul [of the victim].  The same law applies to two people that pushed him [the victim] or forced him into water, or many people are sitting [together] and an arrow emerges from among them and kills, that all are exempted [from court-imposed execution].

Chapter 5



Chapter 6

There are three types of unintentional killers.
There is the killer who acts unintentionally in complete ignorance, and this is as it said "as long as he does not lie in wait."  And the law is that he should be exiled to a Sanctuary City and take advantage of that, as we have explained.
And there is the unintentional killer who acts as one under compulsion, and where the death is caused by a very rare set of circumstances.  And the law is that he is exempt from exile.  And if the Blood Redeemer kills him, the Blood Redeemer is liable for a death sentence himself.
And there is the unintentional killer who acts in a way very similar to an intentional killer, that he acts in an almost criminal fashion due to excessive carelessness or negligence.  And the law is that there is no exile available for him due to his grave sin, and exile does not provide him atonement.  Sanctuary Cities are not meant for him as they exist only for those who have merited exile.  Therefore, if the Blood Redeemer finds him anywhere and kills him, the Redeemer is held not guilty.  

Chapter 7

A scholar who is exiled to a city of refuge, his teacher is exiled with him, as it says, "[And he shall flee to one of these cities] and live (Deuteronomy 19:5)."  Give him [his teacher]in order that he may live and a scholar must have his teacher because without Torah study, one is thought to be dead.  Similarly, if a teacher is exiled, his academy is exiled with him.

Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11




...The roof is like every other thing that has danger in itself, and which is possible that a person will make a mistake with it and die. An example is having a pit in one's property, whether it has water or not - one is obligated to make a wall of ten tefachim (32 inches/80cm.) around it, or a covering over it, so a person won't fall in it and die. And so too any stumbling block in which there is a danger to life: it is a positive mitzvah to remove it, and to guard against it, and to be exceedingly cautious about it, as it is written "take care of yourself and guard your life" (Deut. 4:9). And if one has not removed the stumbling blocks that bring people to danger, one has cancelled a positive commandment and transgressed "do not bring bloodguilt" (Deut. 22:8).
Our Sages forbade many matters because they involve a threat to life. Whenever a person transgresses these guidelines, saying: "I will risk my life, what does this matter to others," or "I am not careful about these things," he should be punished by stripes for rebelliousness.

Chapter 12












It is forbidden to sell to a gentile any instrument of war; nor may you sharpen their swords, nor may you sell them any knives, manacles, iron chains, nor bears, lions, nor anything that could cause damage to the public.  But you may sell them shields to be used defensively.

Chapter 13

