Pri Etz Chaim
פרי עץ חיים
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Pri Etz Chaim

Gate of Prayer

Introduction

1. <b> The First Gate, the Gate of Prayer</b> and it is divided into six chapters.
2. It is explained there the idea of elevating the week day prayers, the need for prayer, and its ideas and it is explained in the chapters.
3. <b> Concerning Prayer:</b>
4. All prayer in the World of Asiyah {is} Malchut of Asiyah. 





Gate of Blessings





Gate of Fringes





Gate of Teffilin





Gate of the World of Action





Gate of the Holies

From Second Edition







Gate of Songs





Gate of the Recitation of the Shema





Gate of the Silent Prayer





Gate of the Repetition of the Silent Prayer





Gate of Amen Intention





Gate of Confession





Gate of Putting Down the Head





Gate of Reading the Torah





Gate of the Afternoon and Evening Prayers





Gate of the Recitation of the Shema Before Retiring





Gate of the Midnight Prayer





Gate of Conduct While Learning





Gate of the Sabbath

Introduction







Gate of The New Month, Chanukah, and Purim





Gate of Festival





Gate of Passover





Gate of the Omer Count





Gate of Shavuot





Chapter 1












Know - that anyone who doesn't sleep at all on this night, and engages in Torah - it's guaranteed that he will live out the year and no damage will befall him... 

Gate of Rosh Hashana

Introduction







Chapter 1






When the world was created in Tishrei (Libra) and everything returns to its original condition, there is a need for the sawing [of the unified male-female energy].  The sawing is the following:  it is to give the sawing all the judgment, with mercy only remaining. And the judgment is sweetened with various sweets (that we will explain further below).  The sawing occurs in these ten days.  Each day, one of the attributes are sawed.  It is known that the head of the [female-energy called] Nukvah is back-to-back with his chest and from there and above is the place called Leah, as it is known that his pairing with her happens during these days.  Rachel is not fully sawed (separated) until Yom Kippur and does not couple until Shmini Atzeret.
On the first day of Rosh Hashana, the head of Zeir Anpin (small face) until but not including his Tiferet, the sawings are all taken during these days and it is therefore harsh judgment.  On the second day of Rosh Hashana where the sawing begins on the most elevated section of his Netzach.  This corresponds

Gate of the Prayers of Rosh Hashana





Gate of the Shofer





Gate of Yom Kippur





Gate of Sukkot





Gate of Lulav



