Mekhilta
מכילתא
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.org



Mekhilta

Perek 1



Perek 2



Perek 3



Perek 4



Perek 5



Perek 6



Perek 7



Perek 8



Perek 9



Perek 10



Perek 11



Perek 12



Perek 13



Pasuk 1



Pasuk 2



Pasuk 3



Pasuk 4



Pasuk 5



Pasuk 6



Pasuk 7



Pasuk 8

And you shall tell your son. I [would] understand from Rosh Chodesh [that one would have to observe Pesach. However] we learn [otherwise, since] it is stated, "on that day." If it is [written] "on that day," it could be from while it is still day [before the night of the fifteenth of Nissan. However] we learn [otherwise, since] it is stated, "for the sake of this;"  when [this] matsa and <i>maror</i> are resting in front of you [meaning, on the night of the fifteenth].
"Because of this": What is the intent of this? Because he — the wicked son, who removed himself from the community — says (Ibid. 12:26) "What is this work to you?", you remove him in kind, by telling him "Because of this the L-rd wrought for me," and not for you. Had you been there, you would not have been redeemed.

Perek 14



Perek 15



Perek 16



Perek 17



Perek 18



Perek 19



Pasuk 1



Pasuk 2



Pasuk 3



Pasuk 4



Pasuk 5



Pasuk 6



Pasuk 7



Pasuk 8



Pasuk 9



Pasuk 10



Pasuk 11



Pasuk 12



Pasuk 13



Pasuk 14



Pasuk 15

(Ibid. 15) "And he said to the people: Be ready in three days": But we did not hear the L rd telling him (in Ibid. 11) that they should separate from their wives! __ But "Be ready" — "Be ready" constitutes a gezeirah shavah  (identity), viz.: Just as "Be ready" here is linked to separation, so, "Be ready" there. Rebbi says: It (that separation is implied) is derived from the verse itself, viz. (Ibid. 10) "Go to the people and make them ready today and tomorrow." If immersion itself is meant, let him immerse on the fifth day, so that he will be clean at sunset (for receiving the Torah on the sixth day.) It is, therefore, written "Go to the people (i.e., the married couples) to direct them to separate (for three days).
(Ibid. 15) "Do not draw near to a woman": From here it was ruled that if a woman ejects semen on the third day (after intercourse) she is pure, as is implied by the Sinai directive. These are the words of R. Elazar b. Azaryah. 

Perek 20



Perek 21



Pasuk 1



Pasuk 2



Pasuk 3



Pasuk 4



Pasuk 5



Pasuk 6



Pasuk 7



Pasuk 8



Pasuk 9



Pasuk 10

"If another he take for him": From here they ruled: A man is obligated to marry off his "small" son (i.e., one who is still "under his wing.") And elsewhere it is written (Devarim 4:9) "and you shall make them known to your sons and to your sons' sons." When do you merit seeing your sons' sons? When you marry off your sons when they are small.
	"she'eirah": This is her food, as in (Michah 3:3) "and who eat the she'er of My people", and (Psalms 78:27) "He rained she'er (manna) upon them as dust." (Exodus, Ibid.) "kesuthah": as stated (i.e., "her clothing"), "and onathah": her (conjugal) time, as in (Genesis 34:2) "And he lay with her and ye'anehah." These are the words of R. Yoshiyah. R. Yonathan says: "she'erah" is her clothing, i.e., clothing that is adapted to her flesh ("she'er"). If she were young, he should not give her (the clothing) of an elderly woman. If she were elderly, he should not give her (the clothing) of a young woman. "and her onah" (time): He should not give her summer (clothing) in the winter or winter (clothing) in the summer, but each (garment) in its time. Whence is "her food" derived? It follows a fortiori, viz.: If he is not permitted to withhold from her things which are not life sustaining, how much more so things which are life sustaining! Whence is "her (conjugal) time derived? It follows a fortiori, viz. If he is not permitted to withhold from her things which she was not married for in the beginning, how much more so things which she was married for in the beginning! Rebbi says: "she'erah" is her conjugal time, as in (Leviticus 18:6) "A man, to all the she'er (flesh) of his kin shall not draw near" (for cohabitation), and (in the same connection) (Ibid. 12, 13) "She is the she'er of your father", "She is the she'er of your mother." "kesuthah": as per its plain meaning (i.e., "her clothing.) "onathah" — "her food", as in (Devarim 8:3) "vayeanchah" and He caused you to hunger."
(Exodus, Ibid. 10) "he shall not diminish": R. Yoshiyah says: What is the intent of this? From (Ibid.) "If another (wife) he take for himself," I might think that this ("he shall not, etc.") refers to the Jewess (that he is taking); it is, therefore, written "he shall not diminish." With whom does "diminution" obtain? With one who has already been given something (i.e., the Hebrew maid-servant).) R. Yonathan says: Scripture (in "he shall not withhold") speaks of a Jewess (in general). You say it speaks of a Jewess, but perhaps it speaks of the Hebrew maid-servant. __ (No, for [9]) "according to the ordinance of the daughters shall he provide for her" already speaks of the Hebrew maid-servant. How, then, am I to understand "If another he take for himself"? As applying to a Jewess (in general).

Pasuk 11



Pasuk 12



Pasuk 13



Pasuk 14



Pasuk 15



Pasuk 16



Pasuk 17



Pasuk 18



Pasuk 19



Pasuk 20



Pasuk 21



Pasuk 22



Pasuk 23



Pasuk 24

"an eye for an eye" money. You say "money," but perhaps an eye (literally) is intended? R. Elazar was wont to say (Leviticus 24:21) "One who strikes a beast shall pay for it, and one who strikes a man shall be put to death." Scripture likens the injuries of a man to the injuries of a beast, and the injuries of a beast to the injuries of a man. And just as the injuries of a beast are subject to monetary payment, so, the injuries of a man. R. Eliezer says: It is written (Exodus 21:30) "When kofer ('atonement payment') is imposed upon him, he shall give the redemption of his soul." Now does this not follow a fortiori, viz.: If where Scripture makes him liable for death, he only pays money, then here (re an eye), where Scripture does not make him liable for death, how much more so does he pay only money! R. Yitzchak says: "an eye for an eye": I understand this to mean that whether or not he intends (to blind him), he pays only money. And, indeed, Scripture limits one who intends to cause a blemish to monetary payment, as it is written (Leviticus 24:19) "And a man if he maims his neighbor" — general; "an eye for an eye" — particular. general-particular. (The rule is:) The general subsumes only what exists in the particular. Then, in (20) "as he maims a man," there is a reversion to the general. Perhaps the first general is generalized (i.e., all maimings are to be included.) Would you say that? We have here an instance of general-particular-general, where (the rule is that) you judge in accordance with the particular, viz.: Just as the particular specifies permanent maimings, external organ prominences, and intended (injuries) as paying only money (and not being punishable by death) (so, all such maimings are included.) Thus, "as he maims a man" — when he intends to maim him.

Pasuk 25

(Exodus 21:25) "A burn for a burn": If you say (the meaning is that he burned him and spilled his blood, this is already subsumed in "a wound for a wound." If you say that he made a welt, this is already subsumed in "a welt for a welt." How, then, is "a burn for a burn" to be understood? As his burning him on his nail or on the sole of his foot without leaving an impression, lading him with stones and causing him suffering thereby, placing snow on his head and making him cold — in which instances he compensates him for his suffering. But if he were frail, indulged, and pampered, how much more so is his "suffering" allotment to be doubled. This is the (type of) suffering intended in "a burn for a burn."

Pasuk 26

(Exodus 21:26) "And if a man strike the eye of his (Canaanite) man-servant": What is the intent of this? From (Leviticus 25:26) "Forever shall you have them serve you," I might think, even if he knocked out his tooth or blinded his eye; it is, therefore, written "And if a man strike the eye of his man-servant or the tooth of his maid-servant, etc." Scripture took his Canaanite man-servant out of his class (of serving forever) to the end of leniency, (a Hebrew man-servant not going free in this manner.)
"And if a man strike": When do I derive the same for a woman? R. Yishmael said, etc. (See 21:18 above).
"the eye of his man-servant or the eye of his maid-servant": to make him liable for each in itself. R. Eliezer says: The verse speaks of a Canaanite man-servant. You say this, but perhaps a Hebrew is intended? It is, therefore, written (Leviticus 25:44) "From them (the Canaanites) shall you buy a man-servant and a maid-servant."
"the eye of his man-servant": I might think (that he goes free) even if it developed a leucoma; it is, therefore, written "and he destroy it." Only a blow that causes destruction (is intended). I might think, even if he performed no act upon it; it is, therefore, written :"And if a man strike the eye" — whence it was ruled: If he struck his ear and deafened  him, or his eye and blinded him, he goes free. (If he struck) near his eye, so that he does not see, or near his ear, so that he does not hear, he does not go free.
If he knocked out two of his teeth at the same time or blinded two of his eyes at the same time, he goes free and takes nothing, it being written "an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth." If he knocked out one after the other, he goes free for the first and takes his injury (payment) for the second, it being written in lieu of his eye."
"free shall he send him": I might think that he must write him a writ of emancipation; it is, therefore, written "in lieu of his eye." R. Eliezer says: It is written here "send" (viz. "free shall he send him") and elsewhere, (in respect to a divorce) "send" (viz. Devarim 24:1 "and he shall send her from his house"). Just as there, with a writ, so, here with a writ. For I might think, since the Torah speaks of one who sends away and one who is sent away, that just as the first cannot send away unless he is an adult, so, the second cannot be sent away unless he is an adult; it is, therefore, written "free shall he send him in lieu of his tooth" — in any event (i.e., even if he is a minor).

Pasuk 27

I might think (that he goes free) even if he knocked out a milk tooth, (which grows back); it is, therefore, written "eye." Just as an eye does not grow back, so the tooth (in question must be one which) does not grow back. This tells me only of tooth and eye. Whence do I derive (the same for) all of the other organs? It is derived inductively (binyan av) from the two, viz.: Tooth is not like eye, and eye is not like tooth. What is common to them is that they (i.e., their maimings) are permanent maimings of external organ prominences which do not grow back, (the maiming of which) causes the servant to go free, so (the maimings of) all such organ prominences which do not grow back cause him to go free.

R. Yishmael says: A Canaanite man-servant can never be redeemed and can go free only by consent (of the master), as it is written (Leviticus 25:46) "And you shall hold them as an inheritance … to inherit as a holding, etc." And in our manner we have learned that a Canaanite man-servant is like a field of holding forever. But if his master persecuted him and knocked out his tooth or blinded his eye or (maimed) one of his (other) external organ prominences, he acquires himself (i.e., his freedom) with afflictions. Now does this not follow a fortiori, viz.: If one can acquire himself by afflictions from the hand of flesh and blood, how much more so, from the hands of Heaven! And thus is it written (Psalms 118:18) "The L rd has afflicted me exceedingly and He did not consign me to death."


Pasuk 28

(Exodus 21:28) "And if an ox gore": The ox, too, was included in (Ibid. 12) "the striker of a man — if he die — shall be put to death." Scripture singled it out here for severity, (that it be put to death) by stoning. Thus, the adducing of this section.
"An if an ox gore": This tells me only of an ox. Whence do I derive (the same for) all beasts? It follows, viz.: It is written here "ox," and elsewhere (in the second Decalogue, Devarim 5:14) "ox." Just as the "ox" of Sinai is equated with "all of your beasts," so, here, all beasts are to be equated with ox. And whence is it derived that all deaths (inflicted by the beast) are equated with goring? It follows, viz.: Since a mued (an ox that gored three times) is put to death (for killing a man) by stoning (viz. Ibid. 29), and a tam (an ox that gored a man to death even the first time) is put to death by stoning — if you have learned about a mued that all deaths (inflicted by it) are equated with goring, so, all deaths (inflicted) by a tam are to be equated with goring. __ No, this may be true of a mued, where he (the owner) pays kofer (viz. 21:30), as opposed to a tam, where he does not  pay kofer. It is, therefore, written (29) "and it killed a man or a woman," for purposes of formulating an identity (gezeirah shavah ), viz.: It is written here (28) "a man or a woman," and there (29) "a man or a woman." Just as there, all deaths are equated with goring, so, here, all deaths are to be equated with goring. And whence is it derived that minors (who were killed by a tam) are equated with adults? It follows, viz.: Since a tam is to be stoned and a mued is to be stoned, if you have learned about mued that minors are to be equated with adults (viz. 21:31), then there (re a tam), too, minors are to be equated with adults. __ No, this may be true of a mued, where he (the owner) pays kofer, wherefore minors are equated with adults, as opposed to a tam, where he does not pay kofer. It is, therefore, written (31) "Or if it gore a son (a minor), or if it gore a daughter (a minor). It ("gore") is extra for purposes of formulating an identity (gezeirah shavah ). It is written here (re tam [28]) "gore," and there (re mued) "gore." Just as there, minors are equated with adults, so, here. R. Shimon b. Yochai said: Why was this (gezeirah shavah ) stated? Even without it, it follows a fortiori, viz.: If in a "place" — killing others — where minors are not equated with adults (— adults being liable; minors not —) — (If in such a place) minors are equated with adults (to impose liability) for their being killed — then in a place where "minors" are equated with "adults," (a young ox as well as a grown ox being stoned for killing a man) — how much more so should minors be equated with adults (to impose liability) for their being killed! __ No, this may be true there, where intent (to damage) was equated with non-intent relative to (payment for) damages, wherefore minors were equated with adults in being killed, as opposed to our instance, where non-intent is not equated with intent, (the "horn" of the ox imposing liability only where the ox butts intentionally), wherefore we would say that minors are not equated with adults (to impose liability) for their being killed. It must, therefore, be written "Or if it gore a son or if it gore a daughter," "gore" being extra for purposes of formulating an identity, as above.
Exodus 21:28) "the ox shall be stoned and its  flesh shall not be eaten": Why is this stated? From "the ox shall be stoned," do I not know that its flesh is forbidden? (It is neveilah [carcass].) But (the meaning is that) if the ox were taken out to be stoned, and its owner intervened and slaughtered it, its flesh may not be eaten. This tells me only of eating. Whence do I derive that it is even forbidden to derive benefit from it? __ Do you ask? If follows a fortiori, viz.: If it is forbidden to derive benefit from  eglah arufah, (viz. Devarim 21:1-9) which atones for the spilling of blood, how much more so is it forbidden to derive benefit from a stoned ox, which is itself a spiller of blood! __ But reverse it, viz.: If it were permitted to derive benefit from a stoned ox, which is a spiller of blood, how much more so would it be permitted to derive benefit from an eglah arufah, which atones for the spiller of blood! It is, therefore, written (Devarim 21:4) "and they shall break there the neck of the heifer in the river-bed" (from which it is derived [hermeneutically] that benefit may not be derived from it.) I have reasoned and reversed. The reversal has been nullified and I have returned to the original a fortiori deduction, viz.: If it is forbidden to derive benefit from eglah arufah, which atones for the spiller of blood, how much more so is it forbidden to derive benefit from a stoned ox, which is itself a spiller of blood. Rebbi says: If it is forbidden to derive benefit from the burnt bullocks and the burnt he-goats, which do not come to atone for the world (viz. Leviticus 26:27), how much more so is it forbidden to derive benefit from eglah arufah, which does come to atone for the world! This tells me only of its flesh (i.e., that benefit may not be derived from the flesh of an ox that killed, which was slaughtered after judgment had been passed upon it.) Whence do I derive (the same for) its skin? R. Yishmael was wont to say: It follows a fortiori, viz.: If the skin of a sin-offering, whose flesh is permitted in its slaughtering, is forbidden (in the derivation of benefit) in its death, then an ox to be stoned, whose flesh is forbidden in its slaughtering, how much more so should its skin be forbidden in its death! __ (No,) this is refuted by an ox which has become tamei, which, although its flesh is forbidden in its slaughtering, its skin is permitted in its death. One of the disciples of R. Yishmael said: This may be true of an ox which has become tamei, from which benefit may be derived, for which reason its skin is permitted in its death, as opposed to an ox to be stoned, which, since benefit is forbidden to be derived therefrom, its skin is to be forbidden in its death.
(Exodus 21:28) "eth its flesh": to include (in the prohibition of benefit) its blood, its fats, and its hide.
"and the owner of the ox is absolved": R. Yehudah says: He is absolved by Heaven. For it would follow (otherwise), viz.: Since a mued is stoned and a tam is stoned, then if we have learned about mued that even though the owner satisfied (the demands of) a beth-din of flesh and blood, he did not satisfy Heaven, (having to pay kofer), then there (in the instance of tam), too, even though he satisfied a beth-din of flesh and blood, he did not satisfy Heaven. It is, therefore, written "and the owner of the ox (a tam) is absolved" — by Heaven. Shimon b. Azzai says: "and the owner of the ox is absolved" — from half-kofer. For it would follow: Since an ox who killed an ox must pay, and an ox that killed a man must pay, then just as there, (in the first instance) a mued pays full damages and a tam, half-damages; here, too, (in the instance of an ox that kills) a man, it is so. And what is the intent of "the owner of the ox is absolved"? Of half-kofer. R. Gamliel says: "and the owner of the ox is absolved" — from the worth of a man-servant. For it would follow (otherwise), viz.: Since both a mued and a tam are stoned (for killing a man), then if we have learned about mued that he (the owner) pays for the worth of a man-servant, then it should be the same with a tam. It is, therefore, written (in the instance of a tam) "the owner of the ox is absolved" — from the worth of a man-servant. R. Akiva says: "the owner of the ox is absolved" — from the worth of fetuses. For it would follow (otherwise), viz.: Since both man and ox are liable for injury, then if we have learned about a man who intended to strike his fellow and struck a woman and caused her to miscarry that he is liable to pay for her fetuses, then the same obtains with an ox; it is, therefore, written "and the owner of the ox is absolved" — of payment for the fetuses.

Pasuk 29

(Exodus 21:29) "And if it were a goring ox": Scripture comes to distinguish between a tam and a mued: A mued requires (that the owner be warned before) witnesses; not a tam. A mued pays kofer; not a tam. A mued pays thirty sela (viz. Ibid. 32); not a tam. A mued pays full damages; a tam, half-damages. A mued pays from the aliyah (the owner's choicest property); a tam, from (sale of) its body.
"mitmol shilshom": today, yesterday, and the day before.  Which is a tam and which is a mued? A mued — one whose owner was warned three days. A tam — one which desisted (from goring) for three consecutive days. These are the words of R. Yehudah. R. Meir says: A mued — one whose owner was warned three times (even in one day). A tam — one whom the children play with without (fear of) being gored. And what is the intent of "mitmol shilshom"? If he was warned three non consecutive days, it is regarded as a tam (and not as a mued).
"and the owner were warned": We are hereby apprised that he is not liable unless he was warned.
"and he did not guard it": to bring (even) a non-paid watcher.
Variantly: "and he did not watch it": as befits it — whence they ruled: If he watched it as befits it, he is not liable; if not as befits it, he is liable. If he tied it with a harness and it freed itself and damaged, he is liable for both a tam and a mued, it being written (Ibid. 36) "and its owner did not guard it" — and this is not considered guarding. These are the words of R. Meir. R. Yehudah says: For a tam he is liable; for a mued, he is not liable, it being written (of the latter) "and its owner not guard it" — and this is considered guarding. R. Eliezer says: It has no "guarding" but the knife. R. Eliezer b. Yaakov exempts him in both instances.
"And it killed a man or a woman": This is "extra," towards comparison and the formulation of a gezeirah shavah (identity) (as above).
"the ox shall be stoned": Why is this stated? It follows a fortiori, viz. :If a tam is to be stoned, how much more so a mued! __ No, this may be so with a tam, for which he does not pay kofer, but not with a mued, for which he does pay kofer. It must, therefore, be written "the ox shall be stoned." Variantly: Because it was in the class (of being stoned) and "departed" (from that class) for a new learning (i.e., that he pays kofer), Scripture restored it to its class. R. Akiva says: "the ox shall be stoned, and its owner, too, shall die." The death of the owner is being likened to the death of the ox, viz.: Just as the death of the owner (requires a beth-din of) twenty-three, so, the death of the ox.
"and its owner, too, shall die": at the hands of Heaven. You say at the hands of Heaven, but perhaps at the hands of man? It is written (Numbers 35:31) "You shall not take kofer (ransom) for the soul of a murderer, who is liable to death" — Redemption is not given for those who are put to death at the hands of man, but (only) to those who are liable to death at the hands of Heaven.

Pasuk 30

(Exodus 21:30) "When kofer is imposed upon him, he shall give the redemption of his soul": the value of the victim. These are the words of R. Yishmael. R. Akiva says: the value of the killer (i.e., the owner of the ox). And thus do we find that redemption is not given for those who are put to death. In all places, those who are liable to death at the hands of man are not redeemed, as it is written (Leviticus 27:24) "Any cherem that is devoted from a man (going out to be executed)  shall not be redeemed, (for) he is going to be put to death" (and has no valuation). But here "he shall give the redemption of his soul." R. Yishmael says: Come and see the mercies of the One who spoke and brought the world into being, for flesh and blood. For a man acquires himself with money from the hands of Heaven, as it is written (Numbers 30:12) "When you take the sum of the children of Israel according to their number, then each man shall give the ransom of his soul to the L rd, etc.", and (II Kings 12:5) "each man, the money for the valuation of his soul," and (Mishlei 13:8) "A man's wealth may redeem his soul," and (Daniel 4:24) "But, O king, let my counsel be acceptable to you. Redeem your soul through charity," and (Job 33:23-24) "If there will be for him but a single defending angel from a thousand to declare a man's uprightness for him, then He will be gracious to him and He will say: Redeem him from descending to the grave  I have found kofer for Him!" We find that certain consecrated objects can be redeemed and others cannot be redeemed; certain things that may not be eaten may be redeemed; things from which benefit may not be derived may not be redeemed. The nations of the world cannot be redeemed, as it is written (Psalms 49:8) "A man cannot redeem his brother; he cannot give his kofer to G d. Too costly is their soul's redemption and unattainable forever." Beloved is Israel for whose souls the Holy One Blessed be He has given the nations as kofer, as it is written (Isaiah 43:3) "I gave Egypt as kofer for you." Why? (Ibid. 4) "Because you were honored in My eyes, you were honored and I loved you, and I placed a man in your place and nations in place of your souls."

Pasuk 31

(Exodus 21:31) "Or if it gore a son, or it gore a daughter": Why is this stated? (Ibid. 29) "and it kill a man or a woman" tells me only of adults. Whence do I derive (the same for) minors? From "Or if it gore a son, or it gore a daughter." This tells me only of a distinct son or daughter. Whence do I derive (the same for) a tumtum (one of indeterminate sex) or a hermaphrodite? From "Or if it gore a son, or it gore a daughter." This tells me only of another's son or daughter. Whence do I derive (the same for) his own son or daughter? From "Or if it gore a son, or it gore a daughter" — in any event.
This tells me only of (its goring) an Israelite. Whence do I derive the same for a proselyte? From (Ibid. 12:49) "One Torah shall there be for the citizen and for the proselyte."


Pasuk 32

(Exodus 21:31) "If the ox gore a man-servant or a maid-servant." These, too, were in the class of "and it kill a man or a woman," and Scripture singled them out for both lenity and severity. For lenity — If he were worth a hundred maneh, he pays thirty selaim. For severity — If he were worth only a dinar, he pays thirty selaim. "If the ox gore a man-servant or a maid-servant" — to make him liable for each one individually. Variantly: "If the ox gore a man-servant or a maid-servant": Scripture speaks of a Canaanite (man-servant or maid-servant). __ But perhaps it speaks of an Israelite? (This cannot be, for) "silver, thirty shekels, shall he give to his master" indicates that a Canaanite is intended, (for if it were an Israelite, the money would go to his heirs.)
"silver, thirty shekels, shall he give to his master": whether a man or a woman.
"and the ox shall be stoned": Why is this stated? (i.e., it was stated already.) For if it were not stated, I would say (otherwise), viz.: Since he is put to death for killing his man-servant or his maid-servant, and another is put to death for killing his man-servant or his maid-servant, and his ox is put to death for killing his man-servant or his maid-servant, and the ox of another is put to death for killing his man-servant or his maid-servant — then if you have learned to make a distinction between his or another's killing his man-servant or his maid-servant (viz. Ibid. 21:21), then we should also make a distinction between his or another's ox killing his man-servant or his maid-servant; it is, therefore, written "thirty shekalim … and the ox shall be stoned" (i.e., no such distinction is made.)


Pasuk 33

(Exodus 21:33) "And if a man open a pit": Why is this stated? It can be derived by reason, viz.: Since the ox is his possession and the pit is his possession, then if you have learned that he is liable for his ox, should he not be liable for his pit? No, this may be true of his ox, whose way it is to cause damage, as opposed to his pit, whose way it is not to go and cause and cause damage. It is, therefore, written "And if a man open a pit or if a man dig a pit." Because I have not been able to derive this by reason, it must be stated by itself.
"And if a man open": This tells me only of opening. Whence do I derive (the same for) digging? It is, therefore, written "if a man dig." But even if this were not stated, I could derive it a fortiori, viz.: If the opener is liable, how much more, so the digger! If you say this you have punished by an a fortiori argument. It is, therefore, written "if he dig" — to teach that punishment is not mandated by an a fortiori argument. Variantly: "if a man open a pit": Opening is being likened to digging, and digging, to opening. Just as one who opens (a pit) with permission is exempt (from liability), so, one who digs it with permission. And just as digging (a pit) entails a specific size (for liability), so, opening. R. Yehudah b. Betheira says: Opening (a pit) is not like digging, or digging, like opening. What is common to them is that wherever one is liable for guarding it, he is liable for the damage that it causes — so, in all instances, wherever one is liable for guarding, he is liable for the damage. This tells me only of opening and digging. Whence do I derive (the same for) figuring, paneling, plastering or performing any other act in it (to which the damage is attributable)? From "and he not cover it." It is not opening or digging which is the criterion (for liability), but covering (i.e., failure  to cover it).
Variantly: "and he not cover it": to include  liability for (even) a non-paid watchman (who fails to cover it). Variantly: "and he not cover it": and he not cover it properly — whence they ruled: If he covered it properly, he is exempt; if improperly, he is liable. If he covered it and another uncovered it, the second is liable. If partners covered a pit and one of them uncovered it, the second is liable. If it were uncovered and one of them knew of it, the one who knew of it is liable, and the other, exempt.
"and there fall there an ox or an ass": He is liable for each in itself.
"an  ox": and not an ox and its trappings. "an ass": and not an ass and its trapping. For it would follow (otherwise), viz.: If in a place (i.e., where he lit a fire), where he is not liable for a beast (that was burned), he is liable for vessels, here, where he is liable for the beast, how much more so should he be liable for vessels! It is, therefore, written "and there fall into it an ox or an ass": an ox, and not its trappings; an ass, and not its trappings.
"and there fall there": in the (normal) mode of falling — whence they ruled: If it fell before it (the pit) because of the sound of the digging, he (the digger) is liable. (If it fell) behind it because of the sound of the digging, he is exempt. But (if he fell into) the pit itself, whether (walking) before it or (walking) behind it, he is liable.

Pasuk 34

"the owner of the pit shall pay": in any event (i.e., whether before or behind it).
"Money shall he restore to its owner': This tells me only of money. Whence do I derive the same for a beast? (i.e., that he may pay with a beast.) It follows, viz.: It is written here "and the carcass shall belong to him," and elsewhere, (Exodus 21:36) "Then shall he pay an ox for an ox, and the carcass shall belong to him. Just as there (he pays) a beast, so, here (he may pay) a beast. Just as here, money; so, there, money.
"and the carcass shall belong to him": to him who sustained the loss. You say this, but perhaps it belongs to him who caused the loss? (This cannot be, for) if so, why need it be mentioned "and the carcass shall belong to him?" (i.e., If he must compensate for the entire loss, then certainly the carcass belongs to him.) (It must be, then, that the carcass belongs to him who sustained the loss) and the intent of the verse is that the value of the carcass is deducted from the total loss (and that amount is restored in addition to the carcass.)

Pasuk 35

(21:35) "And if the ox of a man butt": Included in "goring" is butting, pushing, lying upon, kicking, and biting. These are the words of R. Yoshiyah. Abba Channan says in the name of R. Eliezer: Goring, butting, pushing, lying upon and kicking. Whence is biting derived? It is written (36) "and its owner did not guard it." Now does this not follow a fortiori, viz.: If when he guards it he is liable, how much more so when he does not guard it! What, then, is the intent of "and its owner not guard it"? Scripture makes him liable for an additional guarding. And which is that? (Guarding against biting.)
(21:35) "And if the ox of a man strike" to exclude the ox of a minor.
"the ox of a man": to include the ox of others (i.e., gentiles).
"the ox of his neighbor": to include the ox of a minor.
"his neighbor": to exclude the ox of a Cuthite, the ox of a gentile, the ox of a sojourning proselyte (ger toshav).
"then they shall sell the living ox": Scripture speaks of oxen of equal value (one of which gored the other). __ But perhaps it speaks of oxen of unequal value? Would you say that? What is the way of the damagers? To profit or to lose" __ To lose. And what is the way of the damaged? To take (the amount of) their damage or more than their damage? __ Not more than their damage. (So that to avert this possibility, the first assumption [equal value] must be posited.) Rebbi says: "Halving" is written in respect to the living ox, and "halving" is written in respect to the dead ox" — so it must be oxen of equal value of which Scripture speaks, (the halved shares of the dead ox, perforce being equal.)
"and also the carcass shall they halve": whence they ruled: An ox worth a hundred which gored an ox worth a hundred, or an ox worth two hundred which gored an ox worth two hundred — he (the owner of the dead ox) takes half (of the value of the living ox.) An ox worth a hundred which gored an ox worth two hundred — he takes (the value of) all of it. An ox worth two hundred which gored an ox worth a hundred — he takes a quarter of it. An ox worth two hundred which gored an ox worth two hundred, and the carcass is worth nothing — R. Meir said: Of this it is written "then they shall sell the living ox, etc." R. Yehudah said to him: Read all of this verse, viz. "and  also the (value of the) carcass shall they halve." What is being spoken of? An ox worth two hundred which gored an ox worth two hundred, and the carcass is worth one hundred, (in which instance) the living ox is sold, the (value of the) dead ox is divided equally, and the owner of the carcass deals with it. Of such an instance it is written "and also the carcass shall they halve."

Pasuk 36


(21:36) "mitmol shilshom": today, yesterday, and the day before.
"and he did not guard it": to bring (even) a non-paid watcher, etc.
"pay shall he pay an ox for an ox": This tells me only (that he pays) a beast. Whence do I derive (that he can also pay) money? It follows, viz.: It is written here "and the carcass shall belong to him," and elsewhere (21:34) "and the carcass shall belong to him." Just as here, (he can pay) with a beast, so, there, with a beast. Just as there, (he can pay) with money, so, here, (he can pay) with money.
"and the carcass shall belong to him": (See before Section 12)

Pasuk 37

(Exodus 21:37) "If a man steal an ox or a lamb": Both the slaughterer and the seller were in the (general) class (of thieves), viz. (Ibid. 22:6) "if the thief is found, he shall pay double," and Scripture removed them from that class to make them liable for the more severe "four and five" payment, wherefore this section was stated.
"an ox or a  lamb": to impose liability for each in itself.
"and he slaughter it": This tells me only of slaughtering. Whence do I derive (the same for) selling? From "or he sell it." Variantly: Slaughtering is being likened to selling, and selling, to slaughtering. Just as selling is outside his (the owner's) domain, so, slaughtering (to make him liable for "four and five" payment) must be outside his domain. Just as (he is liable for "four and five") by selling (only) when the animal may be eaten, so, by slaughtering. Just as by selling, (only) when benefit may be derived from it, so by slaughtering. Just as by slaughtering, (only) when he (the thief) cannot revoke (his theft), so, by selling, (when the owner has despaired of the return of the theft, so that the thief has "acquired" the beast.) Just as with slaughtering, all (of the animal is involved), so, with selling.
Variantly: "If a man steal": Consecrated animals were also included in the general class, that if he stole them and slaughtered them outside (the azarah) he would pay "four and five." It is, therefore, written (Leviticus 17:2) "This is the thing that the L rd has commanded, etc." — They (consecrated animals slaughtered outside the azarah) have been singled out for kareth (cutting off, for the desecrator) and not for payment (of "four and five").
(Exodus, Ibid.) "Five (head of) cattle should he pay for the ox": four and itself; "and four sheep for the lamb": three and itself. R. Meir said: Come and see how beloved is work by Him who spoke and brought the world into being. (For) an ox, which he took from its work, he pays five-fold. (For) a lamb which he did not take from its work he pays (only) four-fold. R. Yochanan b. Zakkai says: The Holy One Blessed be He is solicitous of human dignity. (For) an ox, which walks on his feet, (and need not be carried by the thief,) he pays five-fold. (For) a lamb, which he must carry on his back, he pays (only) four-fold, (having already made a kind of partial payment in the sacrificing of his dignity.)
R. Akiva says: "tachath ('in place of') the ox; "tachath the sheep" — to exclude (from "four and five" payment an animal [as opposed to a beast]). For it would follow (otherwise), viz.: Since he (the thief) must pay (money) for stealing a beast, and he must pay (money) for stealing an animal, then if you have learned about a beast that he pays "four and five," so, he should be similarly liable for an animal. __ No, this may be so with a beast, which is sacrificed on the altar, as opposed to an animal, which is not — wherefore it does not pay "four and five." __ But this is refuted by (the theft of) a blemished beast, which, although it is not sacrificed on the altar, does pay "four and five." __ No, this may be so with a blemished beast, whose "kind" (i.e., "beast") is sacrificed upon the altar, as opposed to an animal, whose "kind" is not sacrificed upon the altar — wherefore it is written "tachath ('in place of') the ox"; "tachath ('in place of') the sheep" — to exclude an animal.


Perek 22



Pasuk 1

(Exodus 22:1) "If the thief be found breaking in": This speaks of a doubt (in the owner's mind) as to whether he is breaking in to steal or to kill. You say this, but perhaps the doubt is as to whether he is breaking in to steal or not to steal. Would you say that? If he (broke in) to steal of a certainty and he killed him, he would be liable (for murder), how much more so if there is a doubt as to whether he came to steal! We must thus perforce accept not the second supposition, but the first. From here it follows that a doubt (i.e., a possibility) of saving a life overrides the Sabbath. For if (the sin of) killing, (in this instance, the thief,) (— killing,) which defiles the land and causes the Shechinah to depart (from Israel) — is overridden by the possibility (of saving one's life, how much more so does it follow that the possibility of saving life overrides the Sabbath.)

Pasuk 2

(Exodus 22:2) "If the sun shone upon him": Now does the sun shine upon him alone? Does it not shine upon the whole world? But (the intent is) Just as the sun is peace for the world, so this one (the thief) — If he knows that he is at peace with him, and he killed him nonetheless, he is liable. Similarly (Devarim 22:17) "Then they shall spread out the garment" — They shall make things clear, as a (new) garment. Similarly, (Exodus 21:19) "on his cane" — on his own power. Here, too, (this figurative interpretation is the intent of) "If the sun shone upon him." R. Yishmael says: You say this, but perhaps the intent is (literally) to distinguish between day and night, viz.: If he killed him in the daytime, he is liable; if at night, he is not liable. It is, therefore, written (Devarim 22:26) "and to the maiden you shall do nothing; for as a man would rise up against his neighbor and murder him, so, is this thing" (raping a maiden). Now what do we learn (about raping) from (murdering)? But it (the instance of murdering) apparently comes to teach (something about that of raping), and ends up "learning" (something from it), viz.: Just as in the instance of raping, there is no difference between day and night, here, too, (in the instance of murdering,) no such distinction is to be made. Just as here, if he rose up (against the thief) and killed him, he is not liable, there, too, if she rose up against him and killed him, she is not liable. And just as there, if she had helpers against him and she killed him, she is liable (viz. Devarim, Ibid. 27), so, here, if he (the owner) had helpers against him and he killed him, he is liable.
(Exodus, Ibid.) "If he (the thief) has blood, pay shall he pay": R. Eliezer b. Yaakov says: If there were before him (the thief) pitchers of wine and pitchers of oil and he broke them, so long as he (the owner) knows that he (the thief) is at peace with him, (as in the instance of a father coming to burglarize his son, where the son knows that if he resists his father he will not be killed, [so that he may not kill him]) then (even if) he does kill him, he is liable (retroactively for what he broke), it being written "If he (the thief) has blood (i.e., if it is forbidden to kill him), pay shall he pay."
(Ibid.) "If he lacks it, he is to be sold for his theft": I might think, forever; it is, therefore, written (Ibid. 21:2) "Six years shall he serve, etc.", whence we are apprised that he serves for six years and goes out free on the seventh.
"then he shall be sold for his theft": not for less (than the value of the theft) and not for more. R. Yehudah says: If he stole less than what he was worth, he is not sold; more than what he is worth, the owner of the stolen article has the option of selling him or writing him a writ of emancipation. R. Eliezer says: If he stole less than what he is worth, he is not sold; more than what he is worth, it suffices him to gain half and lose half (of the value of the stolen article).

Pasuk 3


(Exodus 22:3) "If found will be found in his hand": in his possession. Even though there is no proof for this, there is support for it, viz. (Numbers 21:26) "and he took all his land from his hand", and (Genesis 24:10) "Then the servant took … and all the good of his master in his hand," — whence we find "in his hand" in all places to connote "in his possession."
"from ox to ass, living": Let "living" ("chaim") not be mentioned. (It is mentioned) to include an animal ("chayah" [and not only a beast, like ox and ass.)
"living, two shall he pay": and not (the value of) dead (animals).	There are seven "thefts": "stealing men's minds" (i.e., deceiving them), importuning one's neighbor to be his guest when he has no intention of inviting him; proffering gifts that he knows will not be accepted; opening one's barrels (ostensibly "for him alone") when they have already been sold to the shopkeeper; cheating in measuring; falsifying weights; mixing (other) stalks among stalks of fenugrec, sand with beans, and vinegar with oil (even though they ruled that oil is not subject to defilement (me'ilah), wherefore kings are anointed with it.) And, what is more, they say about such a one that if he could "steal" the Higher Mind, he would do so. And thus do we find with Avshalom, that he "stole" three thefts: the heart of his father, the heart of beth-din and the heart of the house of Israel, as it is written (II Samuel  15:6) "And Avshalom stole the heart of the men of Israel." And who is the greater (thief)? The robber or the robbed? The robbed; for he knows that he is being robbed and remains silent. And thus do we find with our fathers, that when they stood on Mount Sinai, they sought to steal the Higher Mind, as it is written (Exodus 24:7) "Everything that the L rd has spoken, we will do and we will hear" — and it (the Higher Mind) was, as it were, "stolen" by them. As it is written (Devarim 5:26) "Would that this heart of theirs were in them to fear Me and to keep all of My mitzvoth all of the days, etc." And if you would say that not all is revealed and known to Him, it is written (Psalms 78:36-37) "And they beguiled Him (only) with their mouths, and (He knew that) their hearts were not constant with Him" — in spite of which (Ibid. 38) "And He was merciful, forgiving sin and not destroying, etc." And it is written (Mishlei 26:23) "As silver dross covering earthenware are lips running (with love) above an evil heart."
Beyond these: If one stole things from which benefit may not be derived, he need not pay. (If he stole servants, land, and consecrated articles, he pays only the principal. (If he stole) garments, vessels, beasts, animals, or birds, he pays kefel (double payment). If he stole the first-born of an ass, he pays kefel, (for) even though benefit may not be derived from it now, it will be permitted later (when it is redeemed). For an ox he pays five-fold. For a sheep he pays four-fold, viz. "Five (head) of cattle, etc."
Beyond these is a kidnapper, who pays his life. R. Shimon b. Yochai says: It is written (Mishlei 29:24) "One who divides with a thief hates his soul. (He hears the adjuration to swear and will not tell.") An analogy: One leaves his neighbor's house laden with (stolen) articles. His friend finds him and asks him "Where are you going?" The thief: "Take your share and don't tell anyone." Later, the robbed one comes and says to him "Swear to me that you did not see that man laden with articles leaving my house." The other: "I swear I know nothing." He is liable for his soul. Of him it is written "One who divides with a thief hates his soul." But if one steals away from his friend, (who asks to be paid for teaching him), and goes (and hides behind a fence) to learn Torah (i.e., to overhear the lesson that he is teaching), though he is called a "thief," he acquires merit for himself. Of him it is written (Mishlei 6:30) "they will not shame a thief for stealing (to fill his soul that is hungry" [for Torah].) In the end, he will be appointed (as a teacher) over the congregation (and he will return the "theft" in full.) As it is written (Ibid. 31) "In the end he will repay seven-fold. All the wealth of his house will he give" — "seven-fold" signifying Torah, viz. (Psalms 12:7) "The words of the L rd are pure words, silver purged in an earthen crucible, refined seven-fold."


Pasuk 4

(Exodus 22:4) "If a man ravage a field or a vineyard, and he send his beast, etc.": Why is this written? (Even) if it were not written, it would follow a fortiori, viz.: If a pit is his property, and his (beast, that is) "sent" is his property, then if you have learned that he is liable for his pit, (which is stationary,) then should he not be liable for his beast, (which is sent)! If it is derivable a fortiori, why need the verse be stated? It comes to teach that the tooth is a mued (i.e., "confirmed") to eat what is appropriate for it, and a best is a mued to break (objects in its path) as it walks, (so that there is full liability even for the first instance of such damages). He is not liable unless the "damager" leaves his domain and causes damage, in which instance the damage is assessed (to be paid) from the best of his land — a fortiori (if the damage is) to consecrated property.
"If a man ravage a field or a vineyard": each in itself.
"a field or a vineyard": Just as a vineyard produces fruit, so "field" (here) is one which produces fruit.
"and he send his beast": From here they ruled: If he gave his sheep to his son, his messenger, or his servant, he is not liable (for the damage it causes.) (If he gave it) to a deaf-mute, an imbecile, or a minor, he is liable.
"and it eat in another's field": R. Nathan says: If one were stacking grain in another's field without permission, and the owner's beast came out and damaged it, (I might think that) he is subsumed in "and he send his beast, etc." It is, therefore, written "and it eat in another's field." And this is not "another's."
"the best of his field and the best of his vineyard": the best of the field of the nizak (the one damaged) and the best of the vineyard of the nizak. These are the words of R. Yishmael. R. Akiva says: Scripture (here) comes to apprise us that the damage is to be assessed (to be paid) from the best of his land — a fortiori (if the damage is) to consecrated property.

Pasuk 5

(Exodus 22:5) "If fire go out and it find thorns … pay shall pay he that lights the fire": Why need this be written? It is derivable a fortiori, viz. If he is liable (if the fire proceeds) through thorns, how much more so if he himself lights it (directly)! If it is derivable a fortiori, why need the verse be stated? Scripture (thus) comes to equate (for liability) (damaging) perforce with (damaging) wilfully, (damaging) non-intentionally with (damaging) intentionally, and (to equate) a woman with a man for all the damaging in the Torah.
"If fire go out and it find thorns": "thorns" are mentioned only to assign a limit (for his liability). If thorns are present (and carry the fire), there is a limit (for his liability). If they are not present (and he lights it directly) there is no limit. From here they ruled: If it crossed a river or a (public) way or a fence ten cubits high and caused damage, he is not liable. How is he perceived? He is perceived as standing in the midst of a beth-kor and damaging, (liability obtaining up to about 137 cubits on all sides.) R. Eliezer says: Sixteen cubits, as (the distance of) the public way. R. Akiva says: Fifty cubits. R. Shimon says: "Pay shall he pay, he that lights the fire" — all according to the fire (i.e., according to the height of the fire and its mass. The bigger it is, the farther it travels.) It once happened that a fire crossed the Jordan and caused damage because of its mass. When is this so? When it moves in spurts; but when it moves contiguously, even up to a mil, he is liable.
"and there be consumed sheaves": All things are included: a pile of reeds and beams, a mound of stones, and of pebbles for the processing of lime.
"or the standing corn": trees also are included.
"or the field": even if it singed the ground. __ But perhaps even if there were vessels hidden in his stack and they were burned? It is, therefore, (to negate this) written "or the standing corn or the field." Just as the field is in the open, so must (what is found) in the standing corn be in the open (for liability to obtain).
"Pay shall he pay, the lighter of the fire": Why is this written? From (22:4) "a man," I would know only of a man. Whence do I derive (the same for) a woman, a tumtum (one of indeterminate sex), and a hermaphrodite? From "Pay shall he pay, the lighter of the fire" — in any event. This tells me only of beast and fire. Whence do I derive the same for all of the other damagers in the Torah? It follows inductively from both. Beast is not like fire, and fire is not like beast. What is common to both is that it is their nature to damage, that they are your property, that it is your obligation to guard them, and that when they cause damage, you must pay for the damage with the best (produce) of the land. Four general rules were stated by R. Yishmael in the name of R. Meir in respect to damages. Wherever the mazik ("the damager") has permission (to be), but not the nizak ("the damaged"), he (the mazik) is not liable. Wherever the nizak has permission, but not the mazik, he (the mazik) is liable for everything. Where neither the nizak nor the mazik have permission (to be), such as property which belongs to neither of them, he (the mazik) is liable for (damage of) "tooth" and "foot," and, for the rest, mued pays full damages, and tam, half damages. Wherever both have permission (to be), such as property owned in common, open land, the public domain, and the like, for "tooth" and "foot" he is not liable and, for the rest, mued pays full damages, and tam, half damages.

Pasuk 6

(Exodus 22:6) "If a man give to his neighbor money or vessels to watch": R. Yishmael says: He must deposit it with him, explicitly, saying "Here, watch this for me"; but if he just says "Keep an eye on it," he is not liable.
"money or vessels": Just as money tends to be counted, so, vessels that tend to be counted — whence it was ruled: Any claim which is not susceptible of measurement, weighing and counting is not a claim. R. Nathan says: "money": to include money of (second-) tithe, (which, unlike first-tithe, reverts not to the Temple, but to the owner.) "vessels": to include any vessel. This tells me only of money and vessels. Whence do I derive (the same for) all things? From "to watch": to include any thing which requires watching.
"and it be stolen from the house of the man": to exempt (from kefel) one who steals from the thief. __ But perhaps the meaning is "and it be stolen from the house of the man, he pays double," but if it be found in his (the watcher's) possession, then even though he swore (that it was stolen), he is not liable (for kefel). It is, therefore, written (22:3) "If the theft be found in his hand, double shall he pay" — in any event (i.e., even if it were found in the watcher's possession. It is not the second assumption, then, which is to be posited, but the first, viz.: "and it be stolen from the hand of the man" — to exempt (from kefel) one who steals from the thief.
"if the thief is found, he pays double": A thief (one who steals by stealth) pays kefel, but not a robber (one who steals openly). Why did Scripture see fit to be more severe with a thief than with a robber? R. Yochanan says: A robber likens the honor of a servant to the honor of his Master, (not fearing both). A thief accords more honor to a servant than to His Master, (fearing the first, but not the second). A thief makes the Eye on high, unseeing, as it were, and the Ear, unhearing. As it is written (Isaiah 29:15) "Woe unto those who would probe deeper than the L rd, to conceal (their) counsel, doing their work in the dark; saying: 'Who sees us? Who notices us?'" And (Psalms 94:7) "They say 'The L rd does not see; the G d of Jacob does not understand.'" And (Ezekiel 9:9) "For they said 'The L rd has forsaken the land; the eye of the L rd does not see.'"

Pasuk 7

(Exodus 22:7) "If the thief not be found": What is the intent of this? From "If the thief is found, he shall pay double," I understand that if the thief is found and he has (what to pay) the watcher is not liable for anything. Whence do I derive that if the thief is found and does not have what to pay, the owner of the stolen objects may not say to the watcher: "Come and swear to me that it did not enter your heart to sell them"? From "If the thief not be found," implying that if the thief were found, the watcher is not liable for anything (even if the thief does not have what to pay.)
"then the master of the house shall draw near": I might think, to inquire of the urim vetumim (on the breast-plate of the high-priest.) It is, therefore, written (Ibid. 8) "whom elohim incriminate." Elohim who incriminate (i.e., judges) are intended.
"then the master of the house (i.e., the watcher) shall draw near to the judges": For an oath. You say, for an oath. But, perhaps for an oath or not for an oath? It follows (that it is for an oath), viz.: "sending forth of the hand" is stated here, and it is stated elsewhere (viz. Ibid. 10). "Just as there, with an oath, so, here, with an oath. Just as there, with "Yod-Keh" (the Name of the L rd), so, here, with "Yod-Keh." Just as here, in beth-din, so, there, in beth-din. Just as there, (he must swear that he did not use it for) his own need, so, here, for his own need. Just as there, (Ibid. 8) "For every matter of offense," so, here, "for every matter of offense."
(Ibid. 7) "that he did not send his hand against his neighbor's deposit": for his need. You say, for his need. But perhaps for his need or not for his need (but for the animal's)? It is, therefore, (to negate this) written "For every matter of offense." Variantly: "For every matter of offense": (As per the difference between Beth Shammai and Beth Hillel,) Beth Shammai saying: One is liable (even) for negative intent vis-à-vis "sending forth the hand." It being written "For every matter of offense," ("offense" subsuming negative intent). And Beth Hillel say: One is not liable until he actually sends forth his hand, this being the thrust of "that he did not send forth his hand."


Pasuk 8

"For every matter of offense" — general. "for an ox, for an ass, for a lamb, for a garment" — particular. General-particular (The rule is:) There is subsumed in the general only what obtains in the particular. "for every lost object about which he will say" — reversion to the general. __ But perhaps (the idea is) to revert to the original generalization? Would you say that? We have here an instance of general-particular-general, (where the rule is:) The general is understood to be of the nature of the particular, viz. (In this instance,) Just as the particular are explicitly only movable, non-mortgaged possessions, so, the general (must be of that nature).
Variantly: "for an ox, for an ass": Why is this stated? Because it is written (earlier [6]) "If a man give to his neighbor money or vessels, etc." and (later 9]) "If a man give to his neighbor an ox or a lamb, etc.", Scripture comes here [8] to discriminate between (the first) watcher, (an unpaid watcher), and the second, (a paid watcher). __ But perhaps Scripture comes to differentiate between [6] "money or vessels" and [9] "beast"? It is, therefore, written [8] "for an ox, for an ass," (indicating that this is not its purpose, but, rather to discriminate between watcher and watcher.)
"about which he will say that it is this": i.e., the first says, it is this, and the second, it is not (exactly) this — whence they ruled: (The oath is administered) only where there is admission to part of the claim. (22:7) "then the master of the house shall draw near to elohim (judge) — one, (Ibid. 8) "until elohim shall come the matter of both" — two. (Ibid.) "Whom elohim shall incriminate" — three. From here they ruled: Monetary litigations are (judged) by three. These are the words of R. Yoshiyah. R. Yonathan says: The first was stated in the beginning, and "beginnings are not expounded." "until elohim shall come the matter of both" — one. "Whom elohim shall incriminate" — two. And "there is no evenly balanced beth-din," wherefore one is added to them — so that we have three. Rebbi says: "until elohim shall come the matter of both. Scripture speaks of two. You say this, but perhaps it speaks of one" __ It is not written "Whom elohim shall incriminate ("yarshiyen," with a vav, [which would signify two]), but "yarshian," (without the vav, which signifies one), so that, (all together) Scripture speaks of two. And "there is no equally balanced beth-din," wherefore one is added to them — so that we have three. From here they ruled: Monetary litigations are (judged) by three. R. Meir says: by five, so that the case be decided by (a majority of) three.
"he shall pay double to his neighbor": R. Shimon says: I read here "he shall pay double to his neighbor," and elsewhere, (Leviticus 5:24) "and he shall pay it (the principal) at its head (and its fifth shall he add to it)!" How are these two verses to be reconciled? One who pays (only) the principal must pay the fifth, and one who pays kefel is exempt from the fifth.
"to his neighbor," and not to the Temple; "to his neighbor," and not to others (i.e., idolators).

Perek 23



Pasuk 1



Pasuk 2



Pasuk 3



Pasuk 4



Pasuk 5



Pasuk 6



Pasuk 7


(Exodus 23:7) "and a clean one and a righteous one you shall not kill": If one testified against another that he worshipped the sun, and another, that he worshipped  the moon, I might think that they combine (to constitute the necessary two witnesses) to incriminate him. It is, therefore, written "and a righteous one (i.e.,  'technically' righteous) you shall not kill." If they saw him pursuing another to kill him, the knife in his hand, and they said to him: Be it known to you that he is a son of the covenant, and the Torah writes "and a clean one and a righteous one you shall not kill," and (Genesis 9:6) "The spiller of the blood of a man, by man shall his blood be spilled," and he said "I know, and even so!" And the witnesses averted their eyes (for a moment and afterwards they found him (the victim) in the death throes, the knife dripping blood in the hand of the murderer — I might think that he is liable (to execution); it is, therefore, written "and a clean one and a righteous one you shall not kill." Once Shimon b. Shetach had a (single) scheming witness (zomem) executed, whereupon Yehudah b. Tabbai said to him "May I (not) see the consolation if you did not spill innocent blood! For the Torah writes "Kill by witnesses, "Kill scheming witnesses" — Just as witnesses — two, so, scheming witnesses — two (must be killed)! Once Yehudah b. Tabbai entered a ruin, where he found a man in his death throes, the knife dripping blood in the hand of the murderer — to whom he said "May '—' come upon me if neither I nor you killed him; but what can I do (to you) when the Torah has written (Devarim 20:15) 'By word of two witnesses shall a thing be established!' But the Omniscient One will exact punishment of that man (i.e., 'you')." He had hardly finished speaking before a snake bit him and he died. Variantly: "and a clean one and a righteous one you shall not kill": If one left beth-din incriminated, and afterwards some defense were found for him, I might think that he remains incriminated; it is, therefore, written "and a clean one and a righteous one do not kill." Variantly: If one left beth-din vindicated and afterwards some incrimination were found against him, I might think that he is returned for incrimination; it is, therefore, written "and a clean one you shall not kill." (I  might think that in such an instance) just as he left your beth-din vindicated, so, he will leave My beth-din (vindicated); it is, therefore, written (Ibid.) "for I will not vindicate the evildoer." Now does this not follow a fortiori, viz.: If re the (lesser) measure (of the Holy One), that of punishment, it is written "for I will not vindicate the evildoer," how much more so in (implementation of) the greater measure, that of good, (will He bestow it to its outermost limits!)
