Rabbeinu Chananel on Genesis
ר' חננאל על בראשית
Eliyahu Munk, HaChut Hameshulash
http://www.urimpublications.com/Merchant2/merchant.mv?Screen=PROD&Store_Code=UP&Product_Code=chut

Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Verse 1



Verse 2



Verse 3



Verse 4



Verse 5



Verse 6

ויחי שת חמש שנים ומאת שנה ויולד את אנוש, seeing that the Israelites trace themselves back to שת, he is the only one of Adam’s sons who is mentioned here.

Verse 7



Verse 8



Verse 9



Verse 10



Verse 11



Verse 12



Verse 13



Verse 14



Verse 15



Verse 16



Verse 17



Verse 18



Verse 19



Verse 20



Verse 21



Verse 22



Verse 23



Verse 24

ואיננו, כי לקח אותו אלוקים, seeing that he was unique in his generation the Torah describes his absence from earth as איננו, “he no longer existed.” [the author means that whenever we leave behind offspring that can carry on our work on earth we have not totally disappeared, though we may be dead. Ed.]

Chapter 6



Verse 1

ויהי כי החל האדם לרוב על פני האדמה ובנות יולדו להם, the Torah speaks of the “daughters who were born to men” as an introduction to the fact that the human species multiplied on the face of the earth. Seeing that there were a disproportionate number of girls being born, the species increased quickly.

Verse 2

ויראו בני האלוהים את בנות האדם כי טובות הנה, ויקחו להם נשים מכל אשר בחרו. We have already explained that the noun אלוהים is a noun which is sometimes applied to G’d, and sometimes to certain people, and sometimes to phenomena which some people worship even though they have nothing divine about them, In Genesis 1,1 בראשית ברא אלוקים, it is clearly a reference to G’d. In Genesis 20,3 ויבא אלוהים אל אבימלך, it is a reference to an angel, seeing that he carried out a mission on behalf of G’d. In Exodus 22,8 עד האלוהים יבא דבר שניהם, it is a reference to a judge, a human being. The term is also applied to select human beings of a spiritually high level, such as when David quotes G’d in Psalms 82,6 אני אמרתי אלהים אתם, I used to say that you (man) are “divine,” (until you sinned). In our verse here, the Torah in speaking of בני האלוהים, refers to the elite of the human species at the time. In our verse it is a reference to the male elite, the judges.

Verse 3

והיו ימיו מאה ועשרים שנה, it is possible that G’d extended their life spans for another 120 years, seeing the measure of their sin was not yet full. We have the Torah on record as the Emorites’ measure of sin not being complete, and that as a result of this the Israelites could not yet dispossess them (Genesis 15,16).  Abusing one’s G’d given tzelem is something that cannot be allowed to continue indefinitely. David already summed this up in Psalms 82,6 when he quoted G’d as saying: אני אמרתי אלוהים אתם ובני עליון כלכם, אכן כאדם תמותון, “I had said that you are all divine beings, sons of the most High; all of you, but you shall die as men do, etc.”

Verse 4

הנפילים היו בארץ בימים ההם וגם אחר כן, the Torah informs us here that the people the spies reported seeing during their tour of the land of Canaan (Numbers 13,33) had been quite common in the period before the deluge. The words וגם אחרי כן mean that even after the deluge there continued to be such gigantic specimen of human beings. The verse speaks of different periods, commencing with a reference to the בני האלוהים who took as their wives from the בנות האדם. These were the people who had originally made a name for themselves due to their size. 

Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Verse 1



Verse 2

The reason why we have two verses in both of which G’d is reported as speaking (separately) although no mention is made of Avram making any response in between, is that the first verse commencing with ויאמר was not a verbalised version of what G’d “said,” but describes what he thought. Such constructions are not unique, other examples occurring in Genesis 27,41 ויאמר עשו בלבו, “Esau said in his heart, etc.” It is reported as Esau having said something, else how could his mother have heard it? Solomon, in Kohelet 2,1 also uses the word אמרתי when describing something he thought rather than something he had actually said.

Chapter 16



Verse 1



Verse 2



Verse 3



Verse 4



Verse 5

ותאמר שרי אל אברם חמסי עליך, the meaning of the words חמסי עליך is revealed when the angel tells Hagar to go back to Sarai her mistress and to submit to her oppression (16,9). The Torah, at this stage, had covered up the change in Sarah's attitude toward Hagar. Sarai had become completely dependent on Hagar as a result of her having become pregnant. Previously, in the mistress-maid relationship it was the maid who had been dependent on her mistress. Avram had accused her of committing a criminal act by oppressing Hagar. By refusing her services as a maid, Hagar was further encouraged to treat her mistress as her inferior. As a result, Sarai now challenged Avram, blaming him for her reduction in status. She therefore demanded that G'd Himself intervene to show that it was really His will that she now be subordinate to Hagar. This is the reason for the dot on the word וביניך. The point is that Sarai did not want such Divine judgment to cause Avram harm. In the event, the angel told Hagar that Sarai had been correct in her treatment of her when he told her to go back and to submit to Sarai's harsh treatment of her.