Micah
מיכה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Micah



Chapter 1

The word of HaShem, that came to Micha the Morashtite in the days of Yotam, Achaz, and Yechizkiyah, kings of Yehuda, that was envisioned concerning Shomron and Yerushalayim:
Hear, O all you peoples! Listen, O land and all it carries — and let the Lord HaShem be a witness against you, the Lord from His holy chamber, 
Lo, here! HaShem is coming forth from His place to descend and tread upon the heights of the land.
And the mountains will melt beneath Him, and the valleys rent asunder like wax before fire, like water poured down a slope.
All of this is for the transgression of Ya’akov, and the sins of the House of Yisrael. What is the transgression of Ya’akov if not Shomron? And what are the shrines of Yehuda if not Yerushalayim?
So, I will make Shomron into ruins in a field, to fertile ground for planting vineyards, and I will toss her stones down into the valley and leave her foundations to the open air.
All of her sculpted idols will be smashed, all of her harlot’s profit burnt by fire. I will make a waste heap of her idols, for from harlot’s work they were gathered, and to harlot’s work they will return.
Over this I will wail and howl, I will be stripped and naked, I will make grief as jackals do, and mourn as the ostriches do!
For she is dying from her wounds, for it has come as far as Yehuda, has touched up to the gate of my people, up to Yerushalayim!
Tell this not at Gat, and do not weep; In Beit Le’afra, go roll in the dust!
Continue on, you who lives in Shafir, in stark, shameful nakedness; She who lives in Tza’anan did not visit the mourning of Beit Ha’etzel; he will take away your upright stance!
Though she who lives in Marot waited patiently for good, yet still evil came down from HaShem to the gate of Yerushalayim.
Hitch the chariot to the steeds, you who lives in Lachish! It is the beginning of sin for the Daughter of Tziyon, for in you are found the transgressions of Yisrael!
You must send gifts to the Heritage of Gat. The houses of Achziv are as a dried-up spring to the kings of Yisrael.
I will bring the occupier to you who live in Mareshet, Yisrael’s glory will spread to Adulam.
Shave your head and cut your hair for the children you delight in; make yourself balding like a vulture, for they have been exiled from you.
