Rabbeinu Chananel on Taanit
רבינו חננאל על תענית
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Rabbeinu Chananel on Taanit



Daf 1a



Daf 1b



Daf 2a



Daf 2b



Daf 3a



Daf 3b



Daf 4a



Daf 4b



Daf 5a



Daf 5b



Daf 6a



Daf 6b



Daf 7a



Daf 7b



Daf 8a



Daf 8b



Daf 9a



Daf 9b



Daf 10a



Daf 10b



Daf 11a



Daf 11b



Daf 12a



Daf 12b



Daf 13a



Daf 13b



Daf 14a



Daf 14b



Daf 15a



Daf 15b



Daf 16a



Daf 16b



Daf 17a



Daf 17b



Daf 18a



Daf 18b



Daf 19a



Daf 19b



Daf 20a



Daf 20b



Daf 21a



Daf 21b



Daf 22a



Daf 22b



Daf 23a



Daf 23b



Daf 24a



Daf 24b



Daf 25a



Daf 25b



Daf 26a



Daf 26b



Daf 27a



Daf 27b



Daf 28a



Daf 28b



Daf 29a



Daf 29b



Daf 30a



Daf 30b

Rav says, "Anyone who eats and drinks on the Ninth of Av (Tisha B'Av) is considered as if they eat and drink on Yom Kippur." Rabbi Akiva says, "Anyone who engages in work on the Ninth of Av never sees a sign of blessing forever." And the majority opinion is that anyone who engages in work on the Ninth of Av does not partake in the joy of Jerusalem, as it is stated, "Rejoice with Jerusalem and be glad with her, all who love her; rejoice greatly with her, all who mourn for her."
Whoever does not mourn for Jerusalem does not witness its joy. And whoever eats on the Ninth of Av, upon him the Scripture says, "Let their iniquity be upon their bones." Their iniquities are engraved on their bones.
Rabbi Yehuda obligates the imposition of the marital conjugal duty, and the sages did not agree with him. A Tanna acknowledges that Rabbi Yehuda's view is valid in cases where it is impossible otherwise, such as in cases of transgressions, nursing, and similar situations where marital duties cannot be enforced. The sages agree with Rabbi Yehuda that everyone must fulfill their conjugal duty if they are physically able to do so, even if they could sleep on the ground. Rava stated that the halacha follows our Tanna who stated that the sages did not agree with Rabbi Yehuda. The custom of Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira on the eve of the Ninth of Av was to sit between the oven and the stove, eat a piece of bread soaked in salt, drink a cup of water, and resemble someone whose deceased is lying before him.
There were no festive days for the Israelites like the 15th of Av and Yom Kippur. Now, regarding Yom Kippur, it is understandable because it is the day when the second tablets were given. As it is calculated, on the 17th of Tammuz, when Moses ascended to receive the first tablets, it took him forty days until the 29th of Av, as it is stated, "And I fell before the Lord," indicating his descent from the mountain. And he ascended again on the 30th day of Av (he completed three) [he stood four], and he descended with the second tablets, which is Yom Kippur. Therefore, it is fitting to be a holiday.
But why is the 15th of Av a holiday? And it is said: It is a day when the tribes were permitted to intermarry with one another.
The verse "And you shall not cause the inheritance to pass from one tribe to another" should be interpreted in the following manner: This practice was applicable only to the generation that entered the land, and it applied only to the division of the land among them. Rabbi Yochanan said that it refers specifically to the tribe of Benjamin, indicating that a man from another tribe should not give his daughter in marriage to a man from the tribe of Benjamin, nor should a man from the tribe of Benjamin give his daughter in marriage to a man from another tribe.
Rav Nachman said, "The day on which the deaths in the desert ceased." And we find in the Jerusalem Talmud that Rabbi Avun said, "The act of digging was abolished on that day." As Rabbi Levi explained, on the evening of the 9th of Av, Moses would issue a proclamation in the Israelite camp, saying, "Go out and dig." They would go out and dig graves, and each person would sleep in his own grave. In the morning, whoever was found alive would return to the camp, while the dead remained in their graves. They would emerge on that day each year, and there were 15,000 minus a few who did not survive. However, in the 38th year, the same number as the years they wandered in the desert, all of them stood and none of them died. They said, "Let us take into account; this is not the day of the 9th of Av." And likewise, they said on the 11th, 12th, and 13th of Av, but when the 15th of Av arrived and the moon was full, they declared, "Certainly, God has nullified that decree." Therefore, they made it a festival.