The Book of Maccabees I
ספר מקבים א
Rabbi Mike Feuer, Jerusalem Anthology
https://www.sefaria.org

The Book of Maccabees I



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4




































Behold, the enemy is struck before us, now let us go up and purify the Sanctuary of the Lord. 
All them men of the army gathered, and they went together up to Mount Zion. 
And it was that when they saw the Holy Temple desolate, and the altar profaned, and that doors burned with fires and the courts destroyed, and grasses of the field sprouting all over it. 
They tore their clothes and threw dirt on their heads and made a great mourning. 
They blew blasts on the trumpets and fell on their faces and their cry reached the heavens. 
And Yehudah commanded one troop of his men to lay siege to the fortress until they had purified the Holy Temple. 
And he chose from among the priests who had not been defiled and who had not abandoned the covenant of their Gd, and he commanded them to purify the Holy Temple and the throw the stones which had been defiled in an unclean place. 
And they saw that the altar of the offering had been profaned, and they took heart counsel together in order to decide what to do. 
And they plan which they devised was to pull it down altogether, in order that it not be a stumbling block for them since foreigners had profaned it. And they tore it down. 
And they placed the stones on the Temple mount in a certain place, until a prophet would stand up among Israel and teach them what was to be done. 
And they took whole stones which iron had never touched, as is written in the Torah of the Lord, and they built a new altar in the likeness of the first one. 
And they repaired the breaches in the Holy Temple, and all that which was within the sanctuary, and they sanctified the courtyard and all that was in it. 
And they renewed all the sacred vessels, and placed the menorah, the incense altar and the table of the show bread back in the Temple. 
And they placed the incense on the altar, and lit the lamps upon the menorah in order to light the Sanctuary. 
And they placed the show bread on the table, and the dividing curtain before the ark, and all the work was completed as in the beginning. 
And it was on the twenty-fifth day of the ninth month, which is Kislev, in the one hundred and forty-eighth year that they rose early in the morning and offered the whole offering on the new altar according to its laws. 
And they dedicated the altar on the very day that the foreigners had defiled it, and they gave praise to the Lord with song, harps, pipes and cymbals. 
And they fell on their faces and prostrated themselves to the Lord because He had given them might and salvation. 
And they celebrated the dedication of the altar for eight days, and brought up whole offerings, and thanksgiving offerings in the joy of their hearts. 
And they glorified the face of the sanctuary with crowns and shields of gold and purified the gates and the courts of the priests, and replaced the doors. 
And there was great rejoicing among all the people, because the Lord had rolled back the disgrace of the nations from upon them. 
And Yehudah, his brothers and all the community of Israel commanded to celebrate the dedication of the altar on the twenty-fifth day of month of Kislev, eight days each year, with praise and thanksgiving to the Lord. 