Tikkun HaKlali
תיקון הכללי
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Tikkun_HaKlali
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Tikkun HaKlali - Wikisource 
-https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Translation:Tikkun_Haklali

Tikkun HaKlali

I am connecting myself in saying the ten chapters of Tehilim to all the true Tzaddikim that are in our generation, and to all the true Tzaddikim resting in dust; especially to our Holy Rabbi, Tzadik Yesod Olam, The “Flowing Brook, a Fountain of Wisdom” <small>(Prov. 18:4)</small> our Rabbi Nachman ben Feiga who revealed this Tikkun.  May his merit protect us and all Yisrael, Amen.
Psalm 16 <br>1. A Michtam by David. Guard me, El (Almighty God), for I have taken refuge in You. 2. [O my soul] you should say to Adonai, "You are my Master; [in bestowing Your] benefits towards me, there is no duty on Your part [on account of my own merit]. 3. But on account of the holy ones who are [buried] in the earth, and of the mighty ones [in faith] in whom is all my delight[/all my needs are fulfilled]. 4. The sorrows of those who hasten after another [deity] will increase; I will not pour their libations of blood, nor will I take their names upon my lips. 5. Adonai is the share given for my portion [i.e. to believe in Him] and [the share] for my cup is You, Who guide me in my lot.  6. Portions have fallen to me in the most pleasant places [i.e. faith in You]; even a beautiful inheritance [ibid.] is upon me." 7. I will bless Adonai, Who counseled me; even at night my conscience instructs me. 8. I have placed Adonai before me constantly; because [He is] at my right hand, I will not falter. 9. Therefore, my heart rejoiced, and my soul was glad; even my flesh shall dwell in safety. 10. For You shall not forsake my soul to the grave; You shall not allow Your pious one to see destruction. 11. You will make known to me the path of life: satiety of joys in seeing Your face, [and being satisfied] with the delights that are at Your right hand forevermore.
Psalm 32 <br>1. By David, a Maskil. Fortunate is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered. 2. Fortunate is the man to whom Adonai ascribes no iniquity and in whose spirit there is no guile. 3. When I was silent, my bones decayed with my moaning all day long. 4. For [both] day and night Your hand was heavily upon me; my freshness was transformed as in the droughts of summer, Selah. 5. My sin I make known to You, and my iniquity I do not conceal; I said, "I will confess my transgressions to Adonai," and You have [always] forgiven my iniquitous sin, Selah. 6. For this [the Divine Presence] let every pious man judge himself: [to draw close] to You before [misfortune] befalls, only before the flooding of might waters [of afflictions]; such a person they will not reach. 7. You are a hiding-place for me, from distress You guard me; with songs of deliverance You encompass me, Selah. 8. "I will enlighten you and instruct you in the way which you shall go; I will wink My eye to you." 9. Be not like a horse or like a mule that does not discern, which must be muzzled with its adornment of bit and rein, that it should not come near you. 10. Many are the pains of the wicked, but as for him who trusts in Adonai — kindness will encompass him. 11. Rejoice in Adonai and exult, O righteous ones, and cause all those of upright hearts to sing praises!
Psalm 41 <br>1. For the Leader, a song by David. 2. Fortunate is he who considers the sick; on a day of calamity Adonai will rescue him. 3. Adonai will preserve him and keep him alive, and he will be called fortunate in all the land, and You will not deliver him into the desire of his enemies. 4. Adonai will support him on his sickbed; when You have transformed his entire restfulness in his illness. 5. I said, "Adonai, be gracious to me; heal my soul because I have sinned against You." 6. My enemies speak evil of me; "When will he die and his name be lost?" 7. And if he comes to see [me], he speaks falsely; his heart gathers iniquity to itself; when he goes outside, he speaks of it. 8. All my enemies whisper together about me; against me do they devise my hurt. 9. "An evil thing shall be poured into him, and once he lies down, he will no longer rise." 10. Even my ally, in whom I trusted, who eats my bread, developed an ambush for me. 11. But You, Adonai, be gracious to me and raise me up, so that I may repay them. 12. By this I shall know that You delight in me, when my enemy does not shout joyfully over me. 13. And as for me, because of my integrity You shall support me, and set me up before Your face forever. 14. Blessed be Adonai, Elohei/(God of) Yisroel, from [one end of] the world, to the [other end of] the world. Amen and amen! 
Psalm 42 <br>1. For the Leader, a Maskil by the sons of Korach. 2. As a she-deer cries longingly for rivulets of water, so does my soul cry longingly to You, Elohim (God, Almighty Master of all forces). 3. My soul thirsts for Elohim, for the living God: “When will I come and appear before Elohim [in the Holy Temple]?” 4. My tears were my bread day and night when they say to me all day long, "Where is your God?" 5. These things I will remember, and I will pour out my soul [because of the pain which is] upon me: How I passed on in covered [wagons], pacing slowly up to the House of Elohim with a joyful shouting and thanksgiving, a celebrating multitude. 6. Why are you downcast, my soul, and why do you wail over me? Hope to Elohim, for I will yet thank Him for the salvations of His presence. 7. My God, the soul that is upon me is downcast; therefore, I will remember You from the land of Yardan and the peaks of Chermon, from the young mountain. 8. One deep [trouble] calls to [another] deep [trouble]; [I am ready] to hear the sound of Your water channels [of afflictions]; all your breakers and waves are gone over me. 9. By day, Adonai commands His kindness, and at night, His song is with me, a prayer to the God [who guards] my life. 10. I will say to God, my Rock, "Why have You forgotten me? Why should I walk in gloom under the oppression of the enemy?" 11. With murder in my bones, my oppressors have reproached me by saying to me all day long, "Where is your God?" 12. Why are you downcast, my soul, and why do you moan over me? Hope to Elohim, for I will yet thank Him for the salvations of my countenance and my God. 
Psalm 59 <br>1. For the Leader, a plea to be spared from destruction; by David, a michtam; when Shaul dispatched and they guarded the house to slay him. 2. Rescue me from my enemies, my God; from those who rise up against me, save me. 3. Save me from workers of iniquity; and from bloodthirsty men rescue me. 4. For behold, they lurked for my soul; strong men lodge against me, neither for any transgression of mine nor for any sin of mine, Adonai. 5. Without any iniquity [of mine], they run and prepare themselves; awaken [Yourself] towards me and see. 6. And You, Adonai-Elohim Tzevaot, God of Israel, arise to visit upon all the nations; be not gracious to any treacherous workers of iniquity, Selah. 7. They return in the evening, they howl like a dog and go round about the city. 8. Behold, they spew forth with their mouth; [they have] swords in their lips, for who hears? 9. But You, Adonai, will laugh at them; You will mock all the nations. 10. [In face of] his strength, for You do I wait, for Elohim is my stronghold. 11. The God of my kindness will precede me; Elohim will show me what befalls my watchful foes. 12. Do not kill them, lest my people forget; make them wander [destitute] with Your power and bring them down, Adonai our Shield. 13. The sin of their mouth is the word of their lips, and they will be seized because of their haughtiness, and because of the curse and the lies that they tell. 14. Destroy [them] with wrath, destroy them so they be no longer, and let [people] know that Elohim rules in Yaacov to the ends of the earth, Selah. 15. And let them return towards evening, let them howl like dogs and go round about the city. 16. Groaning [for food] they will roam about to eat; if they are not sated, they will lodge. 17. And I will sing of Your power, and I will sing praises of Your kindness in the morning, for You were my stronghold and a refuge on a day that I was in straits. 18. My strength! To You will I sing, for Elohim is my stronghold, God of my kindness.
Psalm 77 <br>1. For the Leader, on yedutun, by Asaf, a song. 2. My voice is to God (El Elohim), when I cry out; my voice is to God (El Elohim), that he give ear to me. 3. On the day of my distress, I sought Adonai; my wound oozes at night and does not abate; my soul refuses to be comforted. 4. I remember Elohim and I moan; I speak and my spirit becomes faint, Selah. 5. You held my eyes from [getting any sleep]; I am stricken and unable to speak. 6. I think of days of yore, ancient years. 7. I recall my music at night; I speak with my heart and my spirit searches. 8. "Will Adonai forsake [me] forever and nevermore be appeased? 9. Is His kindness ended forever? Has He finished consoling? 10. Has the Merciful God forgotten graciousness? Has He, in anger, shut off His mercy?” Selah. 11. And I said, "This is to infirm me, this change of the right hand of the Most High." 12. I recall the deeds of Yah when I remember Your wonder from time immemorial. 13. And I meditate over all Your works, and of Your deeds I speak. 14. Elohim, Your way is in sanctifying [your Name by judging the wicked]. Who is a great god as Elohim? 15. You are the God Who works wonders; You made known Your might among the peoples. 16. You redeemed Your people with Your arm, the sons of Yaacov and Yosef, Selah. 17. The waters saw You, Elohim, the waters perceived You, and they trembled, the deeps even quaked. 18. They poured forth thick waters; the skies let out a voice [of thunder], even your arrows [of lightning] went abroad. 19. The sound of Your thunder [rebuked] the wheel[s of Pharao’s chariots]; the lightning illuminated the world; the earth trembled and roared. 20. In the sea was Your way, and Your path in the mighty waters; afterwards Your steps were not known [when the sea returned to its strength to cover the Egyptians]. 21. You led Your people like sheep by the hand of Moshe and Aharon.
Psalm 90 <br>1. A prayer by Moshe, the man of Elohim. Adonai, a shelter are You; You have been for us, in generation after generation. 2. Before the mountains were born, and when the earth and inhabited land were yet non-existent, and from everlasting to everlasting, You are the God. 3. You bring a man down to a crushing point, and You say, "Return, O sons of men." 4. For if a man lived a thousand years, they would be in Your eyes like a bygone yesterday, for they will but pass away, and be like a watch in the night. 5. You flow them; they are as a [dream] during sleep; in the morning, like grass he passes away. 6. In the morning, it blossoms and is rejuvenated; by evening, it is cut off and withers. 7. For we perish from Your wrath, and from Your anger we are dismayed. 8. You have placed our iniquities before You, [the sins of] our youth before the light of Your countenance. 9. For all our days have passed away in Your anger; we have consumed our years as a fleeting thought. 10. The days of our years because of them are seventy years, and if with strength, eighty years; but their proudest success is toil and pain, for it is quickly shorn off and we fly away. 11. Who knows the power of Your anger, and Your wrath according to the reverence that is due unto You? 12. To number our days, so inform [us], that we may get a heart of wisdom. 13. Return, Adonai [from Your wrath]. How long? And be consoled [in thinking favorably] regarding Your servants. 14. Satiate us in the morning with Your loving-kindness, and we will sing out and rejoice throughout our days. 15 Cause us to rejoice according to the days that You afflicted us, the years when we saw evil. 16. May Your works appear to Your servants, and Your majesty to their sons. 17. And may the pleasantness of Adonai Eloheinu be upon us, and the work of our hands, establish for us (w/o mishap to us), and the work of our hands, establish it.
Psalm 105 <br>1 Give thanks to Adonai, proclaim His name; make His deeds known among the peoples. 2. Sing enthusiastically to Him, play music to Him, speak of all His wonders. 3. Boast of His holy name; may the heart of those who seek Adonai rejoice. 4. Search for Adonai and His might; seek His presence constantly. 5. Remember His wonders, which He performed, His miracles and the judgments of His mouth. 6. The seed of Avrahom His servant, the children of Yaacov, His chosen ones. 7. He is the Adonai Eloheinu; throughout all the earth are His judgments. 8. He remembered His covenant forever, the word He had commanded to the thousandth generation, 9. [The Covenant] which He cut with Avrahom, and His oath to Yitzchak, 10. And He set it up to Yaacov as a statute, to Yisroel as an everlasting covenant, 11. Saying, "To you I shall give the land of Canaan, the lot of your inheritance." 12. When they were few in number, hardly dwelling in it. 13. And they walked [in their customs] among one nation and then among another nation, from one kingdom to another people. 14. He let no man rob them, and He reproved kings on their account. 15. "Do not touch My anointed ones, and do not harm My prophets." 16. He called a famine upon the land; He broke every staff of bread. 17. He sent a man before them; Yosef was sold as a slave. 18. They afflicted his foot with fetters; his soul was placed in irons. 19. Until His word came, the saying of the Adonai purified him. 20. A king sent and released him, a ruler of peoples [sent] and loosed his bonds. 21. He made him the master of his household and the ruler over all his possessions. 22. To bind up his princes at his wish, and he made his elders wise. 23. Yisroel came to Egypt, and Yaacov sojourned in the land of Cham. 24. And He made His people very fruitful, and He made it stronger than its adversaries. 25. He turned their heart to hate His people, to plot against His servants. 26. He sent Moshe His servant, [and] Aharon whom He chose. 27. They placed upon them the words of His signs and His miracles in the land of Cham. 28. He sent darkness and it darkened, and [the signs] did not disobey His word. 29. He turned their water into blood, and killed their fish. 30. Their land swarmed with frogs, [even] in the rooms of their monarchs. 31. He commanded and a mixture of noxious beasts came, lice throughout their entire boundary. 32. He made their rains into hail, flaming fire in their land. 33. And it struck their vines and their fig trees, and it broke the trees of their boundary. 34. He spoke and locusts came, and nibbling locusts without number. 35. And they consumed all grass in their land, and they consumed the produce of their soil. 36. And He smote every firstborn in their land, the first of all their strength. 37. And He took them out with silver and gold, and there was no pauper among their tribes. 38. Egypt rejoiced with their departure, for their fear had fallen upon them. 39. He spread out a cloud for shelter, and fire to illuminate the night. 40. They asked, and He brought quails, and the bread of heaven sated them. 41. He opened a rock and water flowed; in the deserts ran rivers. 42 For He remembered His holy word with Avrahom His servant. 43. And He took out His people with joy, His chosen ones with joyful singing. 44. And He gave them lands of nations, and they inherited the toil of regimes. 45. In order that they keep His statutes and observe His laws. Halleluyah!
Psalm 137 <br>1. By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat, we also wept when we remembered Tzion. 2. On willows in its midst we hung our harps. 3. For there our captors asked us for words of song and our tormentors [asked of us] mirth, "Sing for us of the song of Tzion." 4. "How shall we sing the song of Adonai on foreign soil?" 5. If I forget you, Yerushalayim, may my right hand forget [its skill].6 May my tongue cling to my palate, if I do not remember you, if I do not elevate Yerushalayim above my foremost joy. 7. Remember, Adonai, and repay the children of Edom; and the day of Yerushalayim, those who say, "Raze it, raze it, down to its foundation!" 8. Daughter of Babylon, who is destined to be plundered, praiseworthy is he who repays you in accordance with how you have done to us. 9. Praiseworthy is he who will take and dash your infants against the rock. 
Psalm 150 <br>1. Halleluyah! Praise God in His holy place, praise Him in the firmament of His might. 2. Praise Him for His mighty deeds; praise Him as befits His superb greatness. 3. Praise Him the blast of the shofar; praise Him with psaltery and lyre. 4. Praise Him with timbres and dance, praise Him with stringed instruments and flute. 5. Praise Him with resounding cymbals; praise Him with far-sounding trumpets. 6. Let every soul praise Yah! Halleluyah! 
Master of the World, Primal Cause and Driver of everything, You are above and transcendent above everything and there is nothing higher than You, for thought cannot have any grasp of You whatsoever.  And for You, silence is a more of a praise and loftier than any blessing or worship.  You I seek, You I request, that You breach an opening for a paved channel from You down through all the worlds, down to  my spot in the web where I am standing, as it is revealed to You, Who know the hidden things.  And through this path and channel shine Your light on me, to bring me back in complete ''teshuvah''/return before Your presence in truth, in accord with Your will, in reality, in accord with the will of the Choicest of all Your creatures, so that I should not entertain in my thinking, any extraneous thought or any confusion that is contrary to Your will, but only cleave to clear, lucid, and holy thoughts in Your service, in truth, in perception of You and in Your Torah. Incline my heart unto Your testimonies [the Torah], and give me a pure heart to serve You in truth. And take me out from the ocean's abyss unto great light very speedily and soon; the salvation of Hashem [instantaneous] as the blink of an eye, to illuminate all the days of my life in the Ohr Hachayim/Your influx of light to all life, while I am on the face of the Earth. And make me privileged to renew my youth, the days which transpired in darkness, to bring them back into sanctity. And let my going from this world be like my coming — faultless. And let me privileged to gaze upon Hashem's Blissfulness and visit His Temple-chamber; it all proclaims, "Kavod/His Presence!" Amen, netzach selah va`ed/forever and ever.