Bartenura on Mishnah Berakhot
ברטנורא על משנה ברכות
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.org



Bartenura on Mishnah Berakhot

Chapter 1



Mishna 1

Mishna: "From the time that the Priests enter to eat their Terumah (heave offering)." -----(Bartenura): Priests that have become ritually impure and have immersed (in a ritual bath), are not able to eat [with(lit.)] terumah until "the sun has set", which (in actuality) denotes the coming out of the stars. And the reason why (the Mishna) did not write "...from the time of the coming out of the stars", was to teach something incidentally; that if the priests became ritually impure with a form of impurity in which their purification requires a sacrifice, for example a Zav (emission) or Metzorah (skin affliction), the atonement (i.e. sacrifice) does not prevent them from eating Terumah, as it is written: "and the sun set and he is pure, and after he will eat from the sanctified food (Leviticus 22:7)". (It is) The setting of the sun which prevents eating of Terumah, and his atonement (i.e. sacrifice) does not prevent from eating of Terumah etc.
Mishna: "Until the end of the first watch" ----- (Bartenura): Which is the first third of the night, since the night is divided into 3 watches. And from then (end of the first watch) and onward it is not referred to as the time of reciting the Shema of "with laying down" (i.e. Shema of nighttime), and it is not called with your "laying down." And before (the time of) the coming out of the stars is also daytime, and not the time of "laying down." And those who rush forward and recite the Shema of nighttime while it is still day, rely on that which was stated by Rabbi Judah, later, in the chapter of Tefillat HaShachar (Morning Prayer), that the Afternoon Prayer (may be recited) until Plag HaMincha (division of afternoon), which is an hour and a quarter before nighttime. Thus it has been established "that one that performs in accordance of Rabbi Judah has indeed performed", and immediately at the completion of the time for the afternoon prayer, the time of the recitation of the Shema of nighttime begins.
Mishna: "Until the coming up of the dawn" ----(Bartenura): Since the entire night is referred to as the "time of laying down." The law is in accordance with Rabban Gamliel, for the Sages are also in agreement with him, and they do not state "until midnight" but only to distance Man from sin. Nevertheless, ideally at the arrival of the time (season lit.) of the recitation of the Shema of nightime of the Mishna, namely from the coming out of the stars, it is forbidden to conduct a meal, and how much more so to sleep, until one has recited the Shema and prayed.

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Mishna 1



Mishna 2



Mishna 3



Mishna 4

The one who makes his prayer a burden: That his prayer is similar to a load. And the language of "burden": that he says, "a law is established upon me to pray and I need to fulfill myself from it."