Penei Yehoshua on Bava Kamma
פני יהושע על בבא קמא
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Penei_Yehoshua_on_Bava_Kamma
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Penei Yehoshua on Bava Kamma



Daf 1a



Daf 1b



Daf 2a



Daf 2b



Daf 3a



Daf 3b



Daf 4a



Daf 4b



Daf 5a



Daf 5b



Daf 6a



Daf 6b



Daf 7a



Daf 7b



Daf 8a



Daf 8b



Daf 9a



Daf 9b



Daf 10a



Daf 10b



Daf 11a



Daf 11b



Daf 12a



Daf 12b



Daf 13a



Daf 13b



Daf 14a



Daf 14b



Daf 15a



Daf 15b



Daf 16a



Daf 16b



Daf 17a



Daf 17b



Daf 18a



Daf 18b



Daf 19a



Daf 19b



Daf 20a



On Tosafot Bava Kamma 20a, "It is a case of one benefitting while the other does not lose"--...But it is difficult--If it is so [that the squatter who indirectly causes loss should still be exempt], why does the Talmud take it for granted that a squatter who would have otherwise paid rent and the courtyard was meant to be rented out should be obligated to pay just because they benefitted [from living there]? The Talmud itself debates regarding the case of one who benefits without causing the other a loss, suggesting that it is not obvious that merely benefitting should be enough to render them liable. It is difficult to suggest that the person benefitting should help make them liable since they also caused a loss even if it was indirect and we combine the two factors to make them liable even though each factor alone would not be enough to create liability--but this is difficult. Furthermore, when we exempt for indirect damage, we do not distinguish between whether or not the person indirectly causing the damage benefitted from their actions. Furthermore, the opposite should be the case. It should be more logical to render someone liable when they cause loss without benefitting than if they benefitted without causing a loss, since liability for damages is primarily when one causes loss without benefitting. But benefitting without causing the other to lose appears like the trait of Sodom. It seems that there is no real difficulty. The reasoning of Tosafot seems to be that causing loss should not be enough to make one liable since the loss is merely indirect. Rather, Since [the squatter] benefitted from their fellow's property by living in their house, this should be enough by itself to make them liable [to pay rent]. The cause for uncertainty in the Talmud is that, in such a case, we use legal force against the character trait of Sodom since the owner does not lose anything. Further, Rabbi Mordechai b. Hillel writes in the name of Rabbi Eliezer ben Yosef HaLevi that [the squatter] can even force the homeowner ab initio to let them stay in a courtyard meant to be rented out. Even though most rabbinical authorities disagree with him, nonetheless, if it already happened that someone lived [in the courtyard] without the owner's consent, it is certainly justified for the Talmud to be uncertain about the law in such a case. However, in the case in which one person benefits while causing the other a loss, like in the case where the [squatter] would have otherwise rented and the courtyard was meant to be rented out, since there is no need to mention the principle of the trait of Sodom, as they caused damage, it is obvious to the Talmud that they should be liable merely for the fact that they benefitted. 