Perek Shirah
פרק שירה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Perek Shirah

Introductory Text







Chapter 1

Heaven says: "The heavens declare the Glory of God, and of the work of His hands the firmament tells." (Psalms 19:2)
Earth says: "Of David, a psalm. To Adonai is the earth and its fullness, the land and those dwelling on it." (Psalms 24:1)
And it says, "From the wing of the earth we have heard songs, glory to the Righteous." (Isaiah 24:16)
The Garden of Eden says, "Awaken, North-Wind, and come, South-Wind, Blow on my garden, let fruit its spices! My lover will come to his garden and eat the fruit of its preciousness." (Song of Songs 4:16)
Gehenna says, "For He has satisfied the longing soul, and the hungry soul He fills with good." (Psalms 107:9)
Wilderness says: "The wilderness and the waste will rejoice, and the steppe will exult and flower like the rose." (Isaiah 35:1)
Fields say: "Adonai in wisdom founded the earth, establishing the heavens with understanding." (Proverbs 3:19)
Waters say: "Until the Voice resounds the mass of heavenly water, and raises steam from the depths of the earth; lightning He made amid the rain, and brings out wind from its storehouses." (Jeremiah 51:16)
Seas say: "Above the sounds of the great mighty waters, over the sea breakers, mighty on high is Adonai." (Psalms 93:4)
Rivers say: "Rivers clap their hands, together with the mountains they sing." (Psalms 98:8)
Water-sources say: "And the singers as the dancers - 'All my sources are in You.'" (Psalms 87:7) 

Chapter 2

Day says: "Day after day pours out speech, night after night reveals knowledge." (Psalms 19:3)
Night says: "To tell in the morning of Your mercy and of Your truth in the nights" (Psalms 92:3)
Sun says: "Sun, moon stand exalted, as the light of Your arrows goes, the shining of Your lightning-spear." (Habakkuk 3:11)
Moon says: "He made the moon for appointed times, the sun He knows how it goes" (Psalms 104:19)
Stars say: "You alone are Adonai - You made the heavens, the highest heavens and all their host, the earth and all upon it, the seas and all within them, and You bring life to all, and the host of the heavens bows down to You." (Nehemiah 9:6)
Clouds say: "He made darkness His secret place; around Him is the darkness of water; the clouds of the skies." (Psalms 18:2)
Clouds of Glory say: "Yet He burdens the clouds with overflow, the cloud scatters its light."
Wind says: "Say to the North Wind - release! And to the south wind, Do not hold! Bring My sons from far away and My daughters from the edge of the earth." (Isaiah 43:6)
Lightning bolts say: "Lightning within the rain He made, He releases wind from His storehouses." (Psalms 135:7)
Dew says, "I will be as the Dew of Israel, sprouting like a lily, and he shall spread his roots as Lebanon." (Hosea 14:6)
Rains say: "Generous rain You poured, God, strengthening Your inheritance as it lasted" (Psalms 68:10)

Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6









[Yalkut Shimoni, Bo 187:] Rabbi Yeshayah, élève de Rabbi Ḥanina ben Dosa, a jeûné quatre-vingt-cinq jeûnes. Il dit : "Les chiens, à propos desquels il est écrit, 'les chiens sont effrontés d'esprit ; ils ne connaissent pas la satisfaction' — mériteront-ils de dire un chant?" Un ange lui répondit du Ciel et lui dit : "Yeshayah, jusqu'à quand jeûneras-tu pour cela ? C'est un serment du Saint béni soit-Il ; depuis le jour où il a révélé son secret à Havakuk le prophète, il n'a pas révélé cette affaire à quiconque dans le monde. Mais parce que tu es l'élève d'un grand homme, j'ai été envoyé du Ciel pour t'assister. On a dit que les chiens ont écrit à leur sujet, 'Aucun chien n'a aiguisé sa langue contre aucun des enfants d'Israël.' De plus, ils ont mérité que les peaux soient tannées avec leurs excréments, sur lesquels sont écrits les Tefillin, Mezuzot et les rouleaux de la Torah. Pour cette raison, ils ont mérité de dire un chant. Et concernant ce que tu as demandé, retire ta parole et ne continue pas de cette manière, comme il est écrit, 'Celui qui garde sa bouche et sa langue, garde des afflictions de son âme.' Béni soit YHVH à jamais, Amen et Amen."[FR]

Concluding Prayer

After reciting the chapter of Shirah:
Master of all worlds, may it be Your will before You, Lord my God and the God of my ancestors, that in the merit of "the chapter of Shirah" that I have recited – which is the song of the mute, the growing, and the living, and the appointed angels over them from the blessed God – may its recitation be like bringing an offering upon the altar. May this moment be a time of mercy, a time of heeding, a time of listening, and may You be called upon and answer us. We implore You and beseech You to hear our plea....
May the recitation of the chapter of Shirah be presented before You as if we had comprehended all the wondrous and awe-inspiring secrets sealed within it, in all its details. Return us in complete repentance before You, and may we merit a place where the soaring souls and spirits are stationed, as if we have accomplished all that is incumbent upon us to achieve, whether in this reincarnation or in subsequent ones. Fulfill all the desires of our hearts for good (here add specific requests as needed), and send blessings, success, and tranquility in all the works of our hands. May we merit to rule in the future, and may You swiftly restore Your divine presence to Your holy city. Amen. (Adapted from Rabbi Mordechai Gross, shlita)