Orchot Tzadikim
אורחות צדיקים
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Orchot Tzadikim



Gate 1

INTRODUCTION
"The end of the matter, when all is heard, is to fear God and safeguard his commandments, for this is the entirety of man" (Ecclesiastes 12:13). This verse was [written] by King Solomon, who was wiser than all men, and ruled the upper and lower realms (Megillah 11b). And after he saw all actions, and tested all things, and taught many wise things to the world, he concludes his whole [book] with the words, "the ultimate matter is to fear of God". Likewise, Proverbs (1:7) begins, "Fear of God is the beginning of knowledge", and ends (ibid. 31:30), "A woman who fears God is the praiseworthy one". If another man exhorted us to fear God - the world would not accept his words and would say, "Since he has no other affairs, and is idle, therefore he exhorts the fear of God". But Solomon was richer than all men, as it is written (Kings 1 10:27), "And the king gave out silver in Jerusalem like stone", and he was wiser than all men, as it is written (ibid. 5:11), "And he became wiser than all men". He was fit to say (Ecclesiastes 1:2), "Vanity of vanities, all is vanity", and that one should only toil in fear of Heaven. So too did Moses, the father of all wise men and prophets, say in the Torah (Deuteronomy 10:12) "And now Israel, what does the Lord your God ask of you? Only to fear the Lord your God". So too did King David say (Psalms 111:10), "The beginning of wisdom is the fear of God".
Since we see that man is God's chosen creation of the lower world, that he is constructed in the image and form of God, more carefully created than than all created things, and that he has a soul that can understand the foundation of the upper and lower [worlds]; we [can] know that he is the matter of all [God's] intentions for this world, and that all things in this world were created for his needs. Therefore, man was given the true Torah, to teach us the proper way [of life]. For man is very beloved to God, as [seen from the fact] that the angels work [to fulfill] the needs of righteous men, as we know from Abraham and Isaac, and as Jacob said (Genesis 48:16), "May the angel that that saves me from all evil bless the youth", and as it is written (Hosea 12:5) "and he strove with an angel and prevailed", and as Daniel said (Daniel 6:23), "God sent an angel, and he closed the mouths of the lions and they did not hurt me". We find that angels also come to help the righteous, as it written (Kings II 19:35) And it was that night that an angel of God went out and struck the camp of Assyria", and many similar [passages]. We also know that one have much more worth than another, to the extent that one man [can be] equal to many others. Even though they are all of one form and foundation, this man's soul has risen to great heights that are higher than that of his peers, because he made his wisdom rule over his desires, whereas the others let their desires reign over their wisdom, and go though their whole lives in darkness, groping like a blind man in the dark.
Man has five senses: 
1) The sense of hearing, 
2) the sense of sight, 
3) the sense of smell,
 4) the sense of taste, 
and 5) the sense of touch, that which one feels when using something.
These actions compose all of man's actions, and no action is done without one of these five senses. And the heart acts on them, because everything is brought to the heart with these five senses, and so every action and thought is drawn after them. The heart has many thought patterns, such as arrogance and humility, remembrance and forgetting, agony and happiness, embarrassment and insolence, and many more like these. And all of these though patterns draw strength from the five senses, for a blind man can not be as haughty as he would be if he could see.
Therefore, all [capably]-hearted men should try with all of their strength to attain the ultimate good; if one reaches a good [spiritual] level, he should always reach for the level above it, until he attains the ultimate good and gains the world of reward - i.e. the World to Come - with it. Kind David desired to attain the good of the world to come, saying (Psalms 31:20) "How much is the good that You have hidden away for those who fear You", and (ibid. 36:9) "They will be filled with the fat of Your house, and they will drink from the brook of Your delights". But this level [of reward] is only reached by the deserving, as [David] wrote, (ibid. Ch. 16) "Who can live in Your tent and dwell in Your holy mountain, those who go [about] wholesomely and do righteousness...", see further there.
And since we mentioned the value of the [spiritual] levels of man, we should explain their laudable and denigratable and good and bad [parts], until the path before the thinking one is clear and he can enter the King's courtyard; he will choose the good character traits with all of his strength, as he knows clearly what they are, discarding the chaff and taking the wheat.
How so? Some men are naturally angry and are always angry, while others are of a settled mind and only get slight angry over a period of many years. Some people are naturally lustful, and cannot be satiated from their pursuit of their desires, and some are very pure of body and don't even desire the little that the body needs. Some people are greedy and could not be satisfied by all of the money in the world (as [the verse] says (Ecclesiastes 5:9), "One who loves money will never be satisfied by it"), while others are content and find just a small amount sufficient, and do not pursue all of their needs. Some people will mortify themselves out of stinginess, and won't even spend a penny unless [to relieve] great suffering, while others knowingly abandon their money. And all of these ways and traits, such as the exuberance and mournfulness, miserliness and generosity, cruelty and compassion, cowardice and bravery, etc. -
- of all of these traits, some a person has from the moment of his creation as part of his physical nature, while others a person is predisposed to and will acquire them faster than other traits. Some are not intrinsic to a person; and he needs to be them by others, or he reflects on them due to a thought that came to mind, or he hears that that this trait is good and worth following; and he practices it until it becomes ingrained in his heart.
Some traits need to be used in most circumstances, where others need to be used [just] a little. This is comparable to one making a cooked dish - he needs vegetables, meat, water, salt, and pepper; but each of these ingredients need to be added according to the recipe, with a little of some but a lot of the others. If he puts in too little meat, it will be thin, and if he puts in a lot of salt, it will be inedible because it is too salty. So too for the other ingredients - if he puts in a lot when a little is called for, or vice versa, the food will be ruined; but [if he is] an expert [cook] who puts in the proper amount of every ingredient, the food will be pleasant- and sweet-tasting. So too by character traits: Some need to be used a lot (such as humility, shame, etc.), while some need to be used rarely (such as arrogance, insolence, etc.) Therefore, when man weights each trait on scales in order to to use each appropriately, no more and no less, this will enable him to attain the ultimate good.
Know very well that one who is predisposed or habituated to an evil trait, and instead of turning away from it continually becomes entrenched in it, causes himself to abhor and mock good traits. Just as too many aches, pain, and suffering are indicative of physical sickness, many bad character traits are indicative of spiritual sickness; so just like the physically sick may, depending on their illness, find the bitter sweet and vice versa, desire bad food and hate good food; so too the spiritually sick love evil and hate good, being too lethargic to pursue [good] because of the heaviness imposed by their sickness. So did Isaiah say (5:20), "They say that bad is good and good is bad, consider darkness as light and light as darkness, and consider bitterness as sweetness and sweetness for bitterness". They are called (Proverbs 2:13) "those who leave the just path to go down the road of darkness".
And how does one cure spiritual sickness? By going to the sages, the doctors of the soul, and learn from them until they return to a proper path. Those who recognize their evil traits and won't go to a sage to be cured of them - of them it is said (Proverbs 1:7): "Wisdom and ethics despair of them".
There are many people who wish to take hold of the proper path, but don't know what is good for them; they are set every day on attaining a very high level, but don't ever do so. This happens for two reasons:
1) They do not recognize their faults or examine their degrading ways. This is similar to [someone named] Reuben looking for [someone named] Simon, even though Reuben does not recognize him; Reuben will not find him even if he searches all day, because [even if] Reuben crossed Simon many times, he wouldn't recognize him. So too these people - even though they consider what they should be doing and seek good deeds, they won't attain [high levels] since they don't know their own faults.
2) They recognize their bad traits, and commit to getting rid of them and seizing good deeds instead, yet still never reach the proper path [in life] because they are too lazy to properly seek good character traits. This is similar to [when] Reuben recognizes Simon and looks for him, but still can't because he's not looking hard enough.
On this [the verse] says (Proverbs 10:20), "The speech of the righteous is choice silver". [Meaning,] if one borrows his fellow and repays him with silver by weight, if he does not know the accuracy of the silver and weights, or he knows but is not an expert in examining silver, he is open to being [monetarily] harmed via [bad] silver or weights. For sometimes, he will refuse silver and take dross [instead], or take a light weight, or put the silver on the heavy scale-pan; and all of these will lead one to err. Or even if he is an expert in silver and weights, if he doesn't look at it carefully, dross may be mixed in with his silver. But if he is an expert in both silver and weights, and looks at it carefully, then he will be paid his due, in full measures of pure silver. Therefore, the "speech of the righteous" is compared to "choice silver", because the righteous one needs to recognize good, evil, and all character traits; and he needs to properly observe and contemplate them, and to engage his body and wisdom in abandoning foolishness and grabbing understanding, and to remove any mixed-in dross from it, and then his soul will be purified and shine before God, as it is written, (Proverbs 25:4) "Remove the dross from the silver, and a vessel will come out of the refiner", by which it means that when you remove the dross, than the vessel will be pure.
Some have no fixed practices and are always changing them; at one time, they will adhere to one practice, and at another, they abandon that custom and adhere to a new one; and they repeat this process forever. This is like someone who wants to is trying to go to a city, but does not know the road and doesn't recognize the signs leading him there. Therefore, he is confounded by the road, first going one way, then repeatedly backtracking and mistakenly going on a different road. The wise man said about such [people] (Ecclesiastes 1:15), "The toil of the fool who does not know how to get the city will exhaust him". 
Therefore one should take pity those who are drowning in vain falsehoods, and teach them "proper weights and measures and how to examine silver", and instruct them in the ways of the upright, in order that the path that brings one to the fresh and fertile place of all good - namely, fear of Heaven, which is the end purpose of all actions - will be clear at the outset. This is the request that God asks from all people, as it is written (Deuteronomy 1:12) "What does the Lord your God ask of you? Just to fear [God]". And no action is of any consideration if it is [done] without pure fear [of Heaven].
Therefore all should be told that anyone who wants to bring his soul to [possess] good character traits needs to mix fear of Heaven into every [other] trait, for fear of Heaven is the knot that strengthens all of the other traits. It is compared to a thread that is threaded though the holes of pearls, and tied into knots on at the end in order to strengthen all of them; just as it is obvious that if [that] one knots is cut, all the nails will fall, so too fear of Heaven strengthens all of the traits, and if the knot of fear is cut, all of the traits will leave him. And when one does not have good character traits, he cannot have Torah and mitzvos, for the whole Torah is dependent on correcting one's traits. Specifically both the good and bad traits, the wise one can [use] the bad traits for good, and the fool [uses] the good traits for bad.
One who goes in the dark and does not contemplate fixing his character traits, it is possible that he will have a character trait that causes him to lose all of his merits. For example, [take] one who takes pride in his deeds, and always glorifies and beautifies himself with the denigration of his fellow, and takes honor from his ruin. Such a man is compared to one who fills a barrel with great wine, but the barrel has a hole at the bottom, and for whom it is certain that all of that great wine will be lost due to that little hole if he does not plug it. So too the self-aggrandizer; even if he is filled with Torah, he will lose it all through this bad character trait if he is not concerned with rectifying it.
Those who recognize the truth are few. Some don't have the wisdom to recognize it; just as an amputee is unable to climb a ladder, so too people who don't have discernment are unable to attain high levels of wisdom. Some are wise, but have been drowning in the desires of this world from their youth; they use all their wisdom to attain their lusts and do the will of the Evil Inclination, because they have been accustomed from their youth to [do] evil deeds until they are ingrained into his soul. Such a person will find it very hard to escape from the snare of [his] sins. Some have the wisdom to recognize [the truth], and also desire to go in the right path, but are not near the Sages [and so cannot] hear wisdom and proper conduct from them, and so go in the dark. This is comparable to one who as a treasure in his house, but does not know about it, and sells the house to another.
Understand, that man’s many traits differ from one another, and each trait influences his mind – one pulling him here and one pulling him there, and the evil inclination guides him to choose the least [preferable] from among the traits. It is comparable to a man who, walking in the desert, encounters bears, lions, leopards, wolves, and many other terrors. This man needs to open his eyes [i.e., to be alert] to fight each and every one [of them] – if he averts his eyes [i.e., ceases to be alert] for a single second, the beasts will tear him apart. Thus is man with regard to his bad traits – such as desire, pride, hatred, anger, and so forth – they are constantly rolling about in his mind; if he ignores them and does not fix them, the light of truth will be uprooted from his heart and darkness shall take its place. About this the verse says (Psalms 16:8) “I have set the Lord before me constantly.”
Man, at the time of his birth, is in his body and intellect weaker than all other creatures. All other creatures walk, eat, and are self-sustaining on the day of their birth, but man needs a great deal of progress in his body, and also needs more restorations for his soul in order to restore his wisdom and enable him to understand good paths [of life]. This is because man – at the beginning and without a teacher – acts like an animal, but his mind is similar to a tablet which has been primed for writing upon: If this tablet is in the hands of a simpleton, he will score it with meaningless lines until he has wasted it and will no longer serve any purpose. The wise man, however, can write upon it a list of his properties, needs and obligations, and because of the tablet will be able to feed and support his children, and [the tablet] shall serve a great purpose. Likewise is the heart of a man: the fools will create within him pictures of nonsense and falsehoods, and shall write upon him inscriptions of nonsense and grief, and his mind shall be filled with nonsensical and empty thoughts. But the intelligent ones shall write on their minds the writings of God, which are the foundation of the Torah, the commandments, and the understanding of personality traits, until their souls shine like the sky. This was the Solomon’s intention when he said (Proverbs 7:3) “Bind them upon your fingers, write them upon the tablet of your heart.”
Solomon also stated that (Ecclesiastes 20:11) “even a child is known by his doings, whether his work is pure, and whether it is right.” This verse speaks about differentiation among children, for even in their youth their traits are recognizable. As you may observe, some children have the trait of shamefulness, and some of them brazenness; some of them are inclined toward desire, and some of them are inclined toward the lofty good. Recognize that all the traits that you see in a person when he is a young adult or elderly were present also when he was young and fresh, but at that time he did not have the strength to see them or to bring them toward action. It is possible to redirect those youths (whose base traits have become considerable) to the good path, because it is easy for them to learn and because they do not have the strength or intelligence to leave and flee the one who admonishes them, but they must endure it. When in old age, however, they cannot be redirected as easily as they were in their boyhood. They are like a silver plate that has been buried in the ground, and a thick rust has appeared on it during its burial - the silver will require cleaning upon cleaning before the silver returns to its pleasant appearance. Thus is the man who goes along his own way and custom, sunken in the depths of the lowly traits: he must polish his intellect in order to differentiate between the impure and the pure, and to accustom himself to work, until the traits will become natural and ingrained upon his heart. 
This book is called the "Book of Traits," and it is written and sealed with the signet of wisdom in order to transmit knowledge to man, so that this book shall be in the hands of every person as a tool with which to repair from within his traits and actions, [for a person is] like a craftsman who with his tool in hand, can do his work, but if his tool is not in hand, cannot accomplish anything. Therefore hearken to [this] admonition, and take the tool in hand in order to repair your traits. Have you not seen someone who has many types of coin, small and large, but does not know their value? He does not know what to buy with each coin before he knows the value of each. He also needs to know which coin was cancelled by the king, who declared that it must not be spent. After he weighs each and every coin and determines there values, [only] then can he buy with each [coin] his necessities for a fair price, and take care not to spend the coin which the king has decreed may not be spent, unless he is in a situation where he will not be fined. We find that this man will use each and every coin for benefit and happiness, but a fool who does not weigh or evaluate [the coins] and spends what the king has forbidden will undoubtedly suffer great damage.
And you my son, take this parable, which teaches about many of your traits, large and small, and weigh every trait on the scales of your wisdom, until you know the value of each and every trait, and you know to be cautious with those which the Great King disallowed - that each shall not be found within you, except in place where you shall not suffer damage or punishment [as a result]. In this manner you shall approach completion, and you shall be [like] the craftsman with the tool of your trade in your hand.
Now, we want to make known the roots of the traits and their branches, their purposes and the harm they cause. It is our intention to restore man's natures from the senseless matters to a love of admonition, and [to cause] the simpleton to endeavor to know the natures of the sages. And from the Lord - may His Mention be elevated! - we ask assistance, that he make known to us the straight roads and correct paths, [so that we may be able] to teach the tribes of Jeshurun, the community of lovingkindness.
The First Gate: The Gate of Pride
The first gate: In it we shall discuss the trait of pride - and how fitting it is that [pride] is positioned first of all of the gates, because of the obligation of man to separate himself from it, because it is an opening for many evils, and we do not see anything equal to it in evil among all of the [other] traits. Therefore, a man needs to become shrewd: to utilize [pride] in fitting ways, and it push it [aside] in places where it is not fitting.
Pride is the coin that the Holy One, Blessed Be He, forbade [its use] and warned us about in His Torah, as it says (Deuteronomy 6:12): “Guard yourself, lest you forget the Lord your God, who took you out of the Land of Egypt.” For the prideful one forgets his maker, as it is written (Deuteronomy 8:13-18): “And your cattle and your flock shall be increased, and silver and gold will become plentiful for you… and your heart will become high and you will forget the Lord your God… and you will say in your heart, ‘My strength and the might of my hand has made for me this wealth.’ But you should remember the Lord your God, for He is the One Who gives you the strength to create wealth.” And about a king it is said (Deuteronomy 17:20): “Lest his heart shall become higher than those of his brothers.” If the Torah warns even a king – certainly commoners should also not raise themselves above their fellows.
Pride is divisible into two parts:
One is a person’s pride in his body,
and the other part is a person’s pride in his intellectual advantages and his own actions.
A person’s pride in his body has two parts – one good and one bad.
This is a person’s bad pride in his own body:
At the time when such pride is strengthened within a person’s mind, it rules over him from the top of his head to the bottom of his feet.
[It rules] in his head and in his throat, as it is written (Isaiah 3:16): “Because the daughters of Zion are so vain and walk with their necks stretched out.”
[It rules] in his hands and his feet, as it is written (Psalms 36:12): “Let not the foot of the arrogant tread on me, or the hand of the wicked drive me away.” It was for the pride of the foot that the daughter Rabi Hanina ben Teradyon was punished with a decree that she should sit in the harlots’ square – for one time she walked in front of some great men of Rome, and she heard that they said: “how beautiful are the strides of this maiden!” and then she [walked] with greater care. (Avoda Zara 18a)
[It rules] in the eyes, as it is written (Proverbs 6:17): “Haughty eyes.”
[It rules] in the ears, as when he does not hear the words of the wretched poor.
[It rules] in the breath of his nose, as when he stands among poor people or enters their house, he thinks that they are putrid. Even with his words - he may use strong language when speaking about a righteous person, as a result of his pride.
[Pride] is also recognizable in matters of food and drink, and in the wearing of garments of pride - the garments of a non-Jew. About this we were warned in the Torah of Moses (Leviticus 20:23) [that] "you shall not follow the practices of that nation," and it also written (Leviticus 18:3) "you shall not follow their practices," and it is said (Deuteronomy 12:30) "guard yourself, lest you be lured after them." All of these are warning about the same matter: that Israel must be separate from the nations in its dress, its words, and all its practices. As it is said, (Leviticus 20:26) "I will separate you from the peoples."
Prideful people are revolting in the eyes of the Lord, as it says (Ecclesiastes 16:5) "An abomination to the Lord are all with haughty hearts." [The prideful person is] given over into the hands of his impulses, for the Lord's help is not with him, because he is and abomination to the Lord. Even if he does not raise himself above any man in speech or action, but only elevates his stature in his own heart, he is called an abomination, because it says "an abomination to the Lord are all with haughty hearts" - even if he only is haughty in his heart, he is called an abomination.
Our rabbis said: If anyone has within him an expansive spirit, it is as if he has worshiped idols; [for] here it is written that (Ecclesiastes 16:5) "an abomination to the Lord are all those with haughty hearts," and it is written there that "you shall not bring an abomination into your house." Some say it is as if he committed adultery, as it is written (Leviticus 18:27) "For they did all of these abominations..." Some say it as if he built a forbidden altar (Sotah 4b). They say that anyone with an expansive spirit will be decreased, as it is written, "exalted for a small time, and they are gone." He is deserving of being chopped down like an Asheira, as it is said (Isaiah 10:33) "the tall ones will be felled." His dust shall not be stirred (i.e., he will not be brought back to life) and the Divine Presence wails over him. The Holy One, Blessed Is He says, "He and I are not both able to live in the world," as it is written (Psalms 101:5) "[one who] has haughty eyes and an expansive heart - him I cannot endure." And they said that "a man who is arrogant cannot be accepted, even by members of his own household, as it is written (Habakuk 2:5) "an arrogant man will not go unpunished" - even in his own abode (Bava Batra 98b).
Pride cause one to pursue honors, in order to have authority over other people. You already know what happened to Korach and his faction because of his pride, which he wanted to heighten as well as to claim prestige which was not not granted to him from Heaven. As a result of this, a dispute arose, and from this dispute came jealousy and hatred - and both of the these traits are very decadent, as will be explained with the Lord's help.
The conclusion of the matter: Anyone who adorns his body in order to make himself proud forgets the Lord, Blessed be He, and does not concern himself with the commandments, and does not chase after good deeds. For all of his intentions are for himself, to adorn his temporal body, whose end is the worm. One who adorns his body approaches lust, for he will construct his appearance to find favor in the eyes of women, and he shall eventually come to clowning and lightheadedness. Also, when a woman is adorned [when] in front of men, she ignites their hearts and causes illicit [thoughts] to enter their hearts, and for this her punishment is very great, because she is placing a stumbling-block before the masses. Did not the sages forbid to look even at the colored garments of women which are spread out on a wall, even though they are not wearing them (Avoda Zara 20b)? Certainly, then, the punishment is great for a woman who is adorned before men who are gazing at her.
Furthermore, pride leads to desire, for the heart of one who exalts himself is expansive, and he desires all manner of things. Desire is the worst trait of all the traits, for he will desire - as a result of his pride - to wear expensive clothing, to build large palaces, and to eat fine food. The prideful one always covets great things, and if he is unable to afford those things, he will as a result come to theft and robbery. The heart of the prideful one covets, and [his goal of] achieving wealth is [as distant as] the width of the see, and he will never be happy with his share, for what he has will seem small in his eyes compared to the great expenditures which his pride desires.
Furthermore, pride cause one not to be patient, or to tolerate his fellow creatures - and it is unnecessary to elaborate on the defect of one who is impatient, for it is know to all.
This is the bodily pride which is good:
Perhaps a person will say, "Because pride is such a terrible trait, I shall exceedingly separate myself from it," until he neither drinks wine, nor marries a woman, nor lives in a nice dwelling, nor wear nice clothing - [instead, he wears only] sackcloth and flax, torn and filthy, he uses filthy and disgusting vessels, and does not wash his hands or feet until his appearance becomes darker than other men. All of this is so that he can distance himself from pride, until he can distance himself no further. One who takes this path is called a "sinner." Thus it says with regard to a Nazir (Numbers 6:11): "And he shall gain forgiveness for himself because he has sinned against the soul." The sages said (Taanit 11a): If one who separates himself only from wine is called a "sinner", one who withholds everything from himself will certainly [be called a sinner]. The sages said (Yerushalmi Nedarim 9a), "Is what the Torah forbade not sufficient for you, that you must forbid unto you other things?" About this matter and similar things, Solomon said (Ecclesiastes 7:16) "Do not be an overly righteous person, and don't act exceedingly wise. Why should you be dumbfounded?"
The straight path for a person is that he should be 'clean' in all of his concerns, for cleanliness is the boundary of good deeds. How [should one practice cleanliness]? He should wear middling clothing - not pauper's garb which embarrasses its wearer, but average garments which are nice and clean - the poor man [wearing clothing] according to his level of poverty, and the wealthy man according to his level of wealth. It is forbidden that a stain or grease-spot should be found on one's garment, and they also may not be torn. But [the garments] should not be excellent like the garments of those of expansive spirit.
His food should also be 'clean.' He should not eat royal cuisine, but average food and average drink, to the degree that he can afford. He should neither eat nor drink from revolting dishes, lest he violate [the commandment] "You shall not make yourselves disgusting" (Leviticus 11:43); instead, everything should be in a state of cleanliness. His table also, and his bed, should be clean, and all his concerns should be clean.
Also his body should be clean and not filthy. He should take care to wash his face, hands and feet - and his entire body, periodically - as we find that Hillel the Elder (Vayikra Raba 34:3) [did], as when he took leave of his students, and then left and walked together with them. His students said to him, "My master, to where are you going?" He said to them, "to fulfill a commandment." They said to him, "which commandment is it?" He said to them, "to wash in the bathhouse." They said to him, "but is that a commandment?" He said to them, "Yes! If the statues of kings, which they erect in the theaters and circuses, [have] someone appointed to polish and wash them, who receives sustenance for doing so - and what's more, he is elevated among the prominent people of the government - then I, who was created in the Image and Likeness, as it is written (Genesis 9:6) 'For in the image of God he made man' - how much more so!" Furthermore, it is written (Proverbs 16:4) "The Lord made everything for His Own sake" (Shabbat 50b). Anyone who is careful with these matters for the sake of the commandment, and not in order to become adorned or proud - even though these [actions] look like pridefulness - because his intention was in Heaven's name, it is a commandment [fulfilled].
Pride in wisdom and good actions has two parts: One good and one bad.
The bad pride is that he may disparage other people in his heart or with his mouth, and all will be small and lacking in his eyes. He will praise and extol himself, [saying] that he is great in wisdom, and as a result he will not admit to the truth, because of the extent of his pride. Always, it will appear to him that his wisdom, advice, words, and actions are more praiseworthy than the action, wisdom, or advice of his friends. He will constantly glorify himself with his wisdom and actions, for he wants to receive praise and honor for his correct words. About this Solomon said (Proverbs 27:2) "Let a stranger praise you, and not your own mouth." 
The prideful person will always presume good about himself. As a result, he will not burden himself with the Torah, for he will not be concerned about the honor of heaven, but only that the world should agree that he is a good and wise person, which will be enough for him. He will always rejoice at the stumbling of his friends and the limits of their knowledge, and will take honor from the degradation of his friends. [Pridefulness] is also one of the twenty-four things which prevents repentance. A person whose actions are all good and praiseworthy for the purpose of accruing honor is like a gourmet dish - with all of the peddler's seasonings and spices - remaining by the fire until its is burnt and putrid and not fit for eating because of the bitterness which came from its burning. So is the person who glorifies himself with [his own] actions: burnt and putrid when he praises his good deeds.
One who glorifies himself with his alleged wisdom and actions, which he does not really have - there is no trait similarly bad, and none is comparable to it. Did not the Sages say (Yerushalmi Sheviit 10:8), "If a person is honored because people think that he knows two tractates, and he knows only one, he should say to them that he only knows one." How much, much more [is it true] that a person must not mislead the world into presuming him to possess stature which he does not have at all.
Know, also, that we are obligated to ensure that all of our actions are dedicated to the Creator - may He be exalted - both in public and in private. Every action in the service of God should be to approach his will alone, without any human desire to wish for praise for his actions or to receive honor. Rather, he should do everything for the sake of the God Who perceives the heart, as the verse says (Jeremiah 17:10) "I, the Lord, probe the heart, search the mind," and it says (Deuteronomy 29:28) "Hidden things are of the Lord our God." Therefore, if a person will not take care - using wisdom and alacrity - to be rescued from pride, even if he has in his hands Torah and good deeds, he will inherit Gehinnom. For the inclination lies in wait for him, and bring claims and arguments to drive him from the world. Therefore, he should not be too lazy to defeat the evil inclination daily, which is called "the great war." This we see from one of the pious, who met men returning from the war with considerable spoils. He said to them, "You have returned from the small war; you will yet participate in the great war." They said to him, "What is this war?" He said to them, "The inclination and its armies! While any [conventional] enemy which you may have, if you defeat him once or twice or three times, he will then leave you, the inclination does not quit you even if you defeat him one hundred times, as our rabbis said (Pirkei Avot 2:4), "Do not trust yourself until the day you die." For all your days he will lie in wait for you that you may perhaps let down your guard, and if he defeats you in the lightest of the light, in the end he will defeat you in the most stringent of the stringent. Because pride is the root of many deficient traits, and because the inclination is part and parcel of the human heart, and because the entire goal of the inclination is to make truth seem deceitful and make falsehood seem true, and he therefore teaches man to become pride, and brings him arguments [in favor of pride], therefore, one must be savvy in order to counter it.
The early tactics of the inclination are to harden one's heart and raise it up, and to sweeten for him pride and other bad traits. Even if the person knows with certitude that there is sin and iniquity in his pride, even so he does so on purpose and becomes proud, for the inclination inflames his heart [to follow] after honor, until he will not worry about sin.

Gate 2


Humility is a sterling trait, and it is the opposite of arrogance. And one who has this trait, his soul is already turned away from many types of evil. 
And one who has reached this wonderful height--the reward that he receives from a mitzva will be in proportion to his humility, because humility is the root of Divine service, and one insignificant deed of a humble person is received by Hashem--blessed be He--a thousand times more than an impacting deed of one who is full of himself. And so said the Sages (Menachos 110:11), "Whether one increases or decreases [in mitzvos], [they are warmly accepted by Hashem], provided that he directs his mind to d it altruistically."   
However, the deed of an arrogant man is NOT warmly accepted by Hashem--blessed be He--because in fact, it is an abomination! It says (Proverbs 16:5), "The abomination of Hashem is a lofty mind." And because of this, the arrogant one cries out, and is not answered, like it says (Isaiah 1:15), "Even if you maximize your prayer, it is not heeded." And arrogant people do mitzvos and these deeds are shredded up before him, like it says (ibid. 1:12), "Who seeks this from your hands?" and (Jeremiah 7:21) "
But by the trait of humility and timidity, you achieve all goodness, because (Proverbs 3:34) "to humble people He will grant favor." And because the humble person has favor in the eyes of the Holy One--blessed be He--he can cry out be answered immediately, like it says (Isaiah 65:24), "Before they call out I will respond," and they do mitzvos and these deeds are accepted warmlyand joyously, because it says (Koheles 9:7), "Because G-d has already favored your acts"--and He craves them, like it says (Malachi 3:4), "And it is sweet to Hashem, the gift of Judah and Jerusalem." 
But what is "humility"? Humility is embarrassment and a low soul, and thinking of oneself as a nobody. And man is obligated at any given moment or period to be mocked in his own perspective, and of low spirit and soft-hearted and spirit-broken.
The root of humility: that 

Gate 3



Gate 4



Gate 5



Gate 6



Gate 7



Gate 8



Gate 9



Gate 10



Gate 11



Gate 12



Gate 13



Gate 14



Gate 15



Gate 16



Gate 17

Chapter 17: Generosity/Giving
Giving is a trait by which a person can reach great [spiritual] levels. And when the giving is in the correct path--then it is very laudable, and through it he will reach many levels in This World and in the World to Come, as it is said: "A man's gift will broaden for him, and will lead him to the great (mishlei 18:16)." Because through his gifts, kings, officers, and every man will love him. and there is no thing in the world that brings man to love of this world like giving, and also in the World to Come he will receive a great reward due to his gifts.
And there are three types of giving:
One is a donor in money,
The second is a donor with his body [physical ability]
And the third is a donor of wisdom.
These three [traits] were in our father, Avraham:





















Great is chessed/kindness, for with it the world was built, as it is said: "a world of kindness will be built".
Therefore, a person should cling to the trait of generosity, which causes all these good things.

Gate 18



Gate 19





See how G-d's warning about remembering, as it is written (Deut. 8:11) "Take care lest you forget the Lord your G-d, and fail to keep his commandment, and his rules, and his laws".  And this is the big thing, remembering the blessed name in all that you do.  And David said (Psalms 16:8) "I am ever mindful of the Lord presence" 