Likutei Halachot
ליקוטי הלכות
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Likutei_Halachot
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Likutei Halachot

Author's Introduction

1. The introduction from the author, may his righteous and holy memory be for a blessing, which he wrote himself:
2. 

Orach Chaim

Laws of Morning Conduct



Chapter 1



Section 1

1. [You] should strengthen yourself like a lion to wake up in the morning to the service of his Creator, to arouse the dawn. GLOSS:  "I have set the Lord before me always" is a major principle of the Torah, etc.
2. As it said in the words of Rabbeinu z"l (in Likutei Moharan 282) that when man begins to examine himself and sees that he is very far from Hashem, may He be blessed, and he is full of sins and many flaws, and it appears to him that he is far from good(ness), then he is required to search and seek and find within himself some goodness. How can it be that he did no good {act} all his days? And then he will see that even the little {bit of} good that he did is full of injuries, because it {he} is mixed {up} with much waste, even then it is impossible that there is not even a single good point in any way. And therefore he searches and finds within himself another bit of good, and even if this bit of good is also mixed with much waste, even so in any case he has within him some point of good. And then he will search and find within himself other good points and because of this he judges himself on the side of worthiness and finds within himself even more good points, even though he did what he did and damaged what he damaged. Because of this, he in truth goes out from {the side of guilt/}obligation and enters the side of true worthiness. And because of this he can merit repentance, and this is the aspect of (Psalms 37), "and yet a little and the evil is no more", etc. Through that little thing where there is no evil, through this and the meditation  {he is transformed to a good person}, etc, see there. And by this he can make himself happy. And then he can pray and this is like (there, 146) "I will sing unto my God while I yet have my being". By means of the yet little that he finds in himself, by means of this he can sing and thank Hashem and by this melodies are created. For the tunes are made by selecting good spirit from gloomy spirit etc. And this is [why he says] "I will sing" specifically, as in melodies etc. And likewise one must judge others to the side of merit, even if he is a completely wicked one — one must seek and find in him some good point etc. etc. see there. And whoever can do this — to find a good point even in sinners of Israel — he can be chazzan (cantor) and pray before the podium etc., see there. And know, that every one of the Tzaddikim (Righteous) of the Age builds a tabernacle, that from there the children of Hebrew schools receive their breath without sin; therefore they begin from Leviticus etc., see there. And this Tzaddik who can collect all the good that is found in every one, he knows all the aspects that there are in this matter of tabernacles as mentioned above, that the Tzaddikim build, that from there the children receive their breath without sin etc. etc.; look into all this very well:


Section 2

This is the aspect of awakening from sleep, for when a man sees he is far from Hashem Yisbarach, etc., this is the aspect of sleep, which is 1/60 of death. And when he searches and requests and finds within himself some good point, then he enlivens and gladdens himself and rouses himself to the service of Hashem Yisbarach because of this. This is the aspect of rousing from sleep, and this is the aspect (Psalms 3:2) "Hashem, my foes are so many", etc. These are the enemies of the soul which are the sins and flaws of everyone. [That] this is the essence of "the problems of man". And when they overcome a man, G-d forbid, then they want to defeat him completely, G-d forbid. [It is] like he has no more hope, G-d forbid. And this is (Psalms 3:3) "many say of me, “There is no deliverance for him through God, Selah"". And then he is in the aspect of sleep, as is stated above. And this is (Psalms 3:6) "I lie down and sleep" as this is the aspect of sleep, as is stated above. However, truthfully, a man  is forbidden from despairing, and he must strengthen and rouse himself from sleep by the little [point] of good he yet finds in himself. And this is (Id.) "and wake again, for the LORD sustains me". That I strengthen myself and rouse myself from slumber, because I will not despair at all because "the LORD sustains me".  Because [regarding] the point of goodness man finds within himself, this is the aspect of "G-dliness", so to speak, for all the good is from Him, may He be blessed, because the Torah and Israel and Hashem are all one. We find, when Israel possesses some good point, in other words some Mitzvah or good thing, this goodness is complete unity with Him, may He be blessed, because (Psalms 145:9) "Hashem is good to all". And as it is written (Psalms 34:9) "Taste and see how good the LORD is". Because all of the good that is found in every place he is, is all from Him, may He be blessed. And this is "the LORD sustains me", the point of goodness that I found inside of me, which is the aspect of "G-dliness", the aspect of "Hashem is good to all". This is what supports me and wakes me up from my slumber. And then (Psalms 3:7) "I have no fear of the myriad forces arrayed against me on every side", for I do not fear them, even though there are many flaws and sins that are upon me to destroy me, G-d forbid. For from the moment I find [another] point of goodness inside me, because of this I awake from my slumber, and because of this I, in truth enter, to the side of merit; and because of this I merit repentance, etc as explained above. Because all the evil is rejected from before the bit of goodness he finds in himself, and [he] enlivens and elevates himself by this. Because a little bit of light dispels much darkness, as is known. And this is the aspect of (Psalms 139:18) "I end—but am still with You". Because of the other bit [of goodness] of mine, etc., in other words the good point as explained above. The aspect of (Psalms 104:33) "all my life I will chant hymns to my G-d", and this is "He is still with me". In other words, [because of] that other little bit [of goodness in me] He is still with me, as explained above. Because of this "I end", because this is the aspect of waking up from slumber, as explained above.

Section 3

And this is the aspect of (Psalms 57:9) "Awake, O my soul! Awake, O harp and lyre! I will wake the dawn". Which means, that one must rouse himself from his slumber and his stumblings. And by what will he rouse himself? By the good points that he then finds in himself. And this is 'I will wake the dawn', because the good point is in the aspect of <i> Shachar, </i>'dawn', in the aspect of (Song of Songs 1:5) "I am dark, <i>Shechora </i>, but comely, O daughters of Jerusalem. From the heat of this (good point) mixing with much rejection and many flaws that afflict this person, because of this he resembles being <i> Shechora, </i> dark, because he is besieged by darkness/sadness (being) with him, G-d forbid. However, when he judges himself to the side of merit and rouses and finds within himself the point of goodness, as explained above, then she says 'I am dark but comely'; do not view me as dark, etc. Because the darkness is not from me, etc. Like Rashi explained there that the good point within himself which a person has, even among the sinners of Israel is 'comely' and very fine; only that the darkness covers her. However, when she rouses herself she says, 'I am dark but comely, do not see my darkness'. Because to me, I am very comely. And this is the aspect of what our Sages of blessed memory said (Midrash Song of Songs 1:5) 'I am dark due to the incident with the (golden) calf, and I am comely by making the Mishkan'. In other words, even though I have many sins and I am very far from Him, may He be blessed, and this is the aspect of the incident with the calf, which includes all the sins in the world, because (Chulin 5) 'whoever partakes in idol worship is as if he violated the entire Torah', even still "I am comely in the making of the Mishkan, this being the little bit of good I yet found within myself. Because right after the incident with the (golden) calf we were commanded regarding the work of the Mishkan, because it (became) the Will of Hashem, may He be blessed, through Moshe - who gave his soul over them, and prayed for them. Moshe was able to find a good point even in the smallest of small (meaning the lowest of the low type of person), as is brought in the words of our Rabbis, of blessed memory several times. And because of this, he was able to pray for them even though they violated the entire Torah in the incident of the calf. Despite this, he (Moshe) found in them good points. And therefore Moshe said (Exodus 32:11) "“Let not Your anger, O Lord, blaze forth against Your people", etc. - because he found the good in them. Thus the evil was completely rejected, as explained above. Therefore he said 'Let not Your anger, O Lord, blaze forth against Your people', because the evil is nothing next to the little bit of good that is still in them. And Hashem Yisbarach acceded to him and His anger subsided, etc. Then Hashem Yisbarach taught Moshe the order of prayer and arranged for him the 13 principles of mercy, and this is (Exodus 33:19) "And He answered, “I will make all My goodness pass before you", etc. He taught and revealed to him all His goodness, may He be blessed, so to speak, so he will know that Hashem Yisbarach is good to everyone always, and He can rouse the good in the bad (i.e. "bad" people) and enter them into the side of merit and to remember them in repentance. And this is the aspect of the 13 Attributes of Mercy, the aspect of (Exodus 34:6) "G-d, G-d, a G-d compassionate and gracious", etc. Hashem Yisbarach is full of mercy and is good to all and slow to anger to the righteous and the wicked; His is a rod of lovingkindness and He judges all on the side of merit and He finds the good point even in the sinners of Israel. And because of this He judges them on the side of merit, as explained above. This is the aspect of "extending kindness to the thousandth generation", which is the aspect of kindness, in other words that which staff of kindness that He, may He be blessed, has and Who judges on the side of merit, and finds the good points, as explained above. This is the kindness (Chesed) that He extends and sweetens to the thousandth generation; in other words, even though this (person) has against him thousands and myriads of blemishes/flaws which blemish the person, still the little bit of good that is found by kindness, as explained above, dispels all, as explained above. And by this - "forgiving iniquity, transgression", etc. Because of this he enters in truth to the side of merit, etc., as explained above.

Section 4

1. And then, when Hashem Yisbarach acceded to Moshe['s prayer] because of finding good in all Israel, even after the sin of the Golden Calf, as explained above, because Moshe was completely good, in the aspect of (Exodus 2:2) "when she saw how good he was". Therefore he always had the strength to find the good in everyone, even in the sinners of Israel, as explained above. And because of this, Hashem Yisbarach acceded to [his prayer], as explained above. He therefore commanded them regarding the erection of the Mishkan, that everyone will bring whatever contribution that is in his heart [to bring] for the building of the Mishkan, because the good in everyone awoke. Everyone according to the good he has brought whatever contribution in his heart to bring for the building of the Mishkan. Because the Mishkan was built from all the good that came out of everyone of Israel, and this is in the aspect of (Exodus 25:3-4) "gold, silver, and copper; blue, purple, and crimson yarns, fine linen etc" that each and every one brought according to the good point within him. Because gold, silver, and copper etc and in the aspect of the Upper Colors, which are the aspect of the good that is in all of Israel. This is the aspect of (Isaiah 49:3) "Israel in whom I glory", for [the Jewish people] are comprised of many colors [see Likutei Moharan 38:5]; these are the good points that are in all of Israel. A good point, even in the lesser [ones] which is found in them what is lacking in their friend, as explained elsewhere. Hashem Yisbarach takes glory in them, as explained above, and this is the aspect of the colors that were in the Holy Temple and the Mishkan, the aspect of gold and silver, etc. that everyone brought from contributions of his heart. Because all the good points were included there, the aspect of Upper Colors that are in each and every Jew. And therefore, after the incident of the Calf, Moshe had to search and find the good points that are in each and every Jew, as explained above. Therefore, they were specifically commanded regarding the building of the Mishkan, because the Mishkan was built from these good points, as explained above and brought above. And this is "I am dark" - from the sin of the Golden Calf, but "I am comely" - from building the Mishkan from the good points I found within me, the aspect of building the Mishkan, as seen above. And this is understood from the words of Rabbeinu, as explained above, that from the good that is found in every Jew, by this the Mishkan was built. Therefore, a person who is able to find the good in every Jew is the aspect of Chazan (cantor), as explained above. He knows all the aspects that are involved in the idea of the Mishkan from all of the tzaddikim, as explained above, because of the good, as explained above. In this link yourself well in the words of Rabbeinu, as explained above. See there well. 

Section 5

1. And this is (Psalms 57:9) "Awake, O my soul! Awake etc". By what are you able to awake? By "I will wake the dawn". (Id.) By the means which I awake the dawn - that is, the point of goodness, which is the aspect of 'dawn', the aspect of 'I am dark yet comely' -  because of this I am able to wake from my sleep and my falling, etc as explained above. This is the aspect of 'Awake, O harp' etc. (Id.) Because by this we make melodies, the aspect of (Psalms 104:33) "all my life I will chant hymns to my G-d" as explained above. ...
2. This is hinted at in the words of the Shulchan Aruch: 'Strengthen yourself like a lion to rise in the morning to serve your Creator'. Man must strengthen himself to awake from his sleep and failures. And by what does he awaken? Because he will wake the dawn, this is as explained above that he awakens the good points, which are the aspect of 'dawn', the aspect of awakening the dawn. And by this he will awake from his slumber and (his) failings, etc. as explained above. This is the aspect of 'arising in the morning'. Because the essence of the awakening from slumber discussed above is by the aspect of (Zohar Miketz 203) 'the morning of Avraham, the man of Chesed, in other words by the fact that he tilts the scales in favor of Chesed, and judges himself to the side of merit, as explained above. And because of this Avraham converted converts, because he tilted the scales in favor of Chesed and found a good point in everyone and by this he brought everyone closer to Hashem Yisbarach. This is what the commentaries rely on, (Psalms 16:8) "I have set Hashem before me always". In other words, I always place and set Hashem before my eyes, because even though I am far from Him, Yisbarach, even so Hashem is before me (i.e. mindful of me) always in every place, because I found in myself a point of goodness, as explained above. This the explanation of the verse (Psalms 16:8) "I have set Hashem before me always; He is at my right hand; I shall never be shaken". In other words, I am always mindful of Hashem even (if I am) in the lowest levels, G-d forbid. Because "He is at my right hand". Because by the aspect of 'right'/Avraham/Chesed I will never be shaken, in the aspect of (Psalms 94:18) "When I think my foot has given way, Your faithfulness, <i> [Chasdechah] </i>O LORD, supports me". By the aspect of Chesed; in other words tilting the scales in the merit of Chesed and judging yourself to the side of merit and yet finding within yourself some good point. By this you can set Hashem before you always. And because of this you will never be shaken. And this is (Psalms 94:19) "When I am filled with cares, Your assurance soothes my soul". In other words, when the many thoughts confuse me and seek to destroy me, G-d forbid, because of (my) many flaws (i.e. sins), etc., then 'Your assurance soothes my soul'. This is how Hashem comforts him, by helping him to find some good point within himself. This is his comfort, and by this, his soul is soothed, etc., as explained above.

Section 6

1. We find that the essence of the aspect of 'awakening from slumber' is by the good points that he finds within himself even when he, G-d forbid, is in the very lowest level, etc., as explained above. Because of this, he forms melodies, etc., as explained above. Because at night, when it is time to sleep, the Shechinah (G-d's Presence) clarifies inquiries, as is known. This is hinted at as brought above that strengthening yourself is the aspect of the slumber upon man. Therefore it is necessary to request, to search out and to find good points within oneself. By this he will awake from his slumber as explained above. This is the aspect of (Psalms 77:7) "I recall at night their jibes at me; I commune with myself; my spirit inquires". Because at night, in darkness - the aspect of sleep, then "I commune with myself" and seek the good spirit, the aspect of the good point. By this melodies are made, as explained above, the aspect of 'I recall at night their jibes at me', as explained above. By this, when one strengthens himself to awake from his slumber by the good points that he found within himself, as explained above, this is the essence of the tikkun (the correction) of prayer. The essence of prayer is solely to merit to find within oneself points of goodness, in the aspect of (Psalms 146:2) "I sing hymns to my God while I exist", as explained above. This is the aspect of the order of the prayers; in the beginning we say the passages related to sacrifices and incense. They are the aspect of inquiries that are found and good points clarified, even from the aspect of vulgarity from the lowest (level of) creation, as is known. This is the essence of the aspect of the sacrifice, to raise (one) from animal to man. And this is the aspect of incense, that has within it <i> Chelbana </i>, 'galbanum' and as our Rabbis of blessed memory taught from this (Keritot 6b), that all prayer that does not include the prayers of the sinners of Israel is not a prayer. The essence of prayer is in the aspect of incense, which clarifies and finds good points, even in the sinners of Israel, in the aspect of 'galbanum' as explained above. This is the aspect of the eleven spices of incense. In other words, ten spices minus galbanum, this is the aspect of the ten types of singing that is accomplished because of the clarification of and finding the good in the sinners of Israel, the aspect of 'galbanum' as explained above.
[<i>Translator's Note: This is what Rebbe Nachman z"l means: the incense was comprised of 11 spices, one of which was galbanum, which had a foul smell. All 11 spices together are what constitute "incense". If one is missing, it is not "incense". Similarly, the sinners of Israel, which are the aspect of 'galbanum' are an integral part of the whole of the Jewish people. Without them, the Jewish people are not whole, their prayer is not complete. - Rav Mordechai Leib Rothenberg, Shli"ta</i>]

Section 7

1. When we recite the verses of the sacrifices as if we brought them, as our Rabbis of blessed memory stated, "Whoever studies the law of the Olah (burnt offering) is like he brought it himself", etc. The essence of the Tikun of the sacrifices is in the aspect of speech to elevate it from the silent/inanimate to grow to the living word. Because the good points, when they are elevated from a place that elevates it from the lowest levels, the essence is that it is elevated to the aspect of speech. Initially, things are not clear, and the good must be recognized from the heat of the evil that covers it. This is the aspect of a mute that has no speech, in the aspect of (Psalms 39:3) "I was dumb, silent; I was very still", etc. When the good is revealed, as explained above, then the essence of the revelation of the good and its elevation is the aspect of speech, and this is the aspect of (Song of Songs 2:14) "O my dove, in the cranny of the rocks". This is the aspect of of the good point which is the aspect of a wondrous 'dove' who is complete with its partner, and never separates from him forever, etc., as our Rabbis of blessed memory stated (Midrash Shir Hashirim 4). Because the good point that is in everyone, even the lowest of the low, is always firmly attached forever to Hashem Yisbarach in every place that she is. And if she falls, G-d forbid, in the depths of the Kelipot that surround her on all sides - the aspect of 'O my dove, in the cranny of the rocks', "Hidden by the cliff" (Id.) in absolute concealment - then Hashem Yisbarach says to her (Id.) "Let me see your face, Let me hear your voice; For your voice is sweet And your face is comely". Even though you are in the most hidden rung, even then you yourself are very 'comely' in the aspect of 'I am dark yet comely', as explained above. Therefore, reveal yourself and see your countenance, because you are yet 'comely'. The good point [in you] is always 'comely' and therefore 'Let me see your face, Let me hear your voice'. In other words, reveal and find beautiful sights of the good points, and by this 'Let me hear your voice'. Because of this you will merit "to speak", and then you will be able to speak praises and prayers of thanks to Hashem Yisbarach, where before you were not able to speak at all, as explained above. This is (Song of Songs 8:13) "O you who linger in the garden, A lover is listening; Let me hear your voice". And Rashi interprets 'lingers in the garden', between the nations, etc, the aspect of the good points, which sit and rest between the nations, which are the evil desires and blemishes, etc, as is brought in another place (Siman 36). And Hashem Yisbarach desires their voices, and this is  'A lover is listening; Let me hear your voice'. Because Hashem Yisbarach desires that the good points be revealed and listens to their voices with song and praises to Hashem Yisbarach as explained above. This is the aspect of the sacrifice which elevates the good points to the aspect of speech, as explained above. Therefore, he who studies the law of the Olah sacrifice is as if he brought it, etc, because the essence of the Tikun of the sacrifice is in the aspect of speech, as explained above.

Section 8

1. This is the aspect of (Megillah 3) "the priests in their service and the Leviim in their duchan (platform) and Israel in their midst". The essence of the Tikun of the sacrifice, by which he searches and clarifies the good point from among the waste, the aspect of animalism, is by the Priest, the man of Chesed. Because by tipping the scales to Chesed and judging to the side of merit, because of this one finds good points in all the lower rungs, and this is the aspect of the sacrifices, as explained above. Therefore, all of the Tikunei of the sacrifices are accomplished through the Kohen, the man of Chesed. He is the aspect of Avraham, as it is written (Psalms 110:4) <i>"You are a priest forever" </i>, as explained above. By this melodies are formed, as explained above. This is the aspect of the Leviim on their platforms, who conducted songs on the duchan (platform) while the sacrifices were offered. By the aspect of the sacrifice which is brought by the Kohen, the man of Chesed, this is the aspect of clarification and finding good by tipping the scales to Chesed, by creating melodies, as explained above. And 'Israel in their midst' who were learning Torah, this is the aspect of speech, by which there were able to elevate good to speech, which is the essence of its elevation, as explained above. Therefore the people of the watch would read the portion of Breisheet (Taanit 26a) and the portion of Ha'azinu, because the acts of Creation are the essence of the clarification of the goodness, in the aspect of "In His goodness, He renews each and every day the acts of Creation" (Weekly Morning Prayers). And this is the aspect of "For it is good" which He said on each of the six days of Creation". Before the Tikun of the acts of Creation, as it says (Genesis 1:2) <i>"the earth being unformed and void and darkness" </i>, this is the aspect of the strengthening of the evil that covers the good, and the Tikun [for this] is through the aspect of (Id.) <i> "and a wind from God sweeping [over the water]"</i>. This is the spirit of Mashiach, which is the aspect of 'goodness'. Because all of the good points that are found within each and every Jew, this is the aspect of the shining of Mashiach; the essence of goodness is Mashiach, the aspect of Moshe, in the aspect of (Ruth 3:13) <i> "Then in the morning, if he will act as a redeemer, good! let him redeem".</i>. By the aspect of "the spirit of G-d", the spirit of goodness, the aspect of the spirit of Mashiach, by this is the essence of the subsistence and building of the world. Because of this - because of the good points that are found in the midst of "unformed and void" - (Genesis 1:3) <i> And G-d said 'Let there be light'; and there was light". </i> And therefore, (Id.) <i> "G-d separated the light from the darkness". </i> etc. By the good point one truly enters to the side of merit, and then the light is redeemed and the darkness is separated and removed from the light, the evil from the good, etc., as explained above. We find, that the essence of the Creation of the World is through finding and clarifying the good point, as explained above. And this is the aspect of (see the introduction to the tikkunim) "the color of the mishkan is the color of the works of creation"; because the Mishkan is also from the aspect of goodness that is clarified, etc, as explained above. This is what the people of the watch were involved with; they used to stand by the sacrifices with the 'acts of creation', because the sacrifice is the aspect of the 'act of creation', which is the aspect of clarification of the goodness etc as explained above. Therefore the sacrifices were brought in the Mishkan or Holy Temple, because the Mishkan and the Holy Temple were also built by the 'clarification of goodness', etc as explained above. This is the aspect of (Deuteronomy 3:25) <i> "that good hill country" </i> which was said of the Holy Temple. This is the aspect of the portion of Ha'azinu which the people of the watch read. Because the portion of Ha'azinu is the song that Moshe Rabbeinu promised, that by this song the Torah will not be forgotten, as it is written (Deuteronomy 31:21) <i>"this poem shall confront them" </i> etc. Even in absolute concealment, the aspect of (Deuteronomy 31:18) <i> "Yet I will keep My countenance hidden" </i> this song will be a witness, because the song hints that even if Israel is very far from Hashem Yisbarach in absolute concealment, even so they are close to Him, may He be blessed. Because He has yet found within them, even the lowliest, good points, as explained above. This is the aspect of (Deuteronomy 32:9) <i> "For the LORD’s portion is His people, Jacob" </i> etc. he found [us] in the desert. Even in the desert and the unformed void 'the LORD’s portion is His people'. In other words, the aspect of the good points, which are the aspect of 'the LORD’s portion is His people' etc. Therefore, they read the portion of Ha'azinu by the sacrifices, as explained above. By this the portion of Ha'azinu is called 'a song', as it is written, 'then this poem', etc. From the good points, as explained above, that are found in the desert and the unformed void, etc., as explained above, from this a melody and song are formed, as explained above. After the recitation of the passages of sacrifices and incense, which are the aspect of 'clarification and finding good points even in the lowest rungs', as explained above, after this we recite Pesukei d'Zimrah, because of the good points, as explained above, melodies ae formed, the aspect of 'I will sing [praises] to my G-d in my midst'. Specifically, 'I will sing', as explained above. This is the aspect of Pesukei d'Zimrah. which are the aspect of the songs and melodies that are formed through the clarification and finding of the good points that are in the lowest levels, as explained above. Therefore we say in the middle of Pesukei d'Zimrah the verse 'I will sing [praises] to my G-d in my midst', as seen above and explained above.

Section 9

1. And afterwords (i.e. after Pesukei d'Zimrah) we say the blessings of the reading of the Shema and bless Hashem Yisbarach on the renewal of Creation which is renewed with goodness each day always. This is the aspect of the works of the Mishkan, which was built from the good (points) as explained above and brought above. Because 'the color of the Mishkan is like the color of the works of creation' as explained above. This is the essence of the rectification (Tikun) of prayer, as it is written (Isaiah 56:7-8) <i> "For My House shall be called A house of prayer for all peoples. Thus declares the Lord G-D, Who gathers the dispersed of Israel" </i> etc. The essence of the building of the Holy Temple is because Hashem Yisbarach 'gathers the dispersed of Israel', because He finds good points in the rejected and the lost and gathers them into the holiness. By this, the goodness that will be gathered in at the time of the coming of the redemption, (May it be) speedily in our days, the Holy Temple is built, the aspect of 'this good mountain', as explained above. There is the essence of the rectification of prayer, as explained above; because the essence of prayer is only by this - by the good that is found, as explained above. Therefore, before prayer we say (the passages of) the sacrifices and Pesukei d'Zimrah; that is the clarification of the good points, etc. From this we form melodies and songs as explained above. And after this, we build a Mishkan (sanctuary) from this, for there is the essence of the recification of prayer. And this is the aspect of the blessings of the reading of the Shema, which are the aspect of 'halls of holiness'. Therefore we say this: 'And in his goodness he renews each day, always, the works of creation' (from the morning liturgy). Because the color of the Mishkan is the color of the works of Creation, as explained above. From there, from the aspect of 'Mishkan', the young ones receive the breath of their mouth which has no sin. This is the aspect of the Shema, the aspect of (Deuteronomy 6:7) <i> "Impress them upon your children" </i> etc., and <i>"Teach them to your children to speak of them" </i> etc. Because the essence of the aspect of the Shema is from the aspect of 'the good that is clarified', as explained above. By this is the uniqueness of 'For the sake of the unification between the Holy Blessed One and His Shechinah', by the elevation of Mayin Nukvin (feminine waters, a Kabbalistic term), which glorifies the Shechinah, so to speak, "“See what a child I have come to You with” (Zohar III, 13a). (<i>Translator's note: See also Likutei Moharan 260:1</i>). All of this is because of the finding of good points even in the sinners of Israel. Because this is the aspect of the elevation of mayin nukvin ('feminine waters'), to elevate the holiness from the deep, deep Kelipot (<i>translator's note: Kelipot are the "shells" or "husks", i.e. the representation of evil or impure spiritual forces in Jewish mysticism - Rav ML"R Shl"ita</i>). By this it becomes more and more wondrous, because this is the essence of the Honor (Kavod) of Hashem Yisbarach, as our Rabbis of Blessed Memory wrote many times. As it is written in the Zohar (Yitro page 67), "When Yitro came, specifically then-onward was the name of the Holy One, blessed-be-He, raised and honored,". Specifically 'when you shall rise' and elevate the good points that were banished very far down, by this specifically the Shechinah is most glorified, so to speak. By this, the Holy One Blessed Be He and His Shechinah are unified, the aspect of 'Hashem is our G-d, Hashem is one' as is known. And this is the aspect of (Exodus 26:6) <i> "So the Tabernacle became one" </i> . Because all the good points are (then) included in His Holy Unity. Then one can begin to pray the 18 (refers to the Amidah, or Shmoneh Esrei), and one begins "Hashem, open my lips", etc. Because of all that was explained above, specifically one can begin to pray by having found the good and 'making a Tabernacle' etc., as explained above. Then one can begin to open one's mouth to speak. This is the essence of the elevation of the good that is elevated to the aspect of speech. Therefore, we request regarding this, "Hashem, open my lips", etc. 

Section 10

1. And this is like wearing clothes, that it is necessary to hold the clothing on the right side, and always strengthen the right upon the left, for the main thing depends on the aspect of the right, in other words, that one tilts the scales towards Chesed (mercy) and finds in himself some good points. And through this he awakes from the sleep as mentioned above. And through this clothes are made to clothe his soul that was naked until now the whole time the good was not revealed while it was in the aspect of sleep. And this is like the blessing of "Who clothes the naked" that one blesses in the morning, as is brought down. For through the good points that are revealed, the aspect of (Isaiah 49:3) <i>"O Israel in whom I will be glorified"</i>, — specifically in them will Hashem Yisbarach, be glorified, so to speak, as mentioned above. Through this clothes are made, like clothes of glory, clothes of honor, and this is like tzitzit and tefillin which are like clothes for the soul, like (Zohar Bereishit 23) "’For that is his only clothing, it is his garment for his skin’ — this is tzitzit and tefillin" which are made from the good points which are clarified at night in the aspect mentioned above as is understood in the books. The main aspect of clothing, like clothes of glory, the inclusion of the colors, is made from the aspect of good points that are clarified, which are like the inclusion of the colors as mentioned above. And therefore (See 2:4) one must strengthen the right (side) at the time of dressing, for all this is drawn from the aspect of right through tilting the scales towards mercy, through which one finds good points etc. And through this are made clothes, as mentioned above.

Section 11

1. All the blessing of the morning hints to this, that one praises Hashem Yisbarach, that He helps him find in himself good points in order to awake from his sleep and his falling. And this is like "Who gives the rooster understanding, to discern between day and night," for the good point is the aspect of 'day'. And the bad is the aspect of 'night' and darkness. And through this, that he finds good points and then the bad is separated and then one separates between day and night. And this is the aspect of "to discern between day" etc. and this is the aspect of "Who has not made me a gentile" etc. For if he would not find in himself the good point, he could fall completely, G-d forbid, and would become a gentile, G-d forbid. But now through awakening and being strengthened through Hashem Yisbarach, helping him find in himself a good point, as mentioned above, therefore he thanks and praises Hashem Yisbarach that he "did not make me a gentile,". This is the aspect of "who opens the eyes of the blind...releases the bound... straightens the bent." For initially, at the time of his sleep and his falling he was like a blind one searching in the dark. And he was really in prison and was bent etc. But now through the good point that he finds in himself, through Hashem opening his eyes, through this he is released from his bonds and straightened from his bent-ness etc. For through this he actually merits to go out from the side of liability to the side of merit and to return in repentance as mentioned above. And likewise the rest of the blessings, all of them, hint to this. And this is why he concludes "Who gives strength to the tired" since He gives him power within his great tiredness that he can yet awake from his sleep. And this is "Who causes sleep to pass from my eyes" etc. as mentioned above. And all this is through the Chesed (loving-kindness), as mentioned above. And this is why he seals (finishes) it with "who bestows good mercies." For everything is through the mercy, the aspect of (Zohar Miketz 203a) "the morning of Avraham" through tilting the scales towards mercy as mentioned above.

Section 12

1. And this is like the four Parshiyot [that we read before Purim and Pesach]: Parshat Shekalim, the aspect of charity, for charity is the aspect of "kindness to Avraham" who performed charity and kindness with all the world, through which one can find good points, as mentioned above. And this is like (Isaiah 41:2)<i>"Summoned him to His service" </i> . Since through charity one can call the good that falls into the lowest level, in the aspect of feet, in the aspect of (Ruth 3:4) <i>"and uncover his feet, and lay down"</i>. And likewise hinted in the words of Rabbeinu of blessed memory in another place (Ch. 17) that through charity one wakes up the good that was hidden and concealed in places far from Hashem Yisbarach. And this is like the Shekels of voluntary contribution towards the Tabernacle. For the Tablernacle is built from the aspect of the good that is collected etc. as mentioned above.
2. And afterwards one reads Parshat Zachor, which is the aspect of the war of Amalek. For through this one finds the good, as mentioned above. And through this Amalek is surpressed, [Amalek] is the force of the Other Side which strengthens itself, G-d forbid, to cast down the weak ones in Israel as if they have no more hope, G-d forbid. In the aspect of (Deuteronomy 25:18) <i>"he surprised you on the march, all that were feeble... when you were famished and weary" </i> etc. Since he wants to strike the feeble ones, i.e. weak of strength, to cast them down, G-d forbid, which is the aspect of "and cut down all the stragglers in your rear", etc. But when one merits to find in oneself a good point, even at the time of his fall, G-d forbid, through this he suppresses Amalek. And therefore after Parshat Shekalim, which is the aspect of 'the awakening of the good' as mentioned above, we read Parshat Zachor, for through this one suppresses Amalek, as mentioned above.
3. And afterwards we read Parshat Parah, which is the aspect of return, like (Midrash Rabbah Parshat Chukat) <i>"Let its mother [the red heifer] come and wipe up after its son [Golden Calf],"</i> for through the good points that one finds, through this is suppressed the evil, the aspect of Amalek. And through this one merits in truth to return, as mentioned above. And this is the aspect of (Zohar Chukat 180b) a red heifer, faultless. Red — this is harsh judgement. Faultless — this is loose judgement. I.e. when one is in the aspect of harsh judgement, when the evil strengthens itself, G-d forbid, which is like harsh judgement, G-d forbid. Then it is necessary to loosen the judgement through finding in oneself yet some good point. And this is the aspect of (Numbers 19:2) <i>"in which there is no defect and on which no yoke has been laid"</i>. For the good point is like the faultless dove which has not any defect. For she is nice and beautiful, in the aspect of 'I am dark. but comely' etc. as mentioned above. And this is the aspect of (Parshat Parah 19) purifying the impure and making the pure impure. For this aspect, that one judges himself to the side of merit and finds in himself good points — this aspect purifies the impure and makes the pure impure. For whoever is in a low level needs specifically to find merit in himself in order that he should not fall completely, G-d forbid. And his main purification and return is through this specifically, as mentioned above. But whoever is pure, when he holds himself to be on a good level, is certainly damaged by this, for he falls to haughtiness, G-d forbid. As our Sages of blessed memory said: "Even if the whole world tells you you are righteous, be in your eyes as a wicked one". And therefore they said "as a wicked one" and not a completely wicked one, G-d forbid. For it is forbidden to hold oneself to be a completely wicked one, G-d forbid, only, on the contrary, when it seems to him that he is completely wicked, G-d forbid, and even if that is the truth, G-d forbid — even so, it is necessary to seek and ask to find in himself a good point so that he should not be, G-d forbid, completely wicked, as mentioned above. And through this he is purified and merits to return, as mentioned above. And this is the aspect of purifying the impure and making the pure impure, as mentioned above.
4. And afterwards we read Parshat HaChodesh. For this is the aspect of sanctification of the moon, the aspect of filling of the moon from its blemish. For this is known, that when Israel are, G-d forbid, on a low level, this is like the blemish of the moon, denunciation of the moon, from which come all the blemishes and sins, G-d forbid. And therefore when a Jew awakes and finds in himself a good point, through this he comes back in return as mentioned above. This is the aspect of the filling of the moon from its blemish, like the sanctification of the new moon. For the essence of the sanctification of the new moon is through the aspect mentioned above. For at the beginning of the month when one sees the moon to sanctify it at the Court, then it is very very small and thin. And then it is only like a point, i.e. like the good point, mentioned above, which is the aspect of  'I am dark, but comely' etc. as mentioned above. In other words, when the moon is in ultimate minimality at the end of the month, then must all Israel seek and ask until we find some visible little point of the moon, and then they sanctify the moon at the Court, which is the aspect of repair and filling of the moon. For through the aspect of the point alone, the aspect of the good point which one merits to find in the ultimate minimality, through this they are repaired and actually enter into the side of merit etc. as mentioned above. This is the aspect of repair and filling of the moon from its blemish etc. as mentioned above. And therefore the Court and all Israel say "sanctified, sanctified" (Rosh Hashanah 24). For through the point alone they are sanctified etc. as mentioned above, through judging to the side of merit. And this is like all of them saying "sanctified, sanctified," i.e. through their words they raise up the moon from the aspect of blemish and reduction to the aspect of repair and filling, which is its sanctification through the point of light alone that they see of the moon and this itself is the aspect mentioned above. For through denunciation of the moon it was reduced and then Hashem Yisbarach, gave her the stars to appease her mind, as our sages of blessed memory said (Midrash Rabbah 10) and as brought in the explanation of Rashi. For the stars hint to the aspect of the good points that are found in every one of Israel, through which they enter the side of merit in truth, through [their] judging them to the side of merit as mentioned above, like (Daniel 12:3) <i> "and those who lead the many to righteousness will be like the stars forever and ever."</i> 'And they that turn many to righteousness', i.e. the righteous of the generation, which judge everyone to the side of merit. And through this even the sinners of Israel actually enter the side of merit as mentioned above. And this is the aspect of 'stars', the aspect of 'and they that turn many to righteousness [shall be] as the stars' as mentioned above. For the stars are the aspect of points. For this verse 'and they that turn many to righteousness' speaks there at the end of Daniel of the matter mentioned above, as explained there, "Many shall be purified, and made white, and tried; but the wicked shall do wickedly" etc. (Id.). "And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars" etc. That is, at the footsteps of Mashiach, at the end of the Age, the Other Side will strengthen up, G-d forbid, as is known, and then the clarification and purification shall be great, the aspect of 'many shall be purified, and made white, and tried' etc. And then shall be the main rectification, through the aspect mentioned above, through 'they that turn many to righteousness', i.e. through the Tzaddikim who shall judge all to the side of merit and shall find good points even in the very very lowly ones, which is the main service of the Tzaddikim, and through this specifically shall Mashiach come, quickly in our days. For this is the aspect of Mashiach etc. as mentioned above, and this is "And they that be wise shall shine" etc. and "they that turn many to righteousness [shall be] as the stars" etc., for the main rectification and redemption at the end of times shall be through this, through the aspect of the good points mentioned above. which are like stars etc. as mentioned above. And this is like (Psalms 148:3) <i>"praise Him, all bright stars"</i>. For through the good points, which are like the stars that shine, through this one can thank and praise Hashem, as in "I will sing unto my G-d while I yet have my being" as mentioned above. And this is the idea of why [G-d] gave the stars to the moon, to appease her mind. For through the aspect of the stars, which are the aspect of the good points, as mentioned above, through this the blemish of the moon is remedied, as mentioned above.
5. And this is the aspect of rising at midnight. That one must break the force of sleep through the good points mentioned above, the aspect of (Psalms 57:9) <i> "Awake, O my soul! Awake, O harp and lyre!"</i>. And this is  (Berakhot 3) the 'harp of King David which would play by the north (tzafon) wind', the aspect of the good spirit, the good point hidden (tzafun) and concealed even in the ultimate sleep, even in the lowest level, as in (Psalms 3120) <i> "How abundant is the good that You have in store"</i> (tzafanta), and these good points blow on David’s harp, for this is how melodies are made, as mentioned above. And that is why it played by itself through it, as mentioned above. And through this one awakes from the sleep at midnight during the force of sleep etc. as mentioned above. And this is the aspect of the Exodus from Egypt, as it is said in Parashat HaChodesh (Exodus 12) "This month shall be to you" etc. For Parashat HaChodesh, i.e. sanctification of the new month, is the first mitzvah that Israel was commanded at the time of leaving Egypt. For the main redemption of leaving Egypt was through this aspect mentioned above, like (Ezekiel 16:6) <i>"And when I passed by you, and saw you wallowing in your blood"</i>, in other words, Israel was filthy. For they were in the aspect of forty-nine levels of impurity, as is known. And Hashem Yisbarach, had pity on them and found good points in them even during the impurity of Egypt that overcame them, as our Sages said (Midrash Tehillim 114), "on account of only four things were (we) redeemed." This is like good points that Hashem Yisbarach, found in them, even in Egypt, and through this we were redeemed. And this is "I said unto you: In your blood, live". 'In your blood, live' — even in the force of the blood and the filth, even so, live. For there too can one find good points, as mentioned above. As we were redeemed through this, as mentioned above. And therefore the first mitzvah Israel was commanded was Parashat HaChodesh. For this is the aspect of sanctification of the new moon through only a point, as mentioned above. As this is the essence of the redemption from Egypt and the last redemption, as in 'He gathers together the outcasts of Israel' etc. as mentioned above. Blessed be Hashem forever. Amen, and Amen.

Section 13

And this is like (Exodus 11:4) <i> "About 'midnight' I will go out into the midst of 'Egypt'" </i>. "About 'midnight'" specifically, for at midnight the good point is awakened, the aspect of the north wind that blows on the harp of David, as mentioned above. And therefore the good wind, the good point is drawn from the north specifically, for <i>"Out of the north the evil shall break forth"</i> (Jeremiah 1:14) and from there specifically is drawn the north wind, the good wind that blows on the harp of David and plays. For this is the essence of the elevation of the good that goes out from the midst of the force of evil and the Other Side, as mentioned above. And through this specifically melodies are made, as mentioned above and as brought down in the books, that the advantage of light is over darkness specifically, as is known. For at midnight, then the Shechinah, as it were, is in ultimate minimality, as is known, and then it is like only a point. And then is the intensification of the sleep, and then specifically must everyone, whoever the awe of Hashem touches his heart, strengthen himself in very great intensity to awake from the sleep then. And this is the aspect of one wakes up from the force of sleep and the Other Side through the good point alone, etc. as mentioned above. And this is the aspect of the Exodus from Egypt, as explained above. And this is like Passover, as Hashem Yisbarach, spared and skipped over the houses of the children of Israel when he struck the Egyptians, the aspect of Hashem Yisbarach, in His mercy collecting and saving the good points which are the aspect of Israel, like (Exodus 4:22) <i>"Israel is my son, my firstborn" </i>, from amidst the firstborn of Egypt, from amidst the force of the Other Side, as this was the essence of the Egyptian redemption, as mentioned above. Therefore the first to reveal the secret of midnight was Abraham our father, peace be upon him, when he warred with the kings and saved Lot. As it is written (Genesis 14:15) <i>"He divided [his forces] against them [and attacked] that night"</i> etc. For the main idea of midnight i.e. to break the power of sleep, to break the night and the darkness through the good point as mentioned above — this is done only through the idea of Avraham the man of kindness through tilting the scales to the side of mercy as mentioned above. For Avraham chased after the kings to save Lot for the sake of the good point that was in Lot. And therefore although Lot was wicked, Avraham devoted his soul to saving him, for the sake of the good point that was in him. For from him went out Ruth, from whom went out David-Mashiach who is the root of the good point as mentioned above. And therefore the main intention of the kings was to kill Lot. For the whole intention of the Other Side is to overcome the aspect of the good point, G-d forbid. But Hashem did not abandon him to their hands but gave power to the aspect of Avraham, to the aspect of mercy, to save Lot through the good point that was in him. And through this he killed the kings, for through judging to the side of merit and finding good points even in the wicked ones, through this the Other Side is suppressed. For the evil is pushed away before a bit of good, as mentioned above.

Section 14

1. And this is what is written in the Zohar Chadash, You that dwell in the gardens, etc.,  — the idea of rising at midnight, see there and as explained there. In the shame and filth of this lowly world etc., see there. As explained above, since although one may be in the lowest level, 'in shame and filth', even so, Hashem Yisbarach and the angels and the souls of the Tzaddikim that are in Gan Eden hear his voice, the aspect of 'the companions hearken to your voice'. This itself is like rising at midnight, as mentioned above. And see above, that I brought this verse, 'You that dwell in the gardens' that was said in reference to the point that there is in everyone that is laid in the place where it is laid, see there. And now according to the words of the Zohar Chadash mentioned above the idea is well explained.

Section 15

1. And this is like our Sages of Blessed Memory’s dispute regarding the knowledge, to know how to direct when midnight is, as brought down in Berachot 3, "But did David know the exact time of midnight? — Even our teacher Moses did not know it!", etc.  But by David the harp was hung etc. For the main redemption in general and specifically, the redemption of the soul of each and every one depends on this knowledge and conception, to precisely direct the points of midnight. In other words, when the force of sleep strengthens upon the Jewish soul and wants to cast it down completely, G-d forbid, on account of the multitude of his sins and corruptions until he would almost almost fall completely, the Merciful One save us — then specifically Hashem Yisbarach, will shine on him in His mercy that he should remind himself of the good points that are in him and should liven himself as mentioned above, which is the aspect of rising at midnight. This is when the Shekhinah, which is the inclusion of the souls of Israel, is in ultimate smallness and minimality and then she cries in a bitter voice to Hashem Yisbarach, in the aspect of (Psalms 42:2) <i> "Like a hind crying for water."</i> the aspect of (Jeremiah 31:15)<i> "A voice is heard in Ramah, lamentation, and bitter weeping"</i> etc. And then Hashem Yisbarach, awakes His compassion and draws down a thread of mercy etc. as all this is understood in the writings. And all this is done with each Jew at all times. Since at every moment the aspect of sleep strengthens upon him, as mentioned above, until he almost almost etc. — the Merciful One save us. And then specifically must one seek his good point as mentioned above, like (Psalms 94:18-19) <i> "When I think my foot has given way, Your faithfulness, O LORD, supports me. When I am filled with cares, Your assurance soothes my soul"</i>, as all this is like the holy teaching of 'I will sing' mentioned above. That specifically when one arrives in his mind to complete constriction, the Merciful One save us, until he wants to say, 'my foot has given way', G-d forbid, then specifically the mercies of Hashem shall hold him up according to that which is mentioned above, to awake him from his sleep and to strengthen him, which  is the aspect of waking at actual midnight, which is the time of ultimate smallness. And then specifically is the aspect of waking from sleep, which is the aspect of waking from his fall through the aspect of 'I will sing unto My God while I yet have being', as mentioned above. And on this depends the redemption in general and specifically, as mentioned above. And therefore the first redemption was at midnight specifically. And so shall the last redemption be, which we hope to be soon in our days, shall be through the aspect of midnight through 'the fit and fearing ones who arise each night at midnight', that then they will awaken a great kindness, which through this they merit to draw upon themselves always the aspect of the wakening from the sleep that is at midnight, to draw upon themselves this aspect always i.e. that whenever they want to cast upon them a very great sleep and smallness. Even if they cast them down in whatever way they cast them down, G-d forbid, even if what happens to him happens. Despite this he shall always wake up specifically from amidst the force of the smallness, in the aspect of waking at midnight mentioned above. In other words, through the aspect of the yet little good that he finds in himself, and as mentioned above. And therefore Moshe did not yet know how to figure exactly when midnight was. For then it was yet before the giving of the Torah and there was not yet the awakening from below, for there were not quite yet such tzaddikim who arose at midnight and delved in Torah because it was before the giving of Torah. And therefore it was difficult to figure exactly the point of midnight, even for those who say that Moshe did know but was not quite able to speak about it and was yet afraid that perhaps they would mistake it etc. For he was not yet able to draw down this revelation openly because it was before the giving of Torah. But David did know, for the harp was hung above his bed. And the power of the harp is drawn from the Torah, as brought down in the words of the Admor Z"L. For the harp of David was five-stringed, corresponding to the five books of the Pentateuch and he would awake from his sleep until he knew how to figure the hour and the point of midnight. For David was the aspect of Mashiach who always busies with the repair of souls of Israel to awake them from their sleep through the aspect mentioned above, through the good points that he finds in each one and he teaches each one and enlightens his heart that he can seek and ask after and find in himself good points always, in order to awake him from his sleep and fall, that he should not fall completely, G-d forbid. And the main thing is to have direction at the time when he would almost almost fall, G-d forbid. Then specifically he will shine on him in His mercy and save him and awake him from the aspect of (Psalms 37:33) <i>"Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down"</i> etc., the aspect of (Id) <i>"The wicked watches", etc.,. Hashem will not leave him in his hand"</i>. In the aspect of (Deuteronomy 32:36-39) <i>"When He sees that their might is gone, And neither bond nor free is left. He will say: Where are their gods, The rock in whom they sought refuge, etc; See, then, that I, I am He"</i>, etc. And all this is in the power of the Torah which we have already received through Moshe Rabbeinu and through all the Tzaddikim that have been until now who thoroughly explained to us the ways of the Torah. Therefore David did know the time of midnight through the harp mentioned above for he was skillful in playing (I Samuel 16:13) <i>"for all the holy teaching"</i> etc., as mentioned above, is to seek the good and to enliven oneself through this. All this is the idea of the holy melodies that go out from the harp of David, as in, 'I will sing unto my God while I yet have my being', as mentioned above, the aspect of 'Awake... psaltery and harp; I will awake the dawn', as mentioned above. And through this David merited to know to figure the point of midnight mentioned above, upon which the latter redemption in general and in detail depends, for each soul of Israel. For David was Mashiach, through whom will be the final redemption, which is the complete redemption, after which there is no exile. And this is mainly through the aspect of 'songs and melodies mentioned' above, like (II Samuel 23:1) <i>"the Mashiach of the G-d of Jacob, and the sweet singer of Israel"</i>, etc, i.e. through the aspect of 'I will sing' mentioned above. Soon in our days, Amen. And understand these things well, for it is impossible to explain it all. Just that everybody, according to whatever happens to him all the days of his life, in the days of his youth and in the days of his old age, can enliven himself always according to all these words of ours which explain a little of the truth of the holy advice and teaching of 'I will sing unto my God while I yet have my being' which the Admor Z"L very very much implored us to walk in. Happy is he who grasps onto it.

Chapter 2



Section 1

"One should strengthen himself like a lion to stand up in the morning" etc., i.e. one must arise quickly without laziness, and this is the aspect of emunah/faith, as our Rebbi wrote (in Sefer Hamidot -- Quickness), that zerizut/quickness is like faith. For at night the faith is amongst the klipot/shells, but in the morning the faith grows and is awakened. Therefore one must arise from  sleep in quickness, to strengthen himself in faith in order to build and to grow [in] faith. And this is "that he should be the one to wake up the dawn," i.e. the aspect of the gazelle of the dawn, the aspect of malkhut/kingship, the aspect of faith, and this is the aspect of breaking the lust for money, through which one can raise the souls and drawn down Torah. As it is written in the teaching "Happy are the people" [regarding Divine] supervision (in Likutei Moharan 13); see there. Because each and every day one must receive the Torah anew, as our Rabbis of blessed memory said (Deuteronomy 10:13) "...which I command you today..."; let them be each day like new in your eyes (Sifri there). And receiving the Torah is through raising the soul and renewing it, as explained there. And this is done through breaking the lust for money, as mentioned above, which is the aspect of waking from sleep quickly, the aspect of faith as mentioned above. For the lust of money is like apostasy, like night, like darkness, dark face, like sadness and laziness, like death, like sleep which is one sixtieth of death (Berachot 57). And one needs strengthening to break the sleep which is like death, the aspect of the lust for money. And then he can renew his soul and rise up and bring down Torah. And then when he breaks the sleep, the lust for money, then on the contrary the sleep is, on the contrary, specifically good for him. For through sleep he renews his soul, the aspect of (Lamentations 3:23) "They [Hashem's kindnesses] are new every morning: great is Your faithfulness." And likewise through money he renews his soul through trade/[lit. buying and selling] in faith, which is like sleep, as is written in the Torah "Happy are the people..." [where he discusses the] zarka [the “~“ cantillation mark] (Likutei Moharan 35) and this is the explanation of "How long will you sleep, O sluggard? When will you arise out of your sleep?" I.e. how long will you sleep in laziness? When will you break the sleep, whereupon, on the contrary, through sleep he will strengthen his mentalities and his soul will be renewed, as mentioned above. And this is the idea of "when will you arise out of your sleep?" In other words, that you should be revived, that your soul should stand and rise up via the sleep. And when one merits to raise up his soul through breaking the sleep, through this he makes unification of the Blessed Holy One and His Presence. And this is the idea of "that he should be the one to wake up the dawn," to awake "the gazelle of the dawn" to mate. And this is the explanation of "one should strengthen himself like a lion" which is the aspect of collections of souls, to raise them up, as our Rebbi wrote in the lesson “Happy are the people” (Likutei Moharan 13). The aspect of "I have gathered my myrrh with my spice" and through this one draws down complete [Heavenly] supervision, through drawing close to the power of vision through the Torah. And this is (Psalms 16:8) "I have set Hashem before me always", in other words, that His supervision is always upon us. And this is that which is written ([SA OC]1:3) that it is proper for all those who fear Heaven that they should be afflicted and concerned about the destruction of the Holy Temple, for whoever mourns Jerusalem shall merit to see its joy, as our Rabbis said in Bava Batra 60. We find, that through being afflicted and concerned over the Holy Temple, this is an aspect its construction. And building the Holy Temple is the aspect of building knowledge, through which one can raise souls, as mentioned above. As explained in the Likutei Moharan 13 mentioned above, see there. And this is the aspect of rising at midnight, that one breaks the sleep which is like the lust for money and he mourns Jerusalem and the destruction of the Holy Temple and through this he builds it. And through building the Holy Temple, through this they can collect the souls and raise them up. And therefore midnight sweetens judgments, for they break the sleep which is like death, like apostasy as mentioned above. For as long as there is idolatry etc. [there is (Divine) anger in the world] (Sifri, Parshat Re'eh) and through rising at midnight we raise the faith and draw down loving-kindnesses. And this is what our Rebbi said (Likutei Moharan 149) that midnight is as effective as a pidyon (redemption) — like a pidyon specifically. For a pidyon is like charity, that breaks the lust for money and sweetens the judgments. And likewise [rising at] midnight is breaking the sleep which is the aspect of the lust for money as mentioned above, through which judgments are sweetened, as mentioned above.

Chapter 3



Section 1

1. "One should strengthen himself like a lion to stand up in the morning that he should be the one to wake up the dawn." 
2. By the words of the Torah on “and G-d turned the people” [Exodus 13:18] (Likutei Moharan 62), see there. It is explained there that there is a difference between [types of] kushiyot/apparent contradictions/textual difficulties/paradoxes. For there is a kashiya/contradiction whose solution a man could understand. Regarding this it is said (Avot 2:14) "Know what to answer" etc. For the truth is that since Hashem Yisbarach limited the human intellect in what it can understand, it is a great mitzvah to sharpen the intellect to understand a thing according to its nature. And upon this is said, "And know what to answer an apostate." But there exists [such] a paradox, that it is not possible for the human intellect to understand the solution of such a paradox; only in the future to come will the solution be revealed. It is forbidden for a man to look into them and whoever relies on his intellect and probes into it — on this it is said (Proverbs 2:19) "Whoever comes to her does not return". For in such a paradox it is forbidden to rely on one’s intellect, [but rather] only stand on faith, and even those paradoxes that have an answer — sometimes the paths of intellect are stopped up and one does not know how to answer, and apostasy is thrown at him etc. And this apostasy is for each one according to his aspect; one can distinguish between great and small. For one must serve Hashem with the two wills. And in truth if a man knew the knowledge in all his heart that the whole world is full of His glory and Hashem Yisbarach attends at the time of prayer and listens to the prayer — certainly he would pray in great ardor and would be very careful to direct his words. But because a man does not know this knowledge in all his heart — therefore he does not flame up so much and does not take so much precision etc. And all this is from the knowledge being hidden, from the aspect of Machlochet/dispute/detachment, like (Hosea 10:2) <i>ChaLak libam</i>/Their hearts have become detached [from G-d], like the contradictions that come through the paths of wisdom being congested to the point that he cannot answer the apostasy that is in his heart. And the remedy for this dispute in the heart is to learn decided halachah/Torah laws. For through this he merits peace etc. And through this he merits to annul the contradictions in his heart and merits to pray with a whole heart, the aspect of "with all your heart" (b’khol levavcha) —  with both of your wills (Berachot 54) and this is (Psalms 119:7) "I will praise you with uprightness of heart (levav), when I shall have learned Your righteous judgments" etc., see there. But the paradoxes that have no solution — it is forbidden to look into them. One can only strengthen himself in faith. And when he has complete faith, via his eating can be the unification of the Blessed Holy One and His Presence etc. For the selection from the food is through faith. And the main completion and adornment of faith — i.e. to draw specifically those who are far away etc. And for this one needs to raise up the sparks of speech. And then the speech reverses itself and collects the remaining sparks of holiness from the klipot/spiritual husks and impediments etc.; and to raise up the sparks of speech, one needs fasting, etc. For through the craving of eating and drinking, which are the main lusts when they rise up, G-d forbid, they draw the speech into galut mitzrayim/Egyptian (or constrained) exile etc. Then one must attach himself to holiness, so he will not nurse, and 'attaching to holiness' is through fasting, etc. For the essence of everything is the beginning, for “all beginnings are difficult…” etc. And then when you are attached to holiness, so that it is impossible for the klipot to enter in and to nurse from them — then the face of holiness is revealed etc. In order to take out what they swallowed from their mouths etc. And then all the distant ones turn to the faith of Israel, as in (Zephaniah 3:9) "For then will I turn to the people a pure language". “Turn” specifically, that the pure language, the aspect of the speech that is clarified from among them, turns its face to the people in order to collect from them the remaining sparks of holiness. And then it will be fulfilled “that they may all call upon the name of Hashem” etc. And this is like the adornments of faith as mentioned above. And this is (Sabba Mishpatim) “The beautiful world that has no eyes… it went out in the morning and was covered in the day.” Because faith is renewed in a person every morning, the aspect of (Lamentations 3:23) "They are new every morning: great is Your faithfulness". And it is “covered in the day” because the toil of involvement in this world covers up the faith etc. And then the faith recommends before Hashem Yisbarach, concerning those far away, that He should draw them close etc. And this is (Genesis 44:18) "Then Judah came near unto him" — this is the drawing near of one king to another king etc. (Zohar Vayigash) — "for you are like Pharaoh". Just as Pharaoh decrees a thing and it does not come to be, likewise you decree and you shall not fulfill it. For the Tzaddik cancels [a harsh decree] etc. Look well there at all this.

Section 2

And this is the aspect of “One should strengthen himself in the morning like a lion to stand up in the morning, that he should be the one to awaken the dawn.” For the faith is the aspect of malchut/kingship/dominion which is called “dawn.” The aspect of "gazelle of the dawn" as is known. Because the essence of the wholeness of faith is in the morning, the aspect of "They are new every morning: great is Your faithfulness." For this is like “You went out in the morning” as explained above in the Torah mentioned above. And because of this faith is called 'dawn' as mentioned above. Therefore everyone must strengthen like a lion and make great effort to stand up in the morning early before the break of dawn, in order to delve into Torah and prayer, to elevate, complete and to increase holy faith. For this is the aspect of “that he should be to one to wake up the dawn, like (Psalms 57:9) "I will awaken the dawn". In other words, that he should merit via his service before the light of day to awaken the dawn, which is the aspect of faith, which needs to be grown and completed until the light of day, which is its main time of elevation and completion, The aspect of “They are new every morning” etc., the aspect of “You went out in the morning” as mentioned above. And the main completion of the service is to strengthen greatly, to stand up each night at midnight as explained in the Holy Zohar and several places, due to the great admonition that whoever the awe of Hashem touches his heart, is obligated to arise at midnight specifically, because the main completion of  holy faith is through canceling and breaking and burning out of his mind the two kinds of contradictions and heresies mentioned above, which are the paradoxes that are impossible to bring any answer or solution to. For regarding them it is said "whoever comes unto her does not return," and one must rely only on faith alone, as mentioned above. And also there are paradoxes that are possible to answer etc. And also with these paradoxes sometimes the paths of intellect are blocked and it is impossible to answer them. And these difficulties are for each and every person according to his aspect according to the intellect of each and every person. And the rectification for this, to merit to open the mind and to reveal the paths of intellect, is via learning poskim/decided laws etc. as mentioned above. And then one merits to peace and to annul the dispute which are the forces of apostasy and heresy and merits to know what to answer the apostasy in his heart etc. as mentioned above. And this is why one must be strong and get up at midnight. For day and night, which are like light and darkness, are like consciousness and foolishness, which is the hiding of consciousness, as explained in the words of Rabbeinu Z”L in the Torah “Darshu etc.” (Likutei Moharan: 37) that consciousness is like light. And ignorance is the hiding of the consciousness, the aspect of darkness. For darkness is drawn from darkening of the consciousness which is hiding the consciousness, which is where the kushiyot (questions or doubts) come from, as mentioned above. For it is brought in the Zohar “When Lilith spread her wings then the gates of the Gan Eden closed, and executioners of judgement go out in the world, and the world is conducted by the Matron i.e. because at nighttime the darkness is strong, [and the darkness] is absence of da`at/knowledge, which is closing of the gates of Gan Eden, which are like the paths of the intellect. And then executioners of judgement go out in the world, which are the harsh judgments and the kelipot, whose main grip is in heresy and kushiyot that are drawn via lifting away of the consciousness at night, which is the aspect of shutting of the gates of Gan Eden, as is known, and as mentioned, then the world is guided via the Matron which is aspect of the Queen of holiness, which is the aspect of holy faith. Because at night, at the time of darkness, the lifting away of the da`at, then we need to strengthen ourselves only in faith alone, which is the aspect of malchut/kingship, the aspect of the Matron mentioned. And this is the aspect of “and Your faithfulness in the nights” as brought in the words of our Rabbi Z”L in another place, see there (in Likutei Moharan: 35), and this is the aspect of 'sleep which is at night'. Because at night then darkness is drawn on the world. And the root of the darkness is drawn from the upper darkness, which is aspect of `omek hamusag/the offered space, aspect of (Psalms 18:12) “He made darkness His hiding-place.” Which are aspect of the kushiyot that are impossible to answer and impossible to find an answer to them in this world in any way. These kushiyot are aspect of the darkness that hide the revelation of His Blessed G-dliness. And this darkness is impossible to lift away via any knowledge, but only via faith alone, as mentioned. Because it is impossible to find an answer to these kushiyot. And we have to rely only on faith alone, as mentioned. And this is the aspect of sleep at night. Because sleep is aspect of lifting away of the knowledge. And then at the time of sleep, the knowledge enters into faith and is renewed there in the aspect of “they are new in the morning; great is Your faithfulness.” As explained in the words of our Rabbi Z”l in the lesson “Fortunate are the people…” (Likuei Moharan 35), see there. I.e. at the time of darkness of night. In other words, when these kelipot and apostasy and kushiyot that are impossible to answer, which are aspect of darkness of night, begin to rule in the world, then we need sleep, which is a remedy beneficial for the mind. Because then one needs to lift away his da`at/consciousness completely. Because this is the aspect of sleep, lifting away of the da`at and to rely only on faith alone. Because this is the main aspect of sleep, that at that time the da`at is lifted away completely and we rely only on faith, which is aspect of receiving the yoke of the kingdom of heaven, which one accepts on himself before sleeping, via Kriat Shem`a al hamita/the reading the Shem`a on the bed, which is the faith of the unification. Because at the time of sleep the mentalities enter into faith. Because against these kushiyot which are the aspect of the force of the darkness of night, it is impossible to answer. There one needs to lift away his da`at completely, in the aspect of actual sleep, and rely only on faith alone.

Section 3

And this is aspect of rising at midnight. Because although sleep is a big remedy for the mentalities — for they are renewed via faith at the time of sleep as mentioned above —despite this we must be vigilant to rise at midnight. Because night, which is darkness, absence of knowledge, is made up of two parts, which are the first half of night and the second half of night, as is brought [in other books], which are compared to the two kushiyot, as mentioned above. Because the first half of night — then the darkness and the harsh judgement is much greater. Because then the darkness is drawn from the aspect of kushiyot that have no answer. These kushiyot are aspect of the force of darkness, for it is impossible to answer them. And therefore then we need sleep, which is lifting away of the knowledge. For then one needs to lift his knowledge away completely and rely only on faith, which is the aspect of sleep as mentioned above. But at midnight then the harsh judgment is sweetened and then these aforementioned kushiyot are lifted up from the da`at/mind. And then we must rise and delve in Torah and divine service. And thereby we draw down knowledge and open paths of intellect in order to merit to complete knowledge to answer and understand solutions to these kushiyot (that are impossible to settle) as mentioned above. And this is (Psalms 119:62) “At midnight I rise, to acknowledge You, for your judgments of righteousness” — for your judgment of righteousness specifically. For rising at midnight to delve in Torah in order to draw down the knowledge etc. as mentioned above, is in the aspect of learning decided halakhah as mentioned. Through this we draw down knowledge to settle these kushiyot that are able to be settled, which we merit via delving in Torah at midnight as mentioned above. And as explained in the holy Zohar and in the words of our Rabbeinu z”l (Likutei Moharan 149), that via rising at midnight, and via delving then in Torah, thereby knowledge is drawn down, i.e. as mentioned above. Because then in the second half of night the harsh judgment is sweetened and the darkness is not drawn down then, except from the aspect of kushiyot that are possible to be settle, [and] it is only that the paths of knowledge were blocked, which is the aspect of darkness of night. And therefore we need to delve in Torah in order to open the paths of knowledge in order to merit to complete knowledge in the light of day, in order to raise and grow faith in completeness at dawn, which is when it is completed, in the aspect of “nafkat b’tzafra”/it goes out in the morning [Likutei Moharan 32], which is the aspect of “that he should be the one to wake up the dawn” as mentioned above.

Section 4

And this, what is found in the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chaim 1:1), "I have set Hashem before me always" is a major principle of the Torah. For a person's way of sitting, his movements, etc. [and his dealings while he is alone in his house are not like his way of sitting, his movements and his dealings when he is before a great king], as explained in the Shulchan Aruch (Siman 1:1). In other words, we must know and believe that 'the whole world is filled with His glory', and he sits and stands, etc. at all times before the King, the King of Kings, the Holy One Blessed Be He, etc. This is merited through awakening the dawn through rising at chatzot (midnight), through this, drawing down Da'at (knowledge), etc., as explained above, until we merit a complete knowing, that the whole world is full of His glory, to awaken the dawn, because 'these things are tied together', as explained above. For we merit a complete knowledge with a full heart when 'the whole Earth is filled with His glory', through the Da'at that is drawn down by arising at midnight. This is the aspect of learning established Torah law, the aspect of rising at midnight 'to praise You', for 'Your righteous judgments', as explained above. And this - 'to praise You' - is the aspect of (Psalms 119:7) "I will praise You with a sincere heart as I learn Your just rules" which are brought in the Torah, as seen above. This is merited through 'chatzot', as explained above. This is the essence of awakening the dawn as written in the Shulchan Aruch. For the essence is to arise at chatzot; and also those who cannot stand at midnight should strengthen themselves with all they have to arise before the light of the day to engage in Torah (study) and service. Through this, 'we open paths of intellect', etc., according to his aspect (and) according to his service. For through this one merits knowledge with a full heart, where 'the whole Earth is filled with His glory', because we analyze the kushiyot as brought above and explained above. Therefore, we find 'I have set Hashem before me always', etc., in other words, to know that 'the whole Earth is filled with His glory', because this is tied in with that, as explained above. The essence of awakening the dawn is for the rectification of prayer, in order to merit to pray the morning prayer with great feeling and with a full heart. Because by awakening the dawn and engaging in Torah and service, through opening paths of intellect and we merit to nullify doubts and heresies. Then we merit 'full knowledge', where 'the whole world is filled with His glory'. This is the aspect of 'I have set Hashem before me always', etc., as explained above. Through knowing with a full heart that the whole world is filled with His glory, we merit to pray with great devotion. For when one knows that Hashem Yisbarach stands by him during the time of prayer and listens and hears and pays attention to every single word that comes out of his mouth, then certainly one will be very enthusiastic in his prayer, and one will be very precise regarding the intentions of his words, as brought above. One will know this with a full heart, that 'the whole world is filled with His glory', which one merits through rising at midnight, which is the aspect of awakening the dawn as explained above. We find that arising at midnight is a segulah for praying with intention (feeling) and so is understood in the devotions of the Ari z"l, that arising at midnight is a rectification and preparation for prayer.

Section 5

1. This is why it is forbidden to eat before prayer. In the Zohar (Parshat Vayakhel 4, 215b) and in the writings this is very very strict, that even when one arises in the middle of the night it is forbidden to eat or drink until after the prayer. Anyone who eats and drinks then is thought of as a sinner and a diviner (soothsayer), G-d save us. See there. Do not be like those who burst forth now amidst the people to drink before prayer until it is, according to them, like something permitted, and they 'hang themselves on a big tree'. We find a few tzadikim that were very sick and drank before prayer, because they had to do that. And they were viewed as if they were monkeys (animals) before other people, and they fined themselves afterwards and filled their stomachs with Kaavi drinks before prayer until we find that they also ate a little before prayer. Woe to them! Woe to their souls! Because this is a very grave sin, as is brought in the words of our Rabbis of blessed memory (Berakhot 10b) and explained in detail in the Holy Zohar and the writings. We cannot compare ourselves to the great Tzadikim who had a different spirit upon them, and in detail they were (like) greatly sick. Also since most of the tzadikim did not act like this (i.e. did not have this custom) and our Holy Rabbi z"l told us that he never drank even water before prayer even though the Shulchan Aruch permitted one to drink water. Even so, he did not drink even water prior to prayer. Returning to our topic, because of what is explained above, we brought a little of the idea of the prohibition of eating and drinking prior to prayer, because it is brought in the Torah, as explained above, that the Tikun (rectification) of faith is through elevation of the sparks of speech, etc. One merits this through fasting, etc. Because of the lusting (craving) for food and drink the kelipot are strengthened. They are the aspect of the 'ministers of Pharaoh' and they draw down speech beneath the aspect of the straightening of the throat, and one is not able to speak a word before Hashem Yisbarach, etc. The rectification for this is fasting, for through starving oneself, through drawing down the water of the Hasidim to moisten the throat, one fulfill (Isaiah 58:1) "Cry with full throat, without restraint", etc. Through this, faith is fully rectified, etc., as is brought there well, see there. Therefore it is forbidden to eat and drink before prayer, because one has to starve himself before prayer, which is the aspect of fasting hours every day; one starves oneself and investigates (oneself) before prayer. Through this, one draws down the illumination from the aspect of fasting, to attach (oneself) to the holiness in order to bring out the speech from the throat. (This is) in order to adorn the holy faith that is renewed each morning, so one can merit the speech of perfect prayer. Because prayer is the aspect of faith, as is known, which is perfected by the rectification of speech. The essence of prayer is through speech specifically, and the wholeness of speech is through starving oneself with fasting, and breaking the lust for food, as explained above. Because of this, every Jew is required to fast and starve himself in any event before prayer, for then it is a major prohibition from the law to eat and drink, as explained above. Every day before prayer, one must starve himself to proceed in the aspect of fasting to rectify the speech of prayer, which is in the aspect of rectification and adorning faith, etc., as explained above, and as brought in the Torah as seen above, see there. Furthermore, because fasting that attaches to holiness - this is the aspect of the initial strength to which one's face turns at every time - to the beginning - to receive strength from the beginning, which is the essence of 'all beginnings are difficult' as is explained well in the Torah, as seen above. As is explained at the end there, that for the sake of this, one must make an effort to begin each moment anew, and to not have the service become routine for yourself. For the essence of the strength of service is according to the beginning, and therefore one must begin anew every time. Maybe his beginning was not a proper beginning. Therefore, he must begin now; and everyday, at every time, see there. Therefore each morning before prayer one must fast without food before prayer in order to bring forth the speech from the throat, etc, as explained above, by means of going back to the beginning, which is the aspect of attaching oneself to holiness. One must go back at every time to the first moment, as brought above, see there. This is necessary in the morning, because each morning one must begin to engage in the service of Hashem anew, in the aspect of (Lamentations 3:23) "They are renewed every morning", etc. As if one had never begun before at all. As our Rabbis of blessed memory said (Deutoronomy 6:6) "Which I command you today". Every single day it must seem new to you (Sifrei, there). And thus they expounded on the verse (Deutoronomy 27:9) "Silence! Hear, O Israel! Today you have become the people of the LORD your G-d", etc. For each day it should seem to you as if today you entered into the covenant (see the explanation of Rashi there). We find, that every day one must begin anew. Therefore it is forbidden to eat before prayer in the morning, for this is in the aspect of fasting. Through this one draws down the light of the initial strength; and through this one merits to begin each morning anew, as explained above.

Chapter 4



Section 1

1. You must strengthen yourself like a lion to arise in the morning, which is one who awakens the dawn, 'I have set Hashem before me always'. 
2. Regarding Torah "A Garden of Knives", etc., Likutei Moharan 30:1, see there all of that Torah. Every person must seek after and search very hard for a true Rabbi, very great from above, very exalted, who can illuminate him in the perception of G-dliness. Because the perception of G-dliness is impossible to comprehend except by way of several contractions, etc., the aspect of 'encircling and introductions' (see Likutei Moharan 30:3), like the teacher learns with the child, etc. Everything that is small (must be) greatly elevated and everyone that is very sick requires a very great doctor. In other words, a very great Rabbi who will greatly elevate (everything) until he can heal him as well. He can also surround him as well until he enters into the perception of G-dliness, which is the primary essence. It is brought there that these tzimtzumim (contractions), which are the aspect of the introductions, etc., whereby every person comes to the perception of G-dliness, they are the aspect of the Lower Wisdom, the aspect of Malchut (Kingship), the aspect of hair, the aspect of (Tikunei Zohar 70) the measure of the letters of the Torah (see also Likutei Moharan 30:3), the aspect of (Id. 113) black hair (Id. 112) the hair of a circle (see Likutei Moharan 30:3), the aspect of (Song of Songs 1:5) "I am dark, yet comely", which is in the aspect of Avraham fixed (the time and prayer for) Shacharit. One has to revive Malchut, etc. by means of the Or Hapanim (Light of the Face) which illuminates the Three Festivals (i.e. Pesach, Shavuot and Sukkot). Sometimes, Malchut falls, the aspect of four, the four Malchuyot, which are external wisdoms. And who can tolerate the sound of the cry where Malchut has fallen between them, the aspect of (Ecclesiastes 9:17-18) "shouted by a lord in folly", because the fool wants to outsmart, etc. One must cut himself off from them, in the aspect of 'cutting off for G-d'. This is by the Chesed (Lovingkindness) that is revealed through the rebuke, etc. Study all of this there very well. 

Section 2

1. All of this is necessary each morning, for then, in the morning, the first light of dawn arises, which is in the aspect of elevating the dawn, the aspect of Malchut/Lower Chochmah (Kingship/Lower Wisdom), as explained above, which is called 'dawn'. For it, by its means, contracts the visibility of all the perceptions of G-dliness and therefore one must greatly strengthen (himself) to rise early in the morning in order to engage in Torah and service, so he will  grow and elevate and awaken, in the aspect of 'dawn', as explained above. This is the aspect of Lower Wisdom, as explained above, the aspect of (Psalms 57:9) "Awake, O my soul!", etc. "I will wake the dawn", in order to merit the aspect of comprehension of G-dliness, to know Him, may He be Blessed. This is why we were created, because everyone must come to this. Only for this the world came into being. And all the worlds were created only for this, 'that they may know Him' (Ra‘aya Mehemna, Parshat Bo). 

Section 3

And this is the aspect of awakening from sleep, because the essence of sleep is brought down because this aspect - which is the aspect of Malchut/Kingship of the lower intellect, as explained above - is close to the externalities because is the last level of holiness, as is known. Therefore, sometimes it 'falls on them', as explained above. In other words, it falls into the aspect of the 4 Malchuyot, which are the aspect of external wisdom(s). They wish to draw down this intellect onto them to strengthen themselves by means of the intellect in their external wisdom(s), etc., as is written there. Then they need sleep; in other words, all the time they are able to make use of this intellect with holiness, that they are able to surround (themselves) by means of coming to the perception of G-dliness, it is a great Mitzvah to utilize them, everyone according to his abilities. However, when the intellect begins to fall, and confusion overcomes him, this is brought down in the aspect as explained above, in the aspect of external wisdom. These 4 Malchuyot wish to strengthen themselves to bring down this intellect upon them; therefore it is necessary to sleep, which is the disappearance of Da'at; in other words, to remove his Da'at completely. From there is the essence of the aspect of sleep. Therefore, the hour of the sleep of the soul, which is the intellect, comes amidst faith, as it is written (Lamentations 3:23) "They are renewed every morning— Ample is Your grace!". Then one has to remove the intellect completely, and rely solely on faith. Therefore at the time for sleep, which is like a part of death, as is brought in the Holy Zohar (Vayeshev, 184b), for then the life that was drawn down from the Light of the Face departs, and it strengthens in the aspect of the 4 Malchuyot, which are the side of death. The essence of existence by means of faith is through reading the nighttime Kriyat Shema with intention, which is the aspect of faith. At the time where external wisdoms, which are in fact all sorts of confusion that everyone in the world experiences, and all the evil thoughts, and strange (thoughts) and passing thoughts and evil ideas - which are all from the aspect of the kelipot which are the 4 Malchuyot - which are external wisdom, they begin to overtake the intellect. Then it is necessary to remove (intellect) completely, right away, and to rely on faith. This is the aspect of sleep, which is the removal of intellect, for then the soul comes in faith, as is written in another place (Likutei Moharan 35). Even though sleep may be very good, one must strengthen himself not to sleep too much.Therefore, one must be strong like a lion to arise in the morning to break sleep, and to engage in Torah and prayer, so one can cut and elevate the Malchut, in order to merit through this the perception of G-dliness, as explained above. And this is 'I have set Hashem before me always'. That we may merit to know Hashem Yisbarach; in other words, that we may perceive His Blessed G-dliness until we resemble Him, may He be blessed, 'before Him always' and we will never forget Him, even for a moment.

Section 4

This the explanation of this verse (Psalms 16:8) "I have set Hashem before me always". In other words, the perception of G-dliness, as explained above. "He is at my right hand; I shall never be shaken". (Id.) The essence of the building of the Malkhut of Lower Wisdom, as explained above, is through the aspect of 'right' which is Chesed, as it is written there. Through the Chesed, (she) cuts herself off from the 4 Malchuyot and elevates herself to the Light of the Face that are in the Three Festivals, which are the aspect of 'joy of the heart' by means of the mitzvot which we do all during the year, etc., see there. And this is 'He is at my right hand; I shall never be shaken'. In other words, through the aspect of 'right', which is Chesed, 'I shall not be shaken'. By this I will not be shaken nor will I fall into their intellegences, G-d forbid, in the aspect of external wisdom. G-d forbid. Rather, I will only be strengthened to elevate my intellect to the perception of G-dliness, which is the aspect of 'I have set Hashem before me always', as explained above. And this is (Psalms 16:9) "Therefore my heart rejoices, my whole being exults". 'My heart rejoices', this is the aspect of joy in the heart of the mitzvos that are done, which is the aspect of the Light of the Face in the Three Festivals. From there is the lifeforce of Malkhut. This is the aspect of 'kavod' (can be translated as 'honor' or 'glory'), the aspect of the King of Glory. And this is 'therefore my heart rejoices', which is the Light of the Face of the Three Festivals, the aspect of (Proverbs 15:13) "A joyful heart makes a cheerful face", as it is written there. Because of this, 'my whole being exults', for happiness and the lifeforce of Malkhut is drawn down, the aspect of 'glory'. Because of this (Psalms 16:9) "and my body rests secure". This is the the flesh of the body, because for this was man created - so that he will conquer his body by means of toiling and exerting in Torah and mitzvot. For man, to toil in birth is to toil in Torah, as our Rabbis of Blessed Memory stated (Sanhedrin 99) that it is required to toil in Torah and service, and to sanctify and purify oneself so much so that one merits to illuminate, even with his body, the illumination of the perception of His Blessed G-dliness. Because the true, great tzadik encircles us with awesome rotations like these, and with wondrous contractions like these, until the perception of G-dliness is illunimated within us, in our midst and in our bodies, so we will come to this illuminated body. This is the essence of unity, to know that all the illuminations and comprehension that our soul comprehends (and obtains) is also for the body, as it is written in Likutei Moharan 22, 'a seal within a seal'. And this is the aspect of 'and my body rests secure'. Also one's actual flesh rests secure through meriting its life even in its body, to know his Creator through the true tzadik who illuminates for him the perception of G-dliness, as explained above. And this is (Psalms 16:10_ "For You will not abandon me to Sheol". The soul is the aspect of Malkhut, as is known, i.e. the aspect of Lower Wisdom as explained above. And this is 'For You will not abandon me to Sheol', that my portion of Malkhut will not fall, the aspect of my Chidushei Torah (new Torah thoughts), which is the aspect of 'for you will not abandon me to Sheol', G-d forbid. (Sheol) which is external wisdom, the Other Side and the subversive kelipot that strive to overpower mankind at every moment, which he must pull himself out and come to the perception of G-dliness, as explained above. However I am certain that He will not abandon my soul to Sheol, "or let Your faithful one see the Pit" (Id.) 'Your faithful one', this is the aspect of the Rabbi, the true tzadik who engages in his rectification, for through his merit and strength I am certain that He will not abandon my soul to Sheol, for 'He will not let His faithful one' - who is the Rabbi, the true tzadik - to see the pit. In order for him not to see the pit, to not need to see or look there at any time , to elevate us from there. For if, G-d forbid, we would be in Sheol and the pit, then for certain the rabbi who is the true tzadik would look there at every moment with great sadness in order to elevate us from there. He is engaged in our tikun at all times and therefore through his merit and strength I am certain that He (meaning Hashem) will not abandon my soul to Sheol, that His faithful one - the true tzadik - see the pit. And this is (Psalms 16:11) "You will teach me the path of life. In Your presence is perfect joy; delights are ever in Your right hand". That He will teach us the way and the path to come to true life, to bring down vitality for the lifeforce of the aspect of Malkhut, as explained above. This is through the Light of the Face of the Three Festivals, which is the aspect of 'joy in the heart', the aspect of 'In Your presence is perfect joy' etc., as explained above.

Section 5



Section 6



Section 7



Section 8



Section 9



Section 10



Section 11



Section 12

Therefore the miracle of Chanukah was through the Kohanim/Priests, because the Kohen is the aspect of Chesed/Lovingkindness, the aspect of Avraham. By this one cuts out the Malchut of the 4 Malchuyot and enlivens it from the Light of the Face on the Three Festivals, as explained above. This is why it is called Chanukah, because of the inauguration of the Holy Temple which was in those days. The essence of the Light of the Face is in the Holy Temple, where the people went up to during the Festivals to receive the Light of the Face, as explained above. This is the aspect of Chanukah, to cut out the Malchut from the Light of the Face so as to merit, through this, the perception of G-dliness. For this is the essence of the lighting of the Chanukah candles, as explained above.

Laws of Morning Hand Washing



Laws of Fringes



Laws of Phylacteries



Laws for Morning Blessings



Laws of Torah Blessings



Laws of Kaddish



Laws of Reciting Shema



Laws of Prayer



Laws of Priestly Blessings



Laws of Tachanun



Laws of Sidra Kaddish



Laws of Reading the Torah



Laws of the Synagogue



Laws of Business



Laws of Washing One's Hands for a Meal



Laws of Meals



Laws of Grace After Meals and Washing after Meals



Laws of Blessings Over Fruit



Laws of Blessing on Fragrance



Laws of Thanksgiving Blessings



Laws of Blessing on Sights and Other Blessings



Laws for Afternoon Prayer



Laws for Evening Prayer



Laws of Reciting Shema Before Retiring



Laws of the Sabbath



Laws of Joining Domains



Laws of the New Moon



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Section 1



Section 2



Section 3

And therefore we are able to have Rosh Hashanah because Rosh Hashanah is on Rosh Chodesh.  And this is a great kindness from God, because on Rosh Chodesh God said, "Bring for Me an atonement," and therefore we have the opportunity to ask for atonement ourselves.  We find that the essence of Rosh Hashanah is the renewal of the moon, because God said, "Bring for Me an atonement because I diminished the moon," this is itself a renewal because the moon now begins to grow since God is sorry for having decreased its size.

Laws of Passover



Laws of Counter the Omer



Laws of the Shavuot Festival



Laws of the Festival Day



Laws of the Week Days of a Festival



Laws of the Ninth of Av and Other Fast Days



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Section 1

Regarding fasting for the lack of rain.
For our blessed master taught (Likkutei Moharan II:60) that lack of rain is caused by wars and murder. And the essence of war is argument. The <i>tikkun</i>, the way to repair an argument, is through fasting, as our blessed master explained at length (Likkutei Moharan 57).
Therefore, we fast when there is a lack of rain, in order to repair the <i>machloket</i>, the argument, which is the war that is the cause of the lack of rain. This is also the essence of the four fast days that we observe in memory of the destruction of the Temple. These also come in order to repair and bring peace, as our sages taught: when there is peace, there is no fasting. Rather, the point of fasting is when there is no peace. And Jerusalem was only destroyed because of baseless hatred, as our blessed sages taught, and we fast in order to repair these arguments and create peace. This is why we fast for any tragic event that occurs, because all suffering (G!d forbid!) comes from argument - since everything that is contrary to what a person desires has the aspect of argument. All the painful suffering (G!d forbid!) are a result of an overflow of <i>dinim</i>, harsh judgement (G!d forbid!), which also bear the aspect of argument. All suffering is connected to sin, and sin is also a type of argument, since the main source of sustenance for the Evil Inclination (and the <i>Sitra Achara</i>) is argument. Therefore, because of an abundance of argument that gives power (G!d forbid!) to the evil <i>Sitra Achara</i> that overcomes holiness, there is an overflow of judgement in the world (G!d forbid!), and this in itself leads to argument, and this brings suffering (G!d forbid!), which one does not desire and is also a form of argument - and in order to repair all this we establish a day of fasting, which comes to repair the <i>machloket</i>, the argument, as we have shown. The important principle is this - we repair all kinds of argument with fasting, as it is said: the more giving charity, the more peace. And the essence of fasting is giving charity, as it is taught: the reward for fasting is actually for the charity given. (Berachot 6b).

Laws of the New Year



Laws of the Day of Atonement



Laws of the Festival of Booths



Laws of the Palm Branch



Laws of the Hoshana Rabba Festival



Laws of the Hannukah Festival



Laws of the Four Festive Torah Portions



Laws of Purim



Yoreh Deah

Laws of Slaughtering



Laws of Unfit Animals



Laws of Priestly Gifts



Laws of a Limb from a Live Animal



Laws of Meat that was Unobserved



Laws of Fat and Blood



Laws of Blood



Laws of Salting



Laws of Domesticated and Undomesticated Animals



Laws of Things that Come from a Live Animal



Laws of Birds



Laws of Fish



Laws of Insects



Laws of Eggs



Laws of Meat and Milk



Laws of Mixtures



Laws of Non Jewish Food



Laws of Kashering Vessels



Laws of Taste Transfer



Laws of Libational Wine



Laws of Wine Vessels



Laws of Idol Worship



Laws of Interest



Laws of Idolatrous Practices



Laws of Sourcerers and Enchanters



Laws of Shaving and Tatooing



Laws of Shaving



Laws of Forbidden Dresss



Laws of a Menstruant



Laws of Ritual Baths



Laws of Vows



Laws of Oaths



Laws of Honouring One's Father and Mother



Laws of Honouring One's Rabbi and a Torah Scholar



Laws of Teachers



Laws of Torah Study



Laws of Charity



Laws of Circumcision



Laws of Slaves



Laws of Converts



Laws of a Torah Scroll



Laws of a Mezuzah



Laws of Sending Away the Mother Bird



Laws of New Grain



Laws of Three Year Old Trees



Laws of Mixed Crops



Laws of Mixed Breeding



Laws of Fobidden Fabric Blends



Laws of Redeeming the Firstborn



Laws of Firstborn Kosher Animals



Laws of Firstborn Donkey



Laws of Separating From Dough



Laws of Tithes



Laws of First Shearings



Even HaEzer

Laws of Procreation



Laws of Matrimony



Laws of Sanctification



Laws of a Bill of Marriage



Laws of a Bill of Divorce



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Section 1



Section 2



Section 3



Section 4



Section 5



Section 6



Section 7



Section 8



Section 9



Section 10



Section 11



Section 12



Section 13



Section 14



Section 15



Section 16



Section 17



Section 18



Section 19



Section 20



Section 21



Section 22

"...therefore the fifteenth of Av is in the nature of a sweetening and a repair of the ninth of Av"

Laws of Levirate Marriage



Laws of Adulterer



Laws of Rape and Seduction



Choshen Mishpat

Laws for Judges



Laws of Testimony



Laws of Loans



Laws of Plaintiffs and Defendants



Laws of Collecting Loans



Laws of Collecting Loans from Orphans



Laws of Collecting Loans from Purchasers and Laws Designated Collection



Laws of an Agent Collecting Debts and Authorisation



Laws of Authorisation



Laws of Guaranteeing



Laws of Movable Property



Laws of Immovable Property



Laws of Neighbor Damages



Laws of Immovable Partnerships



Laws of Divisions of Partnerships



Laws of Boundaries



Laws of Partners



Laws of Emissaries



Laws of Buying and Selling



Laws of Over and Under Charging



Laws of a Deathly Ill Person



Laws of Gifting



Laws of Lost and Found



Laws of Unloading and Loading



Laws of Ownerless Property and Property of Non Jews



Laws of Inheritance



Laws of an Apotropos



Laws of Lost and Found



Laws for Paid Guardians



Laws of Artisans



Laws of Hiring



Laws of Leasing and Contract Work



Laws of Hiring Labourers



Laws of Borrowing



Laws of Theft



Laws of Stealing



Laws of Damages



Laws of Causing a Loss and Reporting to Government



Laws of Monetary Damages



Laws of Injuring a Person



Laws of Roof Rails and Preservation of Life

