Bartenura on Mishnah Shekalim
ברטנורא על משנה שקלים
Bartenura on Mishnah, trans. by Rabbi Robert Alpert, 2020
http://sefaria.org/

Bartenura on Mishnah Shekalim



Chapter 1



Mishnah 1

באחד באדר משמיעין על השקלים – the Jewish court sends [messengers] throughout the cities of Israel and announces that they should bring their Shekalim (i.e., one-half-shekel per adult male, as per Exodus chapter 30, verses 11-16), because on the first of Nisan, one needs to bring community sacrifices from new Terumah/priest’s due, as it is written (Numbers 28:14): “That shall be the monthly burnt offering for each new moon of the year.” Renew and bring a sacrifice from the new Terumah, for we derive the months of the year of here (Numbers 28:14) from (Exodus 12:2): “It shall be the first of the months of the year for you.” Therefore, we advance it by thirty days, which is from the first day of Adar to announce that they should bring their Shekalim.
ועל הכלאים – We announce that they should reduce the other seed until there should not remain in it one-quarter of a Kab for a Seah, as is taught in Chapter Two [Mishnah One] of Mishnah Kilayim: that every Seah that has one-quarter of a Kab from another species should reduce it, and our Rabbis explained that after the seeds have ground, even one in one-thousand one must uproot everything, for every two kinds and every one kind singly is permitted, but they forbade through mixtures – but relinquishment does not belong witht his, for specifically, when they estimate after that which has been combined at the time of seeding, there is no need other than to reduce, for according to the Torah, one in two is cancelled out, but they don’t call seeding “mixed seeds” other than because of merely appearance’s sake , one must reduce, but after they grew, there is no need for renunciation, but one must uproot everything so that nothing would remain other than one of the species.
בחמשה עשר בו קורין את המגילה בכרכין – [cities] surrounded by walls from the days of Joshua the son of Nun for since it was necessary to teach [in the Mishnah] that on the fifteenth of Adar money-changers sit in the country, it teaches also everything that they would do on that day.
ומתקנים את הדרכים ואת הרחובות – and the marketplaces that were ruined vy rains during the days of he winter, we repair them for the those who come up on Pilgrimage (i.e., at Passover, Shavuot and Sukkot). But there are those who interpret – because of the killers who murder people unintentionally that are able to flee from before the blood avenger as it is written (Deuteronomy 19:3): “You shall survey the distances, [and divide into three parts the territory of the country hat the LORD your God has allotted to you, so that any manslayer may have a place to flee to].”
ואת מקואות המים – if plastered increased in them, we clean them and if their measurement is lacking, we conduct drawn water to them and complete them according to measurement – if they had there the majority of forty Se’ah from that which was proper.
ועושים כל צרכי רבים – such as monetary cases, capital cases and laws of striping and the redemption of valuation of a person or animal dedicated to the sanctuary, property set apart for priest’s or temple use, sanctified property and the handing of the bitter water to the suspected wife and the burning of the heifer and the boring through of the Hebrew bondsman’s ear, and the purification of the leper and the sending to open cavities of collected waters in order that they be found there for the people to drink from them in the days of the summer – all of these are the needs of the many.
ומציינין את הקברות – so that they will not spread tent-like for Levitical uncleanness for Kohanim arising from their being under the same shelter over a corpse, and make them pure, and this marker is when they cleanse the plaster and pour it around the grave, but during the rainy season, the plaster is dissolved/diluted and one must go back and mark it.
ויוצאים – messengers of the Jewish court.
אף על הכלאים – for even though they announced about them on the first of Adar, they do not rely upon the announcement lest the owners did not uproot them (i.e., the mixed seeds), and they themselves go out and uproot them.

Mishnah 2

היו עוקרים ומשליכים לפניהם – in front of the owners of the fields in order that they will be embarrassed but these owners of the fields were happy since they weeded their fields for them, and furthermore, they would place them before their animals, they (i.e., the Rabbis) established that they would throw them on the roads, and still the owners of the fields were happy that they (i.e., the inspectors) would weed for them.
התקינו שיהו מפקירין כל השדה – the confiscation by the court (disposing of private property by the process of law) is valid (see Talmud Gittin 36b).

Mishnah 3

במדינה – in Jerusalem and they would exchange the one-half Shekel to people that each one would bring from the coinage of his country and did not know how many of them come out to one-half Shekel.
ישבו במקדש – because the time would get close that they would sit in the Temple in order that they would hurry to bring [the one-half Shekel]. And Maimonides explained that all the cities of Israel were called "מדינה"/Country/provincial towns, and on the twenty-fifth, they would sit in the "מקדש"/Sanctuary in Jerusalem.
התחילו למשכן – for whomever did not bring their [one-half] Shekel.
את מי ממשכנין לוים – to exclude from the one who states that the Levites do not take pledges, as it is written (Exodus 30:14): “Everyone who is entered in the records, from the age of twenty years up, [shall give the LORD’s offering],” but the Levites were not counted from age twenty years.
אבל לא נשים- (Exodus 30:12): “Each shall pay the LORD a ransom for himself,” is written, and not a woman.
ולא עבדים – for slaves are not obligated other than in commandments that women are obligated for.
וקטנים – even if he brought forth two [pubic] hairs and he is less than twenty years of age.
שוב אינו פוסק – his father, once he had begun, but if his father died, he pays the Shekel on his own.
ואין ממשכנין את הכהנים – even though they are obligated in the one-half shekel.
מפני דרכי שלום – because the service of the Sacrifices is upon them, they extend to them honor and rely upon them that they would not have to delay [bringing] their Shekel; alternatively, they would delay and the Jewish court would not grant upon them a gift like they give from the Temple treasury to the rest of those who do the Holy work as we will explain further on.

Mishnah 4

כל כהן ששוקל אינו חוטא – for even though he is not obligated to give the [one-half] Shekel, and you might think that I would say that if he gives the [one-half] Shekel, it would be found that the community sacrifice is offered from an individual, this comes to inform us that he does not sin since he gives this one-half-shekel to the community completely, and we should not suspect that he would not completely deliver it appropriately.
כל כהן שאינו שוקל חוטא – and the Biblical verse (Exodus 30:14): “Everyone who is entered into the records,” he expounds it this way: He who passes through the Sea of Reeds, that is Kohanim, Levites and Israelites, all who passed through the sea “on the records”, whether they were counted alone, whether they were counted with Israel, “shall give the LORD’s offering,” and even though in the Torah portion of "אלה פקודי"/”These are the records [of the Tabernacle],” it is written (Exodus 38:25): “The silver of those of the community who were recorded,” for six-hundred and three-thousand [and five-hundred and fifty men]” (Exodus 38:26). That is written for the Terumah of the sockets, but for that Terumah, the Levites did not take part, but the Terumah of the community sacrifices, the Kohanim, Levites and Israelites were equal.
לעצמן – for their benefit, but this is not for a homily, for specifically, in the meal offering of the Kohen alone, the Biblical verse stated (Leviticus 6:16) : “[So, too, every meal offering of a priest] shall be a whole offering”/"כליל תהיה"   - and not with that which has the participation with the community. But the Halakah is that the Kohanim are obligated to bring the one-half Shekel and we don’t exact pledges from them for the sake of peace (see end of Mishnah 3).

Mishnah 5

מקבלין מידם – and with the condition that they will hand them over to the community completely for just as a community sacrifice is not offered by an individual.
קיני זבים וזבות – turtle-doves and young pigeons that men with flux and women with discharges bring and it speaks of Cutheans alone, for men with flux and women with discharges are not with idolaters.
כל שהוא נידר ונידב מקבלין מידם – as it teaches in a Baraitha (Talmud Menahot 73b): (Leviticus 22:18): “When any man (איש איש) [of the house of Israel or of the strangers in Israel presents a burnt offering as his offering for any of the votive or any of the freewill offerings that they offer to the LORD],” to include the non-Jews who offer votive or freewill offerings like an Israelite. But I don’t have anything other than a burnt offering, as it is written (Leviticus 22:18): “that they present a burnt offering as his offering”. From where do I learn peace offerings? The inference teaches us “for any of the votive”. From were do we include the bird offerings and the meal offerings and the wine and the frankincense and the wood? The inference teaches us: “for any of the votive or any of the freewill offerings that they offer to the LORD.”
וכן הוא מפורש על ידי עזרא – for the Cutheans wanted to assist them (i.e., the Jews), and they sent to them (Ezra 4:2): “Let us build with you, for we too worship your God [having offered sacrifices to Him since the time of Esarhaddon of Assyria who brought us here].” What did they respond to them? (Ezra 4:3): “It is not for you and for us to build a House [to our God, but we alone will build it to the LORD God of Israel, In accord with the charge that the king, King Cyrus of Persia, laid upon us]” together to our God, for you have no portion or righteousness or memory in Jerusalem.

Mishnah 6

קולבון – קל/easy בון /to understand – that is to say, something light and small that we add to the one-half Shekel to harmonize between them.
השוקל ע"י אשה [וכו'] פטור – for example that he lent them since they are exempt, they are not obligated in agio/surcharge, but he pays the debt for them, even paying the half-shekel for someone who is obligated, he is exempt from the surcharge, as is mentioned later.
אם שקל על ידו ועל יד חבירו – when he lends him, we are speaking about and he pays a full shekel – one half of a shekel for himself and another half-shekel that he lends to his fellow.
חייב קלבון אחד – for he holds that whomever gives the one-half shekel that is clearly defined in the Torah is exempt from the surcharge, as it is written (Exodus 30:13): “This is what everyone….shall pay”/"זה יתנו" – like this he will give and no more; and the second one who gave a full Shekel, does not give other than one surcharge.
ר' מאיר אומר שני קלבונות – Rabbi Meir holds that the person who pays in the one-half shekel is obligated for a surcharge, therefore two paid in a full Shekel [together] are liable for two surcharges, but the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Meir.
הנותן סלע – that is a full shekel to the money changer of sanctified contributions, and he takes from it the one-half shekel that remains to him with him, and the Shekel that is mentioned here is the one-half shekel.
נותן ב' קלבונות – in this the first Tanna/Teacher [of our Mishnah] agrees that he gives two surcharges, one surcharge to keep the balance from the one-half shekel that he takes from the sanctified monies, and the other, for since he did not give the one-half shekel as is delineated in the Torah, he is obligated for the surcharge.

Mishnah 7

השוקל ע"י עני – for a poor person
פטור – since he gives it to them as a gift.
האחין השותפין שחייבין בקלבון – brothers who are partners that split and came back and became partners again – are obligated for the surcharge like two people who gave Selaim.
פטורים ממעשר בהמה – all cattle that are born to them all the days of their partnership do not need to be tithed, for we expound in the [last] chapter of [Tractate] Bekhorot (see Chapter 9, Mishnah 3 – Talmud Bekhorot 56b) (Numbers 18:15): “]The first issue of the womb of every being, man or beast, that is offered to the LORD,[ shall be yours/יהיה לך;” – yours but not of a partnership, and we establish this verse with tithes, and even though that it is written with regard to first born.
וכשחייבים במעשר בהמה – that is when they didn’t divide it, then they are obligated for tithing, as we expound – that he is able, even if they didn’t purchase it as that which belongs to the estate (before division), as the inference teaches us, “it will be”/יהיה – in all cases (see Numbers 18:18).
פטורים מן הקלבון – for the money of their father stands in its legal status as it is like a father who gives for his sons and for or for his neighbors and is exempt.
מעה כסף – one twenty-fourth of Selah, and its weight is sixteen S’eorot.
חצי מעה – one forty-eighth and its weight is eight S’eorot, and the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Chapter 2



Mishnah 1

מצרפין שקלים לדרכונות – the people of the city that gathered together their Shekels can exchange them for Darics (i.e., a Persian gold coin) and this is a gold coin as it is written in Ezra (2:69): “[In accord with their means, they donated to the treasury of the work:] gold-6,100 drachmas, [silver -5,000 minas, and priestly robes – 100],” to ease from upon them the burden/weight of the way.
שופרות – chests whose openings from the top were narrow like a Shofar whose top is narrow from the top and continues to widen in order that people would not be able to take from them anything, as it is written regarding Jehoiada (II Chronicles 24:8): “[The king (Jehoash) ordered that] a chest be made and placed [outside of the gate of the House of the LORD],” (II Kings 12:10): “[And the priest Jehoiada took a chest] and bored a hole in its lid….” They were standing in the Temple courtyard, and everyone was bringing his Shekel and giving it.
כך היו במדינה – in Jerusalem, and according to the words of Maimonides, in the rest of the cities of Israel.
בני העיר ששלחו שקליהם – by the hand of an agent to bring them to the Temple treasury (for congregational sacrifices).
אם נתרמה התרומה – as they were accustomed to donate from the baskets for the needs of the sacrifices, they would donate on what was collected and what would in the future be collected, in order hat there would be a part of a the sacrifices, even for those who had yet not given their Shekels.
נשבעין – the messengers.
לגזברים – to the treasurers, for since the Terumah had been appropriated on these monies, before they were lost, they are made as if they were in the domain of the treasurers from the time that the Terumah had been appropriated, for if they were stolen or lost, they were stolen or lost while in the domain of the treasurers; therefore, the agents swear to the treasurers and they are exempted/dismissed, for even though they don’t take an oath on the sacred property of the Temple, it is a decree of the Sages in order that they not disregard the sacred property of the Temple.
ואם לאו – that at the time when they were lost, the Terumah had not yet been appropriated, and they had not removed the monies from the baskets for what would be collected in the future, it was in the domain of the owners that they were not, therefore, the agents swear to the men of the city and are exempted, and the men of the city go back and collect [for donation] other Shekels in their place, for the first Shekalim that were lost don’t count for them.

Mishnah 2

הנותן שקלו לחבירו לשקול על יד – for him, and the agent went and paid the Shekel (i.e., half-shekel) on his own behalf.
אם נתרמה התרומה – prior to his giving the Shekel to the treasurer.
מעל – he who paid it (i.e., the Shekel) in on his own behalf, for as soon as the Terumah was appropriated on that which would be collected in the future, that specific Shekel that his fellow gave him to pay on his behalf was [already] in the sacred domain [of the Temple] and when he gave on his behalf, he benefitted from the sacred donations, for if he had not given this Shekel on his behalf, they would have exacted a pledge from him, as is taught in the Mishnah above in the first chapter (Mishnah 3), for from when they sat in the Temple, they began to take pledges and it was found that he benefitted from what belonged to the Temple, and he is liable for a sacrifice of sacrilege.
השוקל שקלו מן ההקדש – the monies that were in his hand which were sanctified for the repair of the House, and when he thought that they were non-holy and donated his Shekel from them, and the Terumah had been appropriated, and they bought an animal with that Terumah and sacrificed it or obligated the person who made his donation a sacrifice of sacrilege but not before, because that which is sanctified [and belongs to the Temple] remains sanctified as it was in every place where he is and did not change. And when the animal was sacrificed, and he intended that it be from money, everyone who gave his Shekel in the Terumah of the Temple treasury is made as if he purchased the animal with those monies of Hekdesh/belonging to the Temple and sacrificed it and benefited because they did not have him take a pledge for his Shekel and he became liable for a sacrifice of sacrilege. But the first part of the Mishnah also as it is taught – when his fellow gave him his Shekel on his behalf and he gave the Shekel for himself that he committed sacrilege, that is, also when the animal was sacrificed after the Terumah had been appropriated, for if it had not been taught in the first part of the Mishnah because it relied upon the concluding part of the Mishnah which explains the sacrilege of both of them. And this is the reason that he doesn’t commit sacrilege immediately, even though he already benefitted, because there is no sacrilege other than removing from that which is sanctified [and belonging to the Temple] to that which is non-holy. But someone who removes [funds] from one sanctified area to [another] sanctified area, even though he benefitted, he does not commit sacrilege other than when something is done with the second sanctified [monies]. And this is proven in the Jerusalem Talmud.
יאכל כנגדן – He must bring a Shekel and state that every place which is Second Tithe or Seventh year produce will be redeemed by this Shekel, for the Seventh year – its additional worth is like that which is dedicated to the Temple and the produce purchased with that Shekel should be eaten in Jerusalem for the sake of Second Tithe or eat them in the holiness of the Seventh year if the produce that was redeemed was seventh year produce.

Mishnah 3

המכנס מעות – he collects/gathers bit by bit, penny by penny for his [one-half] shekel and states when he began to collect/gather that these are for his [one-half] shekel. But when he comes to consider what he has gathered and found that there was excess to his shekel.
ב"ש אומרים מותרן נדבה – they would fall to the horn-shaped chests in the Temple, that stand to offer with their monies burnt offerings of the summer for the altar. And the School of Shammai, according to the reasoning, hold that whatever is dedicated to the Temple property, in error, is called dedicated to Temple property.
ובה"א מותרן חולין – for they did not intend this to be sanctified, but only up to their [obligatory one-half] Shekel.
שאביא מהן שקלי שוין שמותר חולין – for it is like saying explicitly – that if I bring in more than a Shekel, I will bring from them a Shekel and the remainder will be non-holy produce.
אלו לחטאתי – and if he gathered/collected monies and said, “these are for my sin-offering,” the School of Hillel agrees that the remainder is a free-will offering.

Mishnah 4

מה בין שקלים לחטאת – what is the difference that regarding Shekalim when one collects/gathers monies and says, “these are for my [half-]Shekel, that the School of Hillel states that the excess is non-holy and that regarding Sin-offerings, that they agree with the School of Shammai that the excess is a free-will offering?
שקלים יש להן קצבה – as it is written (Exodus 30:15): “the rich shall not pay more and the poor shall not pay less,” therefore, he definitely did not intend other than the [half-]shekel, and the excess is an errant dedication to the Temple, but the sin-offering has no limit. If he wants, he should bring a sin-offering of silver M’ah, and if he desires, he can bring greater sums. Therefore, the monies are seized but the excess is a donation.
היו שוקלים דרכונות – coinage of the Persian kingdom that came up with them from the Diaspora and it was of gold. It was worth two Selaim, and people were accustomed to do business with that coin, and like the time of the First Temple when their coin was the Shekel, they would give the one-half Shekel. So, now, when their coin was a Darkon/daric, they would give one-half daric.
חזרו לשקול סלעים – after the Kingdom of Persia passed on, the coinage of the daric was cancelled, they returned to do business with Selaim which was their first coinage that was in usage at the time of the First Temple and they gave one-half shekel as at the first.
חזרו לשקול טבעין – the coin in usage returned to be the Tevaim which is the one-half shekel that they desired to give was one-half of that coinage, that is one Dinar. For a Selah is four dinars and they did not accept it from them for they had to supplement to the Shekel of the Torah because they changed the going currency at that time but not to decrease from it. Therefore, we see that the Shekel also had no definite limit for sometimes the Shekels were large and at other times, the Shekels were small, for they would not give ever other than one-half shekel according to the currency in vogue at the time.
אעפ"כ יד כולן שוה – that is to say, that still the Shekalim are not similar to the sin-offerings, for in each and every time period, the one-half Shekel was equivalent for all. This [person] would donate according to that [person] – each individual one-half Shekel according to the going rate of that time period. But sin-offerings are not equivalent ever, for this one brings a Selah and the other brings two or three Selaim, and in this, the rationale of the School of Hillel agrees with that of the School of Shammai.

Mishnah 5

מותר שקלים חולין – The person who collects/gathers money and says, “these are for my [one-half] Shekel, and when he comes to calculate what he had gathered, he found that there was excess and what was left over was Hullin/non-holy, and the anonymous teaching is according to the School of Hillel.
עשירית האיפה – that the poorest of the poor offer, if he separated out money, and there was excess, they go for a free-will donation, for all excess of sin-offerings and guilt-offerings, the excess is a free-will offering, to purchase with them burnt-offering for the altar’s summer time (a time when the alter was unemployed for private offerings, and free-will burnt-offerings had to be supplied form the Temple fund – see Mishnah Shekalim, Chapter 4, Mishnah 4), according to the Midrash of Jehoiada the Priest, and the tenth of an Ephah was in place of a sin-offering.
מותר עולה עולה – if he separated monies to purchase a burnt-offering and there was excess, he should bring that excess for another burnt-offering.
מותר הפסח לשלמים – as it is written (Deuteronomy 16:2): “You shall slaughter the Passover sacrifice for the LORD your God from the flock and the herd,” but the Passover sacrifice comes from the herd, but the excess of the Passover sacrifice should come from the flock and herd, that is peace-offerings.
מותר נזירים – if they collected money for the Nazirite sacrifices and there was excess, they should preserve them until they purchase other Nazirite sacrifices. But if one Nazirite separated monies for his sacrifices, and there was excess, the excess should go as a free-will offering to the altar’s summer offerings.

מותר שבוים – if they collected tzedakah for the redemption of captives, and there was excess remaining, he should preserve them (i.e., the monies) until they redeem other captives, but if they explicitly did so for this captive, that captive takes possession of it.
מותר המתים למתים – if they collected for the needs of merely burying the dead, the excess is for the burial of other dead people, but, for this specific dead person, the excess goes to his inheritors, for the dead they forgive as it is a disgrace for his inheritors.
יהא מונח עד שיבא אליהו – he is doubtful if the dead pardons his disgrace to his inheritors or not. Therefore, it should like until Elijah comes.
בונים לו נפש על קברו – it is obvious to Rabbi Natan that he does not pardon. Therefore, we build for him a tombstone on his grave from that same excess that the dead person gained. But the Halakha is according to the first Teacher [of the Mishnah] and where they collect for the needs of the burial of the dead because they would think that he didn’t have [funds] and it was found that he did have [funds], we don’t say that in this case, the excess of the dead person goes to his inheritors, since the collection was done in error, and this is proved in the Jerusalem Talmud. And furthermore, it is proven in the Jerusalem Talmud and in our Gemara [i.e., the Babylonian Talmud) (Tractate Megillah 27a) that where there are seven representatives of the town or a town organization where all the business of the community is decided by his mouth, and it appears in his eyes to change [what is done with] the excess of [monies for] captives or the excess of [monies for] the poor or the excess of [monies for] the dead to what appears in his eyes he can change and remove what appears in his eyes for the needs of the hour and they cannot stop him from doing so. And similarly, we always teach practical Halakha.

Chapter 3



Mishnah 1

בשלשה פרקים בשנה תורמין את הלשכה – all of the Shekalim would be placed into one chamber in the Temple and three times a year they would take from it and place them into three baskets/funds, for each basket was from three Se’ah in order to purchase from them the community offerings and they would not take all of it at one time for the needs of the entire year, for those who lived far way had not yet brought all of their Shekalim.
בפרוס הפסח – fifteen days before the Festival [of Passover] is called “half the period of preparation,” because thirty days prior to the Festival they would ask and expound upon the laws of the Festival. And the word "פרוס" is the language of a piece, meaning one-half.
והן גרנות של מעשר – these three periods are the fixed seasons for the tithing of cattle, and these times were fixed by the Sages to tithe the cattle that had been borne, and just as the harvesting season establishes for the tithing of grain, so too, these time periods establish prohibiting eating the cattle that were born until they are tithed, but prior to this period, it is permitted to eat them, even though they haven’t been tithed, but the Sages established these three times for the tithing of cattle, in order that they would be found for those who come up making pilgrimage for the Festivals, for even though it is permitted to sell and to slaughter and to eat all the time that the harvesting season had not yet arrived, even so, people would not slaughter them until they were tithed, for it is pleasant for people to fulfill a Mitzvah with their monies in which they are not lacking anything, such as the tithing of cattle, which of itself brings tithes and they eat it as a peace-offering. If they would not tithe at these three periods, many would be prevented from selling them, because they were not tithed, and there wouldn’t be cattle available for those coming up on pilgrimage.
בן עזאי אומר בכ"ט באדר – his reason is that all of these are a condition, and their disputes are explained in the last chapter of [Tractate] Bekhorot (Chapter 9, Mishnayot 5-6).

Mishnah 2

תורמין את הלשכה – they would separate the Shekalim from the chamber/compartment for the Shekalim were placed there and they would take from them in three funds; each fund of them was three Se’ah. But Maimonides wrote that we first fill the three large baskets of twenty-seven Se’ah and from them donate to three small baskets of nine Se’ah, and freely, he pressed to state this.
וכתוב עליהן א' ב' ג' – to know which one was separated out first, and from it, they would purchase the community offerings first. And after that from the second one, and after that from the third one.
יונית כתוב עליהן – they were accustomed to do it in Greek because it is written (Genesis 9:27): “May God enlarge Japheth, and let him dwell in the tents of Shem.” The beauty of Japheth will dwell in the tents of Shem [Megillah 9a], and the language of “beauty” in the children of Japheth does not exist other than in the Greek language.
פרגוד חפות – the clothing was long and we fold it from the bottom. That double rim is called a פרגוד חפות/hem in his cloak; cloak with sleeves. The person donating [Terumah]/making appropriation does not enter with the double rim in his cloak so that people would not suspect him that he placed into it from the monies of the compartment/chamber.
ולא בתפילין ולא בקמיע – so that people don’t say that he loosened the seam and placed into it money.

Mishnah 3

וזורקו לפני התורם – they intended that their Shekels would be spread out into the basket, and they would purchase from them the community offerings, and they would not come from the remnants of the compartment.
שלש פעמים – on each occasion, he would say, “shall I remove them?,” and they say to him: “Remove.” For it was the manner of the Sages that something should be done thrice, and an example of this we found in the Omer ceremony (see Tractate Menahot, Chapter 10, Mishnah 3): “this sickle, this sickle, this sickle. Shall I reap, Shall I reap, Shall I reap?” and similarly in the removal of the shoe (see Tractate Yevamot, Chapter 12, Mishnah 6) – “Remove the Shoe? Remove the Shoe? Remove the Shoe? = three times.

Mishnah 4

תרם את הראשונים ומחפה בקטבלאות – the first appropriation/Terumah that was on the fifteenth day before Passover – after he appropriated it, he would cover all the remaining Shekalim with קטבלאות/leather spreads that are smooth leather in order that they can put upon it the Shekalim that they will bring from the countries that surround the land of Israel, who wouldn’t bring [it] prior to Passover but they bring it from Passover until Atzeret/Shavuot and give them on top of the [leather] spread in order that they may appropriate from them in the two weeks before Atzeret/Shavuot and not appropriate from the thing that was appropriated from already during the two weeks before Passover, and after he has appropriated during the two weeks before Atzeret, he went back and covered all the monies in the compartment with leather spreads and placed on them all the Shekelim that are brought from Babylonia and Media and from the far-away countries, and appropriate from them in the two weeks before the Holiday/Sukkot. But there was no cover for there is no Terumah/appropriation after that.
הראשונה לשם ארץ ישראל – for they sent their Shekalim first and the others had not yet brought them.
לשם כרכין המוקפים – that are close by like Ammon and Moab and those similar to that, and its example was not to appropriate from that which is surrounded, nor do they surround those with an abscess.  But nevertheless, every single time, they appropriate in the name of all Israel on what was collected and what stands to be collected in the future. But our Tanna/Teacher did not mention the divisions of these places other than to inform them that they established these three periods because then, they will gather all the Shekalim of Israel/the Jewish people.

Chapter 4



Mishnah 1

התרומה מה היו עושין בה – that they placed into the boxes – what did they do with them?
וכל קרבנות הצבור – including incense.
ספיחים – grain that comes up on its own from what was fell off/dropped at the harvest, and we give payment to the guards (i.e., these men were hired to prevent people from collecting the aftergrowth) so that poor people would not glean/gather them in the Seventh year, and bring from the Omer on Passover and the two loaves on Atzeret/Shavuot, for these do not come other than from חדש/new grain and from the Land of Israel. And we give them their payment from the Terumah/sacred donations, for the needs of the sacrifice are considered like the sacrifice itself.
שומר חנם – and even though he acquired them for that which was ownerless, for when he guarded them for free and brought them, they are his. Rabbi Yosi holds that an individual sacrifice is different from the community sacrifice.
אף אתה אומר כו' – that is to say, if you admit that they don’t come other than frm the community, and if you guarded them for free and brought them, he takes possession of them. It is found that they do not come from the community [offerings] since the Rabbis hold that an individual sacrifice does not change into a community [sacrifice], and the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 2

פרה אדומה ושעיר המשתלח – [the Scapegoat] for Azazel.
באין מתרומת הלשכה – come from the Temple fund/treasury chamber Even though the [red] heifer is not slaughtered in the Temple courtyard it comes from the Temple fund/treasury chamber, for the All-Merciful calls it a “sin-offering” (Numbers 19:9 – which is translated as “It is for cleansing.”). And the scapegoat – because it requires taking two goats and it is not known upon which of them will come up the lot “for God” (Leviticus 16:10).
ולשון של זהורית – the scarlet yarn/crimson thread that they cast into the burning of the heifer; and the same law applies to the cedar wood and hyssop, but it (i.e., the Mishnah) took the language of the crimson thread alone to distinguish between this crimson thread and the language of the thread upon the scapegoat.
כבש פרה – they would make two bridges, one on top of the other because of the grave in the depth (i.e., a covered-up uncleanness discovered) from the Temple Mount to the Mount of Olives and upon them, they would remove the heifer.
וכבש [שעיר] – they would make a kind of bridge until the exit from the city, and upon it would go the scapegoat because of the Babylonians who would pluck out its hair and say: “take and leave so that our sins will not tarry.
ולשון שבין קרניו – to know if it had turned white and the sins of the Jewish people had been atoned for, and these do not require a sacrifice. Therefore, they do not come from the Terumah/sacred contributions that were separated for the sake of sacrifices but rather, from what remained in the compartment after the separation of the Terumot/sacred contributions.
ואמת המים – that passes through the Temple courtyard if it needs repair.
וכל צרכי העיר – to dig cisterns, pits and caves, and the repair of its streets, its marketplaces and the guarding of the city.
אבא שאול אומר כו'- but the Halakha is not according to Abba Sahul.

Mishnah 3

מותר שירי הלשכה – what remained after the repairs for the needs of the city were made from them.
לוקחים מהן יינות שמנים וסלתות – and they sell it to those who need wine for libations and oils and fine flour for meal-offerings.
אין משתכרין משל הקדש – for the poor people are not in the place of the rich ones, and it is a disgrace to the Temple property.
ואף לא בשל עניים – lest a poor person donate it and there is none to give him, and the Halakha is according to Rabbi Akiva.

Mishnah 4

מותר תרומה – that is what remains in the boxes/baskets on Rosh Hodesh Nisan, for then we bring sacrifices from the new sacred donations.
צפוי לבית קדש הקדשים – for the floor and the walls.
מותר פירות – Rabbi Yishmael, according to his reasoning, who said above that the surplus of the leftovers of the chamber, we purchase with them wines, oils and fine flour and the income that we make through them is called "מותר הפירות"/surplus of the gains of the produce – that is to say, what remained and was earned from the produce that they bought.
קיץ למזבח – when the altar is idle, we bring from them burnt offerings like the manner of human beings to bring up all kinds of sweets on to the table at the conclusion of the meal, so to, after they have completed bringing the obligatory [offerings] of the day, they bring these burnt offerings, when there are no votive or freewill offerings and the altar is idle.
מותר תרומה לכלי שרת (see Chapter 3, Mishnah 2 of Tractate Shekalim) – a Biblical verse is expounded regarding this (II Chronicles 24:14): “[When they had finished, they brought] the money that was left over [to the king and Jehoiada (the High Priest); it was made into utensils for the House of the LORD,” What is the money that has leftovers? I would state that this is the sacred donations to the chamber.
מותר תרומה לקיץ המזבח – for the needs of the sacred donations that were separated.
מותר נסכים – the treasurers of the Temple treasury would furnish money to the owners of the wine, oils and fine flour to provide for the meal-offerings and libations all year. But if he (i.e., the owner) accepted upon himself to provide three Se’ah for a Sela and it (i.e., the going market price) stood at four Se’ah for a Sela, it was necessary for him to give four Se’ah and that Se’ah was the surplus from the libations. For just as they measure for the Temple treasury, so would measure that was cut through from end to end and overflowing. But the treasurer would erase the measure that was cut through from end to end which is called the surplus from the libations and make of them vessels of the ministry that the libations would be sanctified in vessels of the ministry.
מותר נסכים לקיץ המזבח – when the libations ran out and the burnt offerings ran out.
זה וזה – Rabbi Akiba and Rabbi Hanina.
לא היו מודים בפירות – just as Rabbi Akiba said above (Mishnah three of this chapter): They may not make profit from sacred property, and the conclusion is that it is a condition of the Jewish court regarding the surpluses that all of them should be offered as burnt offerings, and this is the Halakha.

Mishnah 5

נותר הקטורת – that remains every year.
מה היו עושין בה – to offer as incense to God in the next year, for there is no year without surplus for the incense was made into three-hundred and sixty-eight minas for three-hundred and sixty-five minas is like the three hundred and sixty-five days of the solar [year] and three minas that from them, the High Priest would bring in his handfuls on Yom Kippur but they would not all enter with their handfuls. And furthermore, in each ordinary year, there was a surplus since an ordinary year had three-hundred and fifty-four days.
מפרישין ממנה – from the chamber.
שכר האומנין – from the pounding of the incense, they would take their payment from the chamber of the sacred donations and they would take possession of the monies for artisans through one hand from the treasurers and they are non-holy [produce], and even though what is holy does not become non-holy if they don’t bring something else in its place for holiness. The sacred donations of the chamber are different since the Jewish court makes a condition upon them to give them for several things. But after the monies were transferred for the needs of the artisans, they would redeem the incense with those monies. But the sacred monies from the old sacred donations, they would give the incense to the artisans as their payment and go back and repurchase it from them with monies of the new sacred donations. And in this way, the matter was much more discreet to not sell it and then go back and repurchase it.
אם בא חודש בזמנו – that they brought new Shekalim prior to Rosh Hodesh Nisan which is the time for the new sacred donations, they purchase the surplus of the incense from the new sacred donations through redemption as we explained above.
ואם לאו – they had not yet brought their new Shekalim, they purchase it from the old sacred donations if they redeemed it already, and if they had not redeemed it, they offer incense for since the new [donations] had not yet come, they must bring it from the old.

Mishnah 6

המקדיש נכסיו – and an undefined dedication to Temple property is for the repair and upkeep of the Temple.
והיו בהם דברים הראויים לקרבנות צבור – such as incense or wines, oils and fine flour.
ינתנו לאומנין בשכרן – and they go out to the status of “non-holy,” even though no other thing enters in its place, for he holds that something dedicated to the Temple can be redeemed through service as it is written (Exodus 25:8): “And let them make Me a sanctuary [that I may dwell among them],” that the service/work will be accomplished from that which is donated to the Temple.
אינה מן המדה – that is to say, that this measure that you are stating is not like the measure mentioned above with the incense and it is not appropriate but rather that your qualities should be harmonized. Therefore, we separate out the payment of the artisans, etc., as we stated above concerning the surplus of the incense for whatever is dedicated to the Temple is not redeemed through service, and the Halakha is according to Ben Azzai.

Mishnah 7

זכרים ימכרו לצרכי עולות כו' ודמיהם יפלו לשאר הנכסים לבדק הבית – for he holds that undefined things dedicated to the Temple is for the repair and upkeep of the Temple and even with something that is appropriate for the Altar, but that which is appropriate for the Altar does not leave from the Altar for someone who dedicates pure things to the repair and upkeep of the Temple are not redeemed other than for the Altar and their monies will fall to the repair and upkeep of the Temple.
ויביא בדמיהן עולות – for he holds that a thing that is appropriate for the Altar without any qualification is sanctified for the Altar; therefore, males themselves should be offered as burnt offerings and females should be sold for the needs of peace-offerings and he can bring with their monies burnt offerings, but they themselves are not offered as peace offerings, for a person who dedicates his possessions, his intention is that it should all be for “On High,” therefore, cattle which are appropriate to be offered as burnt offerings should be offered as burnt offerings. But females should be sold for the needs of peace-offerings and you can, with their monies, bring burnt-offerings, for since they are appropriate for the Altar, the sanctity of the Altar applies to them. And even for the females, where their bodies are not appropriate, for what he intends to sanctify them for, since it is for the sake of a sacrifice, however, they are worthy, [but] the sanctify of the repair/maintenance of the Temple does not apply to them and he should bring with their monies burnt-offerings.
המקדיש בפירוש – that said that cattle and my possessions are given over to the Temple property for since he dedicated them and separated them one from the other, and even though he didn’t say, the cattle to the altar and my possessions to the upkeep and maintenance of the Temple, it comes to tell us that his intention was that regardless of whether speaking of his cattle or his possession everything should go to one place. But when one sanctifies something all of his possessions undefined, his intention is to dedicate each thing for what is appropriate, and the Halakha is according to Rabbi Akiva.

Mishnah 8

יינות שמנים וסלתות – which are appropriate for meal-offerings and libations.
ועופות – doves and pigeons.
Rabbi Eleazar is our reading and not Rabbi Eliezer. The reason of Rabbi Eleazar is explained in the Jerusalem Talmud, as it is written (Leviticus 22:18): “[When any man of the house of Israel or of the strangers in Israel] presents a burnt offering as his offering for any of the votive or any of the freewill offerings [that they offer to the LORD],” all that they vow or donate from things that they donate to the LOD, even wines, oils and fine-flour will be for a burnt offering – he is able to offer with their monetary value a burnt offering of fowl or if he first gave a fowl, he shall offer it as a burnt offering, the inference teaches us (Leviticus 22:19): “from cattle or sheep or goats.” Surely, he does not with all what he donated other than only a burnt offering of cattle.

Mishnah 9

משערין את הלשכה – they calculate the market price for wines, oils and fine-flour and this market price will stand for thirty days. And they purchase every day from the sellers of wine, oils and fine flour what they need for that sum that they established. But if the cost went up, they do no t add monies, and if it became less expensive, they purchase according to the cheaper price.
המקבל עליו לספק סלתות – in the days of the wheat harvest and the vintage of the grapes and olive harvest, the treasurers would advance money to the storekeeper and the storekeeper would accept upon himself to supply wine, oils and fine flour all year long. But if they were then sold four Se’ah for a Sela and their price increased and stood at three Se’ah for a Sela, one must give four Se’ah. For that which is dedicated to a sacred purpose/Temple property acquires with money, as it is written (Leviticus 27:19 – though the quote is not exact, but all of the sources refer to this verse): “[And if he who consecrated the land wishes to redeem it, he must add one-fifth to the sum at which it was assessed,] and it shall pass to him.” But if he accepted to supply three Se’ah for a Sela and the price became cheaper and stood at four [Se’ah] for a Selah, he gives the four [Se’ah] for a Selah, for he is not worse than a commoner, that does not acquire other than through משיכה/”pulling.”
התליע לו – even if the treasurer pulled and gave the monies for the property which may be resorted to in case of non-payment on behalf of the storekeeper.
אינו מקבל את מעותיו – that is to say, they are not considered the monies of the storekeeper nor did he take possession of them, and even though he received them from the treasurer.
עד שיהיה המזבח מרצה – Therefore, if the wine soured or the fine-flour became infected with worms, the responsibility is upon is the storekeeper.

Chapter 5



Mishnah 1

אלו הן הממונים – fifteen kinds of officers and appointment to authority that are considered in our Mishnah were the daily offering in the Temple. However, these men that are considered were not at the same time, but the pious and the worthy in each generation he would appoint. But my teachers explained on account that the first appointees were appointed for this – thus this was their names. Therefore, the ones who came after them were called by their name
על החותמות ועל הסלתות – it will be explained further in our Mishnah.
על הפייסות – to teach the order of the lottery, who will merit with this service, and whom with that, as is explained in the Tractate Yoma (see Chapter 2, Mishnayot 1-4).
על הקינים – those lacking atonement such as the man and/or a woman with a flux and a woman who just gave birth bring obligatory bird-offerings which are doves and pigeons – they put their monies in the shofar-shaped [chests] that are in the Temple. But those who are appointed over the shofar-shaped [chests] take the money and bring through them the bird-offerings, and someone who was wise, great in knowledge and a specialist had to be appointed, as we state in Tractate Avot (Chapter 3, Mishnah 18).
שהיה פותח דברים וכו' – This is Mordecai Bilshan that came up [to the land of Israel] from the Diaspora, and he is called this because he mixed up many languages.
על חולי מעים – because the Kohanim walk barefoot on the floor and eat a lot of meat and drink water, their intestines were ruined and they always needed a doctor to tell them: this is the good medication for the intestines.
חופר שיחין – he was appointed to dig cisterns, pits and caves, in order that water would be found to drink for those who come up [to Jerusalem] on the Pilgrimage Festivals.
גביני כרוז – that was his name of the man who would announce each morning in the Temple: “Arise, O Priests, to your Divine Service” and they would hear his voice from Jericho.
על נעילת שערים – to lock the gates in the evening and to open them in the morning.
על הפקיע – to whip the Kohanim and Levites that were found to be sleeping during their watches when they would guard the Temple at night, as we say in Tractate [Middot] (see Chapter 1, Mishnah 2, where it states that would use a stick – and not necessarily a strip of leather/strap used as a whip), whomever they would find sleeping they would beat him and burn his clothing. But in the Jerusalem Talmud, they would explain that he stripped the wicks of the Menorah and of the House of Water Drawing as we state in [Tractate Sukkah], the chapter “The flute-playing” (chapter 5) [Talmud Sukkah 51b -see Mishnah 3] – “from the warn-out pants and girdles of the Kohanim, they made wicks [and would kindle them].
צלצל – a musical instrument that has a large sound, from the language תצילנה אזניו/it will be a loud shriek in his ears, “cymbal” in the foreign language.

בית גרמו – the name of a family.
על לחם הפנים – that would be made something like a breached chest and they were artisans in his action and in his baking to detach it from the oven so that it would not break and to make it so that it would not grow moldy.
בית אבטינס – the name of a family that were experts in mixing the incense and they recognized a certain grass whose name was a smoke-raiser (name of a plant) and when they would mix it with the spices of the incense, the smoke of the incense would rise straight up like a stick.
על הפרכות – to make new hangings when they were needed.
המלביש – he was appointed to dress the Kohanim at the time of the Divine Service and to undress them after their service, and to preserve the priestly garments in the compartments that were designed for this.

Mishnah 2

גזברים – they are those under whose control are the sacred property of the Temple, and they redeem the valuation/assessment due of a person or animal dedicated to the Temple and the property set apart for the Temple’s usage and that which is sacred property of the Temple and all of the holy tasks that are performed through them.
אמרכלין – they are higher than the treasurers and (Numbers 3:32): “The head chieftain of the Levites [was Eleazar son of Aaron the priest, in charge of those attending to the duties of the sanctuary],” which we translate [in Aramaic] as "ואמרכלין דממנא" and the language "אמרכל" - “he stated over everything,” and in Arabic we call him “Amir.” What did the seven officers/אמרכלין do? Seven keys of the courtyard were in their hands. If one of them wanted to open it up, he could not until all of them entered in together and the treasurers coming after them would open it and remove whatever they needed. And another level above that of the אמרכלין/officer/trustees (superintending the cashiers) was there, which was not mentioned in the Mishnah and it is brought in the Tosefta (Chapter 2, Halakha 15 – Lieberman edition), and they are two financial officers/controllers ("קתילוקין" ) and there were found five levels there: The High Priest, his assistant, the financial controllers, the trustees, treasurers.
ואין עושין שררה פחות משנים – as it is written (Exodus 28:5): “they, therefore shall receive the gold, [the blue, purple, and crimson yarns and the fine linen]”; the least of many is two.

Mishnah 3

ד' חותמות היו במקדש – three seals for three libations [connected with animal sacrifices] that are divided with the cattle . The first seal was for libations for cattle and they are three-tenths of an Ephah of fine flour mingled with one-half a Hin of oil and one-half a Hin of wine for libation and their seal was an עגל/calf. And the second was a ram for libations of a ram – as the Aramaic translation of איל/ram isדכרא /ram and its libation is two-tenths of a fine flour mingled in one-third a Hin of oil and one-third a Hin of wine for libation. And the third was a kid for libations of a sheep one-year old and they were one Issaron (i.e., one-tenth of an Ephah) of fine flour mingled with one-quarter of a Hin of oil and one-quarter of a Hin of wine for libation. And the fourth was “sinner,” and they were libations of the rich leper that would bring three cattle and it requires ten Log of pure oil for the three sheep and to place on the earlobe and the thumbs, and they call it "חוטא" /”sinner” because we state in Tractate Arakhin (16a): “For seven things plagues come: [gossip, murder, false oaths, illicit sexual behavior; haughtiness, theft, and selfishness].”
חמשה היו – to seals were for the leper.
חוטא דל וחוטא עשיר – because a poor leper is unable to bring other than one cow, and if there was only one seal for a leper, they would give to the poor leper three-tenths, but the first Tanna/teacher held that the for the poor leper, they would give him the seal of the “kid,”/"גדי" and the Halakha is according to the first Tanna.
וארמית כתוב עליהן – for most of their speech was in the Aramaic language.
זכרים ונקבות – whether for libations of burnt offerings that don’t come other than from males or whether from libations of peace-offerings that come from males or females, for the burnt offerings and and peace offerings are those that require libations, as it is written (Numbers 15:3): “[and would present an offering by fire to the LORD from the herd or from the flock,] be it burnt offering or sacrifice, [in fulfillment of a vow explicitly uttered, or as a freewill offering, or at your fixed occasions, producing an odor pleasing to the LORD].”

Mishnah 4

נותן לו מעות – according to the libations that he needs.
בא לו אצל אחיה שהיה ממונה – to purchase libations of the wines, oils, and sifted fine flours, in order that everyone who brings a sacrifice would not have to go back after the libations that are used for the purification of that which has been dedicated to the Temple.
ואם הותירו הותירו להקדש – and we don’t say lest these monies were Yohanan’s that were mingled with the monies of the libations.

Mishnah 5

ממתינים לו עד הערב – Yohanan and Ahiyah join together, if they found excess monies in the hand on Yohanan corresponding to the seal that [if] one states that he lost it, and they give it to him.
ושם היום כתוב – on the seal, a certain day and a certain month.
מפני הרמאין – lest some found a seal that fell from his fell, either from Ahiyah or from Yohanan, and he comes now to take it. But on the day that he finds it, he is not permitted to take it out, as the person who lost it searches after it. And furthermore, one must suspect that lest he purchased the seal at the lowest market price and hid it until the market price became more expensive.

Mishnah 6

לשכת חשאים – on account that those who give money into it do so in secrecy and those who are supported from it take it in secrecy.
ללשכת בדק הבית – to the chamber where they place in it all the holy [things] for Temple repairs.

Chapter 6



Mishnah 1

שלשה עשר שופרות – [thirteen] chests, narrow from the top and wide from the bottom curved like a Shofar because of the deceivers who would not be able to put in their hands into them to show themselves as if they are giving/putting into it, while they are taking from it, and further on, it will explain why there are thirteen chests and thirteen tables and in which location they are placed (see also Mishnah 5 in this chapter).
שלש עשרה השתחויות – and further on (Mishnah 3) it will explain where they were.
כנגד דיר העצים – a chamber/compartment (see also Tractate Middot, Chapter 5, Mishnah 4) where they would store there all the wood of the pile of wood on the altar of the Temple and it was in the northeast corner of the Women’s Court.
ששם הארון נגנז – for King Josiah commanded that it be hidden below in the curved secret and tortuous path that Solomon built at the time when he built the Temple and knew that it would eventually be destroyed. And this is what is written in II Chronicles, chapter 35, verse 3: “He said to the Levites, consecrated to the LORD, who taught all Israel, ‘Put the Holy Ark in the House that Solomon [the son of David, king of Israel] built” (also compare Talmud Yoma 53b) and with it was hidden the staff of Aaron and the bottle of Manna (which was preserved) and the flask of anointing oil.

Mishnah 2

שהיה מתעסק – in his service (see also Tractate Middot, Chapter 2, Mishnah 5) removing the wormy parts from the wood/sorting it, and he had a blemish (i.e., he was unfit for the altar, for priestly service), and the work of those with a blemish was to prepare the wood for the altar, and any wood in which was found worms was unfit/disqualified for the altar.
שהוא משונה – the stone was not even with the other stones of the floor, and he understood it (i.e., the Holy Ark) was taken from there and then returned.
ביחוד – with certainty.

Mishnah 3

והיכן היו ההשתחויות – thirteen prostrations, as is taught in the Mishnah above (Mishnah 1 of this chapter), where they made them.
שער עליון – the Temple was slanted going up from east to west, and the gate nearest to the west was the Upper Gate. And behind it was the Fuel Gate, which was the gate of the wood chamber, which was in the south of the [Temple] courtyard and it was called that name because they would bring in through there the wood of the altar that they would burn on the altar which is called the Fuel Gate.
שער הבכורות – they would bring in there the first-born [cattle] that would be slaughtered there in the south.
מים מפכים – as it is written in Ezekiel (47:2): “And I found water was gushing from [under] the south wall,” and that is south which is called “right-hand,” as it is written )Psalms 89:13): “North and south – [You created them; Tabor and Hermon sing forth Your name].” But see Ezekiel in prophecy that they would go out from the House of the Holy of Holies thin like the proboscides of locusts (see Tractate Pesahim, Chapter 3, Mishnah 5), and when they would arrive at this gate, they would grow strong/gather courage and become like the fulness of a small flask/jar and that is why they call them “gushing waters.”
שער הקרבן – there they would bring in the Holy of Holies whose slaughter was in the north.
שער הנשים – for in it, the women would enter to lay their hands on their sacrifice, according to the words of Rabbi Yosi who said that women lay their hands optionally, but according to Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Shimon, to stand near their sacrifice (see Talmud Eruvin 96b, Rosh Hashanah 13a and Hullin 85a).
שער השיר – through that path they would bring in the musical instruments.
שבו יצא יכניה בגלותו – when he went to the Temple to prostrate and to get permission when he went to Babylonia in the Diaspora, and he left through the path at that gate.
שער ניקנור – it is explained in Yoma 38a in the chapter: “The officer said to them”/אמר להם שממונה (i.e., the Prefect over the Priests).
פשפשין – small gates within the larger gates and even they are from the count/number of thirteen gates, and even though the gate leading to the room (in the Temple) in which the fire is perpetually maintained (see Tractate Tamid, Chapter 1, Mishnah 1 and Tractate Middot, Chapter 1, Mishnah 1, as well as Tractate Shabbat Chapter 1, Mishnah 11), also had a wicket, it was not considered because it was the smallest of them all, but the others were all slightly larger, and these of our Mishnah, of the thirteen gates, we establish in the Gemara in the Jerusalem Talmud like Abba Shaul the son of Hanan, but the Sages state that there were seven gates in the courtyard, but they hold that these thirteen prostrations correspond to the thirteen breaches made by the Grecian kings in the courtyard (see Tractate Middot, Chapter 2, Mishnah 3), and when the Hasmonean kings rose up and defeated them and repaired the breaches, they established thirteen sites of prostration corresponding to every breach that had been repaired.

Mishnah 4

אך של שיש מניחי את האברים – after the dissection, they arrange them (i.e., the parts of the offering – the limbs) on the table until the Kohanim would bring them up, but they did not make them (i.e., the tables) of silver or gold for there is no poverty in the place of wealth, since the gold and the silver cause them (i.e., the parts of the offerings) to get hot and smell badly, whereas the marble cools them off and preserves them so that they do not smell badly, but they would not rely on a miracle that the holy meat never smelled badly (see Tractate Avot, Chapter 5, Mishnah 5, - "ולא הסריח\התליע בשר הקדש מעולם" ).
ועל של כסף כלי שרת – that they would remove each morning ninety-three service vessels, as is taught in the Mishnah [of Tractate] Tamid (Chapter 3, Mishnah 4).
נותנים לחם הפנים בכניסתו – after it was baked until they would set it up on the table.
ועל של זהב ביציאתו – and it would be placed there until the time of its division [among the priests].
שמעלין בקודש ולא מורידין – for since they removed it from on top of the golden table, and they don’t lower it to place it on one of silver.

Mishnah 5

תקלין תדתין – as it explains in on Mishnah, upon which they place the Shekaliim of this year. And when the time of Terumah offering arrives, the treasure takes out all the Shekalim that are in the horn-shaped [chest] and places them in the compartment/chamber in order that they may give Terumah from them. And the second [horn-shaped chest] has written on it “Old Shekel-dues” and whomever had not brought his Shekel in that year brings in the year after that and places it in the same horn-shaped chest, and the treasurer takes them and puts them in the remnants of the compartment/chamber. And on the third [chest] is written on it “Bird Offerings,” and they are large turtle doves. And on the fourth is written “Young Birds for Burnt Offerings,” which are small pigeons and all of them are for Burnt Offerings. But those who bring obligatory bird-offerings give the money or the birds into the hand of the Kohen, and they do not place the money in the horn-shaped chest. But the reason is explained in the Jerusalem Talmud – because of the mixing up of [the monies] lest one of the owners of the bird-offerings dies, for it is found that the waters of the sin-offering whose owners died that depart life are mixed up with them. But the Rabbis do not concern themselves with this, for they hold that in the horn-shaped [chest] for bird offerings, they place the monies of obligatory bird-offerings and with all of the monies found in it, they offer one bird sin-offering and another as a burnt offering, and the second, all of which are free-will donations and are sacrificed as burnt-offering, and the Halakha is according to the Sages.
עצים – A person who donates wood for the pile of wood on the altar in the Temple puts their monetary value into it.
לבונה – A person who donates frankincense puts monies into it and the treasurers take the monies that are in the shofar-shaped chest and purchase from them frankincense and they offer the incense on the altar.
זהב – The person who donates gold places it there, or its financial equivalent and this is for the innermost of the Temple (i.e., the Holy of Holies), that is to say, the service vessels, for the bowls out of which the sprinkling is done were called golden atonement in Ezra (1:10) and [First] Chronicles (28:17) since the Kohen would cleanse his finger with them between each sprinkling and between gifts of sin-offerings, and the left-overs that are on the finger are invalid.
ששה לנדבה – the remaining six shofar-shaped [chests] are for free-will offerings. On the first, it is written on it "מותר חטאת" – the surplus monies for sin-offerings; and the second is "מותר אשם" – the surplus money for guilt offerings. The third is מותר קיני זבים וזבות ויולדות" - the surplus money for bird-offerings of men and women who had suffered a discharge and of women after childbirth. And the fourth is "מותר קרבנות נזיר" – surplus money from the offerings of a Nazirite. The fifth is מותר אשם מצורע – surplus money from guilt offering of a leper. The sixth is "נדבה סתם" – freewill offering – voluntary contributions for offerings on the Altar. But the person who separated monies for a sin offering and purchased his sin-offering and there was surplus from the monies, he casts the surplus into the shofar-shaped [chest] that the words: “surplus monies for sin-offerings” are written upon it and similarly, surplus monies from guilt-offerings he throws into the shofar-shaped [chest] on which it is written “surplus monies for guilt-offerings,” and similarly for all of them. But the shofar-shaped chest that has “freewill offerings” written up on it, anyone who wants to donate something to the altar plces it into that one.

Mishnah 6

לא יפחות מב' גזרים – a person who donates an unspecified [amount of] wood should not donate less than two logs, like those that are arranged on the pile of wood on the altar in the Temple and their measurement is known. And especially, a person who donates an unspecified [amount of] wood, but a person who desires to bring even one piece of wood should bring it.
לא יפחות מן קומץ – for this is the measure of frankincense that comes with the meal-offering as it is written (Leviticus 6:8): “A handful of the choice flour and oil of the meal offering shall be taken from it, with all the frankincense that is on the meal offering, [and this token portion shall be turned into smoke on the altar as a pleasing odor to the LORD].” Just as the lifting of the meal-offering is with a handful, so also the frankincense is with a handful, but if he wants to bring even a particle/drop of frankincense, he can bring it. But a person who donates gold unspecified, should not [bring] less than a Dinar of gold, but this is when he mentioned the shape/form of the coin. But, if he did not mention a coin, but just gold, unspecified, he brings even a hook/curved pin which is a kind of small fork.
אשם הוא אשום אשם לה' – but this Biblical verse (Leviticus 5:19) is difficult from its beginning to its end. The words "אשם הוא"/”it is a guilt offering implies that his existence and his going, that which is eaten is for the Kohanim and the guilt-offering is for God, implying that it is all for God. But Jehoiada the [High] Priest expounded: "אשום אשם לה'" /”he has incurred guilt before the LORD”: Everything that comes on account of a sin and on account of guilt, for example, he separated monies for a sin-offering and a guilt-offering and there was a surplus from them, he should take that surplus as burnt-offerings. “The meat is for God, and the hides go to the Kohanim and it is found that these two Biblical verses are established. He has incurred guilt before God and a guilt offering to the priests. Where do we find this Midrash concerning Jehoiada, as it is written in II Kings (12:17) regarding Jehoiada? “Money brought as a guilt offering or as a sin offering was not deposited in the House of the LORD; it went to the priests.” But it is impossible to state that the money that was sanctified for the sake of a sin-offering and for the sake of a guilt-offering that the Priests should benefit from it, but by force, this is how it should be understood: They should make of it something from it that the Kohanim will benefit from – that is burnt offerings, for the hides go to the Kohanim.

Chapter 7



Mishnah 1

מעות שנמצאו. קרוב לשקלים יפלו לשקלים – for after what is near we follow, as It is written (Deuteronomy 21:3): “The elders of the town nearest to the corpse,” and the one who states majority and near, follows after the majority; our Mishnah establishes that such as a case when Shekalim and freewill donations are equivalent.
מחצה על מחצה יפלו לנדבה – for they (i.e., freewill offerings) are more stringent than Shekalim, since they are all burnt offerings, but sometimes Shekalim are brought as sin-offerings which are consumed by Kohanim. But furthermore, the remnants of the Shekalim are used for the walls of the city and its towers.
מחצה על מחצה יפלו ללבונה – for frankincense is itself a sacrifice but wood is the requirement of a sacrifice.
מחצה על מחצה יפלו לגוזלי עולה – In the Jerusalem Talmud (Shekalim 19a), it raises an objection: it is all right if it is closer to young pigeons for burnt offerings, since according to the Torah, we follow after that which is nearer as if they are definitively from the young pigeons for burnt offerings. But, if it is half-way between them, out of doubt, we cast them in a stringency to the young pigeons for burnt offerings, but the woman who brought these monies, with what shall she gain atonement? For perhaps, they fell from obligatory bird-offerings and when you offer from them pigeon burnt-offerings, with what shall the woman gain atonement? And it (i.e., the Jerusalem Talmud) responds that the Jewish court that is appointed over the bird-offerings takes from the community [offerings] according to those monies that were found and causes them to be acquired by the owners of the monies that were found and they offer from them bird-offerings on the doubt, and the sin-offering will not be consumed.

Mishnah 2

לעולם מעשר – even all of the entire year, since the pilgrims for the Festivals do not manage to spend all of their Second Tithe [monies] and leave them for their relatives or their beloved ones to consume them all year in Jerusalem. And the essential Mitzvah of consuming Second Tithe is peace-offerings. Therefore, most of the cattle that is sold in Jerusalem on all the days f the year are acquired with the money of the [Second] Tithe, and even though that one can say that perhaps they fell from the sellers and were already redeemed, since the buyers are the majority since several people purchase from one merchant, we state that they are purchases but not redeemed, and they are [Second] Tithe.
ובהר הבית חולין – and even on the Festival (i.e., the Intermediate Days), for most of the monies in people’s hands are of [Second] Tithe which are non-holy, and we follow according to [what the case is] the majority of the year. Devoted objects/sacrifices from before the Festival, young birds are found near their nests.
בירושלים – that is not in the market for cattle.
בשעת הרגל הכל מעשר – for we do not follow after the majority of the year because the market places/streets of Jerusalem used to be swept every day and if it would fall earlier, it is already found. But the Temple Mount was not swept because it is high and the wind sweeps and removes all the dust and also no man is permitted to enter the Temple Mount with the dust that is on his feet, therefore, there is no dust found there.

Mishnah 3

אברים עולות – since it has been dissected in the manner of the dissection that has been explained for burnt-offerings, it is known that they are of the burnt offerings.
חתיכות חטאות – for we consume nothing in the Temple courtyard other than sin-offerings and guilt-offerings.
ובירושלים זבחי שלמים – for most of the meat eaten in Jerusalem is that of peace-offerings.
זה וזה – whether it is found in the Temple courtyard or whether it is found in Jerusalem.
תעובר צורתן – because they have been defiled through being given up/discarding from the mind and are prohibited for eating but we cannot despise them and burn them until they have clearly been defiled. Therefore, they require that its status must be altered/let its appearance be gone (i.e., the flesh looks disfigured by beginning to decay), which is that they be defiled through portions of sacrifices left over beyond the legal time and bound to be burned or the status must be altered for peace-offerings – which is until the third day.
נמצאו בגבולים – in the cities of Israel.
אברים נבלות – for it is the manner that we sever the carrions (i.e., animals that died a natural death) into limbs and cast them into the streets so that the dogs would eat them.
חתיכות מותרים – for it was not customary to dissect the carrions to pieces but the fit parts, it was customary to cut them into small pieces to sell them to Jews or to place it into the pot, and this law applies in a city that is completely Jewish; but in a city where there are heathens, even the pieces are forbidden.
שהבשר מרובה – we don’t dissect the flesh into small pieces but cook it by limbs.

Mishnah 4

זכרים עולות – for we assign that it (i.e., the animal) left from Jerusalem for most of the males that are in Jerusalem are burnt offerings, and most of the females are peace offering sacrifices.
הראוי לפסחים – a year-old male from the sheep or the goats.
פסחים – and he who finds it is permitted to him to offer it as his Passover offering. But if its owner comes afterwards, he should give him its monetary value.
קודם לרגל שלשים יום – from the time that they begin to expound upon the laws of Passover, and a person separates his Passover-offering. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 5

היו ממשכנין את מוצאיה – a person who would find a burnt offering or a peace offering, they would exact a pledge from him until he would bring its libations from his own – three-tenths of an Ephah for a bull and two-tenths of an Ephah for a ram and one-tenth for a lamb.
מניחין אותה ובורחים – in order that he would not be liable for its libations.

Mishnah 6

שבעה דברים – that he considered for them and continuing.
נכרי ששלח עולתו – for we expound [the words] "איש איש"/”every person” which teaches that heathens make votive offerings and freewill offerings like Jews do.
שתהא מנחתו – one-tenth of an Ephah that the High Priest would offer each day, one-half of it in the morning and one-half of in the evening.
קריבה משל צבור – as it is written (Leviticus 6:11): [“Only the males among Aaron’s descendants may eat of it, as their due] for all time [throughout the ages from the LORD’s offerings by fire].” This law will be for eternity, meaning to say, from the community, from the sacred donations of the chamber.
רבי יהודה אומר משל יורשים – as it is written (Leviticus 6:15): “And so shall the priest, anointed from among his son to succeed him, [shall prepare it; it is the LORD’s – a law for all time – to be turned entirely into smoke],” and this implies that the Kohen that was anointed who died, succeeding him, one of his sons shall prepare it.
ושלימה היתה קריבה – when it comes from the community, according to Rabbi Shimon, or from the heirs, according to Rabbi Yehuda. A full tenth was offered and not a one-half tenth. Rabbi Shimon derives it from "כליל תקטר"/”to be turned entirely into smoke” (Leviticus 6:15), that he should not offer incense in halves but whole, when it comes from the community. But Rabbi Yehuda derives it as it is written (Leviticus 6:15): “from among his son to succeed him, prepare it,” that one of his sons will offer incense after his father dies, that is, the heirs will prepare it and not half of it, and the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehuda that it comes from the heirs. But that our Mishnah states that the Jewish court instituted a condition, according to the words of Rabbi Shimon that it should come from the community. But it is not from the Torah – the Gemara (Jerusalem Talmud Shekalim 20b) explains that there were two enactments at first that from the Torah it was offered from the community, since it was written “ a law for all time” (Leviticus 6:15) as we have stated. Since we saw that the chamber was hurried, they enacted that it would be collected from the heirs. Since they saw that they were negligent with it, they established to be from the Torah, and it was found now to be offered from the community with the condition of the Jewish court that it would be established by the Torah.

Mishnah 7

שיהיו הכהנים נאותין בהן – specifically regarding the consuming of the sacrifices. But, regarding the eating of non-holy things, even the salting of non-holy things that are eaten in the Temple courtyard with the sacrifices in order that the sacrifices would be eaten with satiation, they don’t enjoy them (i.e., the salt and the wood).
שלא היו מועלין באפרה – for from the Torah, they cannot commit religious sacrilege with its ashes, as it is written (Numbers 19:9): “[A man who is clean shall gather up the ashes of the ow and deposit them outside the camp in a clean place, to be kept for water of lustration for the Israelite community.] It is for cleansing.” Through it they commit religious sacrilege but they don’t commit religious sacrilege through its ashes, but since they saw that they were despising it, they decreed that through its ashes is religious sacrilege because they saw that they separated themselves from the doubt of sprinklings, they established it as from the Torah.
ועל הקינין הפסולות – those obligated for bird-offerings they bring the money and place it into shofar-shaped chest and the Jewish court takes the money and purchases with them the bird-offerings and the owners go to them and rely upon the Jewish court that they will offer their bird-offerings but if the birds flew off or were found to be invalid, it is a condition of the Jewish court that they would take others from the monies of the chamber and give possession to the owners and fulfill through the their religious obligation.
רבי יוסי אומר – the one who regularly supplied the bird-offerings who fixed the price with the treasurers to sell them all the bird sacrifices that are needed, he is obligated to exchange all that is found in them something invalid, as is taught in the Mishnah (nine) above in the chapter “The Sacred Contributions”/"התרומה", he doesn’t receive his funds until the Altar is satisfied. But if the wine fermented or the fine flour became wormy, they return it to him and he returns the money, and the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yosi, for this is what we say in the Jerusalem Talmud that it is a condition of the Jewish court that whomever supplies the bird offerings supplies that which becomes lost or that is invalid.

Chapter 8



Mishnah 1

כל הרוקין הנמצאים בירושלם אהורים – and we do not encourage the spittle of a man or woman suffering from an emission because they defile humans and utensils because we follow after the majority.
חוץ משל שוק העליון – because heathen launderers were found there and the Sages decreed concerning the heathens that they would be like men with a flux in all their matters, and their spittle is ritually impure. But there are those who state that that since the Upper Market did not have the benefit of the crossing found there (i.e., “foot traffic”) and men and women with a flux were alone and distanced themselves from other people that were found there.
שבאמצע טמאים – because men and women with a flux are frequently there and walk in the middle of the roads, and the ritually pure individuals remove themselves to the sides of the roads – in a place where there is not much walking found, and are careful of all ritually impure that they should not come in contact with them, but at the time of the Festival, when the majority of Jews are ritually pure, the ritually impure remove themselves to the sides so that they do not defile the people, and the ritually pure walk in the middle of the roads; therefore, at the time of the Festival, the spittle that is found in the middle of the road is ritually pure, but that which is on the sides is ritually impure, and the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yosi.

Mishnah 2

דרך ירידה לבית הטבילה – there were two paths to the ritual path – on one, they go down and on the other they go up – so that the ritually impure do not come in contact with the ritually pure, and that of the path going down is certainly impure, because they fell from the hand of those bringing them for ritual immersion.
שלא כירידתן עלייתן – for one their descent, they were definitely ritually impure; therefore, they would bring them down to the place of ritual immersion and upon their ascent they were ritually pure after they had been immersed.
רבי יוסי אומר כולן טהורין – they did not make the decree on doubtful utensils in Jerusalem and the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yosi.

מריצה – a tool that crushes and breaks in it the bones of the dead when they want to bring them in a basket to take them from place to place.

Mishnah 3

שוחט בה מיד – for certainly, its owner immersed it [in a ritual bath] from yesterday in order that it would have a sunset (required after purification, to be deemed entirely clean) and that it would be appropriate to slaughter with it on the day of the Eve of Passover.
בשלשה עשר שונה ומטביל – meaning to say, even though it is possible to state that its owner already immersed it [in a ritual bath], the person who finds it must immerse it a second time for perhaps, its owner had not immersed it and they had a while to wait until it was close to darkness, and even though they did not decree on doubtful utensils in Jerusalem because the stringency of holy objects required immersion for it. But Maimonides explained [the word] "שונה" /”a second time,” to mean to sprinkle upon it for it had become ritually impure through contact with the dead, and he sprinkled [from the ashes of the red heifer] on the third day (see Numbers 19:12), and now sprinkles once again upon it and afterwards immerses it.

בזה ובזה – whether on the thirteenth or the fourteenth [of Nisan].
שונה ומטביל – he immerses it again for the hatchet/curved cutting tool is not appropriate other than for the Hagigah/the Festival Offering for the breaking of a bone is permitted on it, and in the Gemara of Pesahim (Tractate Pesahim 70b) establishes that at the time when the Nasi/head of the Sanhedrin is on his deathbed on the thirteenth [of Nisan], for if he would die, the entire community will be ritually impure and will sacrifice the Passover offering in defilement, but they would not to ritually purify the utensils; therefore, the knife that one needs for the slaughtering of the Passover offering – this is one doubt, for perhaps the Nasi won’t died and they will make the Passover offering in ritual purity, they immerse it and there is a presumption that they purified it on the thirteenth day in order to slaughter the Passover offering on the fourteenth. Bu the hatchet/curved cutting tool, there are two doubts: a) perhaps the Nasi will die and they will make the Passover offering in a state of ritual defilement and they don’t bring the Hagigah/Festival offering, and there is no need for the hatchet/curved cutting tool, and even if he doesn’t die, perhaps the Passover offerings are many and they don’t do the Hagigah/Festival Offering on the fourteenth; therefore, they don’t immerse it and b) it has the presumption that it they did not purify it.
חל י"ד להיות בשבת שוחט בה מיד – but we don’t say that since it is Shabbat, we will not slaughter it out of a doubt that perhaps it was ritually impure and it is found that the Passover offering was ritually impure, and we desecrate the Sabbath not at the place of a commandment. But my teachers explained that we slaughter it immediately with a hatchet/curved cutting tool stating that even though there is no Festival offering/Hagigah on the Sabbath, nevertheless, there is a presumption that he immersed it from the Eve of the Sabbath (i.e., Friday) for the need of the Festival offering/Hagigah on the fifteenth [of Nisan].
בחמשה עשר שוחט בה מיד – because the entire people knows that sprinkling and immersion are prohibited on the Jewish festival/Yom Tov, and we immerse everything from before the Jewish festival.
נמצאת – the hatchet/curved cutting tool
קשורה לסכין – is tied to the knife. We stated that it was definitely immersed with the knife, but Maimonides explained that it is found that an undefined knife is tied with another known knife, it is like the known knife; if it (i.e., the known knife) is ritual impure, it (i.e., the other knife) is ritually impure; if it (i.e., the known knife) is ritually pure, it (i.e., the other knife) is ritually pure.

Mishnah 4

פרוכת שנטמת בולד הטומאה – [the Curtain] that touched ritually impure liquids that the Sages decreed regarding these liquids that they defile utensils, as a decree because of the liquid of a man or woman with a flux, such as his spittle or nocturnal emission, which are one of the original or direct causes of Levitical uncleanness, and from the Torah, they defile humans and utensils.
מטבילין אותה בפנים – and it does not require being sent outside of the camp of the Divine Majesty (from the entrance of the court and further), because it is was not defiled other than by a secondary cause of Levitical uncleanness.
ומכניסין אותה מיד – and it does not require having a sunset (after immersion) for complete purification.
נטמאת באב הטומאה – with an unclean reptile or a carrion.
מטבילין אותה בחוץ – we immerse it outside for it requires being sent out [of the camp] as we state in the last chapter of Tractate Eruvin (Chapter 10, Mishnah 15; Talmud Eruvin 104b), that a person who brings in an unclean reptile in the Temple is liable.

Mishnah 5

נימין – “Lytzish” in the foreign language.
עשרים וארבעה חוטין – because it is made from blue, purple and crimson yarns and fine linen and each and every species, its thread is doubled six times as is mentioned in Yoma (Talmud Yoma 87a).
ארכה מ' ורחבה כ' – like the measure of the hall leading to the interior of the Temple (see Tractate Middot, Chapter 4, Mishnah 7), that its height (it should be “length,” based upon the commentary of the Tosafot Yom Tov) was forty cubits and its width was twenty cubits (see also Tractate Middot, Chapter 3, Mishnah 6; but we also learn in Chapter 3, Mishnah 7 that the height was also forty cubits).
ושמונים ושתים רבוא – this was the number of threads from which it was made. Another explanation: the number of gold dinars that they spent on it. But there are books in which it is written in them that “that with twenty thousand and eighty,” meaning to say that there eighty-two young virgins were engaged in making it.
ושלש מאות כהנים היו מטבילין אותה – utensils that were completed even though they were completed in ritual purity, require immersion for holy things, as is found in Tractate Hagigah (Chapter 3, Mishnah 2). The three hundred Kohanim that are taught in our Mishnah is the language of hyperbole and exaggeration, for they did not require so many Kohanim to immerse it.

Mishnah 6

הכל ישרף בפנים – in the large place where the ashes of sacrifices were deposited which was in the Temple courtyard for there they would burn the unfit/disqualified meat of the most holy sacrifices for everything that was disqualified/unfit for the holy sacrifice, we burn it in the holy [precincts].
חוץ מנטמא באב הטומאה בחוץ – for since its defilement is stringent and its disqualification occurred outside, one cannot bring it into the Temple courtyard to burn it for its disqualification did not occur in the holy [precincts].
חוץ משנטמא בולד הטומאה בפנים – for it has two [leniencies]: its defilement was inside, and the leniency of its ritual defilement, but if it was defiled by a primary uncleanness, we do not cause the delay of the ritual defilement inside until it is burned but we remove it immediately and burn it outside.

Mishnah 7

את שנטמא בולד הטומאה בין בפנים בין בחוץ ישרף בפנים – since it is ritually pure from the Torah, even if it became defiled outside, we must fulfill its burning in the holy [precincts].

Mishnah 8

מחצי כבש ולמטה במערב – the Kohanim/priests who obtained the privilege by the arbitration regarding the limbs of the daily offering to bring them up would not bring them up all at one time, but would place them on the ramp and walk to the chamber of Hewn Stones (where the Sanhedrin sat) to recite the Shema and afterwards return and offer up the limbs on top of the Altar as it is taught [in our Mishnah] here, that they are placed on the lower half of he Altar-slope. For the ramp was thirty-two cubits long and from its half-way point downward, they would place them, and the width of ramp was sixteen cubits and on its lower half to the western side, they would place them (i.e., the limbs of the daily offering).
ושל ראשי חדשים – from it half-way point and upwards which is on the rim of the Altar that surrounds it and toward the east.
אינן נוהגים אלא בפני הבית – Shekalim because they are for the needs of a sacrifice, and since there is no sacrifice, there are no Shekalim. But regarding the First Fruits, as it is written (Exodus 23:19): “The choice first fruits of your soil you shall bring to the house of the LORD your God." At the time when you have a Temple, you have First Fruits; when you don’t have a Temple, you don’t have First Fruits.
אבל מעשר דגן וכו' נוהגים בפני הבית ולשא בפני הבית – for the Holiness of the Land [of Israel] is never invalidated. Therefore, it is necessary to separate out Terumot and Tithes and for the Tithe of Cattle, you must separate a tenth. But in Tractate Bekhorot (see Chapter 9, Mishnah 1), they stated that they invalidated the tithe of the cattle so that it should not come regarding it as a stumbling block/snare.
המקדיש שקלים ובכורים – which was not practiced other than when the Temple stood, but if one separated them when the Temple no long existed, they are sanctified.
בכורים אינן קדש – since it is explicitly written concerning them (Exodus 23:19): “you shall bring to the House of the LORD your God,” even if he had separated them post-facto, they are not holy and the name/title of Bikkurim/First Fruits does not take effect upon them because the Temple doesn’t exist. But Maimonides explains that one who sanctifies Shekalim and First Fruits for the upkeep and maintenance of the Temple that he already has, but according to his explanation, the reason for why, according to Rabbi Shimon that Shekalim are holy, and First Fruits is not holy is not clear. But the Halakha is according to Rabbi Shimon.