Mishneh Torah, Neighbors
משנה תורה, הלכות שכנים
Maimonides' Mishneh Torah, edited by Philip Birnbaum, New York, 1967
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH002108864

Mishneh Torah, Neighbors



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6

The inhabitants of a town may lawfully compel one another to share in building a defense wall, gates and bars for the town, to help build a synagogue for their use, and to purchase a <i>Sefer Torah</i> and books of the Prophets and Sacred Writings, so that any member of the community may read them whenever he pleases.
If a person has bought a town in Eretz Yisrael, the court induces him to buy for himself land in all the four directions of the town for purposes of creating a Jewish settlement in Eretz Yisrael. The owners of a stretch of fields may compel one another to dig a large ditch and a small ditch between them.
If a man has a courtyard in another town, the inhabitants of that town may lawfully compel him to share in digging cisterns, trenches, caves, and a water-channel; but they cannot impose other duties upon him. If he has been residing among them in that town, they may coerce him to share in everything.
When funds are collected from the city residents for building the defense wall, they should collect according to the proximity of the homes to the wall; the closer one lives to the wall the more he should contribute.
Anyone who has lived in the town for twelve months, or bought a residential house there, must share with the residents of the town in everything that is needed for the repair of the wall and the gates, the hire of the horsemen who guard the city, and all similar things that pertain to the safeguarding of the town.
All things needed for the safeguarding of the city are taken from the citizens, including orphans, but not from Torah scholars, since the scholars are not in need of extra protection: the Torah is their protection. But for the repair of the roads and the streets even scholars are taxed. If the entire population comes out to do the repairing by themselves, scholars should not come out with them, because it is not right for scholars to degrade themselves in the presence of the common people.

The residents of an alley may lawfully prevent one another from letting a tailor or a tanner or any other craftsman settle among them. If a craftsman has been in an alley without being hindered, or if there has been a bathhouse or a shop or a mill, and someone comes and makes another bathhouse next to the first, or another mill, the owner of the first cannot prevent him, claiming: "You are cutting off my livelihood." Even if the owner of the second is from another alley, he cannot be prevented, since that type of craft is already in their midst. A stranger from another country, however, who comes to open a shop or a bathhouse close to one that is there already, may well be prevented. But if he has contributed along with the other citizens toward payment of the royal tax, he cannot be prevented.
The citizens cannot lawfully hinder peddlers who travel from town to town, because there is a regulation adopted by Ezra permitting them to peddle, so that perfume may be readily available to the daughters of Israel. But they cannot establish permanent residence without the consent of the inhabitants of the town. If the peddler is a scholar, he may establish residence anywhere he pleases.
The citizens may lawfully prevent merchants from bringing their merchandise for sale inside the towns; if the traders sell only on the market day, they cannot be prevented, provided they do the selling in the market ; but they must not go from door to door even on a market day. If they have debts to collect in town, they may sell as much as they need for their livelihood even on a non-market day, until they collect their debts and leave.
If one of the residents of a blind alley wishes to become a general practitioner or a surgeon or a weaver, or a teacher of heathen children, the residents of the alley may lawfully prevent him, because he would increase the number of people coming and going. So too, if one has a house in a cooperative courtyard, he must not rent it out to a general practitioner or a surgeon or a weaver, or a Jewish scribe who writes deeds, or a teacher of heathen children.
If there is a shop in a courtyard, the residents may interfere with the owner and say to him: "We cannot sleep on account of the noise of those who come and go. He should therefore do his work in his shop and sell the product in the market. But they cannot protest and tell him: "We cannot sleep on account of the noise of the hammer or the mill," since he has already established the right to do this. So too, he has the right to teach Torah to Jewish children in his house, and the partners cannot protest and claim: "We cannot sleep because of the noise of the school children."

Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10

A tree may not be grown within twenty-five cubits from the town, or fifty cubits if it is a carob or a sycamore tree, in order to preserve the beauty of the town. Every tree that is found closer to town should be cut down. If the tree was there first, the residents of the town must compensate the owner for it. If it is doubtful which was there first, the owner of the tree is not compensated; he takes his wood and leaves.

Carcasses, graves, and tanneries must be removed fifty cubits from the town.
A tannery may be set up only on the east side of the town, because the east wind is warm and reduces the bad odor resulting from tanning.


If one has a tree in his field close to the cistern of his neighbor, the owner of the cistern cannot interfere with him by claiming: "The roots of the tree will penetrate my cistern and damage it," because this is a damage that comes automatically after some time ; when he planted the tree he caused no harm to the cistern. Just as the one may dig in his premises, so may the other plant in his own. So too, if Reuben dug a cistern, and as he descended he found roots of Simeon's tree in his field, he may cut the roots and continue digging, and the wood belongs to him.— —

Chapter 11



Chapter 12




If one of the brothers or partners has sold his share to a stranger, the buyer may lawfully be removed. The other brothers or partners reimburse him and he leaves, so that a stranger might not thrust himself upon them.
Furthermore, if a man sold his land to a stranger, his neighbor owning adjoining land has the right to pay the price back to the buyer and evict him; the distant buyer is treated as if he were an agent of the owner of the adjacent field. The law of pre-emption prevails regardless of whether the sale was made by the owner in person or through an agent or by the court. Even if the [new] buyer is a scholar, a neighbor, or a relative to the seller, and the owner of the adjacent field is ignorant and distant, the latter has nevertheless priority and may lawfully evict the buyer. This rule is derived from the biblical expression : "Do what is right and good in the sight of the Lord" (Deuteronomy 6:18). The sages have declared : Since the purchaser can as easily buy a similar field elsewhere, it is good and right that the owner of the adjacent land should buy this place rather than a distant person. (Bava Metzia 108a).



If one gave property as a mortgage and then sold it to the mortgagee, the law of pre-emption does not apply. So too, if one sold a distant piece of property that he might redeem one that is close to his home, or if he sold an inferior field that he might redeem a better one for its price, or if he sold land to pay the royal tax or to take care of funeral expenses or for maintenance to wife or daughters, the neighbor's right of pre-emption does not apply to any of these cases, and the buyer acquires title. Why does not the right of pre-emption apply in such cases? Because in all these, the owners are anxious to sell because of urgent need. If you were to apply to them the rule of pre-emption, they would find no buyer, for one would say: "Why should I bother and purchase so that the adjacent landowner may come and evict me? The owners cannot afford to wait until the adjacent landowner will bring money and buy the property.