Pri Tzadik
פרי צדיק
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Pri Tzadik

Title



Introduction



Sefer Kedushat Shabbat



Kuntres Shvitat Shabbat



Bereshit



Rosh Chodesh (manuscript)



Rosh Chodesh Cheshvan



Noach



Lech Lecha



Vayera



Chayei Sara



Rosh Chodesh Kislev



Toldot



Vayetzei



Vayishlach



Vayeshev



Chanukah



Miketz



Vayigash



Chapter 1

To understand the approach of Yehuda (after he had already approached Joseph) by saying  מה נאמר לאדוני - he had accepted the judgement upon himself that they would all be servants and then afterwards when Yosef allowed them all to go free except for the one who had the goblet in his possession would be a servant, he suddenly advances on Joseph with rebukes also on this (he does a 360 degree turn in his approach - why is this? 
The answer to this is that that when the goblet was found in their possession and the law was that they should all be servants, as the brothers themselves said, then Yehuda himself felt that this was the correct judgement had come down from heaven upon them, to pay them back in measure for selling Joseph into slavery, and as a result of that they should all be servants.  And even though Benjamin wasn't a part of the sale of Joseph, he was included because the world is judged based on the majority.  (The proof for this is that) Reuben was also not involved in the sale of Joseph yet he was also included in the decree of being solved into slavery with his brothers.  Yehuda felt that this was a judgment from G-d as he states "האלהים מצא וגו". 
However, when Joseph said that only Benjamin should be a servant, Yehuda reconciled in his heart that this decree didn't come from the sale of Joseph.  Rather, the sale of Joseph was inspired by heaven in order to fulfill the decree of the covenant of the parts, and this would be fulfilled through Joseph because he was the best of them.  They (the brothers) saw this when Jacob mourned over his Joseph for many days they could understand that Joseph was truly righteous.  Yehuda thought that it was for this reason that he had been chosen to complete the affliction.  We have said previously that Jacob believed that he had already fulfilled the servitude and affliction (of the בין הבתרים).  It was for this reason that Jacob wanted to sit in tranquillity (c.f. Rashi 41:1).  Yehuda felt that Yosef was the one chosen to complete the servitude. 
Now, when the ruler of Egypt (Yosef) wanted to have Benjamin as a servant, Yehuda deduced from this that definitely Yosef had died, and now Benjamin had been chosen from heaven to fulfill the decree of servitude instead of him.  In this way, we can lay to rest the statement of "ואחיו מת", even though he said previously that "the other one had disappeared"- what difference would it have made to Joseph if he actually didn't want to believe Yehudah what he said, and also if he didn't know where he was, where would he bring him from!
According to our words, he said this as the truth, because he had deduced that Yosef was now indeed dead.  
It was on this basis that Yehuda became resentful in his soul because he had already caused his father hurt with his mourning of Joseph, and now he had added greater hurt through his responsibility for Benjamin he might G-d forbid, cause death to his father.  He, therefore, approaches with bitterness to request in prayer that he should be accepted as a servant in order to have the servitude and the affliction (of the covenant) fulfilled through him, and Benjamin would be able to return with his brothers.
All the words of Yehuda can be heard on various levels.  On a simple level he was speaking to Yosef, and the words were also directed towards a prayer to G-d -   אדני שאל ; בי אדני ידבר נא עבדך דבר באזני אדני (relates to G-d listening to his prayers), because he knew that everything that was happening emanated from G-d in terms of what Joseph had asked them, and in terms of his command to bring Binyamin.  We find a similar thing with regards to Nehemiah who prays to G-d and then speaks to the King.  Even though we don't find any specific prayers, we understand that the intention of his conversation was towards a prayer to G-d.
This is the meaning of the Medrash which states that Yehudah entered to war, to appeasement, and to prayer, even though we don't find any apparent words of prayer.  We also find the same thing with Yaakov - when he stands up against Eisav that he prepares himself (for the meeting) with presents, prayer and war as is explained by Rashi, because every act of the Avot is a sign for their children - מעשה אבות סימן לבנים, as explained by the Ramban.  In the same way,  in this week's parashah the revelation of Joseph to his brothers is a hint at the future revelation of the Jewish people as a whole. 
The intention of Yaakov through the present is known as the element of the שעיר המשתלח on Yom Kippur (as is mentioned in the Zohar).  Yehuda also thought that by calling Yosef his master that this would in some way appease him, and would fulfill his need for enslavement, and in his heart he intended the words for G-d that it should be a prayer.  In the Medrash Rabbah there is a discussion as to what approach Yehuda took - prayer, appeasement or war, and the opinion of Rabbi Eliezer is that it was all three of them.  That is because these elements are what is required for the future redemption, and that (according to some opinions) one of these elements would suffice to reveal a redemption through it, after all we have suffered.  This is reflected in the name of the righteous that the fight between God and Magog, and the killing of Moshiach ben Yosef has already occurred.
Similarly, Yehuda believed that he was the final element of TIKUN and that he had accepted upon himself the pains that came before Messiah.  After he had accepted upon himself this level of servitude that he was prepared to suffer for the needs of the many, then Joseph was unable to restrain himself even one moment, because this is the moment when he had to reveal himself.  So too, it will be in the time of the time of redemption, that G-d will not restrain himself even one moment, which is the meaning of the verse אני ה' בעתה אחישנה - when the time of redemption comes quickly - it will come incredibly quickly.

Vayechi



Chapter 1

 We find in the Torah that the details of the life of Yaakov are not written clearly, but are alluded to, as is written in Megilla 17A:  Why were the years of Yishmael counted?  In order to relate the longevity of Yaakov's life - to teach us that he was blessed (by Isaac) at the age of 63, and that he was 14 years in the study halls of Shem and Ever (although this was never explicitly stated anywhere in the Torah itself).  This is true especially when he arrived in Egypt and said to Pharoah: The days of my sojourn are 130 years, and since we know that he lived 147 years old, we know from this that he was in Egypt for 17 years.  If this is the case his age is obvious, and there is no need for us to be told his final age of 147 years.  There is therefore no need to mention both his final age or his 17 years that he lived in Egypt (we could derive one from another quite simply (ed))!
The 17 years that Jacob was in Egypt revived some of those bad years which befell him.  This idea is stated (in ) that if an individual lives a good year close to his old age, it is a good sign for him, and G-d considers it as if all his days were good.  All the days of Jacob when he was in pain was not considered to be life because they were not completed in holiness (?) and only in Egypt did he merit to complete them in his holiness.  Logic would dictate that since Israel is the place of greatest holiness in the world, as G-d told Abraham to leave Aram and go to the land of Israel, and Isaac was told that he would be blessed if he lived in this land.  Jacob himself loved the land, and it would have been fitting for Jacob to complete his life in holiness in the holy land, and not in Egypt which is an impure land, and its people are more polluted than any other. 
We find that in the exile in Babylon and in the exile of the second Temple that the main expansion of the oral Torah was specifically in exile.  Specifically there the secrets of the Torah were revealed, more than was revealed while the Jews were in Israel.  It is specifically from Babylon that the people of the great assembly arose and they were able to establish the law of Arava (c.f. Sukkah 44a) We also see in Sukkah (20A) that Ezra rose from Babylon and established Torah, and thereafter Torah was forgotten.  Hillel then went and re-established it (and Hillel was also from Babylon (ed)), Rabbi Chiya and his sons (from Babylon) reconstituted the Torah.  It also states in Medrash Shir Hashirim (4:4) that the righteous after the destruction of the Temple constituted the Torah in a greater way than the righteous in their building of the Temple.
Behold, the creation of the world was with the 12 signs of the zodiac and relates to the creation of the world in space.  The 12 months form the year (SHANA) which is called a SHANA because the sun returns to its original place in the sky a second time (SHEINIS) and strengthens the world a second time.  The world in time has 12 elements.  The 12 tribes represent the soul, because they are the elements which create time and space as is mentioned in SEFER HAYETZIRA.   Everything was created with the Torah, which is G-d's tools (as is expressed in Bereishis Rabbah) and in the book of Bereishit there are 12 Parshiot... The medrash says further that G-d looked into the book of Bereishis and created the world.  this means that this whole book and its stories are part of the creation of the world which was completed with the burial of Yosef who is the righteous one - the pillar of the world.   It is also connected to the story of the last years of Yaakov, his death as well as the blessings given to the tribes of Israel.
This Parasha is closed.  Our Rabbis have explained the reasons for it, and they are all true.  There is another reason for it being closed.  The completion of Jacob's holiness is specifically in Egypt, and not in the land of Israel.  This coincides with the notion that the revelation and arrival of the Jewish People which contains the souls which were prepared for the acceptance of the Torah specifically in a foreign land and not in Israel, and that the end of the creation of the world occurs in the land of Egypt.  These concepts are closed(Satum) from human understanding.
They have said (in the beginning of Vayikra Rabbah) that the purpose of the spaces in the Torah are there in order to give Moshe pause for thought between each parashah.  When something is beyond the understanding of man it is closed.
Nonetheless, this whole parasha alludes to the fact that we should not become discouraged as we are in the in the birth pangs leading to the Messiah, and in every generation the souls become smaller, and how is it possible for us to achieve the final redemption?  The answer lies in the fact that we see what happened to the Jewish people specifically when they were in exile, and specifically in exile they arrived to the exalted levels of holiness because this is the will of G-d.   I also heard in the name of the Rebbe from Parshische of blessed memory, that even though the souls of each generation decrease. nonetheless the hole/point in our hearts becomes more holy in every generation.

Shemot



Vaera



Rosh Chodesh Shvat



Bo



Pidyon Haben



Beshalach



Tu BiShvat



Yitro



Mishpatim



Parshat Shekalim



Rosh Chodesh Adar



Purim Katan



Rosh Chodesh Adar II



Terumah



Tetzaveh



Parshat Zachor



Purim



Shushan Purim



Ki Tisa



Parshat Parah



Vayakhel



Pekudei



Parshat HaChodesh



Vayikra



Rosh Chodesh Nisan



Tzav



Shabbat HaGadol



Pesach



Shmini



Rosh Chodesh Iyar



Tazria



Metzora



Achrei Mot



Kedoshim



Pesach Sheni



Emor



Lag BaOmer



Behar



Bechukotai



Kuntres Amalah shel Torah



Bamidbar



Rosh Chodesh Sivan



Shavuot



Nasso



Beha'alotcha



Sh'lach



Rosh Chodesh Tammuz



Korach



Chukat



Balak



Pinchas



Matot



Masei



Rosh Chodesh Av



Devarim



Vaetchanan



The Fifteenth of Av



Eikev



Re'eh



Rosh Chodesh Elul



Shoftim



Ki Teitzei



Ki Tavo



Nitzavim



Rosh Hashanah



Vayeilech and Shabbat Shuvah



Erev Yom Kippur



Motzei Yom Kippur



Ha'Azinu



Sukkot

