Bartenura on Mishnah Makhshirin
ברטנורא על משנה מכשירין
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Bartenura_on_Mishnah_Makhshirin
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Bartenura on Mishnah, trans. by Rabbi Robert Alpert, 2020
-sefaria.org

Bartenura on Mishnah Makhshirin



Chapter 1



Mishnah 1

כל מעשה שתחילתו לרצון (a liquid the contact with which is welcome at first) – that it is satisfactory (i.e., rainfall) for it with those liquids, in order that the dish be rinsed or for other usages.
אע"פ שאין סופו לרצון (though finally it may be unwelcome/injurious) – when it fell on the fruit/produce, it was not satisfactory for it, even so it is that which makes it fit to become ritually unclean. Alternatively, it may finally be welcome, when they fell upon the fruit/produce. But at the beginning of their coming, the matter was difficult in his eyes, everything is fit to become ritually unclean.
הרי זו בכי יותן – that is to say, the foods that these liquids fell upon, are made fit to become ritually unclean from here and onwards. For no food is susceptible to receive ritual defilement until water or one of the seven liquids (see Tractate Makhshirin, Chapter 6, Mishnah 4) which are water, wine, [olive] oil, milk, honey, blood and dew, as it is written (Leviticus 11:38): “that if water is put on the seed and any part of a carcass falls upon it, it shall be impure for you; it is written as "יתן" but we read it as "יותן". Just as "יתן"/he will place is satisfactory for it, even something "יותן"/that is placed upon it is satisfactory for it.
מטמאין לרצון ושלא לרצון – since they are impure, their defilement and their fitness to become unclean come together as one, and if they (i.e., one of the seven liquids) fell on the fruit, even not being welcome, they defile them, for we don’t require that it is satisfactory for it but rather, that the liquid comes prior to the defilement, as it is written (Leviticus 11:38): “that if water is put on the seed,” and afterwards “and any part of a carcass falls upon it.” But when the liquid and the defiling agent come together as for example that the liquids are defiled, we don’t require that it is satisfactory for it.

Mishnah 2

המרעיד את האילן – he shakes it (i.e., the tree).
או את הטומאה – as for example that he brought there an unclean raven/crow or an olive’s bulk of from a corpse or a carrion (i.e., an animal that died a natural death) and it remained between the branches of the tree.
אינו בכי יותן - if on account of this shaking/vibration rain waters fell that were in the tree on the fruit that is underneath it, they were not made fit for Levitical uncleanness.
היוצאים ואת שבו – liquids that exit on account of the trembling, and liquids that remain on the train and fell afterwards on the fruit are made fit [to receive Levitical uncleanness], they are considered as if they are detached [from the tree].
מפני שהוא מתכון שיצאו מכולו (because the man intends that they should fall – from the tree – in its entirety) – he intended to remove all the water from the tree, and that which remains did not occur to his mind, and are not made fit [to receive Levitical impurity].

Mishnah 3

המרעיד את האילן – to cause its fruit to fall down.
ונפלו על חברו – on another tree. And from that tree, they fell on seeds and on vegetables that are attached to the ground, and liquid drips on those seeds from the water that regularly waters them or from rains that fell upon them.
בית שמאי אומרים הרי הן בכי יותן – for since he would know that these fruits would fall upon those seeds that have water dripping upon them, it reveals his intention that it is satisfactory for him, and the fruit that fell upon those seeds were made fit to receive Levitical defilement.
ובית הלל אומרים אינן בכי יותן - since they did not fall directly from the tree on to the seeds but from the tree to another tree [first].
חלי קופרי – this was his surname.
טבעון – name of a place.
עד שיתכוין – and these since they fell from one tree to another tree or from bush to bus, this is not intention, and he states the reasoning of the School of Hillel.

Mishnah 4

הנוער אגודה של ירק – as for example, herbs that rain fell upon them, or that water fell upon them unintentionally, and he shakes it in order that the water leaves.
חוששים אנו- in astonishment. Meaning to say, according to your words, we should be concerned also for this (i.e., that the water drops from leaf to leaf).
המעלה שק מלא פירות – that water fell unintentionally and they brought it up and placed it on the bank of the river.
התחתון טהור – that is to say, even the bottom one is pure, and all the more so, the top one.

Mishnah 5

המוחק את כרישה (a person who rubs – the wetness off – the leek) - he presses/squeezes the leek in order that the dew leaves it.
כרישה – leeks in the language of Scripture (see Numbers 11:5, PUROSH in the foreign language, and in Arabic KURAT.
והסוחט בשערו ובכסותו (and he who wrings out his hair with his garment) – that he was coming on the path and rain fell on his hair and on his garment, and he wrings them out in order that the water would leave.
ואת שבו – the remaining liquids that fell afterwards on the fruit.
מתכוין שיצאו מכולן – that he intended to remove from them all the water, but it is was not his intention concerning the remainder. Therefore, it is not fit for Levitical uncleanness, according to the School of Hillel of the beginning of the chapter (see Mishnah 2).

Mishnah 6

הנופח – [he blows] with this mouth.
בעדשים – that spittle exited upon them from his mouth with his blowing, and the spittle that comes out from the mouth is considered from the derivatives of water.
אינן בכי יותן – since he did not intend for this [to occur].
וחכמים אומרים בכי יותן – since he intended to blow, and it is the manner of the spittle to leave through blowing. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
האוכל שומשמין – as for example, that he placed sesame in one hand, and a finger that was on his second hand he places into his mouth to moisten with spittle and he places it on the sesame that is in his other hand and they become attached and he brings in his finger into his mouth and eats, and on account of this, the hand that the sesame was in is moistened. And there is liquid dripping.
ר' שמעון אומר אינן בכי יותן – for he intended to moisten his finger, but not to moisten the hand that the sesame was in. But the Rabbis hold, since that he considered/planned with his finger, he makes it fit for Levitical uncleanness even unintentionally, as is taught in the Mishnah at the beginning of our chapter (Mishnah 1): “Any liquid which in the beginning is acceptable, even though at the end it is not acceptable…is under the law of “if water is put [on the seed and any part of a carcass falls upon it, it shall be impure for you]” (Leviticus 11:38). But Rabbi Shimon holds, that it was not acceptable at the beginning other than the moistened liquid of the finger alone. But the remainder that was moistened by the hand was never acceptable. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon in our entire Mishnah.
הסריקין (the robbers. See also Tractate Gittin, Chapter 5, Mishnah 6) – (Judges 11:3): “Men of low character gathered about Jephthah [and went out raiding with him].” We translate into Aramaic: “reckless men.” The language of an אילן סרק /a tree which bears no fruit. Another explanation: סריקין/thieves, for such is the language of Ishmael who calls thieves סראקין/unsavory. And there are those who have the reading: סקרין , the language that there weren’t robbers in the Judea among those who were killed in the war [as described] in the chapter (the fifth chapter of Tractate Gittin, Chapter 5, Mishnah 6) הנזקין (see Tractate Gittin, folio 55b, meaning robbers and violent men.
בשבולת הנהר (the current of the river, the rapid stream) – the path of the river and the running of its waters. It is the language of (Psalms 69:3): “the flood sweeps me away.”
להביאן עמו – that he was not able to carry them, and he floated them down the river.

Chapter 2



Mishnah 1

זיעת בתים טהורה – it does not make the seeds susceptible to receive ritual uncleanness.
זיעתו טמאה – that it is on account of the [drawn] water, and specifically it comes with drawn water, but not if it comes with water that is fastened to something that is unclean that are not susceptible, for even though that currently they are however detached, it was not done intentionally.

Mishnah 2

מרחץ טמאה – of drawn waters.
זיעתו טמאה - it makes the produce susceptible and defiles them.
וטהורה – meaning to say, the sweat coming from a bathhouse is clean, as for example, the bathhouse of the waters of a fountain which are not drawn water, this is subject to [the laws of] “If water be put” (Leviticus 11:38: “But if water is put/וכי יותן מים upon seed grain [and any part of a carcass falls upon it, it shall be unclean for you],” for the sweat makes the produce susceptible [to receive ritual uncleanness].
אם טמאה – the pool, all the sweat [of the walls] that the house produces on its account makes it susceptible and defiles it, but where it is not on its account, it is the sweat of [the walls of] the house and is pure.

Mishnah 3

ברזל טמא – that came from shards of impure vessels.
שבללו (that one smelted) – that one planed/scraped and combined with pure iron that comes from the wrought metal/polished block (see also Tractate Kelim, Chapter 11, Mishnah 1),
אם רוב מן הטמא טמא – the Sages decreed on metal vessels that were defiled and broken and were melted and made of them vessels that would return to their former defilement until he would sprinkle [water] upon them on the third and seventh [days] and immerse them and their sunset would come.
גסאריות (pots) – like a kind of pots that were made to urinate in them. And in the Arabic language we call them BISRIASH.
שישראל ונכרי מטילים לתוכן – urinate into them. And the urine of a heathen is ritually impure, for they (i.e., the Sages) decreed that they would be like those with a flux/gonorrhea for all their matters.
מי שפיכות (water that is poured out, dirty water) – water that they washed with and they pour them - outside, and they are under the presumption of being ritually impure.
אימתי- are dirty waters/waters that are poured out voided in a majority [of rain water].
בזמן שקדמו – that they (i.e., the dirty waters, water that is poured out) [came first] and afterwards the rainwater increased [as a majority] and purified them.
אבל אם קדמו מי גשמים – even if a bit of rain water fell upon them, they are impure.

Mishnah 4

המטהר את גגו (if one scrubs his roof) – We have the reading "המטהר את גגו" /if one purifies his roof. But there are those who have the reading, "הטורף את גגו"/if one scrubs his roof, meaning that he plasters his roof with plaster or lime to even it out. And the water that one places upon it when one purifies it or when one merely plastered it, they pour it (i.e., the water) and they purify itr, and similarly the water that one washes with them his clothing.
וירדו עליהן גשמין – which are pure waters. And the roof or the clothing drips water.
אם רוב מן הטהור טהור – as for example, if it would drip thin drops at the outset and afterwards it would drip thick drops, it is sure that the majority [of the water] is from the pure [water].
אם הוספיו לנטף – that the drops hurry to descend one after another more than at the outset, it is pure, for they certainly are the majority, and even if the drops themselves are larger from what they were at the beginning. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 5

רוחץ בה מיד – on Saturday night, and one does not need to wait until it warms up, for since that the majority are heathens, it was warmed with the knowledge of the heathens.
אם יש בה רשות – the kingdom is called the authority/power (i.e., usually, it refers to the Roman government in Mishnaic times in the Land of Israel), because the license/permission/power is in its hand to do according to its will. But not specifically a king, but if there was there an important man, who has ten servants that warm up for him ten kettles of water at one time, it is permissible to wash in it immediately, and even though the majority of the city is Israelite. For we say, for the sake of that important person [the waters] were warmed up.

Mishnah 6

היה בה ירק, נמכר -vegetable that was detached on the Sabbath, is sold on Saturday night.
אם רוב נכרים לוקח מיד – for since that the majority [of people] are heathens, I was detached with the knowledge of the heathens.
כדי שיבואו ממקום קרוב- where there are vegetables there. But even though that perhaps it was brought from a far-off place, one does not need to wait other than in order that they can harvest vegetables from a nearby place that has vegetables, and bring it from there. For the Sages did not say to wait until evening in order that it be done, but rather as a decree lest [a Jew] say to a heathen on the Sabbath: “Go and bring [vegetables],” and when he sees that he has to wait until evening in order that this thing will come, even from a nearby place, he should not say to a heathen to bring it to him on the Sabbath.
ואם יש שם רשות לוקח מיד – that it is with the knowledge of an important person that they regularly always bring, and not with the knowledge of the Israelite that they brought it.

Mishnah 7

אם רוב נכרים – and it is permitted to feed him (i.e., the baby) un-slaughtered carrion and torn animal flesh, forbidden animals and reptiles by hand (see Talmud Ketubot 15b).
ואם רוב ישראל ישראל – and it incumbent [upon them] to restore to him his lost object like an Israelite. And by that change of expression (i.e., that the majority were Israelites), it was intended to add something new and unexpected here that we remove money from the hand of an Israelite that took possession of it, but we don’t say, establish that the money is in his possession from presumption that he had taken possession of it until he provides proof how that he is an Israelite.
מחצה על מחצה ישראל – regarding matters of damages, that if his ox gored the ox of an Israelites, he pays only one-half damages. But he does not pay full damages according to the law that an ox belonging to a heathen that gored the ox of an Israelite, that whether it is an innocent [ox]/תם or a warned/מועד [ox], it pays full damages, for he could say to him: “Bring proof that I am not an Israelite and pays. But to the remainder of all things here is doubt, and we judge him stringently. Whomever killed him, is not killed for him. If he betrothed a woman, she requires a Jewish bill of divorce from doubt. But he is not like a complete Israelite until he ritually immerses for the sake of conversion.
אחרי רוב המשליכין – that is after the heathens and even though they are the minority. And even if there was only one heathen woman there, she is suspected of those who abandon. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 8

רוב נחתומים – if most of the bakers are heathen, the bread is forbidden, for the bread of heathens is from the eighteen matters that they decreed on that day [that Rabban Gamaliel was deposed as head of the Sanhedrin] (see Tractate Shabbat, Chapter 1, Mishnah 4 and the Bartenura commentary there].
פת עיסה – clean/white bread.
פת קיבר (eaters of black bread) – bread that is not pure/white.
אחר רוב אוכלי פת קיבר – if the majority of them are heathens, the bread is forbidden. Alternatively, one can explain: after the majority of the bakers, after the majority of those who eat white bread, etc. If the majority of them are members of the order for the observance of the Levitical laws in daily intercourse, the bread is ritually pure and there is no need to tithe. But if the majority are those not observing certain religious customs regarding tithes and Levitical cleanness, the bread is ritually impure and one needs to tithe.

Mishnah 9

הולכין אחר רוב טבחין – if the majority are Israelite butchers, the meat is permitted. For the Halakha is not according to Rav who stated that meat that was concealed from the eye is prohibited. But Rav establishes our Mishnah with regard to a case where a person stands and sees from the time that it (i.e., the meat) is slaughtered until it fell, but he did not know who slaughtered it.

Mishnah 10

אם רוב מכניסין לבתיהן פטור - from tithing (see also Tractate Maaserot, Chapter 1, Mishnah 5).
למכור בשוק חייב – that the majority brings [produce] to sell in the marketplace, it is from the house they bring it, and it is already liable [for tithing]. Another explanation: If the majority [of people] bring it into their homes, they are exempt [from tithing] because they regularly tithe prior to bringing it into the house in order that they would be able to eat from them [other than a snack/incidental meal]. For after they brought them into the house, they have immediately become susceptible for tithing. Therefore, what falls from them on the path/road is exempt from tithing, because it is under the presumption of having been tithed, but when they bring them [into the marketplace] to sell, it is the manner to bring them in as eatables forbidden pending the separation of sacred gifts/טבל, because one is able to eat from them an incidental meal/snack, therefore, that which falls from them is not under the presumption of being tithed.
אם רוב נכרים ודאי – Rabbi Meir, according to his reasoning, who holds that there is no acquisition [of land] for heathens in the Land of Israel to release them from tithing, and produce that grew in the fields of heathens are liable for tithing, for the heathen simply did not tithe, therefore, they are definitely eatables forbidden pending the separation of sacred gifts/טבל.
ואם רוב ישראל דמאי – according to the law of produce that is found in the hands of commoners [who are generally observing certain customs regarding tithes and Levitical uncleanness], that one needs to separate from them the tithe of the tithe (i.e., the tithe that the Levite gives to the Kohen) and the Second Tithe.
וחכמים אומרים וכו' – the Sages hold that there is acquisition [of land] for heathens in the Land of Israel to release them from tithing. But there wasn’t an Israelite who would put [his produce] into it (i.e., the storage bin). Everything is doubtfully tithed, for the produce of that Israelite, for they (i.e., the produce) is liable [for tithing]. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 11

פירות שניה שרבו על של שלישית – The first year and second [year] of the Sabbatical cycle one [has the] practice [of giving] First Tithe and Second Tithe on them, and similarly in the fourth and fifth [years]. But in the third and sixth [years], [one gives] First Tithe and the Poor Man’s Tithe.
ושל שביעית – which has In it the sanctity of the Seventh Year and one is exempt from the tithe. And in regard the matter of all of these laws, it is taught that one follows after the majority.
מחצה למחצה להחמיר – But in regard to a doubt of Second Tithe and the Poor Man’s Tithe, he should separate out one tithe, and profane the produce over the money, and separate the divide up the produce among the poor and consume the monies [of Second Tithe] in Jerusalem. But in regard to doubt regarding Seventh Year produce, they are liable for tithes and liable for the Holiness of the Seventh Year [produce] to not use them for business or for puffed up cheeks, and they are liable for removal of tithes (see Deuteronomy 26:13).

Chapter 3



Mishnah 1

שק שהוא מלא. מעלות המערה – that is filled with water.
כל ששאבו (all that absorbed) – the fruit from the moisture of the water, therefore, it is [under the law of] “when water is put on” (Leviticus 11:38), for it is satisfactory for him that the fruit absorbs from the water, and through this, they appear thick and swollen.
רבי יהודה אומר כל שהוא כנגד המים וכו' (Rabbi Yehuda says: Whatever is over against the water) - But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 2

חבית (jar) – of earthenware or soft stone vessel that is like earthenware. But the rest of the vessels that did not observe so much until the fruit that are within them absorb.
שאבו – the fruit became moistened and liquid was dripping on them. This is our reading.
ושאר כל המשקין טהורים – the rest of the seven liquids (see Tractate Makhshirin, Chapter 6, Mishnah 4: milk, [olive] oil, honey, blood) that make something fit to become susceptible for receiving Levitical uncleanness, the fruits are ritually pure that are within the jar if they were moistened by them. For specifically water and wine and vinegar which are thin and clear, they are absorbed in the jar because of their thinness and the fruit absorbs [liquid] from them. But [olive]oil, honey, milk and blood and dew, are thick, and because of their thickness they are not able to be absorbed within the vessel so much until the fruit that is within the jar absorbs from them. Therefore, they are not [included] in “when water is put on” (Leviticus 11:38).
שאין הקטנית שואבת – as for example, split beans and beans and things like them. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Nehemiah.

Mishnah 3

הרודה – that was kneaded in fruit juice but was not made susceptible to receive Levitical uncleanness.
רבי מאיר מטמא – meaning to say, the bread is made fit to receive Levitical uncleanness on account of the wine that was absorbed in it. Alternatively, if the wine was impure/unclean, Rabbi Meir declares it impure on account of the impure wine that was absorbed in it (i.e., the bread).
ר' יוסי מטהר בשל חטים – and the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 4

המרבץ את ביתו (he sprinkles his house) – he sprinkles water in it in order that the dust should not rise up.
וטננו (and the wheat grew prepared for grinding) – it became moistened. It is the language of moist and fat soil, that its explanation is a moist field in the first chapter of [Tractate] Moed Katan [6b].
אם מחמת הסלע – a rock from the Six Days of Creation, and it is the floor of the house and through this, the wheat became moistened.
המטנן בחול (one who prepares [fruit] by mixing with sand) – he who prepares fruit in sand in order that he can moisten it, that is to say, that they will be moistened, that they will receive from the moisture of the sand.
הרי זה בכי יותן – for there is no sand without water.

Mishnah 5

נגוב – dry.
אינו חושש שמא נתן בה חטים וטננו (and he does not scruple lest he put it in grains of wheat and they grow damp) – this is what he said: If he placed on it is wheat, he does not feel pain lest they were moistened.
כשהטל עליהם – as for example, that he would lease it for his work and he harvested the grasses with the dew that was upon them. But he did not intend because of the dew.
להטן בהם חטים – to hide with wheat with them in order that they can be moistened.
אם נתכוין לכך – for the dew that is upon them.
אי אפשר שלא לשמוח – for he would be delayed there in order that rain should fall upon them.

Mishnah 6

פקק הצנור (he stopped up the waterspout) – he closed up the waterspout in order that the water would not come out.
או אם חלחל לתוכו (or if he washed olives by rolling them in the rain water) – he shook and stirred the olives in the water that within the water spout. For Rabbi Yehuda holds that one’s intention does not have an effect to make it fit for Levitical uncleanness until he performs an act to reveal the thought that is in his heart. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 7

אם הפך השקים (if he turned over the sacks) – to one side, in order the water would hasten to enter from both sides, then they would be fit for Levitical uncleanness.
אם עמד והדיח – if he stood in the water to rinse off the feet of his animal, then the water makes fit for Levitical uncleanness of [those animals] that ascend by their feet if [water] fell on the fruit.
באדם ובבהמה טמאה – they make fit for Levitical uncleanness the waters that come upon their feet, whether he rinsed them or whether he did not rinse them. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 8

המוריד את הגלגלים – wheel of His [Divine] Chariot (see Ezekiel, chapter 1), we translate in Aramaic, the wheels of the chariot with horses.
בשעת הקדים - at the time of the heat, the eastern wind blows, and it is the manner of wooden vessels that they split/break because of the heat, and we bring them down to the water and the splits are attached. That is, they are tightened/wedged in, like squeezed in/pressed in, that is to say, in order that they can be pounded together and that the splits are attached to each other.
הרי זה בכי יותן – the waters that are raised in them make fit the seeds to receive ritual defilement, for it is satisfactory for it that these waters are suspended in a vessel to fasten the splits.
בשעת היחף (at the season of foot sores [of animals or of threshing]- that the animal is weary and tired from the trouble of the path. And similar at the time when it is threshing in the grain, the water that she brings up upon her feet always makes the seeds fit to receive ritual defilement because they are intentional, for the waters are good for her to cool her off and to make her cold. Another explanation: At the time of foot sores and the threshing, at the time of the harvest, he wants that the animal washes its feet in order that they will be clean to thresh the grain.

Chapter 4



Mishnah 1

השוחה לשתות, בפיו ובשפמו הרי הן בכי יותן ( he who kneels down to drink) – that is the reason, because the waters do not enter into his mouth unless they touch his moustache first, therefore we consider them [as being under the law of “when water is put on” – Leviticus 11:38).
הממלא בחבית, המים העולים אחריה (he who draws water with a jug, the water which comes up on its outer parts) – they are [considered as under the law of] “when water is put on,” (Leviticus 11:38), for it is impossible that they can enter until they reach its outer parts. But if he placed it underneath the spout [when its waters splash forth], that which comes up on its outer parts is not [considered as under the law of] “when water is put on,” for it is possible for it (i.e., the water) to spout forth continuously that it will descend into it (i.e., the jug) and not touch its outer parts.
מכונן על צוארה (the rope wound round its neck) – surrounding, like a ring that surrounds the neck of the jug. [The word] מכונן is the language of (Deuteronomy 32:6): “Fashioned you and made you endure.”
נתנה – [put] for the jug.
תחת הצנור – to receive the water.
אינן בכי יותן – the waters that are on the outer parts and on the rope, for it is not satisfactory for him other than that the waters should fall into it (i.e., the jug) alone.

Mishnah 2

אפילו אב הטומאה – even if this person was a primary source of ritual impurity, and the liquids which came down upon him were defiled, but we stated above (Tractate Makhshirin, Chapter 1, Mishnah 1): “that impure liquids impart uncleanness whether intentionally and/or unintentionally,” nevertheless, they do not make fit for Levitical uncleanness, since the falling of rain waters upon him was unintentional/not acceptable.
ואם ניער (but if he shook off – the rain) – like he shook off his garment [from the dust]” [Shabbat 147a and Rashi’s commentary]; that he shook his body to remove the rain from upon it.
בכי יותן – the water that falls from him are made fit for Levitical uncleanness.
להקר – to cool himself
או לידוח – to wash his body, as for example that he was dirty with plaster or with excrement/filthy matter.
בטמא – if he was an impure person.
טמאים – the waters [are impure]. But if they fell on the fruit and made them fit for Levitical uncleanness and defiled them as one.
ובטהור בכי יותן – and he makes them fit for Levitical uncleanness.

Mishnah 3



Mishnah 4

חבית שירד הדלף לתוכה (the jug into which water leaking from the roof came down) – that re not acceptable/intentional, and within it (i.e., the jug) are fruit and he doesn’t want that they become fit to receive ritual defilement.
ישבר – that if he empties it out, he transfers the water from here to there intentionally and it is found that the fruit are made fit to receive ritual defilement.
ומודים – The School of Shammai [agrees] with the School of Hillel.
שהוא מושיט את ידו וכו' הן טהורין (that he puts his hand in – and takes pieces of fruit out – and they are not fit for uncleanness) – meaning to say, that they were not made fit through this.

Mishnah 5

הניתזין (that are splashing) – from it outwards.
והצפין (that which overflows the vessel) – above and goes outward. All of them are not [considered as] under the law of “when water is put” (Leviticus 11:38), because they are not done intentionally, and similarly the water that is inside of them.
נטלה לשפכה – that he did not pour them out in their place but rather he took the trough to pour the water out in another place, they are [considered as] under the law of “when water is put,” for they are done intentionally, since he did not pour them out immediately there in their place.
ובית הלל אומרים – since he did not leave them there but took them to pour them, they are not [considered as] under the law of “when water is put.”
הניחה – if he left the trough there from the outset in order that the drippings from the roof would come down upon it.
אלו ואלו – The School of Shammai and the School of Hillel agree that even though that he took it and afterwards poured it out, they are under the law of “when water is put,” since he had already considered/intended it.
מים העולים בידיו – that he washes [his clothing] with them, and it is satisfactory to him.
ברגליו – it is not satisfactory to him.
אא"כ נטנפו רגליו (unless his feet become muddy/soiled) – they are under the law of “when water is put,” anything that he would fill in a jar that is mentioned above, for water that comes up after it is under the law of “when water is put,” as it is explained above, because it is impossible for water to enter into it until they touch its outside (but the Halakha does not follow Rabbi Eliezer).

Mishnah 6

והם טהורין – even though an impure person stretched forth his hand and took it (i.e., the lupines), because they were not made fit/susceptible [for ritual impurity] in the water of the ritual bath, as it is written (Leviticus 11:34): “[as to any liquid that may be drunk,] it shall be become impure if it was inside any vessel,” just as a designated vessel which is detached and it makes fit/susceptible [for ritual impurity], even anything that is detached makes it fit/susceptible [for ritual impurity], excluding water that are in the pits/cisterns, ditches and caves that are not detached from the ground that do not make susceptible/fit [for ritual impurity] when do not make susceptible/fit [for ritual impurity] all the while that they are not detached.
העלם מן המים (if he took them out of the water) – the lupines became fit/susceptible to receive ritual impurity in he detached waters.
הנוגעים בקופה טמאים – that the basket is made first-degree of ritual uncleanness when an impure person touched it/came in contact with it, and the lupines that touch the basket are second-degree of ritual impurity.
ושאר כל הטורמסים – that do not touch the basket.
טהורים – for something that is second degree of ritual impurity does not make non-holy produce third-degree of ritual impurity.
נדה מדיחתו (a menstruant rinses it off) – and it is not susceptible to receive ritual impurity in water that is attached to the cave.

Mishnah 7

ידיו טהורות – for we don’t require intention for non-holy produce. But if they were fruits/produce for tithes, and all the more so for heave-offering/priest’s due, his hands are ritually impure as they were, until he would intend to ritually immerse his hands.
והפירות טהורים – and they were not made susceptible [to receive ritual impurity] (as they fell of their own accord) for this was not considered falling.
ואם בשביל שיודחו ידיו (and if he gave thought that his hands should be rinsed off) – for he had intended to take the fruit/produce from the water, the fruit/produce is under the law of “when water is put,” (Leviticus 11:38), and they are fit/susceptible to receive ritual impurity from now on. For he had considered in this falling of fruit/produce to ritually wash his hands while lifting them up [out of the water], for these for him a liquid that ultimately will be intentional, and even though it is not intentional at the outset, they are under the law of “when water is put.”

Mishnah 8

ופשט אב הטומאה את ידיו לתוכה טמאה – for an earthenware vessel receives ritual defilement from a primary source of ritual impurity (i.e., a corpse) that touches him, his ritual immersion did not count, for even though he was in the ritual bath/Mikveh, because the waters that are in it (i.e., the dish) interpose between him and waters of the ritual bath/Mikveh.
מגע טומאות טהורה – If it was not a primary source of ritual impurity that touched it, but rather a first-degree of ritual impurity, and he is called unclean [only by reason of] contact with unclean things, that is to say, he comes in contact with primary sources of ritual defilement, then the dish is ritually pure, for an earthenware vessel does not receive ritual defilement other than from a primary source of ritual defilement, and it is found that the dish was not defiled other than on account of impure liquids that were within it that had been defiled, and they go back and defile it, and because of this it does not defile, for the waters that were within it were dipped in the waters of a Mikveh/ritual bath and purified. But the rest of the liquids, as for example, wine, [olive] oil and milk, the ritual bath/Mikveh does not purify them, for they do not consider it the dipping of a vessel, filled with an unclean liquid, so as to make its surface level with the surface of the water into which it is dipped/contact between liquids (i.e., a ceremony of Levitical purification), therefore they return and defile the dish, for the Rabbis decreed upon liquids that they would defile, as a decree because of the liquid of a person afflicted with gonorrhea and/or a woman with a flux.

Mishnah 9

הממלא בקילון (if one draws water with the swipe and bucket for drawing water) – when the water is collected in one place and they (i.e., people) request to bring it to another field, they make for them a path that these waters can come in, and the name of that path that these waters are conducted [in a channel] is called a קילון /swipe and bucket for אם drawing water/duct, and up to three days this swipe and bucket does not dry up from the waters that were conducted/flowing into it, and they make the produce/fruit that fell into it susceptible [for ritual impurity], for these were done intentionally.
רבי עקיבא אומר אם נגבו מיד – Rabbi Akiba does not argue with the first Tanna/teacher, for a mere קילון/swipe and bucket for drawing water does not dry until three days. And the first Tanna/teacher is speaking about a mere קילון/swipe and bucket. But this is found explicitly in the Tosefta (Tractate Makhshirin, Chapter 2, Halakha 9) that Rabbi Akiba admits that with a mere קילון/swape-pipe it is three days.

Mishnah 10

שנפו עליהם משקים – impure [liquids].
אם רבו – the rain waters [were greater] than these [impure] liquids, they were nullified and purified.
הוציאן כדי שירדו עליהם גשמים – that he reckoned them for rain [to fall upon them].
אע"פ שרבו טמאין – for the rain waters themselves were ritually defiled.
בלעו משקים טמאים – as for example, that the wood was dry from the outside, but within, the liquids were absorbed, even though that he took them outside in order that the rain would fall upon them, for he reckoned them for rain, and even so, they are ritually pure, for they did not come in contact with impure liquids, for they absorbed them.
לא יסיקם אלא בידים טהורות (he should kindle them only with clean hands)- so that the hands do not ritually defile the rain waters that were considered and they would return and defile the oven, for a liquid defiles a vessel. But with ritually pure hands, he is able to kindle them in the oven, and the oven is ritually pure, but we don’t say that ultimately the impure liquid that is absorbed will come out on account of the kindling, for the fire controls the wood and when the flame seizes them (i.e., the wood), the liquids cease inside them, and they don’t go out when they kindle them in the oven.
אם היו לחין (if they were wet/freshly cut) – these pieces of wood that had absorbed impure liquids and on account of their wetness/moisture, the liquids themselves came out from them, but if those liquids expunged the impure liquid that was absorbed and the liquids (i.e., the sap) were greater on their own than the absorbed [impure] liquid, [they are pure, according to Rabbi Shimon].
טהורין – that they nullified them. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.

Chapter 5



Mishnah 1

מי שטבל בנהר – and the water that is upon him makes him susceptible [for ritual impurity] for they (i.e., the waters) were acceptable/intentional.
והיה לפניו נהר אחר, ועבר בו – but the waters that are upon him from the second river are into acceptable/intentional and do not make him susceptible [for ritual impurity].
טיהרו – the waters of the second river [purified him], waters that were brought up with him from the [initial] ritual immersion, and neither set of waters make him susceptible [for ritual impurity].
דחיו – he (i.e., the other person, who was inebriated) pushed him [into the water].
לשכרו – that his friend was inebriated and through his drunkenness pushed him and caused him to fall into the river.
וכן לבהמתו – that as a result of his drunkenness, he caused his [fellow’s] animal to fall into the river, and the waters of ritual immersions that were upon him and upon his animal were intentional.
טיהרו שניים – that were [upon him] through the drunkenness [of his fellow] and not acceptable/intentional.
את הראשונים –[the waters of the first river which were made insusceptible] which were not acceptable/intentional
ואם כמשחק – his fellow [in jest] pushed him into the river or his animal/beast, also the second waters are under the law of “when water is put” (Leviticus 11:38), and all of them (both the first and the second set of waters) are acceptable/intentional.

Mishnah 2

הנתזין (that splashed) – unintentionally.
העושה ציפור במים (if one make a “bird” in water – producing bubbles by blowing through a tube) – that raises up over the waters an effervescence like bubbles.
הנתזין- through the making of bubbles.
ואת שבה – that is the water of the bubbles themselves. And there are those who have the reading:"העושה צנור במים" /He who makes a water pipe/duct/spout in the water, le the youths do like a kind of spout/duct of a reed or that of a hollow piece of wood to splash from it water in jest.
ואת שבה – the water that remains in the duct/spout.

Mishnah 3

ובללן שינוגבו – mixed/stirred all the fruit in water, that when the water would be scattered upon all the fruit/produce, they would be dried up and withered more quickly.
וחכמים אומרים אינן בכי יותן – And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 4

לעמקו בכי יותן ולרחבו אינו בכי יותן – when a person measures the depth of a cistern with a reed, the mark/trace of the water is recognized until what point they reach, and through this, one knows its depth, therefore, he desires the liquid that is on the marking/trace. But regarding its width, he does not want the liquid that is in the marking. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Akiba, and Rabbi Tarfon retracted [his opinion] to teach according to his (i.e., Rabbi Akiba’s) words.

Mishnah 5

לידע כמה מים יש בו – he desires the liquid that is on the tracing mark, as we have stated [in the previous Mishnah], therefore, they are under the law of “when water is put” (Leviticus 11:38). But to know if there is water within it, he does not a tracing mark of liquid.
ושבאבן – that is to say, that is on the stone also are pure, and there are not susceptible [to ritual -impurity].

Mishnah 6

החובט על השלח (he who beats upon a ]wetted [hide) – he strikes the leather after its washing in order to empty it of water.
השלח – the leather as it is when he strips it from the animal, it is called שלח/(wetted) hide/fresh skin. It is the Aramaic translation of ויפשיטו ואשלחו/and they will strip it and I will flay it.
שהוא מתכוין שיצאו עם הצואה – he intends that the water will flow out with the stains of excrement that were attached on them, therefore, it makes susceptible/fit [for ritual impurity] whatever that splashed from it and even when it is in the water. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 7

העקל (on the ballast) – place on the rims of the ship where water collects there that comes in through the cracks/fissures of the ship.
אם ניער (if he shook it) – to remove the water that is upon him, like, a person who shakes out his garment.
לצרפה (to tighten it) – to check if the water enters into it or not. Another explanation: to strengthen it and to glaze/harden it/muzzle it, because when it is on the dry land, it split open on its own. And they bring it into the water in order that the water would steep in the water and would close up its fissures and cracks.
מסמר לגשמים לצרפו – to strengthen and to harden it/glaze it, when the waters would come upon it afer it had been heated in fire.
אוד (fire-brand/wooden poker) – wood hat part of it was consumed by fire.

Mishnah 8

קסיא של שלחנות (sheet spread over a set table to protect it from flies) – a covering that they would cover the table so that water or something of filth or excrement would fall upon the food.
והשיפא של לבנים (shavings or mat used for covering bricks) – a matting of bulrushes or of reed-grass that they would cover on the bricks to protect them from rains. And theses are like so that the wall may not suffer from the rain which are not under the law of “when water is put” (Leviticus 11:38).
אבל אם ניער – that he intended to rinse them, behold they are under the law of “when water is put.”

Mishnah 9

כל הנצוק טהור (an uninterrupted flow of a liquid poured from vessel to vessel is pure) – if he empties from a ritually pure vessel to an impure vessel, what is in the uppermost is ritually pure, for an uninterrupted flow of a liquid is not a connection, except for those which are considered, because the jet of a viscous mass, when poured out and stopped, bounds backwards (and the connection with eh mass in the unclean vessel is not suddenly severed – see also Tractate Taharot, Chapter 8, Mishnah 9: an uninterrupted flow, a current on slanting ground and…, are not considered a connection of the two liquids, either for communicating uncleanness or for producing cleanness), when the continuous flow is stopped, the remainder returns upwards.
חוץ מדבש הזיפים (except for the thick honey) – there are those who explain good and important honey, and because of its importance, they make it thick/viscid and mix into it worthless matter. But there are those who say, it is on account of the name of its place that it comes from Zif. It is like (Psalms 54:2): “When the Ziphites came and told Saul: [“Know David is hiding among us].”
והצפחת (or a tenacious batter dripped on a hot griddle/a sort of waffle) – food made from flour and הhoney and it is so soft that they are able to pour it and similar to it (Exodus 16:31): “it tasted like wafers in honey.”
המקפה (pulp/stiff mass of grist) – a cooked dish that is not soft nor hard but rather a formation of a coagulated substance/froth that is called מקפה.
של גריסין (a dish of pounded grains) – grounded/milled beans or beans in a mill
ושל פולים – complete that are not grist in the mill.
מפני שהיא סולדת לאחוריה (because it shrinks backward) – when the continuous flow is stopped, that continuous flow/jet returns that flows gently that part of it was in impure liquids that were in the lower vessel and were conducted in a channel above to liquids that are in the pure upper vessel, and it defiles everything that is in the upper vessel.

Mishnah 10

המערה מחם לחם – here also it is concerned with liquids that are in the upper vessel that empties from it which are pure/clean, and that the lower vessel that empties into it are impure.
מצונן לחם טמא – that the lower [vessel] there brings up vapor to the upper cold vessel and defiles it, that the cloud [of vapor] that rises from the hot [in the lower vessel] is considered like liquid.
וכוחו של תחתון יפה (that the force of the lower was stronger) – that its heat is greater than that of the upper [vessel]. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon, for since the upper [vessel] is hot, even though the lower [vessel] is hotter than it (i.e., the upper vessel), the activity of the lower [vessel] is not recognized in the upper [vessel] and does not defile it.

Mishnah 11

המגיסה בקדירה (she stirs the pot) – she turns with a spoon that is in her hand the cooked dish in the pot.
אם הזיעה ידיה – from the vapor of the pot, her hands are made unclean/defiled as if she touched the liquid that is in the pot.
היו ידיה טמאות – if her hands sweated, the sweet is defiled on account of her hands and the pot is defiled, because the vapor makes a connection between the sweat that is on her hands to the liquids that are in the pot.
ר' יוסי אומר אם נטפו – the pot is not impure unless they dripped a drop at a time from the sweat that is in her hands into pot. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.
היין שבכף טהור – and it doesn’t make it susceptible/fit [to receive ritual defilement], but it was not considered to be a liquid until he would empty it into the [other] vessel. And it is like he lacks a designation of liquids in regard to susceptibility [for ritual impurity, so also he lacks a designation of liquids regarding defilement and regarding wine poured as a libation.

Chapter 6



Mishnah 1

המעלה פרותיו לגג מפני הכנימה (he brought his produce onto the roof because of vermin) – worms that grow in the produce. It is the language of (Exodus 8:13): “and vermin came upon [man and beast].”
אם נתכוין לכך – that he intended that dew should fall upon them.
שיש להן מעשה – as for example, if they would pour upon them dew intentionally, they would render it fit [to receive ritual defilement].

Mishnah 2

המעלה את האגודות (if he takes up on the roof bunches – herbs – which had been lying in the market houses) - of vegetables/greens.
ואת הקציעות (figs packed) – they crush the figs in a mortar/mortar-shaped cavity and make them like large loaves, and hey are called קציעות/packed figs.
שימתינו (that they may remain fresh) – it is the language of moisture. And similar to it is found in the Gemara in the chapter "לא יחפור"/One should not dig/hollow out (Chapter 2) [Tractate Bava Batra 18a):"מיתנא קשה לכותלים" (the actual term found in the printed editions of the Talmud is דהבלא /vapor) that is difficult for the walls).
אינו בכי יותן – if dew fell upon them.
כל האגודות – [all the bunches] of greens/vegetables.
של בית השוקים טמאים– because he sellers are accustomed to sprinkle upon them water in order to moisten them and they are made fit to receive ritual defilement, and the hands always handle/touch them. Therefore, they are presumed to be defiled.
מפני משקה הפה – even though that they don’t sprinkle water upon them when they are moist, nevertheless, they regularly put upon them liquid that comes out from the mouth in order to remove the dust that is upon them, and through this they are made fit for [receiving ritual defilement]. But there is a dispute between the first Tanna/teacher and the Rabbi Meir in a place where they do not regularly moisten them with liquid from the mouth; according to Rabbi Meir they are ritually pure, but according the first Tanna/teacher, in every manner they are ritually impure, for even with moist things that they place upon them water. And the Halakha is according to the first Tanna/teacher.
הקמחין והסלתות של בית השוקים טמאים – because they stir/wash the grain in water prior to grinding them and they are made fit [for receiving ritual impurity]. And the hands are always handling/touching them. Therefore, they are presumed to be ritually impure.
החילקה (split grain, grist, grits) - wheat that is pounded and each kernel/stone is divided into two.
טאגיס (mass of groats of wheat, barley) – that each kernel/stone is divided into three parts.
טסגי (pearl barley/barley groats)- each stone/kernel is divided into four parts.
בכל מקום – even not in the house of the market place, for everyone sprinkles water upon them.

Mishnah 3

חוץ משל מוכרי משקה – because they come in contact with/touch them while the liquid is moist on their hands, but they are not strict on the staining/making palatable by moistening , for their shells (i.e., of the eggs) protect them.
ואם היו מוכרים עמהם פירות יבשים – because they dry their hands in order that they do not soil the fruits,, they dry their hands also prior to their touching the eggs.
כל הדגים בחזקת טומאה – because they are made susceptible [for ritual defilement] in the water, and that which is impure/unclean and that which is pure/clean touches it.
חתיכת האלתות (a piece of a large fish/Iltith)- a species of fish that is regularly sold piece by piece. And there is a place whose name is אלתות/Iltith, and there they hunt it and sell it.
ודג המצרין – a very small fish that they bring from it filled basket in Egypt.
וקולים האספנין (Spanish colias, a kind of tunny fish)- a species of fish whose skin is very soft and they call it אלשביט, and these three species, the water does not make them susceptible [for ritual defilement] like other fish, because they llive a long while after their being hunted, after they are made into food, that is, after their death, we don’t put water upon them, because the water causes loss to them. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.
כל הציר בחזקת טומאה – for mere brine that upon which water is put and the hands touch them.
ועל כולם – whether eggs [or] whether fruit [or] whether brine, a common, uneducated person is believed to state that they were not made susceptible [to receive ritual defilement].

מפני שמפקידים אותן – for all the fruit they store them with a common, uneducated person, but if he is not trustworthy/reliable, how can they store them? But fish, they do not store with him, therefore, he is not trustworthy/reliable.
ציר טהור – that it is known regarding it that it was not made susceptible [to receive ritual defilement] through liquids.
שנפל לתוכו מים כל שהוא טמא – for any amount of water makes them susceptible [to receive ritual defilement], and once it is made susceptible, its presumption is that it is impure, for the hands handle them. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov

Mishnah 4

שבעה משקין הן- because it is stated regarding ritual impurity of foods (Leviticus 11:34): “As to any food that may be eaten, it shall become impure if it came in contact with water,” I have [established] only water, from where [do I learn] to include wine and [olive] oil, and milk and honey and blood and dew? The inference teaches us (Leviticus 11:34): “as to any liquid that may be drunk/וכל משקה אשר ישתה",” and if "וכל משקה"/as to any liquid, I might think, mulberry juice, pomegranate juice and the rest of all the fruit juices, the inference teaches us, “[if it came in contact with] water;” just as water is particular that it lacks an epithet, even wine and [olive] oil and milk and honey and blood and dew, lack an epithet, excluding mulberry juice and pomegranate juice and the rest of fruit juices that have an epithet, but bees honey lacks an epithet, for it is called merely honey. And further, we learned in the Tosefta of [Tractate] Shabbat in chapter 9 (Halakhot 24-28): From where do we learn [in the Torah] that blood is a liquid? As it states (Numbers 23:24): “And drink the blood of the slain.” From where [in the Torah] do we learn that wine is a liquid? As it states (Deuteronomy 32:14): “And foaming grape-blood was your drink.” From where [in the Torah] do we learn that honey is a liquid? As it states (Deuteronomy 32:13): “He fed him honey from the crag.” From where [in the Bible] do we learn that [olive] oil is a liquid? As it states (Isaiah 25:6): “A banquet of rich viands/liquid oils.” From where [in the Bible] do we learn that milk is a liquid? As it states (Judges 4:19): “She opened a skin of milk and gave him some to drink.” From where [in the Bible] do we learn that dew is a liquid? As it states (Judges 6:38): “He squeezed the fleece and wrong out the dew from the fleece, a bowlful of water.” From where [in the Bible] do we learn that the tears of the eye are a liquid? As it states (Psalms 80:6): “Made them drink great measures of tears.” From where [in the Bible] do we learn that the water of the nose is a liquid? As it states (Jeremiah 9:17): “That our eyes may run with tears, our pupils flow with water.”
דבש צרעים טהור (hornets’ honey) – that is not considered a liquid, for it doesn’t defile nor does it make susceptible to receive defilement.
ומותר באכילה – that you should not say that since the hornet is the creeping insect of the fowl and it is impure, the honey that comes from it would also be impure, for you might think that I would say that specifically the honey of bees is included by Scripture to be permitted, for it lacks an epithet, but the honey of hornets which has an epithet would not be permitted, it comes to teach us that the honey of hornets is pure and permitted, because of what they said: the honey of bees is permitted because they bring them into their bodies and they don’t furnish it from their bodies, the honey of hornets also brings them into their bodies but does not furnish it from their bodies.

Mishnah 5

בין גדולים – liquids that come out/exude from the anus/end of the rectum.
בין קטנים – urine.
ודם הקזה לשתיה (letting blood, opening a vein) – the letting of blood [from a vein] that he intended to provide as drink for the animals, and beasts or to the Canaanite [slaves].
מי חלב – this is the whey/curdled milk that is separated from the cheese when they curdle the milk and congeal it in rennet, it makes the seeds susceptible [for receiving ritual impurity].
ומוחל כשמן (and the sap/thin secretion is like oil) – black waters hat come out from the olives.
שאין מוחל יוצא מידי שמן (for the sap is not wholly freed from particles of oil) – and it itself is sap/a thin secretion. According to Rabbi Shimon, it is fruit juice and it is not considered a liquid, but is susceptible [to receive ritual impurity] because of the remnants of oil that are in it.
ר' מאיר אומר אע"פ שאין בו שמן – the sap itself is considered a liquid and it is susceptible [to receive ritual impurity] and it defiles. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Meir.
דם השרץ כשבשרו – and combines like the size of a lentil, as it is written regarding the eight reptiles (Leviticus 11:29-30): “The following shall be impure for you [from among the things that swarm on the earth: the mole, the mouse, and great lizards of every variety; the gecko, the land crocodile, the lizard, the sand lizard and the chameleon],” to include its blood that defiles like its flesh, it is able to make the seeds/semen susceptible [to receive ritual defilement], as Scripture teaches (Leviticus 11:29): “The following shall be impure for you” – it is impure, but it does not make the seeds/semen susceptible [to ritual defilement].

Mishnah 6

ואלו מטמאים ומכשירים – that they themselves are impure liquids and they defile and make susceptible [to receive ritual defilement] as one..
זובו של זב – as it is written (Leviticus 15:2): “[When any man has] a discharge [issuing from his member,] he is impure.”
ורוקו – (Leviticus 15:8): “If one with a discharge spits [on one who is pure].”
ומימי רגליו – (Leviticus 15:3): “The impurity from [his discharge] shall mean the following –“/"וזאת תהיה טומאתו" – [the word] "וזאת"/and this – to includes urine.
ורביעית דם מן המת – as it is written (Numbers 19: 13): “Whoever touches a corpse, the body of a person [who has died],”/"כל הנוגע במת בנפש האדם" – “the body of a person is a quarter-log of blood, as it is written (Leviticus 17:11): “it is the blood, as life, [that effects expiation]”/"כי הדם הוא בנפש [יכפר]"(note that there is a slight variant in the way the verse is read from what Bartenura writes: "כי הדם הוא הנפש").
ודם נדה – as it is written (Leviticus 15:33): “and concerning her who is in menstrual infirmity”/"והדוה בנדתה" - just as that which flows from her, is impure like her.
שכבת זרע אינה מכשרת – that it is not considered a liquid, and it has the epithet.
דם הנדה אינו מכשיר – a thing that a person with abdominal troubles/piles that he also does not make susceptible [to receive ritual impurity].
דם המת אינו מכשיר – that since he died, his blood has left the category of a liquid. But the Halakha is not according to any one of these Tannaim/teachers, but rather, all of them defile and are susceptible [to receive ritual defilement] according to the first Tanna/teacher [of the Mishnah].

Mishnah 7

ואלו לא מטמאין – even if they departed/left from that which is impure as for example, from the man with a flux (i.e., gonorrhea) and similar to it, as it is written (Leviticus 15:2): "זובו טמא הוא"/”[when any man has] a discharge [from his member], he is impure” (Bartenura’s commentary writes: "בזובו טמא הוא" which does not exist in that form anywhere based upon my examination of a concordance), he and his discharge/flux are impure, but his sweat nor his ill-smelling moisture/secretion nor his excrement are impure.
והליחה סרוחה – that exits from the abscess, and the same law applies with regard to spittle of an ill-smelling secretion/purulent substance [of a man].
והראי – filthy matter/excrement, like והרעי/excrement.
ודם היוצא עמהם – with the moisture/secretion and the excrement.
ומשקה בן שמונה (and the liquid excreted with a stillborn child at eight months) – all the liquid that came out from the non-viable/premature birth of eight months, as for example, his blood, and his spittle and his urine, for a living eight-month-old baby is like a stone.
חוץ מדמו – that defiles like the blood of a viable child. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.
אע"פ שיוצאים נקיים – that he discharges them [from his bowels] in the path of the privy that are clear like they were when he drank them, nevertheless they do not make susceptible [to receiving ritual impurity], for they exited through the privy.
ר' אלעזר מאמא באלו – for they are considered liquids, and defile and make susceptible [to receive ritual impurity]. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer.
חלב הזכר טהור – for it is not considered liquid. And this is the Halakha.

Mishnah 8

חלב האשה מטמא – makes it fit/susceptible to receive ritual impurity. But if it (i.e., the milk) was defiled or that the woman was impure, it defiles according to the law of impure liquids that the designation/law of liquids has.
לרצון – that is milked intentionally.
ושלא לרצון – as for example, milk that drips from her breasts.
שאינו מיוחד אלא לקטנים – that unspecified is not considered all that much
שדם מגיפתה טמא (that the blood flowing from a woman’s wound is impure) – the blood that comes out from her wound is impure, for they are compared to the “blood of the slain”/דם חללים (see Numbers 23:24) which is called liquid, for what difference is it to me killing completely or killing [only] half.
שדם מגיפתה טהור – for the blood of an animal is not called “the blood of the slain”, for it is written regarding a human.
סלי זיתים וענבים יוכיחו – for one who presses/wrings them (i.e., olives and/or grapes) out for medical purposes it is impure, but nevertheless, with approval/intentionally are impure, but unintentionally, they are ritually pure. Even the milk, even though that one yields milk for medicinal purposes, it is impure, when it is milked unintentionally/without approval, it is law that it would be pure: and when it is not with approval/unintentional, that which comes out from the olives and grapes is not considered liquid until it comes out with approval/intentionally.