Shir HaKavod
שיר הכבוד
Wikipedia
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anim_Zemirot

Shir HaKavod



Line 1

I shall make pleasant songs, and weave verses; Because for You my soul longs.
My soul desires to be in Your hand’s shade; To know all of Your deepest mysteries.
When I speak of Your glory; My heart yearns for Your love.
Therefore I will speak reverently of You; And Your name I will honor in songs of love.
I will recount Your glory, though I have not seen You; I describe You though I have not known You.
In Your prophet's writings, in Your servants' speech; You depicted the beauty of Your glorious splendor.
Your greatness and might; They portrayed in accordance with Your actions.
They depicted you, though You are not as they depicted; They characterized you according to Your doings.
They allegorized you in many visions; Behold, You are one in all depictions.
They saw in You old age and youth; They represented Your hair as both whitened and black.
Old age on the day of judgment, youth on the day of battle; Like a man of war who has many talents.
Like one who wears the helmet of redemption on His head; His right arm and holy left arm bring redemption.
His head is full of the dew of light; His locks with the drops of the night.
He beautifies Himself through me, because He desires me; And He shall be for me a crown of beauty.
His head is like pure gold; On His forehead is inscribed His honored holy name.
For grace, honor, and splendid beauty; His people have made themselves His crown.
The locks of his head are as in youth; His locks are black curls.
The place of justice, His splendid beauty; May He elevate it above his greatest joy.
May His chosen people be a crown of beauty in His hand; may the gloriously beautiful people be a royal diadem.
He carried them like a load, He wore them as a crown; He honored them beyond the worth He saw in them.
His splendor is on me, and my splendor is on Him; He is close to me when I call to him.
White and red, His garments are red; He trod the winepress when He came from Edom.
He showed His tefillin-knot to the humble one; the picture of God was before his eyes.
He desires His people, He glorifies the humble ones; He who sits glorified by their praises.

Take my many songs to Yourself; And may my hymn come be close to You.
May my praise be a crown to Your head; May my prayer be set before You like incense.
May this pauper's song be as valued in Your eyes; As the song sung over Your sacrifices.
May my blessing go up to the Provider; the Creator, the Begetter, Just and Mighty.
May You nod your head to my blessing; May You accept it like the finest spices.
May my contemplation be sweet to You, For my soul yearns for You.
Yours, Lord, is the greatness and the power and the splendor and the triumph and the majesty, for all that is in the heavens and on land is Yours. Your, Lord, is the sovereignty and the rule over every king. Who can recount the heroic acts of the Lord, who can do justice to all His praise?