Bereshit Rabbah
בראשית רבה
Rabbi Mike Feuer, Jerusalem Anthology
https://www.sefaria.org

Bereshit Rabbah



Chapter 1



Chapter 2





R’ Abahu and R’ Chiya Raba. R’ Abahu said - from the beginning of the creation of the world the Holy One saw the actions of the righteous and the actions of the wicked. This is what is written “For the Lord knows the way of the righteous…” (Psalms 1:6) “Now the earth was astonishingly empty…” (Genesis 1:2) these are the actions of the wicked, “And God said, Let there be light…” (Genesis 1:3) these are the actions of the righteous. But I don’t know which one of them He desired, the actions of these or the actions of those. Since it is written “And God saw the light that it was good…” (Genesis 1:4). He desires the actions of the righteous and not the actions of the wicked. R’ Chiya Raba said – from the beginning of the creation of the world the Holy One saw the Holy Temple built, destroyed and built. “In the beginning of God's creation…” (Genesis 1:1) refers to it built, this is what it says “…to plant the heavens and to found the earth…” (Isaiah 51:16) “Now the earth was astonishingly empty…” refers to it destroyed, this is what it says “I saw the earth, and behold, it was void and unformed…” (Jeremiah 4:23) , “And God said, Let there be light…” refers to it built and complete in the future to come, this is what it says “Arise, shine, for your light has come, and the glory of the Lord has shone upon you. For behold, darkness shall cover the earth, and a gross darkness the kingdoms, and the Lord shall shine upon you, and His glory shall appear over you.” (Isaiah 60:1-2) 

Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5







The way of the world is that one pours a full vessel into an empty one. Perhaps you can pour a full vessel into a full vessel?! All the world was water in water and you say “…into one place…” (Genesis 1:9) Rather from here we learn that a little can hold a lot. Similarly - “Moses and Aaron assembled the congregation in front of the rock…” (Numbers 20:10) R’ Chanina said: there was a space the size of the mouth of a small sieve there, and all of Israel stood there? Rather from here we learn that a little can hold a lot. Similarly – “The Lord said to Moses and to Aaron, "Take yourselves handfuls (chofneichem) of furnace soot…” (Exodus 9:8) R’ Huna said: and could Moshe’s handful hold eight handfuls (kamatzim)? That’s strange! Rather from here we learn that a little can hold a lot. There is no comparison between what one takes in a cupped handful (chofan) and what one takes in a closed handful (kamatz). A cupped handful is twice that of a closed and it is written “…and Moses shall cast it heavenward…” (ibid.) therefore Moshe’s cupped hand held eight closed handfuls. Rather from here we learn that a little can hold a lot.  Similarly – R’ Yosi bar Chalifta said: “The length of the courtyard shall be one hundred cubits and the width fifty by fifty cubits,” (Exodus 27:18) and all of Israel stood there? That’s strange! Rather from here we learn that a little can hold a lot. Similarly - “And Joshua said to the children of Israel, Come here…” (Joshua 3:9) R’ Huna said: he stood them all up between the two poles of the ark. R’ Acha bar R’ Chanina said: he placed them between the two poles of the ark. The Rabbis said: he shrank them between the two poles of the ark. Yehoshua said to them: from the fact that the two poles of the ark could hold you, you know that Presence of the Holy One is among you. This is what is written “By this you shall know that the living God is in your midst…” (Joshua 3:10) So too regarding Jerusalem it is taught ‘they stood crowded together, but prostrated themselves with plenty of space between them. R’ Shmuel bar R’ Chana said in the name of R’ Acha: each one had four cubits, and a cubit of space to each side so that no one heard the prayer of his fellow. So too it will be in the time to come, as it says “At that time, they will call Jerusalem the Throne of the Lord…” (Jeremiah 3:17) R’ Yochanan went up to visit R’ Chanina, he found him sitting and interpreting this verse ‘At that time, they will call Jerusalem the Throne of the Lord.’ He said to him: oh my teacher, can Jerusalem really hold the throne of the Lord? He replied: The Holy One said to her ‘spread out your length and breadth and receive your population.’ This is what is written “Widen the place of your tent…” (Isaiah 54:2) Why? “For right and left shall you prevail…” (Isaiah 54:3)

Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14








“…from the earth…” (Bereshit 2:7) R’ Berachiya and R’ Chelbo said in the name of R’ Shmuel bar Nachman: he was created from the place of his atonement. This is what it says “An altar of earth you shall make for Me…” (Shemot 20:21) The Holy One said: behold, I am creating him from the place of his atonement, oh that he stands! “He breathed into his nostrils…” (Bereshit 2:7) This comes to teach that He stood him up as a lifeless form that stretched from the land to the heavens and then threw a soul into him. Since in this world it was with the act of blowing, therefore we die, but in the future it will be given as it says “And I will put My spirit into you, and you shall live…” (Ezekiel 37:14)

Chapter 15

“And the Lord God planted a garden in Eden from the east…” (Bereshit 2:8) They said in the house of R’ Yannai ‘why does the verse use the full name of Gd in reference to planting the garden? Because from the beginning of its creation it required proper alignment. Before man is given form in the womb of his mother, he must align himself with her directions. This is what is written “The Lord's trees are sated, the cedars of Lebanon, which He planted.”’ (Tehillim 104:16) R’ Chanina said ‘They were like the horns of grasshoppers, and the Holy One uprooted them and transplanted into the garden, ‘The Lord's trees are sated…’ R’ Chanina said – their lives were sated, their waters sated, their grove sated.’ R’ Yochanan said ‘the world was not fit to make use of cedars, because they were created only for the needs of the Holy Temple. This is what is written “The Lord's trees are sated, the cedars of Lebanon…” Lebanon only refers to the Holy Temple, as it says “…this good mountain and the Lebanon.”’ (Devarim 3:25) R’ Shmuel bat Nachman said in the name of R’ Yonatan ‘there are twenty-four types of cedar, and only seven of them are praiseworthy. This is what it says “I will give in the desert cedars…”’ (Yeshayahu 41:19) R’ Acha said ‘three: b’rosh is cypress, tidhar is juniper, ta’ashur is box-wood. And why do they call box-wood ta’ashur? Because it is the happiest (m’ushar) among them.’ They added three more to the count – alonim, armonim, almogim. Alonim are oaks, armonim are plane-trees, almogim are aloe-woods. 

Chapter 16


“The name of one is Pishon…” (Bereshit 2:11) This is Migdal Pishtan and its waters flow abundantly. “…that is the one that encompasses all the land of Havilah…” (ibid.) There was not yet a place called Havilah, and it says that the river encompasses it? That is strange! Rather, “tell the end from the beginning…” (Yeshayahu 46:10) “…where there is gold,” (Bereshit 2:11) gold there certainly was. “And the gold of that land is good…” (Bereshit 2:12) R’ Yitzchak said ‘happy is he in whose house it is, happy is he in whose company it is.’ R’ Abahu said ‘the Holy One gave a great good to His world – a man breaks a gold piece into smaller pieces, and he can buy many things with it.’ Resh Lakish said ‘the world was not fit to use gold, why was it created? For the Holy Temple, as it says “And the gold of that land is good…” like that which it says “…this good mountain and the Lebanon.” (Devarim 3:25) “…there is the crystal and the onyx stone.” (Bereshit 2:12) R’ Ibo said ‘you think this is referring to the crystal of apothecaries? Let another verse clarify it for you “…and its appearance was like the appearance of crystal.” (Bamidbar 11:7) Just as this refers to a precious stone, so too that refers to a precious stone.’

Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22







“And Cain spoke to Abel his brother, and it came to pass when they were in the field…” (Genesis 4:8) What were they arguing about? They said: come let’s divide up the world, one will take the land and one will take the moveable property. This one said: the ground you are standing on is mine. The other one said: what you are wearing is mine. This one said: take it off! The other one said: fly! Because of this “…Cain rose against his brother Abel and killed him.” (ibid.) R’ Yehoshua of Sakhnin said in the name of R’ Levi: they both took the land and the moveable property. What were they arguing about? One said: the Holy Temple will be built in my boundary. The other said: the Holy Temple will be built in my boundary. As it says “…when they were in the field…” (ibid.) and the field only refers to the Holy Temple. This is what it says “…Zion shall be plowed as a field…” (Micah 3:12) Because of this “…Cain rose up against Abel his brother and slew him.” Yehudah bar Ami said: they were arguing about the first Eve. R’ Ibo said: the first Eve returned to the dust. Then what were they arguing about? R’ Huna said: an extra twin sister was born with Abel. This one said: I will take her because I am the first born. The other one said: I will take her because she was born with me. Because of this “…Cain rose up against Abel his brother and slew him.”

Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29



Chapter 30



Chapter 31



Chapter 32



Chapter 33



Chapter 34



Chapter 35



Chapter 36



Chapter 37



Chapter 38



Chapter 39



Chapter 40



Chapter 41



... R’ Shimon bar Aba said in the name of R’ Yochanan: any where that it says ‘and it was’ (vayehi) it indicates distress and joy. If it is distress there is no distress like it and if it is joy there is no joy like it. R’ Shmuel ben Nachmani came and split the teaching in half. Anywhere that it says ‘and it was’ (vayehi) indicates distress, ‘and it will be’ (v’haya) indicates joy…The brought a challenge from this verse “…and he was [there] (v’haya) when Jerusalem was taken.” (Jeremiah 38:28) He said to them: this is still a cause of joy because on that very day Israel received full payment for their sins. As R’ Shmuel ben Nachmani said: Israel received full payment for their sins on the day the Holy Temple was destroyed, as it says “Your iniquity is finished, O daughter of Zion…” (Lamentations 4:22)

Chapter 42



Chapter 43






And Malchitzedek king of Shalem – This is what is written “And the daughter of Tyre shall seek your presence with tribute, those who are the richest of the people.” (Tehillim 45:13) ‘Malchitzedek the king of Shalem’, this place makes its inhabitants righteous (matzdik) – Malchitzedek, Adonitzedek (Yehoshua 10:1). Jerusalem is called righteousness as it says, “…in which righteousness would lodge…” (Isaiah 1:21) ‘king of Shalem’ R’ Yitzchak the Bavli says (he is called this) because he was born circumcised. "brought out bread and wine, and he was a priest to the Most High God" (Bereshit 14:18) R’ Shmuel bar Nachmani and the Rabbanan argue, R’ Shmuel said that the laws of the High Priesthood were revealed to him – ‘bread’ is the show bread, ‘wine’ are the libations. The Rabbanan say that Torah was revealed to him as it says, “"Come, partake of my bread and drink of the wine I have mingled.” (Mishle 9:5) ‘and he was a priest to the Most High God’ R’ Aba bar Kahana said every mention of wine written in the Torah makes an impact except for this, R’ Levi said that even this we did not escape, because from there He called upon him “…and they will enslave them and oppress them, for four hundred years.” (Bereshit 15:13)

Chapter 44



Chapter 45



Chapter 46



Chapter 47



Chapter 48










"And he said, "My lords, if only I have found favor in your eyes..." (Bereshit 18:3) R' Chiyah taught: he said this to the greatest of them, Michael. "Please let a little water be taken..." (Bereshit 18:4) R' Eliezer said in the name of R' Simai: the Holy One said to Avraham "you said 'let a little water be taken.' By your life! I will recompense your children in the wilderness, in the settled lands and in the time to come. This is what is written "Then Israel sang this song: "'Ascend, O well,' sing to it!" (Bamidbar 21:17) This is in the wilderness. Where do we learn in the land of Canaan? "... a land with brooks of water, fountains and depths, that emerge in valleys and mountains," (Devarim 8:7) From where do we learn in the time to come? "And it shall come to pass on that day that spring water shall come forth from Jerusalem..." (Zechariah 14:8)

Chapter 49



Chapter 50



Chapter 51



Chapter 52



Chapter 53



Chapter 54



Chapter 55







... And go to the land of Moriah R’ Chiya Raba and R’ Yanai – one says to the place from which  instruction (hora’ah) goes out to the world, and the other says to the place from which awe (yirah) goes out to the world. Similarly regarding the holy of holies (devir), R’ Chiya and R’ Yanai – one says from the place from which the commandments (dibra’ot) go out to the world, and one says from the place from which speech (dibur) goes out to the world. Similarly regarding the ark (aron), R’ Chiya and R’ Yanai – one says to the place from which the light (ha’orah) goes out to the world, and one says to the place where awe (yirah) goes out to the world. R’ Yehoshua ben Levi said that from there the Holy One instructs the nations of the world and brings them down to gehinnom. R’ Shimon bar Yochai said, to the place which is aligned with the Holy Temple above. R’ Yudan said, to the place where there will be an appearance to you (which He will show you). R’ Pinchas said, to the place of the Master of the World. The Rabbis said, to the place where the incense is offered – this is what it says “…I will go to the mountain of myrrh and to the hill of frankincense.” (Shir HaShirim 4:6) 

Chapter 56

“On the third day, Abraham lifted up his eyes…” (Genesis 22:4) It is written “He will revive us from the two days, on the third day He will set us up, and we will live before Him.” (Hoshea 6:2) On the third day of the tribes it is written “On the third day, Joseph said to them…” (Genesis 42:18) On the third day of the spies, as it says “…and hide yourselves there three days…” (Joshua 2:16) On the third day of the giving of the Torah, as it says “It came to pass on the third day…” (Exodus 19:16) On the third day of Jonah, as it is written “…and Jonah was in the belly of the fish for three days and three nights.” (Jonah 2:1) On the third day of those who came up from exile, as it is written “…and stayed there three days.” (Ezra 8:32) On the third day of the resurrection of the dead, as it is written “He will revive us from the two days, on the third day He will set us up, and we will live before Him.” (Hoshea 6:2) On Esther’s third day “Now it came to pass on the third day, that Esther clothed herself regally…” (Esther 5:1) The royalty of her father’s house. In what merit? This is an argument of the Rabbis and R’ Levi. The Rabbis say: in the merit of the third day of the giving of the Torah, as it says “It came to pass on the third day when it was morning…” (Exodus 19:16) R’ Levi said: in the merit of the third day of our father Avraham, as it says "On the third day, Abraham lifted up his eyes and saw the place from afar.” (Genesis 22:4) What did he see? He saw a cloud attached to the mountain. He said: it appears that this is the place where the Holy One told me to offer up my son.








“And Avraham named that place, The Lord will see…” (Bereshit 22:14) R’ Yochanan said: he said before Him ‘Master of the World! At the moment when You said to me ‘take your son, your only one’ I had a response for You - yesterday You said to me “for in Yitzchak will be called your seed” (Bereshit 21:12) and now You say to take my son?! But, heaven forfend I did not do so. Rather, I overcame my mercy in order to do Your will. May it be Your will, oh Lord our Gd, that in the moment when the children of Yitzchak sin and do wrong You recall for their sake this binding and be filled with mercy toward them. Avraham called it yireh, as it says ““And Avraham named that place, The Lord will see (yireh) …” Shem called it Shalem, as it says “And Malchitzedek the king of Shalem…” (Bereshit 14:18) The Holy One said, if I call it yireh as Avraham called  it, Shem the righteous man will be angered. If I call it shalem, Avraham the righteous man will be angered. Rather, I will call it Yerushalayim, as they both called it – yireh-shalem Yerushalayim. R’ Berachia said in the name of R’ Chelbo before it was Shalem, the Holy One made there a sukkah and prayed in it as it says “His Tabernacle was in Salem, and His dwelling place in Zion.” (Tehillim 76:3) What would He say? ‘May it be willed that I see the building of My house.’ Another explanation: this teaches that the Holy One showed him the Temple destroyed and built, destroyed and built, as it says “And Avraham named that place, The Lord will see…” that means built as it says “Three times in the year, every one of your males shall appear (yireh) before the Lord…” (Devarim 16:16)  “…as it is said to this day: On the mountain...” (Bereshit 22:14) that means destroyed, as it says “For Mount Zion, which has become desolate…” (Eicha 5:18) “…the Lord will be seen.” (Bereshit 22:14) built and perfected for the time to come, as it says “For the Lord has built up Zion; He has appeared in His glory.” (Tehillim 102:17)

Chapter 57



Chapter 58



Chapter 59





... David is the shepherd of Israel, as it says “You shall shepherd My people Israel…” (Divre HaYamim I 11:2) And who shepherded David? The Holy One, as it says “The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want.” (Tehillim 23:1) Jerusalem is the light of the world, as it says “And nations shall go by your light…” (Yeshayahu 60:3) And who is the light of Jerusalem? The Holy One, as it is written “…but the Lord shall be to you for an everlasting light…” (Yeshayahu 60:19)

Chapter 60



Chapter 61



Chapter 62



Chapter 63








“And her days to give birth were completed…” (Genesis 25:24) Below they were lacking, here they were full. Below where the word twins is written full, with the letter aleph, Peretz and Zerach were both righteous. Here it is written without an aleph, Yaakov was righteous and Esau was wicked. “And the first one emerged ruddy…” (Genesis 25:25) R’ Chaggai said in the name of R’ Yitzchak: in the merit of “And you shall take for yourselves on the first day…” (Leviticus 23:40) I will be revealed to you first, as it says “I am first and I am last” (Isaiah 44:6) and I will exact retribution on your behalf from the first who is Esau, as it is written “And the first one emerged” and I will build the first for you, which is the Holy Temple of which it is written “As a Throne of Glory, exalted from the beginning…” (Jeremiah 17:12) and I will bring for you the first who is the King Messiah of whom it is written “The first one to Zion, behold, behold them…” (Isaiah 41:27)

Chapter 64




“Because Avraham hearkened to My voice…” (Bereshit 26:5) R’ Yochanan and R’ Chanina both said - Avraham came to consciousness of his Creator at age forty-eight. Resh Lakish said - Avraham came to consciousness of his Creator at age three. From where did they learn this? ‘Because (ekev, also meaning heel) Abraham hearkened to the voice of his Creator, “and kept My charge, My commandments, My statutes, and My instructions." (Bereshit 26:5) R’ Yonatan said in the name of R’ Yochanan – even the laws of mixing courtyards were known to Avraham, ‘My instructions (torati)’, Avraham kept two torahs, even the simple commandments of the oral law. R’ Simon said – even the new name which the Holy One would call Jerusalem in the future was known to Avraham, as it is written “And Avraham named that place, The Lord will see…” (Bereshit 22:14), and it is written “…and the name of the city from that day will be ‘The Lord is There.’” (Yechezkiel 48:35), and it is written “At that time, they will call Jerusalem ‘The Throne of the Lord’…” (Yermiyahu 3:17) R’ Berachia said in the name of R’ Yehudah: there is no day on which the Holy One does not innovate law in the heavenly court. What is his proof? “Hear attentively the noise of His voice and the sound (hegeh) that emanates from His mouth.” (Iyov 37:2) Hegeh only refers to Torah, as it says “…you shall meditate (hegita) therein day and night..” (Yehoshua 1:8)

Chapter 65



Chapter 66



... Another explanation. “…of the dew of the heavens…” (Genesis 27:28) this refers to Zion, as it says “As the dew of Hermon which runs down on the mountains of Zion…” (133:3) “…and of the fatness of the earth…” (Genesis 27:28) refers to the offerings, “grain” refers to the first-fruits, “wine” to the libations…

Chapter 67



Chapter 68



Chapter 69



Chapter 70








... Another explanation. “And he looked, and behold! a well in the field…” (Genesis 29:2) This refers to Zion. “…and behold! three flocks of sheep…” (ibid.) This refers to the three pilgrimage festivals. “…because from that well they would water the flocks…” (ibid.) Because from there they would draw the holy spirit. “…and a huge rock…” (ibid.) This refers to the celebration of the water drawing (simchat bet hashoevah). R’ Hoshaya said: why did they call it the celebration of the water drawing? Because from there they would draw the holy spirit. “And all the flocks would gather there…” (Genesis 29:3) They would come all the way from Mevo Chamat to the stream of Egypt. “…and they would roll the rock off the mouth of the well and water the sheep…” (ibid.) Because from there they would draw the holy spirit. “…and then they would return the rock onto the mouth of the well, to its place.” (ibid) Left to rest for the next pilgrimage festival. Another explanation. “And he looked, and behold! a well in the field…” This refers to Zion. “…and behold! three flocks of sheep…” This refers to the three courts, as it teaches: there were three courts there – one at the entrance to the Temple Mount, one at the entrance to the Courtyard, and one in the Chamber of Hewn Stones. “…because from that well…” Because from there they would hear the ruling. “…and a huge rock…” This refers to the High Court which sat in the Chamber of Hewn Stones. “And all the flocks would gather there…” This refers to the courts throughout the land of Israel. “…and they would roll the rock off…” Because from there they would hear the ruling. “…and then they would return the rock…” Because they would debate back and forth until the ruling was clear. Another explanation. “And he looked, and behold! a well in the field…” This refers to Zion. “…and behold! three flocks of sheep…” This refers to the first three kingdoms. “…because from that well…” Because they became rich from the devoted property that was hidden away in the Temple courts. “…and a huge rock…” This refers to the merit of the forefathers. “And all the flocks would gather there…” This refers to the wicked kingdom who writes out a conscription from all the nations of the world. “…and they would roll the rock off…” Because they became rich from the devoted property that was hidden away in the Temple courts. “…and then they would return the rock…” The merit of the forefathers stands for us in the future…

Chapter 71



Chapter 72



Chapter 73



Chapter 74



Chapter 75



Chapter 76



Chapter 77



Chapter 78



Chapter 79







“And he bought the part of the field where he had pitched his tent from the sons of Hamor, the father of Shechem, for a hundred kesitas.” (Bereshit 33:19) R’ Yudan bar Simon said: this is one of the three places about which the nations of the world cannot defraud Israel and say ‘this is stolen property in your hands.’ They are – the cave of the Machpela, the Holy Temple and the grave of Yosef. The cave of the Machpela, as it is written “And Abraham listened to Ephron, and Abraham weighed out to Ephron the silver…” (Bereshit 23:16) The Holy Temple, as it is written “And David gave to Ornan for the place shekels of gold weighing six hundred.” (Divre HaYamim I 21:25) The grave of Yosef, as it is written ““And he bought the part of the field where he had pitched his tent…” (Bereshit 33:19)

Chapter 80



Chapter 81



Chapter 82



Chapter 83



Chapter 84



Chapter 85



Chapter 86



Chapter 87



Chapter 88



Chapter 89



Chapter 90



Chapter 91



Chapter 92



Chapter 93



Chapter 94



Chapter 95



Chapter 96



Chapter 97



Chapter 98








... “…and to him will be a gathering of peoples.” (Genesis 49:10) This refers to Jerusalem, which in the future will blunt the teeth of the nations of the world, as it says “And it shall come to pass on that day that I will make Jerusalem a stone of burden for all peoples…” (Zechariah 12:3)

Chapter 99

[“Benjamin is a wolf, he will prey…” (Bereshit 49:27)] “Why do you lurk, you lofty mountains, for the mountain that God desired for His dwelling?” (Tehillim 68:17) R’ Yosi haGalili and R’ Akiva: R’ Yosi haGalili explained the verse as referring to the mountains. At the moment when the Holy One came to give the Torah on Sinai the mountains came running and arguing with each other. This one said ‘the Torah will be given on me!’ and this one said ‘the Torah will be given on me!’ Mount Tabor came from Bet Elim and  Mount Carmel from Espamia, this is what is written “As long as I live, says the King, Whose name is the Lord of Hosts, that as sure as Tabor is among the mountains, and Carmel is by the sea, it shall come about.” (Yimiyahu 46:18) This one said ‘I was called!’ and this one said ‘I was called!’ The Holy One said ‘Why do you lurk, you lofty mountains?’ You are all high mountains, but what does lofty (gavnunim) mean? As it says “…or one with long eyebrows (gibein), or a cataract…” (Vayikra 21:20) Idolatry was done on all of you, but Sinai upon which idolatry was never done “…the mountain that God desired for His dwelling,” (Tehillim 68:17) “The Lord descended upon Mount Sinai…” (Shemot 19:20) Nevertheless, “…Even the Lord will dwell [there] forever,” (Tehillim 68:17) refers to the eternal House. R’ Akiva explained the verse as referring to the tribes. At the moment when Shlomo said to build the Holy Temple, the tribes came running and arguing with each other. This one said ‘in my portion it will be built!’ This one said ‘in my portion it will be built!’ The Holy One said to them ‘tribes, why are you lurking? All of you are tribes, all of you are righteous – but lofty (gavnunim). What is gavnunim? Ganavim (thieves). You were all partners in the sale of Yosef; but Benyamin, who did not participate in the sale of Yosef, “…the mountain that God desired for His dwelling.” (Tehillim 68:17) So we find that four hundred and eighty years beforehand the children of Korach prophesied on this, that in the future it would be in the portion of Benyamin as it says “My soul yearns, yea, it pines for the courts of the Lord…” (Tehillim 84:3) So too it says “Behold we heard it in Ephrath…” (Tehillim 132:6) R’ Yehudah says ‘the Holy Temple was built in the portion of Yehudah, as it is written “…Ephrathite man from Bethlehem of Judah…”’ (Shmuel I 17:12) R’ Shimon says ‘in the portion of the son of she who died in Ephrathah. And who died in Ephrathah? Rachel. Perhaps it was in the portion of Yosef who is also among her sons? The verse says “…we found it in the fields of the forest.” (Tehillim 132:6) In the portion of the one who is compared to a beast of the forest, and who is so compared? Benyamin, as it is written “Benjamin is a wolf, he will prey…” (Bereshit 49:27)

Chapter 100













“… and he made for his father a mourning of seven days.” (Bereshit 50:10) Why do we mourn for seven days in parallel to the seven days of feasting? The Holy One said to them: in this world you shared the pain of this righteous one and mourned for him seven days, in the coming world I will transform that mourning to joy, as it says “…and I will turn their mourning into joy and will comfort them and make them rejoice from their sorrow.” (Yirmiyahu 31:12) And just as I console you, so I will console Zion and all her waste places in the manner that it says,” For the Lord shall console Zion, He shall console all its ruins, and He shall make its desert like a paradise and its wasteland like the garden of the Lord; joy and happiness shall be found therein, thanksgiving and a voice of song.” (Yeshayahu 51:3)
