Sha'arei Teshuvah
שערי תשובה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Sha'arei Teshuvah



Chapter 1

Among the good things with which Hashem, blessed be He, has bestowed His creations is the path which He prepared for them to ascend from the within the depths of their actions, to escape from the trap of their inquities, to hold their souls back from destruction, and to remove the divine anger from upon them. He has taught them to return to Him when they sin against Him, because of His goodness and uprightness, for He understands their natures, as it is said (Psalms 25:8): "Good and upright is the Lord; therefore He shows sinners the way." If they increasingly sin and rebel and commit betrayals - though they betray, the doors of repentance are not closed to them, as it is said (Isaiah 31:6): "Return, O children of Israel, to Him to whom they have been so shamefully false." It is also said (Jeremiah 3:22): "Turn back, O rebellious children, I will heal your afflictions." We are advised about repentance in several places in the Torah. It is revealed that repentance is accepted even when the sinner repents because of his many tribulations. How much more so [will he be accepted] if he returns because of fear or love of Hashem, as it is said (Deuteronomy 4:30): "When you are in distress because all these things have befallen you and, in the end, return to the Lord your God and obey Him." It is detailed in the Torah that Hashem will help those who repent beyond what their natural ability would allow, and that he renews within them a pure spirit to reach great heights in His love, as it is said (ibid., 30:2): "And you return to the Lord your God, and you and your children heed His command with all your heart and soul, just as I enjoin upon you this day." Further, it is said about the body of the matter (ibid., 30:5): "Then the LORD your God will open up your heart and the hearts of your offspring to love the LORD your God." The Prophets and the Writings speak constantly on the subject of the repentance, such that the principles of repentance are all explained in their words, as shall be demonstrated.
Know that for the sinner who delays repenting of his sin, his punishment will grow heavier every day, for he knows that the wrath has gone forth against him and he has an opportunity to escape it. That escape is repentance. Yet he still remains in rebellions and stays within his evil, though it is within his power to leave from within the disorder  - he does not fear the anger or the heat. Thus, his evil is great (see also the Midrash to Ecclesiastes, which relates a parable illustrating this concept).
Repentance is delayed only among the ignorant, who are sleeping - lounging. They do not return to their hearts, and they have neither the knowledge nor the understanding to know that they should hurry, to assist in their souls' deliverance. Some of them are led astray from Hashem, Blessed be He, and they do not believe in punishment for sin. Our rabbis, may their memory be a blessing, said: "If you saw a scholar transgress a prohibition at night, do not think badly of him during the day; in truth, he has repented."

Chapter 2



Chapter 3
























































































































































































The seventh aspect - one who misleads his fellow, saying that he did something good for him, or spoke well of him, and didn't do it. Our sages of blessed memory said that it is forbidden to lie to [lit. steal the awareness of] people. And behold this sin is even more serious according to the sages of Israel than robbery, since lying lips are a grievous guilt. And we are obligated [to stay within] the parameters of truth, since truth is one of the foundations of the soul.