Onkelos Genesis
תרגום אונקלוס על בראשית
 J.W. Etheridge. The Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan Ben Uzziel on the Pentateuch. London: Longmans, Green, 1862
 J.W. Etheridge. The Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan Ben Uzziel on the Pentateuch. London: Longmans, Green, 1862



Onkelos Genesis

Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9

And the Lord blessed Noach and his sons, and said to them, Spread abroad, and multiply, and fill the earth.
And the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth, and upon every fowl of the heavens, in all which creepeth upon the earth, and in all fish of the sea; into your hands shall they be delivered.
Every moving thing that liveth, for you it shall be to eat; as the green herb I have given you the whole.
But the flesh with its life‑blood you shall not eat.
And also your blood of your lives will I require, from every beast will I require it, and from the hand of man. From the hand of the man who sheddeth the blood of his brother will I require the life of man.
Whoso sheddeth the blood of man, by witnesses, upon the sentence of the judges, his blood shall be shed; because in the image of the Lord made He man.
And you, spread abroad and multiply; bring forth in the earth and multiply therein.
And the Lord spake to Noach, and to his sons with him, saying,
And I, behold, I establish my covenant with you and with your children after you,
and with every living thing which is with you, of fowl, of cattle, and of every beast of the field that is with you, of all going forth from the ark of every animal of the earth.
And I will establish My covenant with you, and all flesh shall not again be consumed by the waters of a deluge, nor shall there be again a deluge to destroy the earth.
And the Lord said, This is the sign of the covenant which I appoint (give) between My Word, and between you, and between every living soul that is with you unto perpetual generations.
I have set My bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a sign of the covenant between My Word and between the earth.
And it shall be that when clouding I becloud the earth, the bow shall be seen in the cloud,...
and I will remember the covenant which is between My Word, and between You, and between every living soul of all flesh; and there shall not be again the waters of a deluge to destroy all flesh.
And the bow shall be in the cloud, and I will look upon it, to remember the everlasting covenant between the Word of the Lord and between every living soul of all flesh that is upon the earth.
And the Lord said, This is the sign of the covenant which I have established between My Word and between all flesh which is upon the earth.
And the sons of Noach who went forth from the ark were Shem and Cham and Yapheth: and Cham is the father of Kenaan.
These three are the sons of Noach and from them was the whole earth overspread.
And Noach began to be a man working on the earth; and he planted a vineyard,
and he drank of the wine, and was drunk; and he was uncovered in the midst of his tent.
And Cham the father of Kenaan saw the nakedness of his father, and he showed to his two brethren without.
And Shem and Yapheth took a mantle, and laid it upon the shoulders of both, and went backward, and covered the nakedness of their father; and their faces were averted, and the nakedness of their father they saw not.
And Noach awoke from his wine, and knew that which his youngest son had done unto him;
and he said:--Accursed be Kenaan, a working servant shall he be to his brethren.
And he said:--Blessed be the Lord the God of Shem, and Kenaan shall be servant unto them.
The Lord shall enlarge Yapheth, and he shall make his Shekinah to dwell in the tabernacles of Shem: and Kenaan shall be servant unto them.
And Noach lived after the deluge three hundred and fifty years.
And all the days of Noach were nine hundred and fifty years; and he died.