Ecclesiastes
קהלת
The Metsudah Five Megillot, Lakewood, N.J., 2001
https://www.judaicaplace.com/search/brand/Metsudah-Publications/

Ecclesiastes



Chapter 1

The words of Koheles, the son of Dovid, king in Jerusalem.
Vanity of vanities, said Koheles; vanity of vanities, all is vanity.
What profit does man have for all his labor which he labors beneath the sun.
A generation passes away and [another] generation comes, and the earth abides forever.
The sun rises and the sun sets, and to its place it strives, to rise there [again].
It [the wind] goes toward the south, and turns about toward the north; round and round goes the wind, and upon its circuits, the wind returns.
All the rivers flow into the sea, yet the sea is not full; to the place where the rivers flow, there they continue to flow.
All things lead to weariness, man cannot speak of them; the eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing.
That which has been is what will be, and that which has been done is that which will be done; and there is nothing new under the sun.
Sometimes there is a thing of which one will exclaim: “See this is new!”; it has already been in existence in the ages which preceded us.
There is no remembrance of earlier generations; also of the later generations that are to come, there will be no remembrance of them among those who will come after.
I, Koheles, have been king over Israel in Jerusalem.
And I applied my heart to search and explore with wisdom, concerning all that happens beneath the heavens; it is an evil thing that God has given to mankind to be afflicted with.
I have seen all the deeds that were done under the sun; and, behold, all is vanity and vexation of spirit.
That which is crooked, cannot be made straight; and that which is wanting, cannot be counted.
I said to myself: “Behold, I have grown and increased in wisdom over all who were before me in Jerusalem; and my heart has perceived much wisdom and knowledge.”
And I applied my heart to know wisdom, and to know madness and folly; I understand that this, too, was vexation of the spirit.
For with much wisdom, there is much vexation; and he who increases knowledge increases pain.

Chapter 2

I said to myself, “Come now, I will try [the life of] joy, and enjoy the good life”; and behold, this too was vanity.
Of laughter, I said, it is senseless; and of joy—what does it accomplish.
I searched in my heart [for a way] to pamper my flesh with wine; while my heart conducted itself with wisdom, and to grasp foolishness, until I could see which was best for men to do under the heavens during the brief span of their lives.
I made great works; I built houses for myself, I planted vineyards for myself.
I made gardens and orchards for myself; and planted in them, every kind of fruit tree.
I made pools of water from which to irrigate the forest, growing with trees.
I acquired men-servants and maid-servants, and had servants born in my house; also herds of cattle and sheep I possessed in greater quantity than anyone who preceded me in Jerusalem.
I also amassed silver and gold, and treasures of kings and provinces; I obtained singers and musical instruments, and things that delight the people, chests and chests of them.
I was great [in wealth], and surpassed all who preceded me in Jerusalem; also my wisdom remained with me.
And whatever my eyes desired, I did not deny them; I withheld not my heart from any joy, for my heart rejoiced in all my labor; and this was my portion [reward] from all my labor.
Then I looked upon all my works that my hands had done, and on the labor I had performed; and behold—all was vanity and vexation of spirit and there is no profit under the sun.
I [then] turned my attention to behold wisdom, and madness and foolishness; for of what value is the man who would come after the king [to repeat] that which has already been done [by him].
Then I perceived that the advantage of wisdom over foolishness, was like that of light over darkness.
The wise man, his eyes are in his head, but the fool walks in darkness; but I also understood that the same fate befalls both of them.
And I said to myself: “Since the fate of the fool will also be my fate, why do I seek to become wiser?” Then I said to myself: “This too is vanity.”
For there is no remembrance of either the wise man or the fool, forever; since in the days to come all will be forgotten; and how can the death of the wise man be like [the death of] the fool?
And [so] I hated life, for I was sorely grieved, by all that was done under the sun; for all is vanity and vexation of spirit.
And I hated all my labor in which I labored under the sun; for I must leave it to the man who will succeed me.
And who knows whether he will be a wise man or a fool? Yet he will rule over all my work in which I labored, and have shown myself to be wise under the sun; this, too, is vanity.
And [so] I turned my heart to despair of all the labor in which I labored under the sun.
For there is a man who labored with wisdom, knowledge and skill; and [yet] to a man who has not labored, he shall leave it, as his portion; this, too, is vanity and a great evil.
For what has a man of all his labor, and of the ambition of his heart, for which he labors under the sun?
For all his days are painful, and aggravation is his lot, even at night his heart has no rest; this, too, is vanity.
Is it not beneficial for man that he eats and drinks, and shows himself content with his labor? —this, too, I saw, that it is from the hand of God.
For who should eat and who should enjoy, if not I?
For to the man who is good in His sight, He gives wisdom, knowledge and joy; but to the sinner, He gives the urge to gather and accumulate—that he should [ultimately] hand it [on to him] who is good in the sight of God; this, too, is vanity and vexation of spirit.

Chapter 3

For everything there is a season and there is a time for everything under the sky:
A time to be born and a time to die; a time to plant, and a time to uproot the planted.
A time to kill and a time to heal; a time to wreck and a time to build.
A time to weep and a time to laugh; a time to mourn and a time to dance.
A time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones; a time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing.
A time to seek and a time to abandon; a time to preserve, and a time to discard.
A time to rip apart and a time to sew; a time to be silent and a time to speak.
A time to love and a time to hate; a time for war and a time for peace.
What benefit [then] has the worker from his labor?
I have seen the matter which God has given to man to be afflicted with.
He has made everything beautiful in its time; even [a sense of] the external world, He has set in their heart, yet man cannot discover the work that God has done from [the] beginning to the end.
I know there is nothing better for them than to rejoice and perform good deeds in his life.
And also, when every man eats and drinks, and enjoys the good of all his labors, that is the gift of God.
I know that whatever God does will endure forever, nothing can be added to it, nor anything be diminished from it; God has so made it that man should fear before Him.
That which already was, exists now, and that which is to be, has already been; and God seeks the pursued.
And, furthermore, I have seen under the sun: in the place of justice there was wickedness, and in the place of righteousness there was wickedness.
I said to myself: “The righteous and the wicked God will judge; for there is a time for every desire, and for every deed—there.”
I said to myself: “Concerning the state of man, God has set them apart that they may see that they themselves are as beast.”
For the fate of men and the fate of the beasts—the same fate befalls both, as one dies, so dies the other, the same breath is in all of them; and the superiority of man over beast is nil for all is vanity.
All go to one place; all come from the dust, and all return to the dust.
Who knows the spirit of man, whether it rises upwards and the spirit of the beast whether it descends to the earth.”
I perceived, therefore, that there is nothing better than man should rejoice in his work, for that is his lot; for who will bring him to see what will be after him.

Chapter 4

And I returned and considered all the oppressions that are committed under the sun; and behold, tears of the oppressed, with no one to comfort them, and from the hand of their oppressors [flows the] power—with no one to comfort them.
And so I praised the dead who already died; more than the living who are still alive.
And better than both of these is he who has not yet been born; who has not seen the evil deed that is committed under the sun.
And I observed that all labor and all skillful work is the result of man’s envy of his neighbor; this, too, is vanity and vexation of spirit.
The fool folds his hands and eats his own flesh.
Better is a handful [earned] in contentment; than two handfuls [earned] in labor and vexation of spirit.
And I returned and observed [another form of] vanity under the sun.
There is one who is alone, with none other beside him, he has neither son nor brother; yet there is no end to his labor, neither is his eye ever satisfied with riches; [nor does he ask himself] For whom do I labor and deprive myself of goodness? this too is vanity, and an evil matter.
Two are better than one; because they receive a goodly reward for their work.
For if they fall, one will lift up the other; but woe to him who is alone when he falls, and there is no one to lift him.
Also, if two lie together they can be warm; but how can one be warm alone?
And if an individual attacks, the two of them can stand against him; and the threefold cord is not quickly severed.
Better a poor but wise child; than an old and foolish king, who no longer knows how to be vigilant.
Even though he [the child] emerged from prison to be king; even though in his own kingdom he was born a pauper.
I observed that all the living that walk under the sun were supportive of the young successor who stepped into his place.
There was no limit to all the peoples, to all of them whom he lead; even though [it is so now] those who come after [the next generation] will not rejoice in him; for this, too, is vanity and vexation of spirit.
Guard your foot when you go to the House of God, come near and listen rather than offer sacrifices like the fools; for they do not know that they do evil.

Chapter 5

Do not be impulsive with your mouth, nor let your heart be hasty to utter a word before God; for God is in heaven and you are on earth, therefore, let your words be few.
For a dream comes with many subjects and the voice of a fool with many words.
When you make an oath to God, do not delay in its fulfillment, for He has no desire in fools; whatever you vow, fulfill.
It is better that you not vow [at all] rather than vow and not fulfill.
Do not permit your mouth to bring guilt on your flesh, nor say before the angel that it was an error; why should God be angered by your voice, and destroy the work of your hands.
For in the multitude of dreams and vanities and in the multitude of words; man should fear God.
Oppression of the poor, perversion of justice and righteousness—should you observe these in the state—do not be astonished by the fact; for One higher than the high watches, and there are high ones above them.
The profit of the earth is desired by all; the king himself is subject to the soil.
He who loves money will never be satisfied with money, and he who loves abundance will have no produce; this too is vanity.
As goods increase so do those who consume them; and what advantage has the owner except beholding them with his eyes.
Sweet is the sleep of the laborer, whether he eats little or much; but the satiety of the rich will not permit him to sleep.
There is a sickening evil [which] I have seen under the sun—wealth preserved by its owner to his own detriment.
And should he lose that wealth through some tragic mishap; and should a son be born to him—he will have nothing in his hand.
As he came from his mother’s womb, naked will he return as he came; he will take nothing for his labor, [nothing] that he will carry in his hand.
This too is a sickening evil; as he came, so shall he depart; what profit did he gain that he toiled for the wind.
Also, all his days he eats in darkness; and he has much grief, illness and anger.
Behold that which I have seen: it is good, even commendable for one to eat and drink and to enjoy the good of all his labor that he labors under the sun, during the counted days of his life that God has given him for that is his portion.
Also, every man to whom God has given wealth and possession, and the power to enjoy them, to take his share and to rejoice in his labor; this is the gift of God.
For they are not many, let him remember, the days of his life; while God answers [provides] him with the joy of his heart.

Chapter 6

There is an evil which I have seen under the sun; and it weighs heavily on man.
A man to whom God grants wealth, possessions and honor, and lacks nothing for himself of all he desires, yet God does not give him the power to eat thereof but instead a stranger will enjoy them; this is vanity and an evil disease.
If a man begets a hundred [children], and lives many years, so that the days of his years are many, and his soul is not sated of goodness, and moreover he has no burial; I say, that better off than he, is the stillborn child.
For he [the stillborn child] comes in vain and departs in darkness; and its name shrouded in darkness.
Though it never saw the sun, nor knew of it; its contentment is greater than his.
Though he live a thousand years twice over, and enjoy no goodness; indeed, to one place, they all go.
All man’s labor is to fill his mouth; yet his appetite is never filled.
What advantage has the wise man over the fool? What disadvantage has the poor man who knows how to cope with [the problems of] life?
Better is what the eyes actually see, than the imagination of the soul; this too is vanity and vexation of spirit.
Whatever has been has already been named, and it is foreknown what man is; he cannot contend with one who is mightier than he.
For there are many things that increase vanity; in what way is man better for it?
For who knows what is good for man in [his] life, in the counted days of his vanity, which he spends as a [mere] shadow; for who can tell a man what will be after him under the sun.

Chapter 7

Better a good name than precious oil; and the day of death than the day of birth.
Better to go to a house of mourning than to go to a house of feasting, for that is the end of all men; and the living should take it to heart.
Better vexation than levity; for through a grieved countenance, the heart is made better.
The heart of the wise [reflect on] the house of mourning; but the heart of the fools [are attracted] to the house of feasting.
Better to hear the rebuke of the wise than for man to hear the song of fools.
For like the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of the fool; this too is vanity.
For quarreling makes the wise foolish, and a gift corrupts the heart.
Better is the end of a matter than its beginning; better is patience than pride.
Do not quicken your spirit to anger; for anger rests in the bosom of fools.
Do not say: was it that the former days were better than these? for it is not out of wisdom that you ask this question.
It is good to have wisdom with inheritance; and [such wisdom] benefits those who see the sun [i.e. mankind].
For wisdom shelters [as well] as money shelters; but the advantage of knowledge is that wisdom preserves the life of him who possesses it.
Consider the deeds of God; for who [else] can straighten that which he [man] made crooked.
On a day of goodness [prosperity] be in good spirits, and on a day of adversity reflect [that]: the one was set up against the other by God, in order that man should not find anything after him.
I have seen all things in the days of my vanity, there is a righteous man who perishes [despite] his righteousness, and there is a wicked man whose life is prolonged [despite] his wickedness.
Be not exceedingly righteous nor overly wise; why destroy yourself.
Be not excessively wicked, and don’t be a fool; why should you die before your time.
It is best to take hold of one, and also from the other withdraw not your hand; for he who fears God will discharge his duty to both.
Wisdom gives [more] strength to the wise than ten rulers of the city.
For there is not a righteous man on earth; who does [only] good, and never sins.
Furthermore, of all the words that are spoken, take them not to heart; lest you hear your own servant curse you.
For also there were many times as you know in your heart that you, too, have cursed others.
All this I have probed with wisdom; I said “I will be wise, but it [proved to be] far beyond me.”
That which was, is far beyond me; and so very deep, who can find it.
So I turned about and applied my heart to know, to explore, and to search for wisdom and the reason for things, and to know that wickedness is folly, and foolishness is madness.
And I find more bitter than death, the woman—whose heart is full of traps and nets, her hands as chains; he who seeks to please God, will escape from her, but the sinner will be trapped by her.
See this is what I have found says Koheles; adding one to another to find an accounting.
For which yet my soul searches, and yet I have not found; one [worthy] man among a thousand I have found, but a [worthy] woman among all of them, I have not found.
See, this only have I found: that God made man upright; but they sought out many stratagems.

Chapter 8

Who is like the wise person and who knows how to interpret things? A man’s wisdom lights up his face, and the boldness of his face is changed.
My [advice to you is]: keep the King’s command, and do so because of the oath to God.
Do not hasten to leave His Presence do not persist in doing evil; for whatever pleases Him, He does.
For the King’s word is all powerful; and who can say to Him, “What are You doing?”
He who preserves the commandment will know no evil; and [the significance of] time and judgment is known by the wise man.
For every matter there is a time and judgement; when the evil of man overwhelms him.
For he does not know what will be, for when it comes to pass who will tell him?
Man has no power over the spirit, to retain the spirit, he has no power over the day of death, nor dispatch in battle; nor will wickedness save its perpetrator.
All this I have seen, and I applied my heart to [understand] all the work that is done under the sun; there is a time when man rules over man to his detriment.
And so I have seen how the wicked were buried and came forth anew [whereas the righteous] who were gone from the holy place were forgotten in the very city where they performed [righteousness;] this, too, is vanity.
Because the execution of sentence against evil deeds is not done quickly; therefore, the hearts of men are filled with encouragement to do evil.
Though a sinner does evil a hundred times and his days are prolonged; nevertheless, I know that it will be well with those who fear God, who fear before His Presence.
And it will not be well with the wicked, nor shall he prolong his days which are like a shadow; because he does not fear before the Presence of God.
There is a vanity which is done upon the earth: there are righteous men who suffer as if they had performed [the same] deeds as those who are wicked; and there are wicked men who receive [reward] as if they had performed the same deeds as the righteous; I said that this too is vanity.
I extolled [the concept of] rejoicing for there is nothing better for man under the sun than to eat and drink and be joyful; and this will accompany him in his toil [all] the days of his life which God has given him under the sun.
When I applied my heart to know wisdom and to observe the activity that is done on the earth—for neither by day nor by night does he see sleep with his eyes.
And I saw all the works of God—that man cannot discover the work that is done under the sun; and though a man labor to seek it out he will not find it; and even though a wise man declares that he knows it, he, too, will not be able to discover it.

Chapter 9

For all this I put to my heart and [I sought to] make all this clear: that the righteous and the wise and their works are in the hand of God; whether it be love or hate, man does not know, all is before them.
All things come alike to all; the same fate [awaits] the righteous and the wicked, the good and the pure and the impure, to him who brings offerings, and to him who does not bring offerings; as is with the good man so is it with the sinner, as is with the one who swears [easily] so is it with the one who fears an oath.
This is an evil in all that is done under the sun: that the same fate awaits all; [therefore], the hearts of men are filled with evil, and madness is in their hearts during their lifetime, and afterwards they join the dead.
For to him that is joined to all the living there is hope; for a live dog is better than a dead lion.
For the living know that they will die; but the dead know nothing, and there is no further reward for them, for their memory is forgotten.
Also their love, their hate, and their jealousy have already perished; and a portion they will never again have in anything that is done under the sun.
Go eat your bread in joy, and drink your wine with a glad heart; for already God has accepted your deeds.
At all times, let your garments be white; and your head never lack oil.
See [to enjoy] life with the wife you love, all the days of your vain life which He has given you under the sun—all the days of your vanity;—for that is your portion in life, and in your labor in which you toil under the sun.
Whatever you are able to do do with all your might; for there is neither deed, nor strategy, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave where you are going.
Again I saw under the sun: that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, nor does bread [come] to the wise, nor riches to men of understanding, nor favor to the learned; for time and chance happen to them all.
For also, man does not know his time, as fish that are caught in a fatal net, as birds that are caught in a snare; like them, men are snared in the moment of misfortune, when it falls upon them suddenly.
This, too, I have seen [concerning] wisdom under the sun; and its impact was great upon me.
[There was] a small city, with few men within it; and a mighty king came upon it and surrounded it and built great bulwarks against it.
But there was found in the city, a poor wise man, and he saved the city with his wisdom; yet no person remembered that poor man.
And [yet] I said: “Wisdom is better than might; [although] a poor man’s wisdom is despised, and his words go unheeded.
The words of the wise, are received with pleasure more than the shouts of a ruler of fools.
Wisdom is better than weapons of war; but one sinner destroys a multitude of good.

Chapter 10

Dead flies decay and pollute the perfumer’s ointment; wisdom and honor are outweighed by a little foolishness.
The heart [understanding] of a wise man is at his right hand; but the heart of a fool is at his left.
Also, when a fool walks by the way, his heart [understanding] fails him; and proclaims to all that he is a fool.
If the spirit [anger] of the Ruler flares up against you, do not leave your place; for softness pacifies great offenses.
There is an evil which I have seen under the sun; like an error emanating from the ruler.
Folly is set upon great heights; but the rich sit in low places.
I have seen slaves on horses, and princes walking on foot like slaves on the ground.
He who digs a pit will fall into it; he who breaks down a fence will be bitten by a snake.
He who removes stones will be hurt by them; he who splits logs will be endangered by them.
If the axe is blunt, and one has not sharpened its edge, he must exert more strength; there is more profit in a skill of wisdom.
If the snake bites before it is charmed; there is no advantage in having a charmer.
The words of a wise man win favor; but the lips of a fool devour him.
The beginning of his words is foolishness, and the end of his talk is evil madness.
The fool multiplies words; man knows not what will be; and what will be after him, who can tell him.
The labor of the fools exhausts them; for he does not know the way to the city.
Woe to you, O land, if your king is a [mere] lad and whose officers feast in the morning.
Fortunate are you, land whose king is a free [noble] man; and your officers feast at the proper time—in strength and not in drunkenness.
Where there is slothfulness, the ceiling sags, and where there is idleness, the house leaks.
A feast is made for laughter, and wine will gladden life; and money answers all things.
Even in your thoughts do not curse the king, and in your bed-chamber do not curse the rich; for a bird of the skies may carry [your] voice, and that which has wings will reveal the matter.

Chapter 11

Cast your bread upon the waters, for after many days you will find it.
Contribute to seven and even to eight; for you never know what calamity will come upon the earth.
When the clouds are filled with rain they will empty themselves upon the earth; and if a tree falls in the south or in the north, in the place where the tree falls there it remains.
He who watches [waits] for the wind, will never sow; and he who looks to the clouds will never reap.
Just as you do not know the way of the wind, nor the nature of that which is hidden in the womb of her that is with child, so will you never know the working of God Who does all things.
[Therefore] in the morning sow your seed, and in the evening do not remain idle; for you do not know which will prosper, whether this or that, or whether both are equally good.
And the light is sweet; and it is good [pleasant] for the eyes to behold the sun.
For even if many years should man live, let him rejoice in all of them; and remember the days of darkness, for they will be many; all that comes is vanity.
Rejoice, young man, in your youth, and let your heart cheer you in the days of your youth, follow the ways of your heart and the sight of your eyes; but realize that for all these things, God will bring you to judgement.
Therefore, banish anger from your heart and remove evil from your flesh; for childhood and youth are vanity.

Chapter 12

So remember your Creator in the days of your youth; before the evil days come, and the years draw near of which you will say: “I have no desire in them.”
Before the darkening of the sun, the light, the moon and the stars; and the clouds return after the rain.
In the day when trembling prevails over the preservers of the house and the strong men will be bent and the grinders cease because they are few, and the starers in the windows are dimmed.
And the doors to the street will be shut, when the sound of the grinding is low; and when one will awaken at the sound of a bird, and muffled will be the daughters [sounds] of song.
Also, when they will fear heights, and terrors on the road, and the almond tree will blossom and the grasshopper will be a burden, and the desire will fail; for, [in this manner,] man goes to his eternal home, and the mourners go about the streets.
Before the snapping of the silver cord, and the golden bowl is shattered; and the pitcher is broken at the fountain, and the wheel is shattered into the pit.
And the dust returns to the earth as it was; and the spirit returns to God Who gave it.
Vanity of vanities says Koheles, all is vanity.
And besides that Koheles was wise, he also taught the people knowledge; he weighed and probed—and adapted many proverbs.
Koheles sought to find words of delight; and to write in a proper way words of truth.
The words of the wise are like goads, like well fastened nails [are the words] of the masters of [learned] assemblies; all were given from one Shepherd.
And, furthermore, my son, be admonished; of making many books, there is no end, and much study wears away the flesh.
In conclusion, after all has been heard; fear God, and preserve His commandments, for this is the whole [duty] of man.
For every deed God will bring into judgement, and every hidden thing; whether good or bad. (In conclusion, after all has been heard; fear God, and preserve His commandments, for this is the whole [duty] of man.)