Mishneh Torah, Firstlings
משנה תורה, הלכות בכורות
Maimonides' Mishneh Torah, edited by Philip Birnbaum, New York, 1967
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH002108864

Mishneh Torah, Firstlings



Chapter 1

It is a positive command to set apart every male firstborn, whether among human beings or among clean cattle or among the donkey species, whether they are unharmed or diseased, as it is written: "Consecrate to me every firstborn, man or beast; every firstborn among the Israelites is mine" (Exodus 13:2). All these belong to the priests.
The firstborn of a human being and the firstborn of a donkey must be redeemed, and their redemption price is given to the priests. The firstborn of clean cattle is to be slaughtered in the Temple Court, like other things holy in a minor degree.— —
If the firstborn of a clean animal was blemished, it had to be given to the priest, whether it was blemished from birth or it became blemished after it had been perfect. If the priest wanted to, he might eat it anywhere, sell it, or serve it as food to anyone he pleased, even to a non-Jew, since it was permissible for common use.— —

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6

It is a positive command to set apart one out of ten from all clean cattle which are born to any man each year. This command applies only to herds or flocks, as it is written: "All tithes of the herd or flock … shall be holy to the Lord" (Leviticus 27:32).

All are required to give tithe from cattle: priests, Levites, and lay Israelites.

Chapter 7

If a man had ten lambs and he set apart one of the ten, or if he had a hundred and he set ten apart as tithe, they are not valid tithe. But how should one act? He must gather all the lambs or all the calves into the fold and make an opening so small that two cannot get out at the same time. Their dams are left outside bleating, so that the lambs hear their voice and leave the fold to meet them, as it is written: "All that passes under the shepherd's staff" (32), meaning that each must pass under the staff of itself, and not that the owner should pull it out. When they emerge from the fold, one after the other, the owner begins to count: one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, and the lamb which comes out tenth, whether male or female, unblemished or blemished, he marks with red paint and says: "This is tithe."— —





Young lambs are not like untithed farm products from which it is forbidden to eat until they are tithed.— — One may sell or slaughter whatever he pleases before he performs the tithing; then the tithe animal is consecrated and consumed in a legally prescribed manner.— —
The sages appointed three seasons in the year for tithing cattle, and when one of these seasons arrives one must not sell or slaughter until he has given tithe.— —