Ohr Chadash
אור חדש
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Ohr_Chadash
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Ohr Chadash

Introduction



















<b>In the book of Proverbs</b> (9:1) – “Wisdom (of women) has built her house, etc.” In the Midrash (Midrash Mishle 9:1): “Wisdom (of women) has built her house […] She has slaughtered her slaughtering and also set her table” (Proverbs 9:1-2) – that is Queen Esther: At the time that distress came to the Jewish people, she prepared a meal for Ahasuerus and for the wicked Haman, and she got him very drunk with wine. Yet Haman thought to himself that she was giving him honor and did not know that she set a trap for him. As, by getting him drunk with wine, she acquired her people [for herself] forever. “And also set her table” – in this world and in the next world. What is this? [It] is the good name that she acquired. For, in the future, all the festivals are to be abolished; but the days of Purim will never be abolished, as it is stated (Esther 9:27), “not to be passed over.” Rabbi Elazar said, “Also Yom Kippur will never be abolished, as it is stated, ‘And it will be to you for an everlasting statute.’” To here [is the Midrash].

Preface







Chapter 1



Verse 1



















"Seven and twenty and one hundred provinces"—It should have said, "One hundred and twenty-seven provinces," placing the greater number first, just as it does regarding the years of the life of Sarah: "One hundred years, and twenty years, and seven years" (Genesis 23:1). The explanation is that in the case of years, the total number is indivisible; it forms a single complete unit. Therefore, the Torah first attaches what can be added to the greater number, starting with the hundred. However, provinces are inherently divided into separate entities. There is no need to combine them into a single total, so the text begins with the smaller number, "seven." Additionally, even if a king ruled over only seven provinces, he would still be considered a king. Thus, the verse starts with seven, emphasizing that even a small domain qualifies as a kingdom, before mentioning the larger numbers. By contrast, a person’s lifespan cannot be merely "seven years," as the total years of life must include the larger numbers first. Moreover, the mention of the provinces reflects their conquest. When describing conquest, it is appropriate to begin with a small number, as the king’s rule expanded progressively. In the case of Sarah’s life, however, the greater years—the core of her life—are mentioned first, followed by the smaller divisions, as the additional years are secondary in significance compared to the main period of her life.

Chapter 2



Verse 1



Verse 2



Verse 3



Verse 4



Verse 5



Verse 6



Verse 7


















In the Midrash (Bereshit Rabbah 30:8): The Rabbis say, "Everyone in whose regard <i>haya</i> (was) is stated, he fed others and sustained them. Noah, about whom it is stated (Genesis 6:9), 'he was a righteous man,' fed and sustained [the animals] all twelve months, as it is stated (Genesis 6:21), 'And you, take for you [from all food that is eaten…and it shall be for you and for them for food].' Joseph – 'Joseph provided for his father and his brothers' (Genesis 47:12). Moses fed and sustained Israel for forty years in the wilderness. Job – 'I ate my bread alone, [and an orphan did not partake of it].' (Job 31:17). This was meant as a rhetorical question. Mordekhai fed and sustained [others]." Rabbi Yudan said, "One time he went around to all the wet nurses, but did not immediately find a wet nurse for Esther, and he nursed her himself." Rabbi Berekhiah and Rabbi Abahu said in the name of Rabbi Eliezer, "Milk came into him [his breasts] and he nursed her." [When] Rabbi Abahu expounded this in public, the audience laughed as he spoke [of a man producing milk]. He said to them, "But is it not [stated in] a mishna (Makhshirin 6:7): Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says, 'The milk of a male is pure.'"
And the explanation of this is that one who feeds and sustains – because he gives existence to the one he sustains; therefore the expression, was, is written with the one who sustains. For, was, is being in the past. And all that is past precedes; likewise one who feeds and sustains precedes the other. And hence anyone about whom it states the expression, was, feeds and sustains the other, since he precedes him, and he was existence for the other. And it was because Esther was prepared to receive from Mordkehai, and not from anyone else at all. For behold it is written about Esther, "and she was a daughter to him." And since she was a daughter to him, she was completely a daughter to him, so he nursed her completely. And hence they said that Mordekhai nursed Esthter, and milk came to him.
And it can [also] be explained that since Mordekhai was sustaining her and he did not have a wet nurse, blessing impacted on the food. And this was through Mordekhai; so he would feed Esther, as if it was completely milk. And so was it in her bowels, given that she was a daughter to Mordekhai. But it was difficult for them, that milk is not fit for man, so it is not fit for Mordekhai that this blessing come [in this way,] that it be milk, as it is completely foreign to the way of the world. And it about this that he said [that] behold, we have learned, "The milk of a male is pure." And if so, milk is fit for a male. Hence Mordekhai was impacted by this blessing, that it be the sustenance with which he sustained her, such that it became milk in her bowels. And all of this is because God, may He blessed, gave Esther to Mordechai as a daughter.

Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Verse 1



Verse 2



Verse 3



Verse 4



Verse 5



Verse 6



Verse 7



Verse 8



Verse 9



Verse 10



Verse 11



Verse 12



Verse 13



Verse 14



Verse 15



Verse 16



Verse 17



Verse 18



Verse 19



Verse 20



Verse 21



Verse 22




<b>And for sending portions to one another, etc.:</b> This commandment is on Purim more than on a holiday. But why is this commandment more on this day than on a holiday? Indeed the matter is known from that which was explained above. That Purim is for the Jewish people, since they vanquished the seed of Amalek who are the greatest enemy and adversary. And that is because the Jewish people is the opposite of the seed of Amalek. Since, so long as the seed of Amalek is in the world, [God's] name is not One (Rashi on Exodus 17:15). Whereas the Jewish people 'unify God's name evening and morning.' And because of this, they are one nation, and are attached to Him, may He be blessed, who is One. And because the Jewish people is one nation, it is fitting for them to be as one nation and to have complete connection and affection. Hence they must support the poor, from the angle that it is a brother, and they are one nation. This is like it is written with the commandment of charity, "your brother," in every place. For since they are our brothers, we should give [them] charity. And that is why this commandment is more specifically on this day, whether it is sending portions or whether it is gifts to the indigent.