Rambam on Mishnah Terumot
רמב"ם על משנה תרומות
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Rambam on Mishnah Terumot



Chapter 1



Mishnah 1



Mishnah 2



Mishnah 3



Mishnah 4



Mishnah 5

It is known that the gleanings, forgotten sheaves, and corners of the field, which are designated for the poor, do not belong to the field owner, and therefore he is not obligated to separate the required tithe from them. This is because they fall under the category of laws pertaining to the poor. However, regarding ownerless produce, perhaps one could argue that it is permissible for him to take the obligated tithe from it, as he has a right to ownerless property since it is open to all. However, the Almighty has stated that the ownerless property has no share or inheritance with you (Deuteronomy 14:27-28), and He further said, "From what is yours and his, you have brought forth the ownerless property" (Deuteronomy 15:3). Thus, ownerless property is considered equal to both you and him. And they said regarding the first tithe, when the Levite has received his portion and the owner still has produce from his own land, he is undoubtedly obligated to separate the required tithe. Furthermore, even if he has tithes that he acquired from Israel, it is not appropriate for him to take from them the measure of the obligated tithe for his own produce and give it to the priest. This is because the priest has a specific law and right regarding that tithe, which is the tithe of the tithes. However, he should separate the tithe of the tithes, and afterward, he should separate the obligated tithe for his own produce.
And regarding the one who is obligated for the exempt, he should separate a contribution of terumah from fully ripened fruits that are subject to tithes. This is because fruits that have not completed their growth are exempt from tithes, as will be explained.
The "old and new" refers to the seed of this year together with the seed of the coming year. It is not appropriate to separate terumah obligated for one of the seeds and apply it to the other. All of this is according to the verse, "To separate from the tithe of the children of Israel the contribution of the Lord" (Numbers 18:26), meaning that one should separate from the same type of produce and not from a different type.
And not from the produce of the land for produce from abroad. The reason for this is stated: "All the tithe of the land, whether of the seed of the land or of the fruit of the tree, is the Lord's" (Leviticus 27:30). Although there are verses brought as evidence, some of which refer to tithes and others to terumot ma'aser, there is no contradiction here. We derive evidence from the verses that discuss terumot on tithes and from the verses that discuss tithes on terumot, as they are interconnected. The principle is that one should separate from what is obligated according to the law.