Siddur, Ashkenaz
סידור נוסח אשכנז
merged
http://www.sefaria.org/Siddur,_Ashkenaz
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-http://www.sefaria.org



Siddur, Ashkenaz

Seder 1

Shacharit
Poems:
The king of the world, who ruled before any creature was created. At the time they were made, all was according to His will, and then His name was called "King". And after everything was finished, he alone ruled, awe-inspiring. He was, He is, and He will be with splendor. And, he was first, with no second, to rule over him or to collaborate; with no beginning and no end, he has the strength and the right. And he is my G-d, my redeemer is alive; the rock who sustains me in a distressful day. And he is my banner and refuge, the portion of my cup on the day I call out. In his hand, I safegaurd my spirit, [for] when I sleep, [I know that] I will wake. And with my spirit is my body; G-d is for me, and I will not be afraid. 
May the living G-d be exalted, and praised, it is found that there is no specific time to find him [for he is eternal]. He is one, and there is none as unified as his unity; it is hidden, and there is also no end to his unity. He has no bodily form, and no body; his holiness has not been ordered for him. He is earlier than anything which he created, [He is] the first and there is none before His earliness. He is surely the lord of the world, to all being, and He teaches his greatness and kingship. An abundance of prophecy He gave to them, his special and splendorous people. There never again arose in Israel like Moses, a prophet and seer of His image. A truthful instruction, G-d gave to His people, by the hand of his prophet who was trustworthy in His house. The G-d will not change, nor will he switch His belief, forever [there is none] except for Him. He watches and knows our secrets, and looks at the end of something at its beginning. He recompensates people with kindness, according to their deeds, and gives the wicked bad according to his evil. At the end of days, He will send our annointed, to redeem those who wait for the end [when] His salvation [takes place]. The dead will G-d resuscitate, in his abundant kindness, blessed be His praised name forever.
Morning Blessings:
Blessed are you, Hashem, our G-d and king of the world, who gave the rooster (or mind) insight to distinguish between day and night.
Blessed are you, Hashem, our G-d and king of the world, who did not make me a gentile.
Blessed are you, Hashem, our G-d and king of the world, who did not make me a slave (Women say: A maidservant).
Men- Blessed are you, Hashem, our G-d and king of the world, who did not make me a woman.
Women- Blessed are you, Hashem, our G-d and king of the world, who made me according to his will.
Blessed are you, Hashem, our G-d and king of the world, who opens [the eyes of] the blind.
Blessed are you, Hashem, our G-d and king of the world, who clothes the naked.
Blessed are you, Hashem, our G-d and king of the world, who releases the bound.
Blessed are you, Hashem, our G-d and king of the world, who straightens the bent.
Blessed are you, Hashem, our G-d and king of the world, who placed the land on the water.
Blessed are you, Hashem, our G-d and king of the world, who fulfilled all my needs for me.
Blessed are you, Hashem, our G-d and king of the world, who prepares the steps of man.
Blessed are you, Hashem, our G-d and king of the world, who girds Israel with courage.
Blessed are you, Hashem, our G-d and king of the world, who crowns Israel with splendor.
Blessed are you, Hashem, our G-d and king of the world, who gives to the weary strength.
Blessed are you, Hashem, our G-d and king of the world, who removes sleep from my eyes, and slumber from my pupils.
And may it be pleasing before You, Hashem our G-d and the G-d of our forefathers, that you make us accustomed in your Torah, and make us stick to your commandments. And that You do not bring us not to the hands of sin, nor to the hands of transgression and wrongdoing, nor to the hands of trial, and nor to the hands of scorn. And let not the evil inclination rule inside us, and distance us from a bad person and a bad friend. And stick us to the good inclination and to good deeds, and force our inclination to be subdued to You. And grant us today and every day grace and kindness and mercy, in your eyes an in the eyes of all who see us, and reward us with good kindnesses. Blessed are You, Hashem, who rewards good kindnesses upon His nation, Israel. May it be pleasing before You, Hashem my G-d and the G-d of my forefathers, that save us today and every day from those who are arrogant and from arrogance itself, from a bad person, a bad friend, a bad neighbor, a bad strike, from the destructive Satan, from a harsh law and from a harsh judge, whether he is a son of the covenant or whether he is not a son of the covenant.





















































































The Shema and its Blessings
Bless Hashem, the blessed one: Blessed is Hashem, the blessed one, forever and ever.
[When praying] alone say: God, faithful King.
Listen Israel! Hashem our God, Hashem is one!
Whisper - Blessed is the name of the glory of His Kingdom forever and ever.





With a great love have You loved us, Lord our God. With great and exceeding pity have You had pity upon us.  For the sake of our forefathers who trusted in You and You taught them the laws of life, so too grace us and teach us. Our Father, the merciful Father, the merciful One, have mercy upon us and allow our hearts to understand, to cognate, to accept, to learn and to teach; to observe, to do and to perform all the words of the study of Your Torah with love. And brighten our eyes in Your Torah; and have our hearts cling to Your commandments; and unify our hearts to love and fear Your name. And for ever and ever let us not be embarrassed, as we trust in Your great and awesome name. Let us rejoice and be happy in Your salvation. And bring us in peace from the four corners of the world and take us upright to our land; as You are the Power who enacts salvation. And You have chosen us from all peoples and languages, and You have brought us close to Your great name, that we should thank You and unify You with love. Blessed are You, Lord, who chooses His people Israel with love.






















You gracefully give knowledge to man and you teach understanding to the mortal. Grace us with  knowledge, understanding and intelligence from You. Blessed are You, Lord, who gracefully gives knowledge.











For the righteous and for the pious. And for the elders of your people the house of Israel. And for the young who are studying. And for the righteous converts. And for us. Place Your mercy Hashem our G-d. And give good reward to all those who trust in your name in truthfulness. And place our portion with them forever and never abandon us for with trust in You. Blessing is sourced from You Hashem Who guards and is a security for the righteous.


Hear our voice. Hashem, our God, have pity and be compassionate with us. And receive our prayer with compassion and goodwill. For You are God, who hears prayers and supplications. From before You, our King, do not leave us empty. For you compassionately hear the prayer of Your people, Israel. Blessed are You, Hashem, who hears prayer. 












































































































<i>In a house of mourning, during the Shaharit and Minhah prayers, the following Psalm is said after Aleinu </i>