Netzach Yisrael
נצח ישראל
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Netzach Yisrael

Introduction







Chapter 1

When a good thing is known from its opposite, that is true knowledge.  The knowledge of all things is acquired from their opposite.  It is from the appearance of black that one can gain knowledge of the appearance of white.  And smilarly with all opposites.  From one is acquired the knowledge of its opposite.  It is widely accepted that "the knowledge of opposites is all one thing".  Because of this, the [Sages] say in Arvei Pesachim (The final chapter of Babylonian Talmud Tractate Pesachim 116a) that in the Haggadah "one begins with disgrace and concludes with praise".  Why do they begin with disgrace?  Only because true praise can only be recognised from its opposite.  Therefore, we cannot explain the the concept of the final redemption [geulah], without explaining the concept of exile [galut] and churban [destruction of the temple in Jerusalem].  It is by this means that we can come to know the goodness and salvation which we hope for.  When we come to explain the concept of exile with true knowledge, we will need to start with the cause of the exile, and matters connected to the exile.
There is another reason to explain the concept of exile first.  The exile itself is proof and clear imperative for redemption.  This is because there is no doubt that exile is an alteration and departure from the normal order.  The Blessed Holy One arranged each nation in the place which is appropriate for it, so he arranged the People of Israel into the place which is appropriate for it, namely the Land of Israel.  Exile from their place is a complete alteration and departure [from that order].  Anything which departs from its natural place, which is outside its place, is unable to stay in the place which is not natural for it.  Rather they need to return to their natural place.  Because if they remain in a place which is unnatural for them, then the unnatural would become natural.  And it is impossible for the unnatural to become natural.  A metaphor: it is like trying to force fire to stay down, when it's natural state is to rise - or like trying to hold up solid matter, when its natural state is to fall to the earth.  If you could achieve that, then you would be making the unnatural natural.
Similarly with the People of Israel themselves.  If they were to stay in exile for ever, which is not the right place for them to be (since the right place for them, according to the order of existence, is the Land of Israel under their own sovereignty and not under the sovereignty of any other).  Just like everything in natural existence, each one has its own place as our sages decreed (Pirkei Avot 4:3) "There is nothing which does not have its place".  Each thing under its own sovereignty.  If they would remain in exile forever, then this thing (unnaturally standing outside their place) would become natural.  Only natural things can stand permanently, because the nature which the Blessed Holy One gave to each thing is what sustains it such that it is established to stand forever.  If an unnatural state of affairs were to exist forever, even though it was not according to the order and nature of existence, then the nature of that thing would be loosened and nullified completely for no purpose, and such a thing could not happen.
Similarly, dispersal is not a natural state of affairs.  Just as each thing returns to its place, so dispersed and separated parts have to return to [become] one entity.  This is clear to anyone of intelligence, that all parts have one essence to them.  If so, why would there be a division between them, and not unity, since they are one thing?  Therefore all dispersal stands only to be coalesced together.  Therefore the dispersal of the People of Israel among the nations is a thing which exists outside of nature, since (the People of Israel) is one nation, suitable to be standing together as one, as is found in the case of all natural things which are not divided into two.  Rather that they should be joined together.  Similarly "All the rivers flow into the sea" (Kohelet 1:7) to be gathered together.  One thing is not divided.  So since the Jewish nation is a nation united more than any other nation, not divided or separated , it is appropriate that they should be gathered together.  From this we can see that dispersal is particularly unnatural for them.  It is impossible to say that this state of affairs is only because of sin and iniquity, after all the dispersal of the People of Israel is so unnatural, because if this were to become permanent, then the unnatural would have to become natural.
Furthermore, according to the order of existence, it is not appropriate for a nation to be subjugated by another under the weight of a yoke upon it.  Because the Blessed Holy One created each nation with its own purpose.  The idea that the People of Israel should be "higher than all the other nations of the earth" (Deut 28:1) when they do the will of the Almighty is a separate concept, because it is the order of existence that [in those conditions] they should be on a higher level.    But in the case of the rest of the nations, according to the order of existence, it is appropriate that each one of them from the point of view of being created for its own purpose, should not be under the authority of others.  And if such a state of affairs were to exist permanently, namely the exile and the hand of other nations ruling over the People of Israel, then such a state of affairs contrary to the order of existence, an alteration in the order of the world, would be impossible. Therefore we can only understand redemption from exile.
The Sages hinted towards this idea, in their wisdom, in Midrash Bereishit Rabbah (44:18) [on the double language in the verse] "G-d said to Avram you shall surely know [lit: it is known, you will know]" (Gen 15:13)" [The Midrash says:] "(1) It is known that I will disperse them, you will know that I will gather them in.  (2) It is known that I will pawn them, you will know that I will reclaim them.  (3) It is known that I will subjugate them, you will know that I will redeem them." This Midrash did not need to express all three of these ideas, because they are all one concept.  It would have been enough for them to express [only the third one] "It is known that I will subjugate them, you will know that I will redeem them"  Because this is the essence which records that, in any case, that He will redeem Am Yisrael.  So why did they need to mention also the idea of (1) gathering in and (2) reclaiming?    The [Sages] wanted to express that by this double expression  the exile and redemption are hinted at.  The exile is referred to by the expression "it is known" and the redemption by the expression "you will know" in the future tense. They explain [that G-d is saying] "it is known that I disperse them, you will know that I will gather them in".  Because dispersal is not according to the order of existence - that a single entity, like the People of Israel which is one people, should be dispersed, as has been explained already, that things which are one are together also.  And [the Sages say] "it is known that I will pawn them" meaning that I will put them under the authority of others, and it is not appropriate according to the order of existence that the People of Israel should stand under any other sovereignty.  Because when the People of Israel are in another land, they leave behind their own sovereignty and stand under the authority of another.  Like a pawned object which is situated in the domain of someone other than its owner.  So with the People of Israel, who should not, according to the order of existence, be under the government of others, and that others should be subjugating them, because it was not for this that they were created.  Therefore, "by it being known  that I will subjugate them, you will know that I will redeem them" - take them out of the subjugation.  Because He is the One who ordered existence, it is impossible that something which comes from Him should depart from that order.  Rather something temporary arising out of the happening of a sin, because something which is a temporary punishment because of sin is not called a departure from the order of existence.  But for such a state of affairs to continue forever cannot be, because you will not find anything which departs from the natural order which sustains.  Similarly when [the Sages] said "it is known that I will subjugate them, you will know that I will redeem them", it is because the subjugation of one nation by another is not in accordance with the order of existence as it should be, because it should be that every nation is free.  This we have discussed at length in my book "Gevurot Hashem" (Chap 35) on the verse "This month shall be for you the first of months" (Ex 12:2)  q.v. Thus has been explained by these three ideas [being out of place, dispersal, and subjugation] that one can come to an understanding of redemption from [understanding] exile.

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9






And in the Midrash (Eikhah Rabbah 1:1): They asked Ben Azai, saying to him, "Our teacher, expound for us one matter from the scroll of Lamentations." He said to them, "Israel was exiled only after they denied the Unique One of the world, circumcision that was given after twenty generations, the Ten Commandments, and the five books of the Torah. From where [do we know this]?  '<i>Eikhah</i> (the numerical value of which is 36, the sum of these things) does it sit desolate.'" To here [is the Midrash]. The author of this Midrash further clarified the matter. And that is because Israel had a covenant with God, may He be blessed. And when they had the covenant with God, may He be blessed - and that is the link and the connection - they were not exiled. For they had a connection and link with God, may He be blessed. But [they were exiled] when they negated the covenant, by way of denying the One with whom they had a covenant; and that was the Unique One of the world. And they also denied that there was a receiver of the covenant, since circumcision indicates that the Jews accepted the covenant from God, may He be blessed. For circumcision is a covenant that clings to the body of a person, and it is the connection. And that is why the covenant is in their flesh: To say that the Jews accept the covenant from God, may He be blessed. And the Torah and the Ten Commandments are a covenant and a connection when the Jews are following the Torah and the Ten Commandments. For they rest in the "Ark of the Covenant" (Joshua 3:6). As the Torah and the commandments that God, may He be blessed, gave to Israel - that is the covenant itself and the connection, when the Jews are doing His commandments. For any covenant and link is on account of three [entities]. The first [here] is God, may He be blessed, who sealed a covenant with them. [The second] is the recipient of the covenant, which is man. And the thing that is the covenant is the third. 

Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29



Chapter 30



Chapter 31



Chapter 32



Chapter 33



Chapter 34




In the [Babylonian] Talmud in chapter Chelek (Sanhedrin 94a) he said: "To where were [the ten tribes] exiled? Mar Zutra says:  to Afrikei, and Rabbi Ḥanina says: To the Selug Mountains".  Now, according to the one who said "Afrikei", there are no known Israelites in Africa.  And one can't say that they were mixed with the gentiles and that the dispute [of Rabbi Akiva  and Rabbi Elazar] is whether those mixed among the gentiles will return in the future, for in the first chapter of Tractate Yevamoth (17a) it is [clear] that we are not concerned for this [possibility], for it says there: a [presumed] gentile who [attempts to] perform Kiddushin [which is only effectable by an Israelite or proselyte] nowadays, we are not concerned that the "Kiddushin" may be valid, [since] perhaps he is from the ten tribes, as "it is learned as a tradition that the girls from the ten tribes of that generation [became barren]", and there was no further concern that there were [descendants] of the ten tribes [mixed among the gentiles].  Therefore, one must say that that which Rabbi Elazar said that the ten tribes are destined to return, the meaning is that they will return in the future along with the rest of the exiles [of the kingdom of Judah].  For even now also they are [mixed] in the midst of the rest of the exiles [of the kingdom of Judah], for originally He exiled them such that ultimately they would be able to return with the rest of the exiles, for He exiled them originally to Afrikei or to the Selug Mountains, and afterward they were uprooted from their place [there] to be amongst the rest of the exiles [of Judah].  For often a person uproots himself from his place and goes to another place.  And according to [Rabbi Akiva] who said that [the ten tribes] never return, those 10 tribes went off and were lost from the land. This is what is meant "They are not destined to return", i.e. from the onset He didn't exile them that they would then return [again] in the future; rather they would be lost from Israel. Nonetheless, it is unsayable that [G-d forbid] an [entire] tribe would be gone from Israel.  Rather, as we said, [the 10 tribes] returned [to Israel] in the days of Jeremiah and [Josiah ruled] over them (Megillah 14b).  [Rabbi Akiva] is only speaking regarding those [of the 10 tribes] who did not return in the days of Jeremiah, whether they are destined to return. Regarding them [alone] he said "and he cast them to another land as this day" [means] that they will never return.

Chapter 35



Chapter 36



Chapter 37



Chapter 38



Chapter 39



Chapter 40



Chapter 41



Chapter 42



Chapter 43



Chapter 44



Chapter 45



Chapter 46



Chapter 47



Chapter 48



Chapter 49



Chapter 50



Chapter 51



Chapter 52



Chapter 53



Chapter 54



In the first chapter of Taanit (9a): Rabbi Yose, son of Rabbi Yehudah, says, “Three good sustainers rose up for the Jewish people, and they are: Moses, Aaron and Miriam. And three good gifts were given through their agency, and these are they: The well, the [pillar of] cloud, and the manna. The well in the merit of Miriam; the pillar of cloud in the merit of Aaron; the manna in the merit of Moses. When Miriam died, the well disappeared, as it is stated (Numbers 20:1), ‘And Miriam died there’; and it says thereafter (Numbers 20:2), ‘And there was no water for the congregation.’ But it returned in the merit of [Moses and Aaron]. When Aaron died the clouds of glory disappeared, as it is stated (Numbers 33:40), ‘And the Canaanite, the king of Arad heard.’ What report did he hear? He heard that Aaron had died and the clouds of glory had disappeared, and he thought he had been given permission to go to war against the Jewish people. And this is [the meaning of] that which is written (Numbers 20:29), ‘And all the congregation saw that Aaron was dead.’ Do not read [the verse as], ‘And they saw (<i>vayiru</i>)’; but rather [as], ‘And they were seen (<i>vayerau</i>)' [since the clouds which had concealed the Jewish people were temporarily removed]. Both returned in the merit of Moses. As it is stated (Zechariah 11:8), ‘And I cut off the three shepherds in one month.’ But did they die in one month? Didn’t Miriam die in Nisan, and Aaron in Av and Moses in Adar? Rather, it is that three good gifts that were given through their agency were annulled, and all disappeared in one month.” To here [is the Gemara].
And it can be asked why were the clouds of glory  by the agency of Aaron, and the manna by the agency of Moses and the well by the agency of Miriam. But once you understand the things that were explained to you above, you will understand these things. We have already explained that Moses was fitting that the manna should be through his agency. For it was the sustenance of Israel and he was the sustainer of the generation and the leader of the generation. As the leader and the king in particular is called the sustainer, since he fills the lackings of the generation, just as sustenance fills man's lackings. And that is why Moses - who was the sustainer and king of Israel in particular, as explained above - was fitting to sustain and feed Israel to the point that the sustenance of Israel should be by his agency. Hence the manna, which is the sustenance of Israel, was by the agency of Moses.
And the clouds of glory were by that agency of Aaron: We have already told you that the connection of the Holy One, blessed be He, with Israel was through Aaron. It is in the same way that you find in every place that the Divine Presence was revealed among the lower beings, it was with the clouds of glory - "And the Lord appeared [...] in the pillar of cloud" (Deuteronomy 31:15), and such was always [the case]; "It was on the third day, in the morning, that there was thunder and lightning; a heavy cloud" (Exodus 19:17). And likewise, in every place where there was the revelation of His Divine Presence to the lower creatures, it was with the pillar of cloud. And that is why it was fitting that it be by the agency of Aaron, for the connection between God, may He be blessed, and Israel was through Aaron, as was explained.