Aramaic Targum to Song of Songs
תרגום על שיר השירים
Jay Treat's English Translation
http://www.sas.upenn.edu/~jtreat/song/targum/



Aramaic Targum to Song of Songs

Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4

On that day King Solomon sacrificed a thousand burnt offerings on the altar and his offering was accepted with favor by YY. An echo came forth from heaven and this is what it said, “How beautiful you are, O Assembly of Israel, and how beautiful are those leaders of the Assembly and the sages sitting in the Sanhedrin, they who enlighten for ever and ever the people of the House of Israel (who resemble turtledoves, the nestlings of a dove); and even the rest of the members of your Assembly and the people of the land are righteous as the sons of Jacob who gathered stones and made a monument on Mount Gilead. 12
“How beautiful are the Priests and Levites who bring your offerings and eat the holy meat, the tithe, and the heave-offering, and are untainted by any theft or robbery, just as the flocks of Jacob’s sheep were clean at the time they were shorn and came up from the Jabbok river. For none of them was obtained by theft or robbery. All of them resembled one another, they bore twins every time, and none of them was barren or miscarried.”
And the lips of the High Priest were uttering prayers before YY on the Day of Atonement, and his words changed the sins of Israel (which resembled a scarlet thread) and made them white as clean wool. 13 And the king who was at their head was full of precepts like the pomegranate, not to mention the overseers and rulers who were near the king, who were righteous and in whom there was nothing evil.
And the head of the Academy, who was master to you, was as mighty in merit and great in good deeds as David the King of Israel, and on the word of his mouth the world was built. And the people of the House of Israel were confident in the teaching of the Law with which he was occupied, and they were victorious in war as if they were holding in their hands all sorts of heroic weapons.
Your two redeemers who are destined to redeem you, Messiah Son of David and Messiah Son of Ephraim, resemble Moses and Aaron, the sons of Jochebed (who are comparable to two young antelopes, twins of a gazelle). And by their merit they fed the people of the House of Israel for forty years in the wilderness on manna, plump fowl, and the water of Miriam’s well.
And all the time that the House of Israel held fast to the ways of their righteous fathers, the demons and night-demons and morning-demons and midday-demons 14 fled from among them, because the glorious Presence of YY dwelt in the Temple that was built on Mount Moriah, and all the demons and destroyers would flee from the smell of the spice incense.
And at the time that the people, the House of Israel, did the will of the Lord of the World, He would praise them in heaven above, and this is what He said: “You are all beautiful, O Assembly of Israel, and there is no blemish in you!”
YY said by His Word, “The Assembly of Israel (which resembles a chaste bride) will dwell with me, and with Me they will go up to the Temple. And the heads of the people who dwell by the river Amana and who dwell on the peak of Snow Mountain and the nations who are in Hermon will be bringing gifts to you. And those who inhabit strong cities (mighty as lions) will be bringing tribute to you–the offering from cities of the mountains (which are stronger than leopards).
“Your love is fixed upon the tablet of My heart, O My sister, Assembly of Israel (who are comparable to a chaste bride). Fixed upon the tablet of My heart is the love of the least of your rabbis who is righteous like one of the rabbis of the Sanhedrin and like one of the kings of the House of Judah, upon whose neck was placed the crown of kingship.
“How beautiful to Me is your love, My sister, Assembly of Israel (who are comparable to a chaste bride). How good to me is your love, more than that of the seventy nations, and the good name of your righteous ones is more fragrant than all spices.
“And when the priests pray in the court of the Sanctuary, their lips drip flowing honey. And your tongue, O chaste bride, with your utterances–their songs and praises are sweet as milk and honey. And the scent of the garments of the priests is like the scent of frankincense.
“And your women who are married to husbands are as chaste as a chaste bride and like the Garden of Eden which no man is permitted to enter except the righteous whose souls are sent into it by the hand of the angels. And your virgins are concealed and hidden in chambers and sealed in this way: like the spring of living water which issued from beneath the Tree, was divided into four river-sources, and, if it had not been sealed by the Great and Holy Name, would have come gushing out and flooded the whole world.
“And your young men are full of precepts (like pomegranates), and they love their wives and beget children righteous as themselves. And their odor is like the pleasant spices of the Garden of Eden: cypress trees with spikenard plants.
“Spikenard and saffron, fragrant calamus and cinnamon, with all the woods of frankincense, pure myrrh, eaglewood, with all types of spices.
“And the waters of Siloah flow gently with the rest of the waters that proceed from Lebanon to water the land of Israel for the sake of those occupied with the words of the Law (who are likened to a well of living waters), and by the merit of the oblation of water poured on the altar of the Temple that is built in Jerusalem (which is called Lebanon).”
And on the northern side was a table and on it were twelve loaves of show-bread; on the southern side was the candlestick to give light; and on the altar the priests offered the sacrifice and on it sent up the spice incense.
The Assembly of Israel said, “Let God, my Beloved, enter the Temple and favorably receive the sacrifices of His people.”