Tiferet Yosef
תפארת יוסף
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Tiferet Yosef

Rosh Hashanah



Vayeilech and Shabbat Shuvah



Ha'azinu and Shabbat Shuvah



Erev Yom Kippur



Motzei Yom Kippur



Sukkot



Shabbat Chol HaMoed Sukkot



Hoshana Rabba



Shemini Atzeret



Simchat Torah



Bereshit



Noach



Tetzaveh



Parashat Zakhor



Purim



Ki Tisa



Parashat Parah



Vayakhel



Pekudei



Parashat HaChodesh



Vayikra



Tzav



...The Blessed Name flows the light of Divine Will even toward the needs of this world as well, as has been explained “For when I freed your ancestors from the land of Egypt, I did not speak with them or command them concerning burnt offerings or sacrifice (Jeremiah 7:22).” My grandfather questioned how it could be said that they were not commanded about the sacrifices, for isn’t the Torat Kohanim (Leviticus) filled with the laws of sacrifices?
The matter is that, truthfully, when a person stands with great clarity as at Mt. Sinai, at the moment when God spoke the first commandment “I am Yhvh your God,” at that moment they stood with such clarity that it wasn’t even necessary to say even the second commandment. as we learned in Talmud (Shabbat 88b). All of them recognized that the earth and all that’s in it is God’s and how everything is from God. So there was no need for any [animal] sacrifice since the essential purpose of the sacrifice is that a person takes from their wealth and absorbs it in the supernal fire and so sees how the self is absorbed into its source.
However, when a person stands in such clarity and knows how s/he is included in the source, there is no need to bring a sacrifice. Thus we learn in the Zohar (Sh’mini 38a), “[One who gives a gift to the king,] Would s/he take it from the house of the king to give to the king?” It’s not necessary to offer a sacrifice when one realizes that it’s not mine to start with.

Shabbat HaGadol



Pesach



Shabbat Chol HaMoed Pesach



The Seventh Day of Pesach



The Eighth Day of Pesach



Shmini



Achrei Mot



Emor



Bamidbar



Machar Chodesh Haftarah



Rosh Chodesh Sivan



Shavuot



Nasso



Beha'alotcha



Korach



Ki Teitzei



Ki Tavo



Nitzavim



Talmud Anthology

Berakhot



Shabbat



Pesachim



Yoma



Sukkah



Rosh Hashanah



Taanit



Megillah



Chagigah



Sanhedrin

