Ikar Siftei Hachamim on Genesis
עיקר שפתי חכמים על בראשית
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.org

Chapter 1



Verse 1

That since the Torah was only given to Israel, in order that they observe the commandments written in them (and that is why it is called Torah [Hebrew for instruction]); if so, all of these stories should not have been written in the Torah, but rather should have comprised a different book, like the Book of Joshua or the Book of Judges.
Which is not the case with circumcision and the sciatic nerve, since only individuals were commanded (for themselves and for all of Israel), and so long as all of Israel was not commanded to [do] them, they are not considered to be from [the Torah's] commandments, since it is written "Moshe commanded us the Torah" (Deuteronomy 33:4) [hence anything not commanded to the people through Moshe, is not considered Torah].
It is a statement and an answer, which means to say that the verse in Psalms explains the reason why it starts with 'In the beginning;' and this is what is understood from the verse, "the power of His actions," the explanation of ['His actions' being] the creation story, and that is why He "told His people;" because He wanted "to give them the inheritance of the nations;" because of Avraham, who God promised that He would give the Land of Canaan to his descendants (and this inheritance is from the rewards of the commandments and is [so] considered like a commandment, and, if so, it needs to inform that the creation is 'the power of His deeds'). There is also [another explanation]; it was difficult for Rashi: it should have written the Book of Genesis after Ha'azinu [towards the end of the Torah] and not to begin with it here, and he answers; "because of the 'Power of His actions, etc.,'" meaning to say, if it had written the Book of Genesis at the end of [the Torah], it would not have been a proof that [these] writings are coming to testify that the Children of Israel are not like thieves; but rather, we would have said that the reason the Book of Genesis [is written] is to tell [us] that the world is not pre-existing, which is a fundamental principle of faith, and as is written by Ramban. But now that it began with Genesis, per force, we must say that it is to explain, "Because of 'the power of His actions, etc.,'" meaning that the verse itself is testifying to this. And be exact and find the truth [to this].

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29



Chapter 30



Chapter 31



Chapter 32



Chapter 33



Chapter 34



Chapter 35



Chapter 36



Chapter 37



Verse 1



Verse 2



Verse 3

Should you say, but Binyamin was born to him further into his old age, it must be said that all the sons of Ya'akov were born to him one after the other, in six years, all but Binyamin, born after a long interval. Everyone thought that he would have no more sons from her so they called Yosef Son of old Age. And even after Binyamin was born, they called him that because they had become accustomed to it.
Because the first explanation was problematic–what difference does it make if he was born in his old age or in the days of his youth? Therefore the Onkelos reference. Being for Rashi yet problematic to say of him "son of his old age," he questions the word זקונים in order to introduce the זיו איקונין interpretation. (Maharshal)
Regarding the difficulty in "what difference does it make," the text says that he made for him a k'tonet passim. If you argue that it is to teach that a person should not treat one of the sons differently, for on account of two selas by which Yosef's tunic was more valuable his brothers became jealous of him, this is not the intention of the text. (cf T. Shab 10b) For it is not written "His brothers feared because he made for him a k'tonet passim, but surely on account of his dreams and words they became jealous of him. Therefore he brings Midrash Agadah, etc. (Maharshal) He wants to say that פסים is acrostic for Potifera, sochrim, Yishma'elim, and Midyanim. It must be said regarding this agadah, that vav is missing from the word sochrim in the verse: "Men passed, Midyanim sochrim." (v.28) It should have been v'sochrim (and merchants). Further, absent in the text is selling of Yosef to merchants, and for that matter, neither is selling to Midyanim.  If it is not thus for merchants, why here?
