Horayot
הוריות
merged
http://www.sefaria.org/Horayot
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-http://www.sefaria.org



Horayot

Daf 1a



Daf 1b



Daf 2a



Daf 2b



Daf 3a



Daf 3b



Daf 4a



Daf 4b



Daf 5a



Daf 5b



Daf 6a



Daf 6b



Daf 7a



Daf 7b



Daf 8a



Daf 8b



Daf 9a



Daf 9b



Daf 10a





Like what happened with R. Gamaliel and R. Joshua. They were traveling on a ship. R. Gamaliel had some bread and R. Joshua had with him bread and flour. When R. Gamaliel's bread was finished he depended on R. Joshua's flour. He said to him: Did you know, that we would be so delayed that you brought flour ? He said to him: Every 70 years a star appears that confuses the (ships) [sailors], so I said to myself: perhaps this star will appear and confuse us. He said to him: So much is in your control, yet you board a ship.  Instead of marveling at me, marvel about the two disciples you have on land, R. Eleazar Hisma and R. Yohanan b. Gudgada,  who are able to calculate how many drops are in the sea, and yet don't have bread to eat or clothes to put on. He decided to appoint them to leadership positions.  When he got back to land he sent for them, but they didn't come. He sent for them again and they came. He said to them: "Do you imagine that I was offering you rulership? 

Daf 10b

It's servitude that I'm giving you, as it is said (I Kings 12:7), And they spoke to him saying: If you will be a servant to this people today.

Daf 11a



Daf 11b



Daf 12a
















































Rav Ami said, 
"That person that wants to know whether he will take out the year or not, should suspend a candle during the ten days between Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur in a room where the wind is not blowing. If its light (its flame) continues, he will know that he will take out the year.
And a person that wants to conduct a business deal and wants to know if the deal will be a successful one or not, should feed a chicken. If it becomes fat and beautiful, he will know that it will be successful.
That person that wants to go on a journey and wants to know if he will return home, should stand in a friend's room. If he sees a shadow of a shadow, he will know that he will return home."
And this is not a [correct] matter, lest his spirit become weak [as a result] and his [fortune guided by his] constellation will become bad.
Abbaye said, "Now that you have said 
that a sign is a [correct] matter, truly a man should accustom himself to looking at squash, beans, leeks, beets and dates on Rosh Hashanah."