Shulchan Arukh, Yoreh De'ah
יורה דעה
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.org



Shulchan Arukh, Yoreh De'ah

Siman 1

All may slaughter, at the outset, even women . Rema some say that women should not schecht since they alreadt have a custom not to schecht and the minhag is for women not to shecht.    Slaves and virtually anyone even though you do not know them who does not faint because of slaughtering. (is fit for slaughtering.) Even though you do not know where or whether he learned the laws of slaughtering. It is permitted from the outset to accept what he slaughters and permitted to eat it as well. This is because most are familiar with his slaughtering and his expertise is known as well. What are we saying? (We are saying) that if that person is not in front of us it is permitted to eat what he slaughters because we rely on what is generally known. However if he is before us we need to check if he is an expert in the laws of slaughtering, however we do not need to ask if he faints....
He does not need to know all of the different details of the laws, but rather if he says "concerning this matter I was in doubt and I asked (a competent rabbi)", such an individual is called "knowledgeable", until he calls that which is forbidden "permitted" (then he demonstrates his ignorance and incompetence). Rema: and we check him about the laws of schechita that will be explained later in the beginning of S23 and checking of the knife and the simanim after schechita that will be explained in S25. And if he shechts and is not here in front of us to check, we still check the simanim to see if they are mostly shechted, because whatever is possible to check we do. And this is all on places where there is not custom to get kabbalah, but in places where the custom is to get kabbalah, like Germans and others like them, do not customarily check after him
A person who we know that he does not know the laws of schechita, even if he shechts in front of us 4 or 5 times a proper schechita and shechts privately his schechita is posul, even of they ask him, did you do such and such and from his answer it is seems he shechted correctly, we do not rely on him, even if e says he is certain that he shechted correctly.Rema :(and a person who generally to tire, and we know he is not micjzaku and he shechts and says I know I did not tire, he is believed, since he knows hilchas schechita) and someone who we know does knpt know hilxhos schechita, we can give him to sheht if someone supervises him, assumed ng he sees the schechita from the beginning to the end.Rema( and some are strict and forbid apriori him to schecht even since he doesn't know hilxhos schechita, and ths is the custom.
If his goats or chickens are stolen or lost, and he found them properly slaughtered; in a place where most people are Jews (and also the majority of the thieves in the city are Jews), they are permissible [to eat] - whether he found them in the market or he found them in the refuse heap in the house. But if he found them in the refuse heap in the market, they are forbidden.
A deaf person that does not speak or hear, and a mentally disabled person, which is one who goes out himself at night or rips his clothes or sleeps in a graveyard or destroys  what is given to him even just one of these,if he does it for no reason and a child who cannot steady his hands, he one who is deaf and speaks but cannot hear: He does not perform the slaughter since he does not hear the blessing. If he performs the slaughter, even if it just for himself, the slaughter is valid.
...One who hears but does not speak: if he is an expert, he performs the slaughter even from the outset if another says the blessing.
...A drunk who has reached the drunkenness of Lot--his status is like one who is crazy. If he has not reached the drunkenness of Lot--he may perform the slaughter from the outset. Rem'a: There are those who say that a drunk does not perform the slaughter  because he often comes to chopping (instead of cutting).
...One who is blind: He does not perform the slaughter from the outset unless others are watching him. If he performs the slaughter, his slaughter is valid.
...One who is naked: He does not perform the slaughter from the outset because he cannot say the blessing.
...If a community vowed that only a certain butcher would perform the slaughter, and another goes and performs the slaughter: there those who say that his slaughter is forbidden. Rem'a: If they abolished the decree--all butchers are assumed to be valid as before. 

Siman 2

ritual slaughter of [a kosher animal done by] a worshipper of stars [meaning non-jew; the animal slaughtered has the status of a] Nevilah, even [if the ritual slaughtering was done by a non-jewish] minor and even if its not a non-jew (for example a ger toshav) even if others [who are jews] supervise him

Siman 3



Siman 4



Siman 5



Siman 6



Siman 7



Siman 8



Siman 9



Siman 10



Siman 11



Siman 12



Siman 13


One who slaughters an animal and finds it Kosher, then found inside a fetus of 8 (months), whether alive or dead, or a fetus of 9 (months) dead, it may be eaten and does not require slaughter. And if he finds inside a fetus of 9 (months) that is a alive: if it stood on the ground, it requires slaughter, but other treifos do not prohibit it. If it did not stand on the ground it does not require slaughter. And if its hooves are klutos (meaning, that its hoof is whole and not cracked, or it has some other wonderment - Hagahos Ashr"i), even though it stood on the ground, it does not require slaughter. And some are in doubt.

Siman 14



Siman 15



Siman 16



Siman 17



Siman 18



Siman 19



Siman 20



Siman 21



Siman 22



Siman 23



Siman 24



Siman 25



Siman 26



Siman 27



Siman 28



Siman 29

There are eight types of terefot, and their signs are D"N (final), HN"K (initial), N (initial), P"Sh: attacked (derusah),  perforated (nekuvah), missing (haserah), removed (netulah),  torn (keruah), fallen (nefulah), severed (pesukah), and broken (sheburah). 

Siman 30

If in a behemah (domesticated animal) or chaya (wild animal), most of the bone of the head is crushed, either most of its vault (gab) or most of its circumference (hekkef), the animal is a trefah, even though the membrane is intact.  

Siman 31



Siman 32



Siman 33



Siman 34



Siman 35

1. The punctured lung is treif
2. The lung has five (<i>ear-shaped</i>) minor lobes, three on the right and two on the left side, as the animal is suspended by its feet and its guts face the slaughterer, such that the slaughterer's and the animal's right sides are one.  On the right side there is another small lobe called the "small roseate lobe", not in line with the minor lobes, rather it projects from the front.  If one is missing from the right or the left, or if there were two on the right and three on the left, the lung is terefah. <i>HGH"H: The shapes of the right minor lobes are unlike those of the left ones.  If they are reversed in shape - terefah.  Similarly if the right middle minor lobe is larger than the lower minor lobe - terefah. If the upper left minor lobe is larger than the upper right minor lobe - terefah.  Similarly, if the major right lobe is larger than the left - all this is called 'reversed' and is terefah.  The roseate small lobe - if it's absent, or if it's on the left side - kosher. HGH: In these lands we regard zero or two small roseate lobes, or a roseate lobe on the wrong side, terefah, and it is proper to do so, and many of our rabbis agree, and custom should not be changed. Similarly, if its appearance or shape differs from the norm - terefah.  If there are two roseate lobes with a common finger-thick base: even though it has a crack, it's kosher.  And if one is upside down and the other normal, we follow the larger, if that is right side up, it's kosher.  The roseate lobe is normally in a pocket.  </i>

Siman 36



Siman 37



Siman 38



Siman 39



Siman 40



Siman 41



Siman 42



Siman 43



Siman 44



Siman 45



Siman 46



Siman 47



Siman 48



Siman 49



Siman 50



Siman 51



Siman 52



Siman 53



Siman 54



Siman 55



Siman 56



Siman 57



Siman 58



Siman 59



Siman 60



Siman 61



Siman 62

A limb from a live animal is forbidden from a domesticated animal, a wild animal, or fowl.
A limb that separates from a live animal is forbidden. And flesh that separates from a live animal is forbidden because of "And the flesh in the field Treifah." And even what separates from the animal [but] is still inside it - such as [where it was] cut from the spleen or from the kidneys and the piece was left inside it - it is forbidden.

Siman 63

Meat that was found spread out in the market, one goes after the majority, because a part goes after the majority of parts. If the majority of the sellers [of meat] are non-Jews, it is forbidden. And if the majority of the sellers are Jews, it is permitted. And this is the case with meat that was found in the hand of a non-Jew and it is not known from whom he purchased it. If the meat sellers are Jews, it is permitted. This is the law [according to] Torah. And the Sages already forbade all meat that is found, either at the market or in the hand of a non-Jew, even though all the sellers and all of the slaughterers are Jews. And furthermore, the one who buys meat and places it in his house and it disappears, it is forbidden [to eat it]. Rather, if there is a sign or there were recognizable rings [on the meat], and he definitely recognizes it that it is the [same meat] or it was bound and stamped, [then the meat is permitted].


Siman 64



Siman 65



Siman 66

The blood of a domesticated or wild animal, whether it is a pure or impure animal, is forbidden. This includes the blood of an embryo (shalil), but the blood of fish and locusts is permitted.
Blood of eggs, if one knows that they 

Siman 67



Siman 68










One is not permitted to scald kids and lambs and chicken in a kli rishon [first vessel] unless the fat has been removed and the meat has been salted. And likewise, one may not pour onto them from a kli rishon, and if you do pour, it is enough [to remove] a klippah [outer layer] of the skin. And if the head of the chicken is above where the pouring occurred, a klippah is not even required.  Rema: It is not considered 'pouring' unless there was no stopping of the stream from the kli rishon when it was touching down, but if there was a break it is already not considered a pouring and it is not forbidden. 

Siman 69

Meat needs to be washed before it is salted. (if the butcher washed it, there is no need to wash it in the house, tur). If, after washing, the piece was cut into two or three (or the hooves were removed after washing, aruch), returning and rewashing is necessary. 
If it was salted but not washed first, rinse it and salt it again. There are some who forbid this practice. Rema: This is our custom, even if it was only salted a little bit, like the amount of salt used before it is roasted, and even if it was not salted for a shiur melicha (aruch, sharei durah, and semag). One who is in danger of a great loss can be lenient (beit yosef), and if it was just rinsed a little before salting it is acceptable after the fact. This is the rule if the piece of meat is 60 times the volume of the blood that is on it (Sharei Durah in the name of the Mahari). If one salted an unwashed piece of meat with other pieces of meat, the other pieces are acceptable and the unwashed one is forbidden (aruch).
Don't use salt that is as fine as flour, and don't use salt that is too thick because it will fall off the meat. Rema: and if one only has salt that is as fine as flour, it is acceptable to use it.
One should scatter salt so that no place remains without salt. And, one should salt so that it [i.e. the meat] won't be fitting for eating with the same amount of salt. There is no need to add more salt than this. It should be salted on both sides. Birds need to be salted also on the inside. If they are only salted on the inside or on the outside, and likewise with pieces [of meat] that are only salted on one side, these are permitted. Gloss: And there are those who forbid this even after the fact, and this is the custom if there is no great need for the meat [i.e. to feed guests, or shabbat is starting soon. This means that it is permissible to use meat salted on one side even from the outset if there is a need for it.]. But if the meat hasn't been cooked, one should not cook it as is, but if it's within 12 hours of having been salted should instead salt the second side that hasn't been salted and then cook it afterwards. If it has been after 12 hours of being salted then one should roast it on the fire, and the fire certainly draws it [i.e. the blood] out, and the side that was salted won't absorb [blood] from the side that wasn't salted.
After you salted the piece of meat, if you cut that piece, there is no need to return and salt the place where the meat has been cut.
The length of salting the meat is not less than the length it takes [in time] to walk a mile, and this is approximately a third of an hour. Gloss: And this is authoritative after the fact, or even from the outset [if the meat is needed in order to] to honor guests or for the needs of Shabbat. But, without this [need] the custom is to wait with the meat being salted for the length of an hour, and this cannot be changed.
Before one places the meat in the vessel that it will be washed in, one should shake off the salt that's on it or wash it in water and afterwards place the meat in the vessel that it's being washed in and wash it several times. The vessel should be washed between each and every rinsing [of the meat]. Gloss: And there are those who say that the meat needs to be washed three times and this is the custom from the outset, therefore if one washes or shakes off the salt from among it and washes it twice, this is like washing it three times. Or one places the water in the vessel and afterwards places the meat in it and washes it three times. And this is the custom from the outset, that one gives lots of water in the first rinsing in order to nullify the strength of the salt that's in the brine. It's permitted to wash the meat in fruit juice, and water is not required. 
If one did not shake off the salt that is on [the meat] and did not rinse it [off], the [meat] is not forbidden because the water in the vessel will negate the strength of the salt. Rema: Even a small amount of water will negate the strength of the tzir. (Aruch, klal 6 and Mahari). There are those who permit [the meat] even if there was no water in the vessel when the meat was placed there since we aren't concerned about the short amount of time while the person is washing the meat. (Share Durah). We can rely on this. We only worry about all this for the first washing, but after the first washing there is no concern. (Such are the words of the Mordechai and the Ran). And there is no difference between washing in a vessel that is kosher, non-kosher, or dairy. As long as there is a little water in the vessel to negate the strength of the salt so that it is not cooking, even if the vessel is dairy or non-kosher, or dirty with forbidden things. (Aruch).
Meat that was salted and then cooked without a final washing must  have a sixty ratio (19) [34] against the salt that is upon it.  Rema: (20) [35] And the entire pot is included in the sixty, [36] and if  there is a piece of meat in the pot of equal size to this piece that was  not washed off, everything is permitted for there must be sixty times  the amount of salt on the piece (21), for the piece is certainly at least  sixty times it's salt, and if there is not sixty times against the salt  [37], even if only placed in a kli sheini everything is forbidden (23)  since [38] there is salt and tzir, it has cooked somewhat.  [39] Dried meat can be permitted even in a kli rishon, for it must  certainly be sixty times the size of the salt that is upon it since it has  dried. However, initially one must be careful even with dry meat that  it should not be cooked or even washed in hot water without being  first washed of it’s salt. All this is referring to a case where meat has  not been washed off of it's salt at all, however if even only slightly  washed once, and then cooked, it is permitted, post facto , for post  facto one washing is sufficient. Salt used once, [40] may not be  used again, [41], and it goes without saying that it is forbidden to eat  used salt.   
[42] A non-Jew who works in Jew’s home, who is cooking a piece of  meat that we’re not sure if it was washed off is subject to the following  halacha: If the non-Jew knows Jewish customs, we may believe to say he  washed it off if there was an adult Jew occasionally walking in and out, or  if there was a knowledgeable child. Rema:  One of these is sufficient (24) [43] either mesiach Ifi tumo that he washed  it well, or a Jew, even a child was around walking in and out for he has  some respect for Jewish customs. However if he told the non-Jew not to  wash meat without permission, and the non-Jew went and did so, it is  forbidden for we see that he has no fear and he should not be relied on.   
[44] Meat that has been cooked without having been salted is permitted if  there are [45] sixty times (26) that piece in the pot, (27) and all the other  meat is permitted as well. Rema: (28) [47] Some forbid that piece even if  there is sixty against it, and that is how we are to act if not for a great need  (2) as in honour of Shabbos or [47] guests when we may rely on those  who are lenient. If a piece of meat was not salted (30) properly it is as if it  was never salted. Any meat that stood for three days without having been  salted remains forbidden even if salted and if it is [48] cooked we require  sixty against it.
Meat that was left for three full days without having been salted can no  longer be saltedbecause the blood has dried and will no longer be  released through salting. Therefore it [49] may not be cooked [50] only  roasted (31) and after it is roasted [51] it still may not be cooked (32) but if  it was it is permitted. [52] Meat should not be left for three days for fear  that it may be cooked.   
(33) [53] If the meat was soaked in water within three days, it may go  another three days (34) (54) less half an hour. Meat that we are not sure if  it was salted within three days is permitted. 
Meat that was left unsalted for three days [55] and was then mixed up with  other pieces is [56] nullified [57] among the permissible majority, and [58]  all the pieces may be cooked (35) [59] even if it was a chaticha ha’ruya  I’hischabed. This is also the rule for pieces cooked without being salted,  and then mixed with others.  
(36) [60] Meat covered in blood that was sitting in water for twenty four hours is  forbidden by some unless it is roasted (37) [61] or unless there is sixty in the  water against it, [62] Some even forbid it to be roasted, and this is how we should  act. 
We perform the salting only in a vessel with holes or upon straw or shavings or in  a diagonal position insuring that if water was spilled onto it, it would flow off  immediately. Rema: An especially smooth surface that water would flow from  need not be placed in a slanted position. however if it’s not this smooth it must be placed slanted so that the water flows out. Even in a vessel with holes, one  should be careful to make sure the holes are open, therefore it should not be  placed on the ground, for then it is as a vessel without holes. As a result of this  some people are stringent and place straw or shavings because even the meat  can close up the holes. (38) Post facto, one need not worry about all this. If one  performed the salting in a vessel without holes (39) [63] it is forbidden to use the  vessel with very hot items. Rema: [64] And if it was used then one must take off a  klipah for a dry item, and if it was a liquid we need sixty against the klipah of the  vessel. [66] Some say that even with cold items it is forbidden to use the vessel  unless it is washed down well, and if it was used without first being washed off,  the item used should be washed off. (40) [67] However, it is permissible to re-use  this vessel for salting once holes are made in it (41) [68] or even without holes if  meat has been salted and washed off. 
(42) But if it has holes [69] it is permissible to eat boiling hot food from it, and there are some that forbid boiling hot [70]One should be careful  initially (43) but post facto, it is permitted. 
Meat [71] that was salted in a vessel without holes [72] and was left for as  long as it takes for water to begin boiling is subject to the following rules:  Anything in the tzir is forbidden even for roasting, and what is outside the  tzir is not forbidden [73] expect for a klipah’s worth, even if it is fatty.  Rema: (44) [74] Some forbid the entire piece, even that which is outside  the tzir, even if only salted slightly as is done in preparation for roasting  [75] and even if it was not left for the required salting time rather only for a  little while allowing for tzir to be seen [76] this is the custom, and it should  not be changed. Nevertheless, only the actual piece that is touching the  tzir is forbidden (45) [77] but the other pieces that are upon it and salted  with it are permitted, and this is indeed the custom. 
After meat has been salted and washed, it may even be placed in water that is not boiling [78] and there are those that require it to be placed in boiling water. Rema: The custom is to follow the first opinion. 
Meat that was salted for as long as required and then placed in a vessel without holes without being washed off [79] and then filled up with tzir is permitted. (46) According to this, meat that fell into tzir that came out of the meat (47) after the required salting time is permitted. There are those who forbid it no matter what, and they should be followed initially. Rema: [80] And some forbid even post facto (48) [81] a klipah and this is the custom, regarding that which is in the tzir. However, anything outside the tzir is permitted. (49) [82] The vessel into which the tzir fell is forbidden, [83] Therefore if the vessel was dairy (50) and is dirty, the meat is forbidden since even after the salting time it is considered roseiach [84] however if it is a case of great loss and needed for a mitzvah (51) one may be lenient and say that once the required salting time has passed, it is no longer considered roseiach. (52) [85] According to his words even though meat sat in salt its required time, one may not eat it until it is washed off well. It is forbidden to cut it with a knife before it gets washed [86] and if cut, the knife must be kashered. Rema: [87] And some permit it to be cut with a knife after it went through it’s required salting time [88] for salt can not affect vessels [89] and it is indeed permitted [90] but the knife must be washed off [91] or thrusted into the ground if the tzir has already dried. Even if it is before the required salting time has passed (53) there is no prohibition on the knife, rather the problem is now that blood had come out from the meat to its surface, if one wants to now wash off that spot and go re-salt it one may do so. If one wants to then go and perform a salting in order to preserve the meat after it has been property salted for blood in a vessel with holes, [92] then the meat must be washed off well and re-salted. It may even be re-salted in a vessel without holes. If one wants [93] to salt meat and eat it roasted without washing one may do so and we are not worried about the blood that is on the salt, for the fire sucks out the blood and the salt can not absorb it. This is when it is salted and put on to be roasted, but if it sat in the salt, the salt absorbs blood, and the meat becomes forbidden. Therefore, it must be washed off well, then roasted, and then it may be eaten. See later on in section 76 regarding the law for meat that was salted without being washed off, and then roasted) 
In a place where salt is not easily found, one should roast the meat (54) until its blood has come out, and then one may cook it. 

Siman 70

One may salt many pieces, one on top of the other. Regardless of the fact that the the bottom piece finishes its excretions before the top one, we don't say that [the bottom piece] absorbs from the blood of the top one. This is because [the bottom piece] excretes gravy for a lengthy amount of time, and the entire time that gravy is emitted, [the piece] does not absorb. [This is true] even when much gravy gathers and stands inside of a depression between the pieces of meat - it is permitted. In what case is this dealing? In a case when he salts meat on meat, and even ox meat with kid or lamb meat, and even with chicken - [because] it is impossible for them to finish all the excretions of their gravy before the ox meat finishes excreting its blood. {RMA - in any event, we are accustomed to being strict in the first instance, that each piece which has a depression, as in [the case of] of a complete side of meat, to turn it over, in order that the blood should run off. However, one must not worry post factum. A piece which was salted twice is permitted - we don't worry that the secondary salt causes the blood from the first salting to be reabsorbed.} However, meat with fish, even chicken with fish, is forbidden to salt together. This is because the fish ceases excreting all of its gravy before the chicken finishes excreting its blood. If one did salt fish and chicken together, the chicken is permitted but one must take a peeling off the fish. However, if the scales were not removed when it was salted, it is permitted. {RMA - and there are those who forbid the entire fish [not just a peeling] if there wasn't 60 times [the volume] of the chicken, as we estimate in salting 60 times the volume, and such is the custom. And this is specifically referring to an instance where the scales weren't present, as fish skin is a soft membrane and excretes immediately. However, where the scales were present, it is permitted, as they do not excrete [all of their fluids] immediately and [thus] do not absorb from the chickens, because the entire time that they are busy excreting, they will not absorb, as we say about two pieces which were salted together.

Siman 71

[1] The head (1) is cut into two pieces and salted well on the inner side, [2] and is salted on its hair, for the hair is not a blockage from allowing blood to be released by the salt. 
(2) [3] The hooves are slightly slit at the bottom, salted, and laid out so the slit is face down. The hair is also salted. [4j See earlier section 68. 
The membrane surrounding the brain has many veins, and the brain itself  has much blood which will not come out through simply salting the head,  because the skull is blocking it, not allowing for the blood to flow.  Therefore, one who wants to salt it must cut the skull and remove the  brain, cut the surrounding membrane and salt it. [5] If one wants to salt the  head with the brain inside, then a hole must be pierced throughout the  skull and membrane, salt it, and place the hole face down as to allow the  blood to flow. It is then permitted even to be cooked. Rema: [6] And see  earlier in section 68 how one should act initially. If one salted the whole  head without making a hole in the skull then the [7] membrane and skull are forbidden, (3) [8] but the head is permitted along with any other meat  that is with it. The thigh bone, as well as other bones that have marrow  inside of them [9] must be salted [10] and the salting of the bone suffices  for the marrow as well. The bone need not be pierced. [11] Nevertheless,  ideally one should not salt it along with other meat, only alone. Post facto it  is permitted.   

Siman 72



Siman 73

The liver contains a lot of blood.

Siman 74



Siman 75

Blood is not assumed to be in the intestines (1) [1] such as in the paunch  and the maw [2] and the bowels and the rectum (meaning the intestinal  tube which is at the top of the anus), if they are without fat on them.  Therefore if they were cooked in a pot without having been salted, they are  permitted [3] unless they have a blush red appearance. Rema: And if they  were salted in a vessel that does not have any holes, they are permitted.  (2) [5] Nevertheless, initially they require salting in a vessel with holes and  a preliminary washing as any other meat. Some disagree regarding the  paunch and say that it does contain blood, [6] even post facto the paunch  and reticulum of the ruminant stomach is forbidden as any other meat.  However the fat that is upon them is as any other meat. Therefore when  the rectum and other intestines are salted [7] they are not salted on the  inner part over the actual food, (3) rather on the outside where the fat is  attached. Rema: If the rectum was salted on the inner side and not on the  outer side it is as if it wasn’t salted. [8] if it was cooked this way it is not  kosher [9] if it has fat on the outside. If it wasn’t cooked yet (4) [10] go back  and salt the outer part [11] and it is then permitted. Eggs that are found in  poultry after being slaughtered if only the yolk was formed but not the white  part of the egg, then it must be salted as any other meat. (5) [12] and it  may be salted with other meat, if even the white part has been formed,  even if the shell on it is as hard as the shell on eggs which are sold in the  market, it is customary to salt it. However one must be careful not to salt it  with other meat, put post facto one need not worry. All fat, even of poultry  is considered as all other meat for the purposes of salting and washing. 
Intestines without fat on them, even though not containing blood (6) [13]  may be salted with other meat. Rema: Some forbid them to be salted with  other meat (7) and this is initially how one should act, however post facto it  is permitted.   
The fat of the winding coil that is on the bowel is full of vessels containing  blood. Therefore some forbid it to be cooked, even if cut and salted, but  now we customarily permit it. Those blood vessels, which if someone is  expert in, may be stretched and properly hung until not even one remains.   

Siman 76



Siman 77



Siman 78



Siman 79



Siman 80



Wild ox is considered a type of cattle

Siman 81



Siman 82

The signs of a kosher bird are not explained from the Torah, rather it only enumerated the non-kosher types, and the permitted types of birds. And the prohibited types, 24 were mentioned in the Torah (See: Rambam Forbidden Foods 1:14)
Anyone who is an expert in those types and their names, behold he eats all of the birds that are not from them, and he doesn't need checking. (Ibid.) And a kosher bird is eaten according to tradition, and that is the clear thing in that place that it is a kosher bird. And the hunter is believed saying: This bird, my hunting rabbi permitted for me, since that hunter is known to be in an expert in non-kosher types that are mentioned in the Torah and their names. Someone who does not know them and does not know their names, he should check the signs: every bird that is a bird of prey and he eats [it], and it is known that it is of non-kosher types. And if he does not know if it is a bird of prey or not, if, when they stand it up with wire, split along its legs, two fingers here and two fingers here, or it is [a bird that] clutches from the air and he eats [it], it is known that it is a bird of prey. If it is known that it is not a bird of prey, there are three signs of [its] kosher [status]: an extra finger, a crop [digestive pouch near gullet], and its gizzard is peeled by hand, excluding if it was only peeled with a knife. (See the Mechaber) If it hardened and was attached, and he placed it in the sun and it healed and then it was peeled by hand, behold this is a sign of [it being] kosher. And even though it has these three signs, it should not be eaten, because we are concerned lest it is a bird of prey, rather, unless they have a tradition that was transmitted to them by their ancestors that it is kosher. (See Rambam Forbidden Foods 1:18).
There are those who say that all birds that have a wide beak and the palm of its foot is wide like a goose, and it is known that it is not a bird of prey, and is permitted to eat if it has the three signs on its body. <i>Gloss: And there are those who say that we don't rely even on this, and one should only eat a bird with an accepted tradition that it is kosher (in the Arukh...) and we are accustomed to this and it should not be changed.</i>
One who is from a place that they are accustomed to a prohibition with a single bird because they do not have a tradition, and he went to a place where they do have a tradition, he is able to eat it in the place where he went, even if his intention to return. And if he went from a place that does have a tradition and he went to a place that does not have a tradition, it is permitted for him to eat it.
If the rest of the places that do not have a tradition are able to eat it relying upon the place that does have a tradition, there is one who forbids and there is one who prohibits. And there is [a reason] to be concerned regarding the words of the one who prohibits.

Siman 83

The signs of fish are explicit in the Torah: All that have fins and scales, kosher. And fins, it is what it swims with. And scales, they are hardened skins on it. <i>Gloss: Specifically when they are peeled by hand or with a utensil, but if it is impossible to peel them from the skin of the fish, it is not called scales (HM''M 1:41)</i> And even if it only has one fit and one scale, it is permitted. And if it does not not, and in the future when it grows after a time or when it had them while still in water and he removes them immediately upon taking it out to dry it, it is permitted. (Rambam Forbiddne Foods Chapter 1 and the Rif and the Ran and this is the law) <i>Gloss: And there are those who say that one does not permit with one scale, only when it stands on its jaw or tail or fin (the Tur and the Rosh according to the Beit Yosef and the Ran and this is the law in the name of the Ramban), and it is good to be stringent.</i>
There are types of fish that their scales are very think and are not recognizable [as scales], if they are wrapped in a garment or placed in a vessel full of salt water and scales are found, it is permitted.
Everything that has scales has fins, and there are [fish] that have fins but not scales. Therefore, if one found a cut of fish that has scales, one does not have to go after fins. If one found fins, one should not eat it until he knows it has scales.
If one found cuts of fish and one of them has scales, if the cuts are suitable, all of them are permitted; the presumption being that it came from one fish. And if none of them are suitable, those that have scales found on them, they are permitted, and the rest are are prohibited, even if all of them were salted together. <i>Gloss: And if one found there a fish that has a wide head and spine, it is permitted to eat, specifically if it had scales. But if the fish is whole, and we do not see scales on it, we cannot rely on the head and spine.</i>
Non-kosher fish brine, is only rabbinic. Therefore, it is permitted to purchase salted fish from a non-Jew, [that are] kosher, even though they were placed with non-kosher [fish] in the same vessel, lest they were not salted together. <i>Gloss: There are those who prohibit, if they were placed with non-kosher [fish] in one barrel. We are accustomed to not purchase them, even if we see that it was only placed with [other] non-kosher salted fish in a mixture on the table that they are being sold on. (Trumat HaDeshen 174 and Hagahot Sh''D, Sh''D Siman 20, and Or Zarua and Arukh Klal 13 and Mordechai in the name of the Tosafot Rabbi Israel), except for herring and markrish which are permitted in every circumstance, and definitely when they are not salted with non-kosher [fish], because it is not the way to salt them with them [the other types of fish] (Mordechai). Even regarding the rest of the fish, one should not be stringent to rummage and check if there are non-kosher fish among them. If one sees that non-kosher fish are being soaked in the water with kosher [fish], even herring there [is what to say] to prohibit it (Hagahot Sh''D in the name of MaHaRA''I and Rabbi Yerucham). But there is no concern lest it is being soaked, the whole time that we don't see [them] (ibid.). All of this is from the outset, but after the fact, when has already purchased them, there is [what to say] to permit them in every circumstance, because fish brine is rabbinic, and we say lest they were not salted together in the beginning, and we are not concerned after that of it absorbing from one to the other (Arukh). And specifically when suspended in oil, and just salted fish do not have oil, but if there is oil, it is prohibited by the Torah, and doubt [regarding Torah law we lean towards] stringent (ibid.). And in the case that the fish are salted dry, it is permitted in every circumstance, after the non-kosher [fish] also are dry (MaHaRA''I BT''H). And we are accustomed to be stringent also with this from the outset, if they are placed among them (ibid.).</i>
Non Jews that bring a barrel of water full with fish brine, if one Kilkit [type of fish] (explanation: a prepared non-kosher fish, this is what Rashi explains, and others explain that it is a kosher fish) is in it, it is permitted, because this is a sign that it is from kosher fish. If not, it is prohibited. And this applies when there is a single Kilkit, in a sealed barrel, but if it is open, it did not jump regarding less than two, but regarding one we are concerned lest it never came. And there is one who says, if there were many barrels, all of them are open, and a Kilkit, since it is a kosher fish, one among them, all of them are permitted. If they were sealed, open one of them and if one found a Kilkit, it is permitted. A second, if one found a Kilkit in it, all of them are permitted. There is one who says, it is permitted as a result of the Kilkit, this applies when there is not a fish or cut [of a fish] that does not have scales, but if there are [fish without scales], all are prohibited. 
Aggressive fish are only taken by an expert, unless a Jew says, <i>or a non-Jew (Ran and this is understood from the Rashba)</i> that is selling them: I salted and took from kosher fish. But if he says: They are kosher, he is not believed, rather unless he is a proven [expert] regarding kashrut. 
Eggs of a fish, if there were two round sections (explanation: spherical and wide like jugs) or they were clear, non-kosher. <i>and it is law regarding aggressive [fish], also the law applies here (Tur).</i> One round and one clear, ask the Jew who sold [it]. If he said: I salted, and took [them] from a kosher fish, eat according to his word. If he said: they are kosher, do not believe him, rather unless he is a proven [expert] regarding kashrut. Now it is the simple custom to purchase just fish eggs, whether whole or soft, even from non-Jews, provided they are red. But if the [eggs] are black, do not eat them at all.
A kosher fish that is found in the intestines of a non-kosher fish, if found either in the secretary channel, or the swallowing channel, or it went out, it is kosher.
A non-kosher fish that was found in the intestines of a kosher fish, it is prohibited (see Rambam in Forbidden Foods 5).

Siman 84

Insects that grow in water that is in house vessels, pits, and caves, that don't have fountain in them, are permitted, even though they don't have fins and scales. Therefore, one can lean over and drink from them, and not to be concerned with them, if they happened to come into his mouth. <i>But it is forbidden to draw [water] in a vessel and drink from them (Ashiri and the Arukh Klal 41 and the Kol Bo)</i> And if they left their place where they grew, like outside pit or on side of vessel, even though they came back, they are forbidden. And presumably, there is no place of concern that they left. But if they did not leave but are on side of vessel, on inside, they are permitted.
Those that grow in water that is in furrows or ditches, (explanation: slits, long and short ditches, wide like made for fish inclosures, Rashi), they are withdrawn and not flowing, there are those who forbid and there are those who permit.
The one who filters water, or the rest of liquids, if it had worms or gnats or mosquitoes in it, even though they returned inside, it is prohibited, because they had already left. Therefore a drink that worms normally grow in them, and similar situations, one does not filter it with wood slivers and straw, at night, lest they will return or fall inside the vessel, and one comes to drink them. <i>Gloss: But it is permitted to filter through a garment or sieve, for behold they are not able to fall through there into the drink, also it is permitted to pour a liquid from one vessel to another vessel, since they always are with a liquid, this is sanitary treatment (Beit Yosef).</i>
Worms that grow in fruit, in picked [fruit], they are permitted. The Torah only forbade crawling things that crawl on land. To what are we referring, when they did not leave the fruit. But if they left the fruit, even if it did not reach the land rather it dead in the air before it reached the ground, even if it did not entirely leave the fruit, only a little, or it only left onto the fruit, or on the seed that is inside, or if it left from fruit to fruit, it is forbidden. And there are those who say even if it died within the fruit and left afterwards. Any time that it is found within the fruit, even a hole bored to the outside, we are not concerned lest it left and returned. <i>There are those who forbid if the hole bored to the outside (Moredechai PA''T and Sh''D in the name of RAB''N and Rabbi ABI''H in the name of Rabbi Yoel Huvah BT''H Siman 171) and this is how we are accustomed (Terumat HaDeshen ibid. and Hagahot SH''D.</i>

Siman 85



Siman 86



Siman 87

It is written in the Torah: "you will not cook a kid in the milk of its mother" three times (Exodus 23:19; Exodus 34:26; Deuteronomy 14:21); once for the prohibition of cooking, once for the prohibition of eating, and once for the prohibition of receiving benefit [from the cooked meat and milk products]. The prohibition of eating is presented in the language of cooking, to say that there is no prohibition from the Torah [in regard to meat and milk] unless it is in a manner of cooking, but rabbinically it [the mixture of meat and milk] is forbidden in every way. <i>All meat and milk [mixtures] that are not forbidden from the torah are permitted to benefit from.</i>
[The word] "kid", is not specific, it is the same rule with ox, sheep and goat. There is no difference if it is the milk of the mother, or of another [domesticated] animal.  Rather, the verse refers to the common case. 
The law only applies with meat from a pure [kosher] animal and milk from a pure animal, but meat of a pure animal in milk that is impure, or meat from an impure animal in pure milk, is permitted to cook and benefit from.  Meat of a wild animal and of fowl, even in milk which is pure, is permitted to cook and benefit from; and even eating is only prohibited rabbinically.  Fish and grasshoppers are not prohibited [with milk] even rabbinically.  <i>We make milk from almonds and place bird meat in it, since [milk and bird meat] is only rabbinically [forbidden].  But with meat from a domesticated animal, place almonds next to the milk, so that people don't misunderstand.  This is as we said above, in chapter 66.</i>
It is forbidden to cook [meat] with the milk of a woman, because of appearances. If woman's milk fell into [meat] food, it is nullified and there is no need to measure.  <i>It seems according to this, all the more so that it is forbidden to cook with impure milk or impure meat with pure milk, in the case of domesticated animals. But with rabbinical prohibited fowl, there is no need to be concerned. </i>
Eggs that are found inside chickens, if they are complete - i.e. they have white and yolk - even though that it is bound with sinews -  indeed it is complete and it is permissible to eat it with milk. If the egg only has yolk, it is forbidden to cook with milk.  If he eats the eggs alone, it is permissible to eat cheese or milk afterwards.   

Siman 88



Siman 89

One who eats meat, even of a wild animal or fowl, does not eat cheese afterwards until he waits six hours.  Even if he waits that period, if he has meat between his teeth he has to remove it.  One who chews food for a child has to wait. <i>If afterwards he finds meat between his teeth and removes it, he has to wipe his mouth out before eating cheese (Ran chapter 25).  There are those that says  that he doesn't have to wait six hours, but rather immediately if he finishes the meal and says the concluding blessing, it is permissible after wiping and rinsing his mouth (Tosafot Hullin 105a - "At the next meal", Mordechai chapter 25, Haga'ot Ashri, Haga'ot Maimoniot chapter 9 of forbidden foods, and Ravya).  The simple customer in our countries is to wait after eating meat one hour and to eat cheese afterwards, but you have to say the concluding blessing after the meat (HaAruch, Haga'ot Shaarei Dura) because then it's like a new meal and permissible to eat according to the lenient view.  But with no blessing, waiting alone does not good.  It doesn't matter if you waited before the blessing or afterwards (his own reasoning, from the Mahari, as opposed to the Issur v'Heter).  If he finds meat between his teeth after the hour, he has to pull it out (his own reasoning, from the Ran above).  And there are those that say not to say the concluding blessing in order to eat cheese (Aruch in the name of Maharach) but we're not careful about this.  And some are careful to wait six hours after eating meat before eating cheese, and it's proper to do so.</i> 
If one ate cheese it is permissible to eat meat immediately afterwords as long as one examines one's hands, so that one should not have any pieces of cheese attached to them, and if it is night and one is therefore unable to examine them thoroughly one must wash them. One must clean one's mouth and rinse it out. One cleans it by chewing bread, thereby thoroughly cleaning his mouth with it, and one can do this with anything that one chooses, except with flour, dates, or vegetables, because they attach to the palate (the area above the esophagus close to the teeth) and do not wipe well. Afterwords one should rinse ones mouth with water or wine. This was all stated in regard to meat of domestic or wild animals, but if one wishes to eat poultry after cheese there is no need for cleaning or rinsing.       Comment (Ramah): some are stringent (to wait six hours) even with meat after cheese (Mordechai in the name of the Maharam and Bet Yosef, Bach siman 173) and so is the custom with hard cheese, we do not eat afterwords even poultry, like with cheese after meat (and so it is in the Zohar). Some are lenient, and one should not protest against them, but they should do cleaning, rinsing, and washing of the hands, and it is better to be stringent.  ...

One who ate cheese, and wants to eat meat, needs to remove from the table leftover bread that he ate with the cheese. And it is forbidden to each cheese on the tablecloth that they ate bread on. (And vice-versa is similarly forbidden.) (So is implied in the Aruch.) And all the more so is it forbidden to cut cheese, even cold, with a knife that they usually use to cut meat. And not only that, but even the bread that they eat with the cheese is forbidden to cut with a knife that they use to cut meat. <i>And vice-versa is also similarly forbidden. However, via stabbing into hard ground, it is permitted. (Beit Yosef, quoting A"Ch and Kol Bo). But, all of Israel already is accustomed to having two knives and to mark one of them, so it is distinguished, they are accustomed to marking the dairy one, and it's not right to change a custom of Israel.</i>


Siman 90



Siman 91

[Cold] Meat and cheese that touched each other are both permissible to be eaten, but it's necessary to rinse the place where they touched.  It is permissible to wrap them both in one handkerchief, and not be worried lest they touch.
Anything that requires rinsing, for example placing permissible cold meat on a cold non-kosher plate, is prohibited, lest you eat it without rinsing.   This applies particularly to cooked meat, since it is generally not rinsed, but something that is generally rinsed, like raw meat and similar things, is permitted [to place on a non-kosher plate.]  <i>This applies particularly to something that is a bit moist; with things that are entirely dry, and the plate only absorbed from [is only used for] cold things, it is permissible to place a dry thing on it without any rinsing at all (his own reasoning) see chapter 122.</i>
It's necessary to be careful that meat doesn't touch bread, because if it touches it, it's forbidden to eat it with cheese. Also be careful that cheese doesn't touch it [bread], because if it touches it, it's forbidden to eat it with meat.
Hot meat and milk that are mixed together, and even cold meat that [falls] into hot milk or cold milk that [falls] into hot meat, everything is prohibited, because the bottom item determines [the status].   But hot milk that fell on cold meat or hot meat that fell into cold milk - peel off [the outer layer of] the meat and the rest is permitted, <i>In a case where the meat needed to be peeled, if it wasn't peeled, but cooked as is, it is permitted after-the-fact. (Aruch klal 29)</i> and the milk is all permitted (Rambam, Rabbenu Hananel, R"i, and others).  If one fell into the other [both] cold, rinse the meat and they're permitted.  

Siman 92

An olive-worth of meat that falls into a pot of boiling milk: let a non-Jew taste the dish. If he says that there is a taste of meat in it, it is forbidden. If not, it [the milk] is permitted, even in less than sixty, and that piece [the meat] is forbidden.  When is this true?  When one quickly removes the piece before it exudes the milk that it absorbed, meaning before the pot rests from its boiling.  But if he didn't remove it before it was able to exude the milk it absorbed, even if a non Jew tastes it and it has no taste at all, (rama) it's forbidden unless there is sixty.  <i>See chapter 98 (Shulchan Arukh, Yoreh De'ah 98) that we aren't accustomed to rely on the tasting of a non-Jew and we need sixty every time.</i> 
Milk falls into a pot of meat: [let a non-Jew] taste the piece that the milk fell on.  If it does not taste of milk, everything is permitted.  If the piece does taste of milk, then that piece is forbidden. <i>For us who don't rely on a non-Jew, we need sixty in the piece, and if there's not sixty then it's all forbidden.</i> And we measure it [the original piece of meat] against the whole [pot].  If there was in all that is in the pot, the pieces, the vegetables, the soup, and the spices, enough that this piece is one in sixty [or less] of the whole, the piece is forbidden and the rest is permitted.  In what situation are we speaking? When the pot was not stirred at the beginning when the milk  fell in, but only at the end, and the pot wasn't covered.  But if it was stirred from beginning until end or was covered from the time of [milk] falling in until the end, everything joins together to nullify the taste of milk. <i>Therefore, if it wasn't stirred at all, not at the beginning and not at the end, and wasn't covered at all, if there is sixty in the pot compared to the drop of milk that fell in, it only prohibits the piece alone, and the rest of the pot is permitted (Bet Yosef in the name of the Ra'avid and Magid Mishnah in the name of the Rambam.) And also if it was stirred at the beginning or covered immediately even though it wasn't stirred or covered at the end, all of the pot joins together, if it was stirred or covered immediately when the prohibited matter fell in (Tur and Bet Yosef in the name of the Ri N Haviv.)</i>  Therefore, if [the milk] fell into the soup or onto a piece and we don't know onto which piece it fell, stir the whole pot until it's all mixed.  If in the whole pot there is a taste of milk, it's prohibited, and if not, it's permitted.  And if there is no non-Jew to taste and be relied on, we measure with sixty (until now, the language of the Rambam.)  <i>There are those who disagree and reason that stirring the pot isn't effective unless it's stirred immediately after the prohibited matter fell in, and this is our practice.</i>   
When a piece of meat becomes forbidden due to milk it is prohibited completely. If it was cooked with others, sixty is needed to negate it all. If you recognize it, take it out and the others are acceptable. If you don't recognize it, the sauce is permitted but all the pieces of meat are forbidden if the initial piece was roeeya latchabel (too important to be considered part of a mixture)
The rule of "the piece of meat becomes, in essence, forbidden" only applies in the realm of mixing meat and milk together, but in other prohibitions, like an olive's bulk of forbidden fat that was absorbed by a piece of meat, and the meat is not greater in bulk than sixty olives, so that the forbidden fat would be nullified, the meat becomes forbidden. If afterwards, the meat is cooked with other meat, only sixty times the original olive's bulk of fat are necessary for the meat to nullify the prohibition, and even the original piece of meat returns to its state of permissibility. Rema: 



... A pan of milk, placed in an oven, underneath a pot of meat - the steam rises, enters into the pot, and renders it forbidden. Rema: If there was actual milk in the pan, then we require sixty times its volume in the meat. All of this is when the pan is open, and the steam rises up from the food itself, to the pan that is above it, and also if the the two are so close to each other that the steam that rises is so how that it would make your hand retreat rapidly. If not, then everything is permissible. Therefore, we hang meat pans over dairy pots, and we don't worry about the steam that rises. And if something is covered, then everything is permissible, since it is like two pots that touch each other, which do not make each other forbidden, and all the more so with mere steam. Yet it is good to be strict on all this.
A

Siman 93



Siman 94

...If one inserted a spoon into a cooking vessel two times and did not know in the meantime, they need 60 times twice (the amount of food versus the spoon). There are those who say that it is sufficient to have 60 times (the amount) once. This is the custom. 
If one inserted a spoon into a cooking vessel two times and did not know in the meantime, they need 60 times twice (the amount of food versus the spoon). There are those who say that it is sufficient to have 60 times (the amount) once. This is the custom. 


Siman 95

Fish that were cooked or roasted in a well-washed meat pot with no fat stuck to it are permissible to eat with kutach [a milk based food], because they [the fish] are two degrees removed from a permissible taste.  If the pot was not well-washed, if there is more than 1/60th the fish worth of substance on the pot, it's forbidden to eat them [the fish] with kutach.
An egg that was cooked in water in a dairy pot - it is permissible to put it into a chicken, even before the fact.  But if it was cooked in a pot with meat, even in its shell, it is forbidden to eat with kutach. <i>There are those that are strict with roasting and cooking and prohibit second-degree taste (Rivan in the name of Rashi, Aruch 34 quotes the Mordechai and ...) and the custom is to prohibit it before the fact.  After the fact, it is permissible in every way (Aruch).  This [prohibition] is only eating it with milk or meat itself, but it is permissible to serve it on their dishes  before the fact (Issur v'Heter, Aruch) and that is the practice. Also, if they weren't initially cooked or roasted, rather they were just on a meat plate, it is permissible to eat them with milk, and the inverse (his own reasoning). Also, if the vessel that they were cooked or roasted in was rancid - meaning it was not used for cooking food within 24 hours - we are lenient even before the fact to eat them with the other type (Aruch, ibid). All of this is assuming that the food is not sharp, but if it was sharp - e.g. you cooked sharp things in a meat pot even if it has not been used that day, or you crushed spices with a meat pestle, if you [cooked] it in milk, it's prohibited even after the fact, until there is 60 times the meat that is absorbed in them. ...</i>
Plates used for meat that were washed in a dairy pot with water so hot that one's hand recoils, even if both the plates and the pot had been used within the day - all is permitted because they are "nat bar nat" - a second degree impartation of taste of permissible foods and tastes. And this is only if one can say " I am certain that there was no fat stuck to the plates or to the pot." And if there was fat stuck to them then there needs to be 60 times the volume of water to nullify the volume of the fat that is on the plates. REMA: And some forbid even if there is no fat stuck to them unless the pot or the plates had not absorbed the taste within 24 hours. Then the plates and pot are permissible and the water - we are strict before the fact. But if both the plate and the pot had both been used for 24 hours and they were both washed together with piping hot water, then all is forbidden. And this is our practice and we should not change. But this is the case only if they were washed together in a "primary pot" that was on the stove (or heating element).  But if dairy and meat dishes are washed one after another or if they are washed together in a secondary vessel, then all is permissible. And if water is poured from a primary meat vessel onto a dairy vessel then its status is like a primary vessel and the dairy vessel is prohibited if it had been used for dairy within 24 hours. But if boiling water, (that was heated in a pot) that is neither dairy nor meat is poured on meat and dairy dishes tougher, even if there is oil stuck to them, all is permissible since the heat of pouring is not comparable to the heat of a primary vessel such that the vessels that water is poured over can swallow substances one from another. And if one finds a dairy plate among meat plates we are not concerned that they may have been washed together in a way that renders them prohibited. 
It appears to me that if one places ash in the hot water in a large pot before washing dishes in the pot, even if there is grease stuck to the plates, it is permissible because the ash mixes with the grease to impart a rancid taste.

Siman 96

Radish or beets that were cut with a Meat knife, used that day or that was not cleaned off. It is not allowed to be eaten with Milk, until a slice is removed from the location of the cutting that is an "amount to be taken" . This amount is equivalent to the width of your thumb. Or you can taste it, and if it does not have the taste you can just rinse it and it is fine . There are those who say that this is also the rule with a knife that was not used that day and was cleaned off. And if you did not take the "amount to be taken" and you did not taste it and you cooked it with Milk, you need 60 times the amount that the knife touched, and this is the rule for something that was cut with a knife of a Non-Jew.

Siman 97

One may not knead dough with milk, lest one come to eat it with meat.  If one did knead it that way, the whole loaf is prohibited even to eat alone.  If it was a small quantity that can be eaten in one sitting, or its shape is unusual so it will be recognizable that it shouldn't be eaten with meat, it is permitted. One may not bake bread in an oven that was smeared with fat, and if one did, the rules are as for a dough kneaded with milk. GLOSS: Thus we are accustomed to knead bread with milk for Shavuot, and also fat for the honor of the Sabbath, because all of this is considered a small amount.  Also, its shape is distinct from other bread. And all the more so phladan or pashtida are  permitted (Hagahot S.D.) One should not bake bread with any phladan or pashtida in an oven, because it is considered possible that fat may leak onto the bread, and if it leaks under the bread it is as if the bread was kneaded with it (Beit Yosef in the name of the Hagahot Ashiri).  The custom is to put the secondary (here: pareve) near the mouth of the oven (Beit Yosef in the name of the Hagahot S.D).  Even if the food is in a pan (which would prevent the leaking problem) we are accustomed to be strict in the first instance. 

Siman 98



Siman 99



Siman 100



Siman 101



Siman 102



Siman 103

Any forbidden thing with a rancid taste cannot render a mixture prohibited. And even a case where the item's taste is not rancid by itself, but rather tasty and enhancing, but if it is rancid in this mixture, the mixture is permitted. Rema: However, important things, like a biryah (complete organism) and other similar things, if they do not themselves have a rancid taste, even if they make the mixture taste worse, they are not nullified, even in a thousand times their volume. 



Any cooking pot that has not been used within the day is considered to have a rancid taste and cannot render anything forbidden. And it is considered to have not been used for a day if 24 hours have passed since the forbidden substance was cooked. And once 24 hours pass from the time that the forbidden substance was cooked in the pot, it is no longer considered to have been used within a day. And if one cooks in that pot when it has not been used within the day the resulting food is permissible since the part imparted a rancid taste. And this is assuming that the pot was cleaned and there was no grease on its surface. For if it was not cleaned then it is forbidden for it is no different than a piece of forbidden food which is not rancid. And some permit even if the pot was cooked in before it was washed. REMA: And if there are 60 times the volume of whatever is stuck to the surface of the pot then all agree that it is permissible since the pot itself has not bene used within 24 hours and this is how we practice.

Siman 104



Siman 105



Siman 106



Siman 107



Siman 108



Siman 109



Siman 110



Siman 111



Siman 112



Siman 113



Siman 114



Siman 115



Siman 116



Siman 117



Siman 118



Siman 119



Siman 120

...One who acquires from an idol worshipper a meal vessel of metal or glass or vessels or covered in lead from the inside - even though they are new one must dunk them in a mikvah or a stream that is forty se'ot. GLOSS: There are those who says that vessels that are covered in lead even on the inside are dunked in a mikvah without a blessing, and this is how we act. 
The vessel must be loose in your hands at the time of dunking, for if it is tight in your hands it is an interposition, and if you dampen your hand in the water at the outset there is no need to worry (GLOSS: and specifically that you dampened your hands in the waters of the Mikvah but not in water that is detached).
Bless "on the dipping of a vessel", and if there are two or more bless "on the dipping of vessels".
Tripods upon which we set upon them large pots do not require dunking but parillas [barbecue grills] require dipping because the actual food is placed on them.
A shechita [ie ritual slaughter] knife (GLOSS: or a knife for undressing) - there are those who say that it does not require dunking. GLOSS: And there are those who disagree, and it is good to dunk it without a blessing. The irons upon which Matzot [unleavened breads] are repaired do not require dunking. And so too a covering which we force onto the bread to bake it. But a covering for a large pot requires dunking. 
A wooden vessel which has iron hoops on the outside for holding it up does not require dunking.
A silver cup which is connected to a wooden vessel requires dunking. GLOSS: And so too pepper millstones which within the wood there is iron affixed for grinding require dunking. And so too iron funnels or tappings of iron and other metals - all of them require dunking. And specifically that the essence of the vessel is metal, but if the essence of the vessel is wood only if some iron is affixed to it since in order to use it without the iron dunking is not required, but a vessel which is repaired with iron rods, and without the rods one would not be able to use it, and they are on the inside - dunking is required.
One who borrows or rents a vessel from an idol worshipper does not need to dunk, but if an Israelite acquires it from an idol worshipper and lends it to a friend it requires dunking as [dunking] was already required by the first person. And there are those who say that if the first person did not take it for the purpose of a meal, rather only for cutting parchments and the like, he is not required to dunk it. GLOSS: But it is forbidden for the first person to use it for the needs of a meal, even on a temporary basis, without dunking although he acquired it the purpose of [cutting] parchments. And so too if the second Israelite acquired it from the first for the purpose of meals the second must dunk it. 
If an idol worshipper provides a vessel as a loan guarantee to an Israelite [ie as collateral] - if it appears in the mind of the idol worshipper that it is permanent in his hand, dunking is required, and if not, dunk without a blessing or acquire a different vessel and dunk. (GLOSS: and if in the end it becomes permanent in his hand, dunk without a blessing).
...An Israelite who gave silver to an idol-worshipping artisan to make a vessel from it does not require dunking. GLOSS: And there are those who disagree and say to dunk without a blessing. And if some of the silver used to make the vessel was owned by the idol worshipper, dunking is required. And thus an Israelite artisan who makes a vessel for an idol worshipper and acquires it from him shall dunk, also without a blessing if the idol worshipper gave him the metals, but if [the Israelite artisan] makes it himself and only acquired the metals from the idol worshipper or if he gave some metals of his own, dunking is not required.
An Israelite who sells a vessel to an idol worshipper and returns and takes it from him - dunking is required. But if [the idol worshipper] holds it as collateral and [the Israelite] returns and redeems it, it does not require dunking. GLOSS: An Israelite and an idol worshipper who acquire a vessel in partnership - it does not require dunking. An Israelite whose vessel was robbed or stolen and returned to him - dunking is not required. But a minister or governor who forced an Israelite and took his vessel and returned it to him, dunking is required because it already became permanent in the hand of the idol worshipper.
One must dunk the handles of the vessel.
One must remove the rust before dunking, and if one did not remove - if he is careful about it, it is a separation. And if he rubs and puts it on coals and there remains there a bit of rust which is not removable this way, there are some who are not stringent and it is not [considered] a separation.
One may not believe [ie rely on] a child regarding dunking of vessels. (GLOSS: But if [the child] dunks before an adult, it is considered a dunking).
If one dunked vessels alongside an idol worshipper, it is a dunking (GLOSS: But one may not believe [ie trust] [an idol worhsipper] regarding dunking).
If one forgot and did not dunk from the eve of the Sabbath or the eve of a holiday, give it to an idol worshipper as a gift and afterwards borrow it from him and one may use it. GLOSS: And this is how it's done even on regular day in a place where there is no mikvah. And if one mistakenly uses the vessel without dunking - the food he used it for is not forbidden, and he shall dunk it thereafter.

Siman 121

One who takes old (ie used) vessels from one who worships idols [lit. stars] - the way in which the idol-worshipper used them, this is how he kashers them. Therefore, one who takes a used old vessel which was used for cold, such as cups and plates and others like that - he washes them and he must scrub them well in water at the time of washing in order to remove and polish the issur (forbidden matter) which is on them, and afterwards rinse them in water and dip them (in a mikvah). GLOSS: There are places where the custom is to place wine in vessels (ie barrels) where the planks of wood are smeared with fat because the nature of wine is to separate itself from the fat, and the fat congeals and stands by itself and does not touch the wine at all (Ribash 149).
[He] took from them [the idol-worshipper] vessels which were used with heat, whether they were made of metal, wood or stone, he dunks them in boiling hot water and afterwards dips them in a mikveh (if they are made of metal) and then they and are permitted. If you dipped them [ie metal vessels] in a mikveh [first] and then dunked them in boiling hot water - they are permitted. And there are those who say that they must be dipped in the mikvah again. GLOSS: This is also the rule regarding a vessel made of bones, see the laws of Passover 451. One should not dunk a vessel in boiling water when the vessel has been used within the past 24 hours (see the Tur) and one should not use the water from the boiling (Aruch). Every instance in which dunking in boiling water is required it doesn't help if you scrape them with a tool. And see above 108: The Law of a Bread Paddel which is Issur.
The laws of [making kosher through] boiling and heating until it turns white are written in the Laws of Passover. 
A pan which was fried in, even though with regards to chametz on Passover it is enough to dunk in boiling water, with regards to other forbidden matters we require whitening through fire. 
If one dunks in boiling water a vessel which requires whitening by fire, the vessel may not be used with hot food even if it is not next to the fire. GLOSS: But it is permitted to use for cold food, even from the outset [without dunking in boiling water either], through washing and scrubbing well, and all the more so with regards to a vessel which requires dunking in boiling water. And this can only be done in temporary circumstances such as when he is in the house of an idol-worshipper or it is after the fact. But if he wants to use these vessels on a regular basis, there  are some who are stringent and say that even to use it with cold, dunking in boiling water or whitening through heat is required. It is decreed lest once come to use it with hot, and this is our custom. And even vessels which were used for cold, if there is a concern that they were used to heat wine such as a vessel made of silver, our practice is to dunk in boiling water and it should not be changed. And even chests and tables which were acquired from idol-worshippers, it is our custom to dunk them in boiling water, for they may have spilled something hot on them, and this is specifically from the outset, but after the fact there is no need to worry about all of this. And an earthenware vessel which was used for cold, which is impossible to dunk in  boiling water, we consider 'after the fact' and we say that it is enough to empty it and scrub it well, and it is permitted to place in it afterwards even sharp foods like vinegar and others like that. And all the more so hard things like spices and others like that, and see above 91.Metal vessels - even though there are those who that say that if it is used only partially for forbidden foods, the entire vessel is forbidden, because something on part of it is like something hot on all of it, but with regards to kashering it, it doesn't have the effect unless you kasher the entire thing whether it is through dunking in boiling water or whitening by fire. GLOSS: And specifically if the entire vessel was used, but if you know that it was not [all] used, only partially, as it is absorbed is where it emits.
An old [ie used] knife, whether it is big or small, which is acquired from an idol worshipper - if you want to use it to cut something cold - if it doesn't have dimples/holes - thrust it into hard ground 10 times. And every single thrust must be into hard ground. Therefore one may not thrust into a place where there was already another thrust. And even if you cut a sharp food like a raddish this is sufficient (REMA: And to use it regularly don't diminish that which is done for other vessels, for which we dunk in boiled water even for cold). (As it was explained) if there are dimples (or) you want to cut something hot or slaughter [with the knife], whiten it through fire, or sharpen with a whetstone of a blacksmith well on every surface. GLOSS: There are those who say that sharpening this way is only to cut something cold, not something hot, and this is the custom a priori. And if you are not able to whiten the knife through fire well because of the handle, whiten it through fire and dunk in boiling water after. However, if you whitened but did not dunk in boiling water, even if there are dimples, or if you dunked but did not whiten and there are not dimples and you cut something warm it won't be forbidden even if the knife has been used in the previous day, and if you sharpened it well with a whetstone in every place, and dunk it in boiling water afterwords it is effective like whitening through fire if you are able to clean the dimples in it. 

Siman 122



Siman 123



Siman 124



Siman 125



Siman 126



Siman 127



Siman 128



Siman 129



Siman 130



Siman 131



Siman 132



Siman 133



Siman 134



Siman 135



Siman 136



Siman 137



Siman 138



Siman 139



Siman 140



Siman 141

1) Mehaber: All the images of star worshippers found in villages are forbidden, since, apparently, they were made as idols, but those found in cities are permissible, since they were certainly made for the sake of beauty, unless they stand at the entrance of the city, and an image of a staff or a bird or a ball or a sword or a diadem and a ring is in the hand. 

Siman 142



Siman 143



Siman 144



Siman 145



Siman 146



Siman 147



Siman 148



Siman 149

A city in which they (idol worshipers) are making a fair on the day of their festival, and the idol worshipers are gathering from a number of places and are traveling there for the honor of idol worship, it is permitted to travel on its outskirts and it is forbidden to enter it. If (the fair) is on its outskirts, it is permitted to enter it. One who is traveling from one place to another place, it is forbidden to pass through it if the path is specific to (that city) (That is, that one does not pass [through that path] from that city to another city.)

Siman 150



Siman 151



Siman 152



Siman 153



Siman 154



Siman 155



Siman 156



Siman 157



Siman 158



Siman 159



Siman 160



Siman 161



Siman 162



Siman 163



Siman 164



Siman 165



Siman 166



Siman 167



Siman 168



Siman 169



Siman 170



Siman 171



Siman 172



Siman 173



Siman 174



Siman 175



Siman 176



Siman 177



Siman 178



Siman 179



Siman 180

Incised writing, defined as cutting his flesh and filling the place of cutting with kohl [following the emendation of Biur HaGra YD 180.2] or ink or any other dye that leaves a mark.
If he does this on his friend's flesh, the one to whom it was done is exempt unless he aided in the matter.
One is permitted to put ash on his wound.
One who marks his slave lest he escape is exempt (But it seems that, in the first place, it is forbidden).

Siman 181



Siman 182



Siman 183



Siman 184



Siman 185



Siman 186



Siman 187



Siman 188



Siman 189

A woman with no established veset must keep the 30th day since her last period, since this is the "middle veset" for women in general.  But if she has an established veset of 20 or 25 days, she only keeps this day [and not the "middle veset."]

Siman 190



Siman 191



Siman 192



Siman 193



Siman 194



Siman 195



Siman 196



Siman 197



Siman 198



Siman 199



Siman 200



Siman 201



Siman 202



Siman 203



Siman 204



Siman 205



Siman 206



Siman 207



Siman 208



Siman 209



Siman 210



Siman 211



Siman 212



Siman 213



Siman 214



Siman 215



Siman 216



Siman 217



Siman 218



Siman 219



Siman 220



Siman 221



Siman 222



Siman 223



Siman 224



Siman 225



Siman 226



Siman 227



Siman 228



Siman 229



Siman 230



Siman 231



Siman 232



Siman 233



Siman 234



Siman 235



Siman 236



Siman 237



Siman 238



Siman 239



Siman 240



Siman 241



Siman 242



Siman 243



Siman 244



Siman 245



Siman 246

Every Jewish man is obligated in studying Torah, whether poor or rich, whether completely healthy or suffering, whether young or very old. Even a poor man who frequents doorways (to beg) and even one with a wife and children is obligated to set a time for himself to study Torah, by day or by night, as it says, "And you shall meditate in it day and night." (And in a pressing time, even if he only read Shem"a in the morning or evening, it is called "It shall not be moved..." (HG"M 1 &amp; SM"G Asin 12). And one that it is impossible for him to learn because he does not know how to at all or because of troubles that he has, should support others who study. Haga"h: And it will be considered for him as if he learned himself (Tur) And a person is able to make a condition with his friend, that he will study Torah and he will support him, and he will split the reward with him. But if he already toiled in Torah, he is unable to sell him his portion for the money he will give to him. (TA"V? path 2  from Bavli Sotah)

Siman 247

It is a positive commandment to give tzedakah according to the achieving hand [within reach, how much you can afford], and a few times we were commanded about it in the form of positive commandment. And there is a negative commandment in one who turns his eyes away, as it is said: “You shall not harden your heart nor shut your hand” (Devarim 15:7). And all who avert their eyes are called wicked, and it’s as if their worship is idol worship. And much so one is to be cautious about it, because it is possible that it will lead to bloodshed, that poor person who asks will die if there is none giving to his hand, like the story of Naham Ish Gamzu. 

All the ones that are merciful to the poor, the Holy One Blessed Be He is merciful to them. RaMA Note: And the man should take it to heart that he should request every hour of his livelihood from the Holy One Blessed Be He, and like that he requests of this from the HKBH, so should he hear the pleas of poor men. Also he takes it to heart that what goes around comes around in the world, and end of the man that will come him or his son or his grandson are the ones in this state, and all the mercy he has shown to others, the Merciful one will have upon him. 
Charity dispels harsh decrees and famine (&amp;) saves from death as happened at Zarephath: Gloss: (RAMA) This is referring to tithing and one should not test God except in this regard as it was said {Malachi 3,10} "And try Me now herewith" [with tithing] (Tur from the last chapter of Gemara Tanit), and there are those who say that specifically in regards to giving tithes [on produce from Israel] is it allowed to test the Holy One Blessed be His name, but not in regards to other forms of charity. (The Bais Yosef seems to hold this way from Shas there):

Siman 248

Every person if obligated to give charity, even a pauper who is reliant on charity is obligated to give from what is given to him. One who gives less than what is fit for (him) to give, the court would force him and whip him lashes of rebellion until he gives what they evaluated he should give. They go to his property in his presence and take what is fit for him to give. 


The enforcer of Tzedakah doesn’t receive from the women, and from the slaves and from children, only a little thing, but not a big thing because the assumption is that it was robbed or burgled from others. And even many little things were there, everything according to the tithes of the owners and their poor. And where do these words derive anonymously, but if the owner protests, even all that he is forbidden to receive from him. 

A son that eats next to his father and a slave that eats with his master, gives a slice a bread to the poor or to the son of his close friend and he doesn’t worry about thieving, such has been the behavior of the owners of the house. 

Siman 249







A lower level than this is one who gives tzedakah to a poor person and doesn't know to whom they are giving, and the poor person doesn't know from whom they are receiving. And similar to this, is when you give to a charitable fund - and you only give to a charitable fund if you know that the trustee responsible for the fund knows how to run it properly. 

Siman 250



Siman 251



One who gives his non-minor sons and daughters, whom he is not obligated to feed, in order to teach the sons Torah and to direct the daughters on the straight path, and so one who gives gifts to his father and they need them, behold this is in the category of tzedakah.  And not only that, but he is required to give [the relative] precedence over others.  And even if it is not his son or father, but a relative, he must give him precedence to all others.  And his paternal brother takes precedence over his maternal brother.  And the poor of his household take precedence over the poor of his city; and the poor of his city take precedence over the poor of another city.  (so is found in the Sma”g and Sma”k and Tur) <small>Gloss:  Those who are fixed in a city are called the poor of that city, and they take precedence to other poor people who come there from elsewhere (Tur, unlike R”Y son of Baruch).</small>  The residents of Israel take precedence to the residents of the diaspora. <small>Gloss:  Supporting himself takes precedence over everyone, and he is not obligated to give tzedakah until he has his own sustenance, and afterwards he prioritizes the support of his father and mother, if they are poor, and they take precedence to sustaining his sons.  And afterwards, his sons, and they take precedence to his brothers, and they take precedence to other relatives, and relatives take precedence to neighbors, and neighbors to the people of the city, and the people of his city to the people of another city.  And the same is true if they were taken captive and he needed to redeem them  (This is all in the Tur)</small>



One must prioritize feeding the hungry over clothing the naked.
A man and a woman who came to ask for food, we give precedence to the woman over the man.  And so if they came to ask for clothing.  And so if male and female orphans came to get married, they give precedence to the female orphan to marry her off..

One who comes and says, 'feed me,' we don't check whether they are being deceitful, rather feed them immediately. If there was someone naked who came and said, 'clothe me,' we do check whether they are being deceitful. But if we know them,we clothe them immediately.

Siman 252




One is not to obtain the release of captives using money more than their value, to keep a normal state of matters, so that the enemies [=the government officials] do not kidnap more so as to gain more money. However, a person may redeem <b> himself </b> with as much money as he wants. A scholar  of Torah and even a sharp student who is only destined to become a scholar of Torah may be redeemed [even with over paying.] <i> (And for if one's wife counts as a separate individual: see the Tur Even Haezer 78.) </i>

Siman 253


There are this who say that these amounts were only stated for their own day, however, at this time a person may receive until they have enough that a person and his family can be sustained on its profits. Thee words are sensible. 

Siman 254



Siman 255



Siman 256



Siman 257









A person should not give all of his charity (lit., monies) to just one poor person.
One who distributes charity must take care not to favor (lit., increase towards) his relatives more than other people. Rem"a: [This law applies] particularly to a <i>Gabbai</i> [distributors of communal charity], but everyone may give their charity or their <i>Ma'aser</i> to whomever from their relatives, and they take precedence as was explained above in Siman 251 (Mordechi First Chapter of Bava Batra)

Siman 258



Siman 259



Siman 260



Siman 261



Siman 262



Siman 263



Siman 264



Siman 265



Siman 266



Siman 267



Siman 268

A convert that enters to join to [the] jewish people is obligated in circumcision. If he was already circumcised when he was a Idol worshipper <i> or he was born circumcised (the Tur quoting the Rosh)</i>, its necessary to draw blood from it and not bless on it (the circumcision).And If the organ was destroyed , [the fact that] there isn't circumcision [does not prevent him] from converting and its enough for him [to convert] through immersion [alone]. <i> [If] he immerses before he is circumcised, it is effective, that afther the fact he was immersed</i>  and there are those who say that he [the convert] doesnt have to immerse [due to the circumstances].


Since the ritual of immersion of a convert needs a beis din of three, they don't immerse him on shabbat and not on yom tov and not in the night. and if he immerses indeed this [individual] is a [proper] convert.







When a [potential] convert comes to convert check after him, perhaps it is because of money he took, or because of power she will gain, or because of fear that [the pontential convert] is coming to enter the religion.  And if he is a man, check after him perhaps he placed his eyes on a Jewish woman.  And if she is a woman, check after her perhaps she placed her eyes on the single men of Israel.  And if you do not find to them [such] a cause, inform them of the weight of the yoke of the Torah, and the  difficulty of fulfilling it on the nations of the world in order that [the potential converts] leave.  If they accept and do not leave, and you see them that they are returning out of love, accept them.  And if you did not check after him or you did not inform him of the rewards of the commandments and their punishments, and he was circumcised and immersed before three ordinary people, this is a convert.  Even if you are informed that it is because of some thing (like those discussed above) that he converted, since he was circumcised and immersed he has left the category of Idol Worshippers (i.e. Non-Jews), and we are worried for him until his righteousness is clarified.  And even if he returns and serves Idols, he is like an apostate Israelite that his marriages are marriages.  [Rama]: An apostate Israelite that repents does not need to immerse.  Just that rabbinically he should immerse and accept words of joining (strict observance) before three. 

Siman 269



Siman 270



Siman 271



Siman 272



Siman 273



Siman 274



Siman 275



Siman 276



Siman 277



Siman 278



Siman 279



Siman 280



Siman 281



Siman 282



Siman 283



Siman 284



Siman 285



Siman 286



Siman 287



Siman 288



Siman 289



Siman 290



Siman 291



Siman 292



Siman 293

It is forbidden to eat new (crop) of the five types of grain until the Omer is brought, which is the 16th of Nissan. As it says, “And bread, toasted grain, and unripe (or damp) grain you may not eat until (the end of) this very day.” And in these times that there is no Omer, it is forbidden (on) all of the 16th day. And outside of Israel where we observe two days, it is forbidden (on) all of the 17th day, until the beginning of the night of the 18th.
The prohibition of (eating) new (grain) is practiced both in Israel and outside Israel, whether of a Jew’s (grain) or a non-Jew’s.
Grain that did not take root before the 16th of Nissan is forbidden until the next Omer comes. Rama: And nevertheless, all indeterminate grain is permitted after Passover because of a double doubt. Perhaps it comes from the previous year. And even if you’ll say that it came from this year, nevertheless, perhaps it took root before the Omer (Tur quoting the Rosh).  And in types of grain that they certainly plant after Pesach, for example in some countries where they plant spelt and barley after Passover, then he should be stringent after the harvest, unless the gates of the country are not closed and most of the grain comes from another place where they plant before Passover. (Hg”M Ch. 11 from the M”A &amp; Tos. End of Ch. 1 of Kiddushin) And also, in a time when the winter season extends to after Passover, and in all of that region they plant the abovementioned crops after Passover, one should be stringent and suspect unless known otherwise. But one should not teach others in a place where most of their drinking and eating is from these species, because it is better that they be negligent and not to be pre-meditated. (So it seems in the Tur quoting the Rosh and T”H Ch. 158)

Siman 294



Siman 295



Siman 296



Siman 297



Siman 298



Siman 299



Siman 300



Siman 301



Siman 302



Siman 303



Siman 304



Siman 305



Siman 306



Siman 307



Siman 308



Siman 309



Siman 310



Siman 311



Siman 312



Siman 313



Siman 314



Siman 315



Siman 316



Siman 317



Siman 318



Siman 319



Siman 320



Siman 321



Siman 322



Siman 323



Siman 324



Siman 325



Siman 326



Siman 327



Siman 328



Siman 329



Siman 330



Siman 331


In this era, even in a place where Jews ascending from the Diaspora have acquired a presumption of ownership, and even in the days of Ezra (the Scribe), there is no pentateuchal obligation of priestly gifts and tithes; rather, a rabbinic obligation exists, since the verse says, "When you shall come...," implying when all of you will ascend to the land, and not a partial Aliyah, as there was in the days of Ezra.  <i>Gloss: And there are dissenters, and their position is that [even] nowadays we are biblically obligated <u>in the land of Israel</u> in priestly gifts and tithes, yet we do not follow this custom (Yaakov ben Asher (Ba'al ha-Turim) quoting Rabeinu Yitzchak).</i>

Siman 332



Siman 333



Siman 334



Siman 335

...It is a religious obligation to visit the sick. Relatives and close friends may visit immediately and others after three days. But if he (the sick) is gravely ill, all may visit immediately.
...A person of high status should visit even a person of modest status, even several times a day, and [one should also visit] one's peer. Anyone who exceeds this standard is worthy of praise, but one should take care not to burden the patient.  There are those who maintain that even an enemy should visit the sick individual (Maharal 197). This does not seem correct to me, rather one should not visit a patient or comfort a mourner who is one's enemy lest the [suffering person] think that [the enemy] is rejoicing in his misfortune, which will only cause more suffering. And this is what seems correct to me. 
...The visitor should not sit on the bed, nor on a chair nor on a bench but rather wrap himself (in tallit?) and sit before him because the Divine Presence rests above his head. Isserles: Especially if the sick person is laying on the ground because the one sitting would be higher then him but if he is laying on a bed it is permitted to sit on a chair or bench....
...We do not visit a sick person during the first three hours of the day because the illness is less pronounced in the morning and one might be tempted not to pray for him; nor during the last three hours of the day because the illness is more severe then and one might despair of praying for mercy. (And anyone who visits the sick and doesn't pray for him has not fulfilled the mitzvah.) (Bet Yosef based on Ramban.)
...When one prays for mercy for the patient, if one is doing so in the patient's presence, one may pray in any language he desires, but if this is not in the patient's presence, one must only pray in the Holy Tongue [Hebrew].
...[When one prays for the sick person] one should include in the prayer a request on behalf of all of the ill among the Jewish people, saying, "May the One have mercy upon you among the people of Israel," and on Shabbat, one should say, "It is Shabbat and we don't cry out on Shabbat, but healing is near at hand."
...We tell the patient that he should attend to his affairs; if he owes or is owed money, but he should not take this inquiry as evidence that he is dying and become afraid.
...We don't visit patients with intestinal maladies, nor eye disorders, nor mental disorders, nor those who have difficulty speaking. We don't visit in these patients' presence, rather, we enter the vestibule of their house and ask after their welfare, inquiring whether they need anything in particular, and we listen to learn about the suffering of [the patient? the caregiver?], and we pray for the patient.
...We visit the sick non-Jews because for the "ways of peace" (mipnei darkei shalom)
...For an intestinal disease, a woman tends to a man but a man does not tend to a woman. Rama’s Note: there are those who say that whoever has a sick person in his house, goes to the sage that request from them mercy for the sick person. And similarly the custom to bless the sick in synagogue, to call them a new name, because changing the name tempers the severe decree. Comfort to the mourners comes before visiting the sick. 

Siman 336

The Torah gives permission for physicians to practice, and it is in fact commanded under the category of saving a life. Furthermore, if it is withheld from someone, it is equivalent to murder [lit. spilling blood]. This is true even if [the patient] has [another] physician, since not just anyone is qualified to practice medicine. Someone should not occupy themselves with practicing medicine unless they are an expert, and there is not a greater [physician] available. If [one practices medicine although] this is not the case, it is equivalent to murder [lit. spilling blood]. If one practices medicine without the permission of the court, they are liable to pay [a penalty for malpractice], even if they are an expert. If one practices medicine with the permission of the court, but makes an error resulting in injury, they are exempt from human judgement but liable to heavenly judgement. If [a physician] killed [a patient] and knows it was [the result of] an error, [the physician] it exiled on account of it.
The physician is forbidden to exact payment for advice or teaching, but payment for effort and (unknown) are permitted.

Siman 337



Siman 338



Siman 339

One who is dying is like a living person for all his affairs.  They do not die his cheeks, and they do not annoint him, and they do not wash him, and they do not stuff up his orifices, and they do not remove the pillow from under him, and they do not place him on sand nor on clay nor on earth, and they do not place a pot or a trowel or a pitcher of water or a grain of salt on his stomach, and they do not announce about him to the cities, and they do not hire flautists and lamenters, and they do not close his eyes, until his soul departs.  And anyone who closes with the departuer of the soul, behold this one spills blood.  And they do not tear over him and they do not remove their shoes and they do not eulogize over him and they do not bring a coffin into the house with him until he dies.  And they do not open about him with [the post-death blessing of] justifying the judgment until his soul departs.  Gloss: and some say that they do not dig a grave, even tough it is not with him in the house, until after he dies.  (Rivash 114)  It is forbidden to dig any grave to be open until the next day, that they not bury him in it on that day, and there is danger in the matter.  (Rabbenu Yeruham in the name of R. Yehudah he-Hassid, ob"n)  And so it is forbidden to cause the dead person to die quickly.  Such as one who was dying for a long time and he could not separate, it is forbidden to remove the pillow or the mattress from underneath hum, because they say that there are feathers of some birds that cause this, and similarly they should not move him from his place.  And similarly it is forbidden to place the keys of the synagogue under his head, in order that he take leave.  But if there is something there that is causing delay in the departure of the soul, such as if there is a banging noise next to that house, such as a wood chopper, or there is salt on his tongue, and thes eare preventing the departure of the soul, it is permmitted to remove it from there, that in this there is no activity at all, rather he removes the barrier (it is all in the glosses of Alfasi in the chapter "these shave")....

Siman 340



Siman 341



Siman 342



Siman 343



Siman 344



Siman 345



Siman 346



Siman 347



Siman 348



Siman 349



Siman 350



Siman 351



Siman 352

The deceased is not buried in expensive shrouds, even if he was a prince in Israel.
The custom was to bury in white garments.