Pesach Haggadah Edot Hamizrah
הגדה של פסח עדות המזרח
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Pesach Haggadah Edot Hamizrah

Kadesh

Kadesh
We pour the first cup and make Kiddush over it
Before Kiddush some say the following 


Every person in the household should stand up holding their cup. The one making Kiddush should have in mind to fulfill everyone else's obligation of reciting Kiddush and they in return have in mind to fulfill their obligation. 
If Pesach falls on Shabbat one should say Shalom Aleichem, Eshet Hayil, Atkenu Se'udatah and then skips Azamer Bishvahin and continues. 
A psalm of David [i.e., a psalm for reposing the Shechinah upon David (He would play and the Shechinah would come to rest upon him)]. The L rd is my shepherd [(in this desert in which I walk; therefore,)] I shall not want.In green pastures He couches me; He leads me beside the still waters.He restores my [beleaguered] soul. He leads me in straight paths [(protecting me from my foes)], for His name's sake.Though I walk in the vale of darkness [(the desert of Ziph [viz. I Samuel 23:15])], I will fear no evil, for You are with me. Your rod [of afflictions] and your staff [of succor] — they comfort me [(both tending to forgiveness of sin)]. [Thus, I trust that] You shall set before me a table [(of kingdom)] in the face of my enemies. You have [already] anointed my head with the oil [of kingship]; my cup runs over [with good]. Only good and lovingkindness shall follow me all the days of my life, and I shall dwell in the house of the L rd forever.

If Pesach falls out in a weekday, one starts from here
 




On Saturday night one says



We drink the cup of wine while leaning on the left side

Urchatz

Urhatz
One should wash their hands before eating Karpas without a blessing. <br> Before washing one's hands some say

Karpas

Karpas
One should take less than a Kazayit of Karpas and dip it into saltwater. One should bless on the Karpas and have in mind that this blessing should cover the Maror <br> Before dipping the Karpas in saltwater some say

Yachatz

Yahatz
One takes the middle Matza and breaks it into two pieces representing a ו and a ד.  The ו should be bigger and is hidden for the Afikoman. Theד is placed back on the Seder plate between the other Matzot. Before doing the Yahatz some say

Magid

Ha Lachma Anya

Maggid
We say the Haggadah aloud and joyously. This is the story of the Jews leaving Egypt which reciting it is a biblical mitzvah. <br> Before the start of Maggid some say. 
...


Four Questions

We pour the second cup and remove the Seder plate as if we are done the Seder so the children will wonder and ask. 
Why is this night different from all other nights?  On all other nights we don’t even dip once, and on this night, twice.  On all other nights we eat chametz and matzah, and on this night, only matzah.  On all other nights we eat many vegetables, and on this night, maror.  On all other nights we eat and drink sitting and reclining, and on this night we all recline.

We Were Slaves in Egypt

We return the Seder plate to it's place on the table and continue with the Haggadah. The Matza should remain uncovered throughout Maggid but whenever one holds the cup with cover the Matza

Story of the Five Rabbis



The Four Sons



Yechol Me'rosh Chodesh



In the Beginning Our Fathers Were Idol Worshipers




We cover the Matzot, hold the cup of wine in our right hand and say

First Fruits Declaration

We put down the cup and uncover the Matza until Lefichach

The Ten Plagues



Dayenu

Persians have the custom it hitting one another with scallions during Dayenu

Rabban Gamliel's Three Things


When we say Pesach, one should look at the Shankbone on the Seder plate but not pick it up

One should pick up the top Matza and say Matza Zo
One picks up the Marror and says Marror Ze

First Half of Hallel

One should cover the Matzot and pick up the cup of wine and say

Second Cup of Wine


...I am ready and prepared to fulfill the mitzvah of drinking the second cup of wine, out of the four ‎cups established by the rabbis of blessed memory on the Passover night. Each one individually is a ‎mitzvah in its own right. May the favor of the ETERNAL, our God, be upon us; let the work of our ‎hands prosper, O prosper the work of our hands! 
One drinks the cup leaning on the left side without making a Blessing

Rachtzah

Rahtzah
One should wash their hands. Before washing some say. 
We wash. One should raise their hands and then say. 

Motzi Matzah

Motzi Matza
One takes all three Matzot and says Hamotzi. One then drops the lowest Matza and then says Al Achilat Matza on the remaining two. One then eats two Kizeitot of Matza while leaning on the left side. One should make sure not to speak until after Korech. <br> Some say before saying Hamotzi.

Maror

Marror
One takes a K'za'it of Marror and dips in the Haroset. One should shake off the Haroset so the taste stays bitter. <br> Some say before the B'rachah.
We make the B'rachah and do not lean when eating the Marror. 

Korech

Korech
One takes a K'za'it of the third Matza with K'za'it of Marror and dips it in Haroset and says.  

One eats the Korech sandwich leaning on the left side. 

Shulchan Orech

Shulhan Orech
One eats the meal joyously. One should not eat too much in order to be able to enjoy the Afikoman. <br> One says before  eatinr an egg. <br> During the meal some say. 

Tzafun



Barech

Birkat Hamazon



Third Cup of Wine



Pour Out Thy Wrath



Hallel

Second Half of Hallel



Songs of Praise and Thanks



Fourth Cup of Wine



Nirtzah

Chad Gadya



Echad Mi Yodea


Who knows two? I know two! Two tablets of the covenant; one is our God in the heavens and the earth.