Tzavaat HaRivash
צוואת הריב"ש
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Tzavaat HaRivash



Chapter 1

1. Testament of Rav Israel baal shem, peace be upon him. Be Honest in your work in order that it should be blessed complete work, and the main thing is not to forget the sayings {of torah}. Important too is to study every day a lesson of Moral Guidance and Inspiration, whether much or whether less. And see to yourself always, and cleave to yourself good traits and straight {honest} habits, that no comfort is in a day without the activity of mitzva, whether light or whether serious. And the sign for this is "Be careful with a minor or major mitzvah" {Avot 2:1}. An explanation, caution (zahir) is from the language, "and the wise shall shine יזהירו" {root:זהר} {Daniel 12:3}. What I want to say is, the soul will shine and illuminate from either a "Small" or "Large" mitzvah, because, "the merciful one seeks the heart." (Zohar II:162b; Sanhedrin 106b). 
2. I have balanced(שויתי) hashem across from me always. (Psalms 16:8) Shviti is related to equanimity, (השתוות, root: שוה) that what is in every experience should be equal to you, whether you are being praised or defamed; and in everything else the same. For example, everything you eat should be the same to you  {as ma'an} whether delicacy or any other food. When all is truly equal in your eyes you've removed the yetzer hara from yourself completely. You should say, (about what happens to you) "everything comes from him, may this bring him blessing, and if it's decent in his eyes, etc." And {when} all your intentions are for the sake of heaven, but for yourself there is no difference , this is a very high level. And every man needs to perform HaShem's work with all his strength because everything is needed before HaShem, may this bring Him a blessing, who desires that his work be in all the ophanim. And the intention, because sometimes man walks and speaks with other people and so isn't able to learn and needs to be connected in hashem, may this bring him blessing, and towards unity in unities. And yes, a man walks on the road and isn't able to pray, and so learns according to his way and needs to work in other ophanim {areas he  didn't expect}. And don't regret this, because HaShem wants his work in all the ophanim, sometimes in this ophan and sometimes in that ophan. And like this, it will happen while he's on the road and sees a lilac, or speaks with someone in order to perform the work in that ophan. Very important is to go towards HaShem in your work and prepare yourself for what comes to mind, you will think you are blessed and will see and ask from HaShem; that invites Him {into yourself} constantly. What HaShem knows is for his good, and not what it looks like to other people, and if he's able to see what's good in His eyes is bad, he only throws away everything in his business, and his needs will be blessed.