Maaseh Rav
מעשה רב
merged
http://www.sefaria.org/Maaseh_Rav
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-http://www.sefaria.org

Maaseh Rav



Siman 1

To arise at midnight and recite Tikkun Chatzot.

Siman 2

One who is awake the whole night, washes his hands and blesses [the morning blessings], but not the blessings on the Torah.  If he then sleeps by day, he must say the blessings on the Torah [upon arising].


Siman 3



Siman 4

In washing one's hands, both in the morning and for a meal, the right hand should be first.


Siman 5

In the morning, one should pour 4 times.  Three times to remove evil spirits, and a fourth time to purify the water which became impure.

Siman 6

The blessing Elokai Neshama (My G-d, the soul you placed in me) should be said together with the blessing Asher Yatzar (Who formed man with wisdom).  [See Biurei haGra Shulchan Orach Orach Chaim 4:3]

Siman 7

All of the blessings from "who gives wisdom" until "vayidaber" (Editor: I am unsure what he means.  Perhaps the sacrifices.) one can say immediately upon arising from bed even before daylight.  For "Vayidaber" one should wait until daylight. (See Magen Avraham 46:13)

Siman 8

The blessing on the Torah, one should say it before reading the daily sacrifice (See the Gra's comment on Shulchan Aruch Orach Chaim 46:17) If one wants to learn before daylight, one should say the blessings on the Torah after the order of the morning blessings before one learns.

Siman 9

All of the morning blessings, if one forgot to say them immediately, one has opportunity to say them all day and the night until going to sleep, except the blessing on Torah for which one fulfills his obligation with Ahava Raba (Great Love, the blessing before Shema in the morning).  (See Biurei HaGra 47:7).  Thus on Yom Kippur, when one does not say 'Who met all my needs' and 'Who removes sleep', one should say these at night upon putting on leather shoes and washing one's face (See Biurei HaGra 46:15)

Siman 10

Going to a bath house is not an interruption for one's blessing on the Torah, and all the moreso sleep.  (See Biurei HaGra 47:9-11)

Siman 11



Siman 12



Siman 13



Siman 14



Siman 15



Siman 16



Siman 17



Siman 18



Siman 19



Siman 20



Siman 21



Siman 22

Rashi of blessed memory