Mishneh Torah, Nazariteship
משנה תורה, הלכות נזירות
Maimonides' Mishneh Torah, edited by Philip Birnbaum, New York, 1967
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH002108864

Mishneh Torah, Nazariteship



Chapter 1



Chapter 2




















Naziriteship was observed both during the time of the Temple and after the time of the Temple. Accordingly, if anyone has vowed nowadays to become a nazirite, he becomes a lifelong nazirite, for we have no Temple where he might offer his sacrifices on the day his term as nazirite is completed.
Naziriteship is observed only in Eretz Yisrael. If a man took the nazirite vow in the Diaspora, he is fined and compelled to go to Eretz Yisrael to be a nazirite there for the number of days he specified in the nazirite vow.— —
As long as he is outside Eretz Yisrael, he is forbidden to drink wine, defile himself for the dead, or cut his hair; he must observe all the details of naziriteship, even though these days are not counted. If he transgresses by drinking wine, cutting his hair, touching a corpse or the like, he is to be lashed.

Chapter 3

The duration of unspecified naziriteship is thirty days. If, for example, one said "I will be a nazirite," he becomes one for no less than thirty days.— —
If he specified a period of less than thirty days, as when he said: "I will be a nazirite for one day," or "ten days," or "twenty days," he becomes a nazirite for thirty days, since there can be no naziriteship for less than thirty days. This law is based on tradition.










Samson was not a complete nazirite, because he had not taken the nazirite vow, but the angel separated him from uncleanness. What was his legal status? He was forbidden to drink wine and cut his hair, but was permitted to defile himself for the dead. This, too, is based on tradition.
Accordingly, if anyone said: "I will be a nazirite like Samson," he becomes a lifelong nazirite, kept from cutting his hair and drinking wine. He must not cut his hair every twelve months, like other lifelong nazirites, but he may defile himself for the dead.— —

Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10














If a man said: "I will be a nazirite if I will perform this or that," or "if I will not perform," or something of the sort, he is a sinful person; such naziriteship is of the sinful. If, however, one vows to God in a way of holiness, he does a good thing and deserves praise. Concerning such a man it is written: "His consecration to God is upon his head … he is consecrated to the Lord" (Numbers 6:7-8). Scripture considers him the equal of a prophet, as it is written: "I raised up some of your sons as prophets, and some of your young men as nazirites" (Amos 2:11).