Pesikta Rabbati
פסיקתא רבתי
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Pesikta_Rabbati
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org
-Rabbi Mike Feuer, Jerusalem Anthology
-https://www.sefaria.org

Pesikta Rabbati





Chapter 1

And it will be, from new month to new month, and from Sabbath to Sabbath, all flesh will come to bow before Me," said Hashem (Isaiah 66:23). Teach us, our teacher, a person from Israel who blessed after meals on Rosh Chodesh and forgot and did not mention Rosh Chodesh, how should he act? Teach us, our rabbis, if he forgot and did not mention Rosh Chodesh, and he completed the blessing after meals and remembered immediately before diverting his mind from the blessing, he does not need to return from the outset but concludes a small blessing at the end: "Blessed are You, Hashem our God, King of the universe, who gave new months to His nation, Israel. Blessed are You, who sanctifies Israel and the new months." Shimon ben Abba said in the name of Rabbi Yochanan: If one is uncertain whether he mentioned Rosh Chodesh or not, he does not return. And on Chol Hamoed, he must say, in the prayer of Musaf, "And grant us, Hashem our God." Behold, we have learned that new months are considered like the festivals, as it is said: "And on your joyous days and your festivals and on your new moons" (Numbers 10:10), and even like Sabbaths, new months are considered equal. New months are thus found to be equal to the festivals and Sabbaths. How do we know they are even equal to Sabbaths? From what the prophet completed: "And it will be, from new month to new month and from Sabbath to Sabbath, all flesh will come to bow." Thus Rabbi Tanchuma began: "My soul thirsts for God, for the living God; when will I come and see the face of God" (Psalms 42:3). This sustains the tradition at the beginning of Parashat Acharei Mot. Another interpretation: "My soul thirsts for God"—when You will execute judgment (in the future) [upon the nations of the world]. "God you shall not curse" (Exodus 22:27). Another interpretation: "For God"—when You return the divinity that You displayed at Sinai. I said, "You are as gods" (Psalms 82:6). Another interpretation: "For God"—when You will clothe Yourself in divinity as You did at Sinai, hasten the end and unite Your divinity in Your world, as it is said: "And Hashem will be King over all the earth" (Zechariah 14:9). How does this interpret Jacob's blessing? "And may God give you from the dew"—when the divine attributes will grant you (Genesis 27:28). Another interpretation: "For God, the living God"—He is living and eternal for all ages. Another interpretation: "For God, the living God"—He promises life, bringing rains in their time and causing dew to flourish in their season for our livelihood. Another interpretation: "For God, the living God"—to God who is living and established by His word. Rabbi Pinchas the Kohen ben Chama said: Though those who made the promises have died (these being the prophets), the God who made the promises is alive and enduring. "My soul thirsts for God, the living God; when shall I come and see the face of God?" Israel said to the Holy One, Blessed be He: "Master of the Universe, when will You restore to us the honor we had when we ascended for the three pilgrimage festivals and saw the face of the Divine Presence?" Rabbi Yitzchak said: Just as they would come to see, so too they came to be seen. As it is written: "When shall I come and see [in the spirit of holiness]." Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: Why was it called "The Joy of the Water Drawing"? Because from there they drew the spirit of holiness. They said, "When will You restore us to that honor? Behold, how much time has passed since the destruction of our Temple, and now it is already 1,151 years. When shall I come and see the face of God?" God said to them: "My children, in this world, how many times did you ascend in the year? Was it not only three times a year? But when the end arrives, I will rebuild it, and you will not ascend three times a year but every month and every Sabbath, as it is said: 'And it will be, from new month to new month, and from Sabbath to Sabbath.' Another interpretation: "And it will be, from new month to new month"—how is it possible for all flesh to come to Jerusalem every month and every Sabbath? Rabbi Levi said: In the future, Jerusalem will be like the Land of Israel, and the Land of Israel will be like the entire world. How will they come for Rosh Chodesh and the Sabbath from the ends of the earth? The clouds will come and carry them to Jerusalem, and they will pray there in the morning. This is what the prophet praises: "Who are these that fly like a cloud" (Isaiah 60:8). Another interpretation: "And it will be, from new month"—and what if Rosh Chodesh coincides with the Sabbath? The verse says: "From new month and from Sabbath"—how? Rabbi Pinchas the Kohen ben Chama said in the name of Rabbi Reuven: They will come twice, once for the Sabbath and once for Rosh Chodesh. The clouds will carry them at dawn and bring them to Jerusalem, and they will pray there in the morning. Then they will carry them [back to their homes] and return to Jerusalem. "Who are these that fly like a cloud"—this refers to the morning. "And like doves to their dovecotes"—this refers to the afternoon. "All flesh shall come"—it does not say "all Israel" but "all flesh." Rabbi Pinchas said: What is "all flesh"? It refers to anyone who subdues their desires in this world; they merit to see the Divine Presence, as it is written: "He who shuts his eyes from seeing evil" (Isaiah 33:15). What is written afterward? "Your eyes will see the King in His beauty" (ibid. 33:17). Another interpretation: "All flesh"—even the nations of the world. But not all of them—only those who did not enslave Israel. The Messiah will accept them. And by what merit will Israel attain all this honor? By the merit of settling the Land of Israel, enduring suffering among the nations of the world. You will also find that the patriarchs of the world endured suffering for the sake of burial in the Land of Israel. Rabbi Chanina said: All weights mentioned in the Torah are in sela'im, those in the prophets are in litras, and those in the writings are in kintarin, except for the weight of the silver Abraham gave to Ephron for burial—these were kintarin. "Four hundred shekels of silver" (Genesis 23:15). Come and see, Abraham gave 400 kintarin of silver for the burial plot. And similarly, Jacob—he gave all the gold he accumulated in his lifetime and all his wealth (recognized) [to ensure] that he might give it to Esau to prevent him from entering the burial cave, as it is written: "In my burial place that I have dug for myself" (Genesis 50:5). And similarly, when Jacob was nearing the end of his life, he made Joseph swear to him, saying, "Do not bury me in Egypt" (Genesis 47:29). And why did he say this? Rabbi Chanina said: There are things involved. Rabbi Yose said: There are things involved. Resh Lakish said in the name of Rabbi Eliezer HaKappar: Because the dead of the Land of Israel will be revived at the time of the Messiah, as David said: "I shall walk before the Lord in the lands of the living" (Psalms 116:9). And is the Land of Israel the "land of the living"? Do people not die in it? Is the Land outside Israel not the "land of the living"? Rather, the Land of Israel is called the "land of the living" because the dead buried in it will be revived. And since David said: "In the lands of the living," it means that the dead buried in the Land of Israel will live in the days of the Messiah. Rabbi Yose asked Resh Lakish: Even someone like Jeroboam the son of Nebat? He replied: "Sulfur and salt." Rabbi Chelbo asked Rabbi Ami: "Even someone like Jeroboam the son of Nebat?" He replied: "I asked Resh Lakish, and he told me, 'Sulfur and salt.'" Rabbi Brachia asked Rabbi Chelbo: "Even someone like Jeroboam the son of Nebat?" He replied: "I asked Rabbi Ami, and he told me, 'I asked Resh Lakish, and he told me, "Sulfur and salt."'" Rabbi Brachia said: "We do not contradict this, for what is meant by 'sulfur'? It is not a physical punishment; rather, it indicates that the Holy One, Blessed be He, will punish the wicked in Gehinnom with sulfur and salt. But the Temple was destroyed." Rabbi Yehuda bar Rabbi Elai said: "For seven years, the Land of Israel burned with sulfur and fire, as it is written: 'Sulfur and salt, a burning of its entire land' (Deuteronomy 29:22)." Rabbi Yose ben Chalafta said: "For 52 years after the destruction of the Temple, no person passed through the Land of Israel, as it is written: 'Upon the mountains... for they have been desolate, without a man passing through' (Jeremiah 9:9), and 'From the bird of the heavens to the beast, they have wandered away' (ibid.)." Why? "Because it burned with fire cast upon it, as it is written: 'From above, He cast fire into my bones' (Lamentations 1:13)." As for the punishment of Jeroboam the son of Nebat and his companions, the Holy One, Blessed be He, has already punished them during those seven years when the Land of Israel burned with fire. Thus, even Jeroboam the son of Nebat and his companions will live in the time of the Messiah. And who caused them to escape the judgment of Gehinnom and be buried in the Land of Israel? As it is written: "And He will atone for His land and His people" (Deuteronomy 32:43). Rabbi Huna the Kohen ben Avin said in the name of Rabbi Abba ben Yamina: A person who dies outside the Land of Israel and is buried outside the Land of Israel has two troubles upon him—the trouble of death and the trouble of burial, as it is written concerning Pashhur: "And you, Pashhur, and all your household, will go into captivity; in Babylon, you will die, and there you will be buried" (Jeremiah 20:6). Rabbi Chama bar Chanina said: A person who dies outside the Land but is brought to be buried in the Land of Israel has only one trouble—death. And how does Rabbi Chama bar Chanina explain "There you will die, and there you will be buried"? That the burial in the Land of Israel atones for him. Rabbi Berochia and Rabbi Eliezer ben Pedat were walking in [Ilfa], and they saw coffins coming from outside the Land. Rabbi Berochia said to Rabbi Eliezer: "What benefit do they gain by doing this? In their lives, they left it, and now in their deaths, they return to it?" Rabbi Eliezer said to him: "It is not as you say. Since they are buried in the Land of Israel, and a clod of its earth is placed on them, it atones for them, as it is written: 'And He will atone for His land and His people' (Deuteronomy 32:43)." If so, have the righteous outside the Land lost out? No, why? Rabbi Elazar said in the name of Rabbi Simai: "The Holy One, Blessed be He, makes tunnels beneath the earth, and they roll like jars, coming to the Land of Israel. And once they arrive in the Land of Israel, the Holy One, Blessed be He, gives them their souls, as it is written: 'He gives a soul to the people upon it' (Isaiah 42:5). And there is an explicit verse in Ezekiel: 'You will know that I am Hashem when I open your graves and bring you to the Land of Israel' (Ezekiel 37:13)." At that time: "I will put My spirit in you, and you shall live" (ibid. 37:14). From here, we learn that the dead of the Land of Israel will live in the time of the Messiah, and the righteous outside the Land will come into it and live there. And if so, will the nations of the world, who are buried in the Land, also live? No, as it is written in Isaiah: "And no one of the inhabitants will say, 'I am sick'; the people that dwell therein will be forgiven their iniquity" (Isaiah 33:24). The evil neighbors will not say: "We are mingled and therefore we too live with them." Rather, only the people dwelling therein, "forgiven their iniquity," shall live. Who are these forgiven their iniquity? Those of whom it is said: "Who is a God like You, forgiving iniquity and passing over transgressions for the remnant of His heritage" (Micah 7:18). And how long will the days of the Messiah be? Rabbi Akiva says: Forty years, as it is written: "He afflicted you and caused you to hunger" (Deuteronomy 8:3), and it is written: "Make us glad according to the days You have afflicted us" (Psalms 90:15). Just as the affliction mentioned here was forty years, so too the affliction here is forty years. Rabbi Avin said: What is Rabbi Akiva's reasoning? "As in the days of your coming out of Egypt, I will show him wonders" (Micah 7:15). Rabbi Eliezer says: Four hundred years, as it is written: "And they shall serve them, and they shall afflict them four hundred years" (Genesis 15:13), and it is written: "Make us glad according to the days You have afflicted us" (Psalms 90:15). Rabbi Brachia said in the name of Rabbi Dosa the Great: Six hundred years, as it is written: "As the days of the tree, so shall be the days of My people" (Isaiah 65:22). Which tree is this? It is the stump that lasts six hundred years. Rabbi Eliezer bar Rabbi Yossi the Galilean says: One thousand years, as it is written: "For a thousand years in Your eyes are but as yesterday when it is past" (Psalms 90:4), and it is written: "For the day of vengeance is in My heart, and the year of My redeemed has come" (Isaiah 63:4). The day of the Holy One, Blessed be He, is one thousand years. Rabbi Yehoshua says: Two thousand years, as it is written: "Make us glad according to the days You have afflicted us" (Psalms 90:15). And there are no "days" less than two days, and the day of the Holy One, Blessed be He, is one thousand years. Rabbi Abahu says: Seven thousand years, as it is written: "As the joy of a bridegroom over the bride, so shall your God rejoice over you" (Isaiah 62:5). And how long is the joy of a bridegroom over the bride? Seven days. And the day of the Holy One, Blessed be He, is one thousand years. Rabbi says: It is not possible to calculate. "For the day of vengeance is in My heart, and the year of My redeemed has come" (Isaiah 63:4). And how long are the days of the Messiah? 365,000 years. During these days, the children of Israel will live in the Land of Israel and eat its produce, and all the righteous from outside the Land will come through tunnels to it. Once they arrive in it, immediately the Holy One, Blessed be He, will give them their souls, and they will stand and eat together with the children of Israel, as it is written: "He who stretches out the earth and its produce, who gives a soul to the people upon it" (Isaiah 42:5). When will King Messiah come? Rabbi Elazar said: Near the time of the Messiah, ten places will be swallowed, ten places will be overturned, and ten places will be destroyed. Rabbi Chiya bar Abba said: The Messiah will not come except in a generation whose face is like the face of a dog. Rabbi Elazar said: In a generation that deserves destruction, the Messiah will come. Rabbi Levi said: Near the time of the Messiah, a great event will occur in the world.

Chapter 2

... Teach us, our master, from when does the mitzvah of the Channukah lamp begin? Our rabbis taught – from when the sun sets until the majority of people are gone from the marketplace. And where are they to be lit? If one lives on an upper floor with a window facing the public domain, light there. If it is a time of danger, light within your house [and it is forbidden to do work by its light. R’ Asi said] it is forbidden to see by its light. Why do we light Channukah lamps? When the Hasmonean High Priest defeated the Greeks, as it says “For I bend Judah for Me like a bow; I filled [the hand of] Ephraim, and I will arouse your children, O Zion, upon your children, O Javan; and I will make you as the sword of a mighty man,” (Zechariah 9:13) they entered the Holy Temple. They found there eight iron stakes, fixed them in the ground and lit lamps upon them. Why do we read the Hallel psalms of praise? Because it is written “The Lord is God, and He gave us light.” (Tehillim 118:27) Why don’t we read it on Purim? It is written “…to destroy, to slay, and to cause to perish the entire host of every people and province that oppress them…” (Esther 8:11) and we don’t read it except to mark the fall of a kingdom and the kingdom of Ahasuerus still stood. But when the Holy One destroyed the kingdom of Greece they began to sing hymns and praises and to say that in the past we were servants to Pharoah, servants to Greece and now we are servants to the Holy One “Praise, you servants of the Lord…” (Tehillim 113:1) How many channukot (dedications) were there? There were seven. The dedication of heaven and earth, as it says “Now the heavens and the earth were completed…” (Bereshit 2:1) What dedication was there then? “And God placed them in the expanse of the heavens to shed light upon the earth.” (Bereshit 1:17) The dedication of the wall, as it says “And in the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem…” (Nechemiah 12:27) The dedication of those who came up from the exile, as it says “And they offered up for the dedication of this House of God…” (Ezra 6:17) The dedication of the priests, which we light for. The dedication of the world to come, as it says “And it shall come to pass on that day, that I will search Jerusalem with candles…” (Tzephaniah 1:12) The dedication of the princes “This was the dedication offering of the altar…” (Bamidbar 7:84) The dedication of the Sanctuary, which this is speaking of “A psalm; a song of dedication of the House, of David.” (Tehillim 30:1) Another explanation. There are seven channukot. The dedication of the creation of the world, as it is written “Now the heavens and the earth were completed…” (Bereshit 2:1) Completion is the language of dedication, as is written “All the work of the Mishkan of the Tent of Meeting was completed…” (Shemot 39:32) The dedication of Moshe, as it is written “And it was that on the day that Moses finished erecting the Mishkan…” (Bamidbar 7:1) The dedication of the House, as it is written “A psalm; a song of dedication of the House, of David.” (Tehillim 30:1) The dedication of the Second Temple [as it says “And they offered up for the dedication of this House of God…” (Ezra 6:17) and the dedication of the wall] as it says “And in the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem…” (Nechemiah 12:27) The current one of the House of Hasmonean. The dedication of the world to come, because even that has lights, as it is written “And the light of the moon shall be like the light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be seven-fold as the light of the seven days…” (Isaiah 30:26)

Chapter 3

... [What about all] the praise of Joseph, who exceeded in the honor of his father? And yet he did not enter into him all the time, such that were it not that they came to tell him, "Your father is sick," he would not have known! Rather this is to inform you of his righteousness. For he did not want to be alone with his father, lest he say to him, "How did your brothers act with you?" And [then] he would curse them.... Hence he did not go to his father all the time.)

Chapter 4



Chapter 5

… it is written there “Behold the heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain You…” (Melachim I 8:27) and here it is written “…the glory of the Lord filled the Tabernacle.” (Shemot 40:35) R’ Yehoshua of Sachnin said in the name of R’ Levi ‘to what is this likened? To an open cave at the edge of the sea. When the sea storms the cave is filled, but the sea is not reduced. So too, even though it is written that ‘the glory of the Lord filled the Tabernacle’ the upper and lower worlds did not lose anything of the brilliance of the glory of the Holy One, just as it is written “Do I not fill the heavens and the earth? says the Lord.” (Yirmiyahu 23:24) Therefore it is written here ‘And it was’. Just as the Divine Presence was here below at the beginning of the creation of the world but withdrew to above, now it returned to be below as it had been “And it was that on the day that Moses finished…” (Bamidbar 7:1) ... [Another explanation. “And it was that on the day that Moses finished erecting the Mishkan…” (Numbers 7:1)] R’ Simon said: at the time when the Holy One told Israel to erect the Tabernacle, He hinted that when the Tabernacle below is erected, the Tabernacle above is erected, as it says “And it was that on the day that Moses finished…” (ibid.) It does not say ‘erecting the Tabernacle’ but rather ‘erecting this (et) the Tabernacle.’ This refers to the Tabernacle above. The Holy One said: in this world, when the Tabernacle was erected, I commanded Aharon and his sons that they bless you. In the time to come I, in my glory, will bless you. So it is written “May the Lord bless you from Zion, He Who made heaven and earth.” (Psalms 134:3)

Chapter 6

... Another explanation. “And all the work that king Solomon had wrought in the house of the Lord was finished.” (Melachim I 7:51) What does ‘all the work’ mean? It was built by itself, rising and floating up – thus it does not say when the house was built, but rather “And the house, when it was in building…” (Melachim I 6:7) “…was built of stone finished at the quarry (masa)…” (ibid.) What does ‘finished at the quarry’ (masa nivne) mean? R’ Brechia said: the stone picked itself up (nosah atzma), rose up and was built by itself. This is what Shlomo said in his song “I have surely built You a house to dwell in…” (Melachim I 8:13) He says ‘I have surely built’, meaning ‘I built a building and the stones rose up and flew into place themselves’. If you are shocked that the Holy One would do such a thing for a single righteous person, “And a stone was brought and placed on the mouth of the pit…” (Daniel 6:18) And where did they get a rock in Bavel? Our Rabbis said that it rolled all the way from the land of Israel and came in an instant. So if the Holy One did such a thing for flesh and blood, are you surprised that He would do so for the building of a house to the Holy One?

Chapter 7



Chapter 8

... Teach us, oh master – may one light a lamp for personal use from the Channukah lights? Our masters taught us – R’ Acha said in the name of Rav ‘it is forbidden to light a lamp to use from the Channukah lights, but one may light a Channukah light from a Channukah light.’ From where did they learn that it is permissible to light a Channukah light (from it)? R’ Yaakov ben Aba said, they learned it from the menorah that was in the Holy of Holies, as our rabbis taught that if one found they had gone out, they should be cleaned out and re-lit from those that are still lit. (Tamid 3) If we would relight an extinguished lamp of the menorah, which was placed in the innermost sanctum, from the lamps still burning all the more so it is permissible to light a Channukah light from the lights still burning.’ The Holy One said, just as in this world lamps were lit in the Holy of Holies, so too I will do when I rebuild Jerusalem. From where do we know this? From the words of the prophet “And it shall come to pass on that day, that I will search Jerusalem with candles…” (Tzephaniah 1:12)

Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14


Our rabbis taught: An incident once took place with a Jewish man who had one cow [which he used] for ploughing. [Then], his hand [fortune] was diminished and he sold her [the cow] to a non-Jewish man and it ploughed with him [for the] six day of the week. On Shabbat he took her out to plough with him and she laid down under the yoke. He then walked [to the cow] and hit her, and she did not move from her place. Since he saw it was so, he walked and said to the Jewish man who sold her to him: "Come [and] take your cow, perhaps she has some [debilitating] pain since [no matter] how many times I hit her and she [still] does not move from her place." The Jewish man understood [the cause of the cow's action], saying [to himself] this is for the sake of Shabbat, [for] she has learned to rest on Shabbat. He [the Jew] said to him [the non-Jew]: "Come, I will make her stand up." When he neared [the cow], he spoke into the cow's ear: "Cow, you know that when you were in my possession you would plough during the days of the week and on Shabbat you would rest. [But] now that I have been afflicted by suffering, and you are in the hands of a non-Jew I am asking you to stand up and plough." Immediately, she stood up and ploughed. The non-Jew said to him: "I had not asked you to take the cow until now, and I did not come to you to address any matter apart from this. And I will not let you go until you tell me what you did to her in her ear, [for] I struggled with her and I hit her and she did not stand up." The Jewish man began to appease him and said: "I did no magic or sorcery, rather in this specific manner did I divert her." Immediately, the non-Jew was awestruck, saying [to himself]: If a cow which does not have [the ability of] speech nor understanding can recognize her Creator, then how can I - who was formed in His image, and who was given understanding - not walk and recognize my Creator. Immediately, he went and converted. And he studied and became worthy of [teaching] Torah. And they called his name "Yochanan be Tortah" and [even] until today, our Rabbis have reported Halacha in his name. And if you will wonder how it came to be that a cow led one man to be gathered under the wings of the Divine Presence, in fact, on the account of a cow all of Israel became pure as we read concerning [the Red Heifer] "This is the statute of the Torah" (Numbers 19:2)....

Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20

... In the hour that Shlomo built the Holy Temple, the whole world was filled with the fragrance of spices. In the end he saw that it would be destroyed and he wept, saying ‘this fragrance was all for naught!’ The Holy One said to him ‘do not be distressed, I will build it as an eternal construction “…between my breasts he shall lie.” (Shir HaShirim 1:13)’ Thus it says “His jaws are like a bed of spice…” (Shir HaShirim 5:13)

Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26

... Jeremiah said: when I was coming up to Jerusalem, I lifted up my eyes and saw a woman sitting on the mountaintop, her clothes were black and her hair unkempt. She cried: I am seeking who will comfort me! And I cried: I am seeking who will comfort me! I came near and spoke with her, and I said to her: if you are a woman, then speak with me. If you are a spirit, then go away from me. She answered and said to me: Do you not recognize me? I am the one who had seven children. Their father went away to a land across the sea and as I was going up to cry for him, a prophet said to me ‘the house collapsed on your seven children and killed them.’ I do not know for whom I am crying and for whom my hair is unkempt.I answered and said to her: you are no better than my mother Zion, who was made a pasture for the beasts of the field. She answered and said to me: I am your mother Zion, I am she – the mother of seven, so it is written “She who bore seven has been cut off…” (Jeremiah 15:9) Jeremiah said to her: the blows you have received are like those of Job. Job’s sons and daughters were taken from him, your sons and daughters were taken from you. From Job I took his silver and gold, from you I have taken your silver and gold. I cast Job into the trash heap, you I have made into a heap of trash. And just as I came back and consoled Job, so too in the future I will return and console you. I doubled Job’s sons and daughters, and in the future I will double your sons and daughters. I doubled Job’s gold and silver, and in the future I will do so for you. I shook the trash from Job, and of you it is said “Shake yourselves from the dust, arise, sit down, O Jerusalem…” (Isaiah 52:2) Flesh and blood built you and flesh and blood destroyed you. But In the time to come I will build you, because thus it is written “The Lord is the builder of Jerusalem; He will gather the outcasts of Israel.” (Psalms 147:2) Amen! May the Holy One fulfill what is written about us speedily and in our day “And the redeemed of Zion shall return, and they shall come to Zion with song, with joy of days of yore shall be upon their heads; they shall achieve gladness and joy, and sadness and sighing shall flee.” (Isaiah 35:10)

Chapter 27

... The angels said before the Holy One, ‘Master of the World! Isn’t this Jerusalem?!’ as it is said “This is Jerusalem; in the midst of the nations I have placed her…” (Yechezkel 5:5) He replied to them, “But she exchanged My judgments for wickedness more than the nations…” (Yechezkel 5:6) They said to Him, “But they are Your people and Your inheritance, which You brought out with Your great strength…” (Devarim 9:29) He replied to them, “For My people have forgotten Me; they burn incense to vanity…” (Yirmiyahu 18:15) They said to Him, ‘act for the sake of the forefathers!’ He replied to them, “…the fathers are kindling fire…” (Yirmiyahu 7:18) They said to Him, ‘act for the sake of the children!’ He replied to them, “But they rebelled against Me and would not consent to hearken to Me…” (Yechezkel 20:8) They said to Him, ‘act for the sake of the tribe of Yehudah!’ “And Judah did what displeased the Lord…” (Melachim I 14:22) They said to Him, ‘act for the sake of the leaders!’ He replied to them, “Its heads judge for bribes…” (Micha 3:11) They said to Him, ‘act for the sake of the tribes!’ He replied to them, ‘and Gad, and Reuven and the half tribe of Menashe…’ They said to Him, ‘act for the sake of the tribe of Dan!’ He replied to them, “And the children of Dan set up for themselves the graven image.” (Shoftim 18:30) They said to Him,’ act for the sake of the students!’ He replied to them, “…And those who hold onto the Torah did not know Me…” (Yirmiyahu 2:8) They said to Him, ‘act for the sake of the prophets!’ He replied to them, “[It was] for the sins of her prophets, the iniquities of her priests…” (Eicha 4:13) They said to Him, ‘act for the sake of the kings!’ He replied to them, “And the altars that were on the roof, [the roof of] Ahaz's upper chamber, which the kings of Judah had made…” (Melachim II 23:12) The ministering angels said to Him, ‘act for our sake!’ He replied to them, “But they mocked the messengers of God…” (Divre HaYamim II 36:16) They said to Him, ‘act for the sake of Your name which is called upon them!’ He replied to them, ‘they have profaned My holy name.’ They said to Him, ‘You do not want to be appeased, what is the image of their father doing by You?’ “He has cast down from heaven to earth the glory of Israel…” (Eicha 2:1) This statement with which they clothed You, what has it done to You?! If the thing were not written, it would be impossible to say “The Lord has done what He devised, He has carried out His word…” (Eicha 2:17) They said to Him, ‘Master of the World! Is this not Jerusalem about whom you wrote “Behold on [My] hands have I engraved you…”’ (Yeshayahu 49:16) He replied to them, “I, too, shall clap My hands, one upon the other, and I shall put My fury to rest…” (Yechezkel 21:22) Since Zion saw that He did not want to be appeased, she started up and said “The Lord has forsaken me, and the Lord has forgotten me." (Yeshayahu 49:14) May it be Your will Lord our God and God of our fathers that Your Temple be rebuilt speedily in our days, that your Presence return within it, that You gather my exiles from the four corners of the world, that they rebuild the cities of Yehudah and settle Shechem and inherit it speedily. Amen.

Chapter 28

... R’ Yitzchak expounded on, “On willows in its midst we hung our harps.” (Psalms 137:2) Come and see – the dirt of the land of Israel is for repentance. While they were still in the land of Israel, Jeremiah was saying to them ‘repent before the judgement is sealed upon you,’ and they did not accept his words. Once they were exiled, they kept themselves sanctified through the commandments, taking their harps and hanging them on the willows. “For there our captors asked us for words of song…” (Psalms 137:3) At that time the nations of the world said to them: stand up and sing before idols just as you would sing in the Holy Temple. They replied: if we had sung songs in our place, we would not have been exiles. And now how should we sing songs before idols?! R ‘ Yitzchak Tavlai would say: to what is this to be compared? To a king of flesh and blood who married the daughter of kings. He said to her: get up and bring me a cup to drink, and she did not want to serve him. He was angry with her and drove her from his house, and she went and married a man who was afflicted with boils. He said: get up and bring me a cup to drink. She said to him: worthless one! I was a daughter of kings, married to a king, and because he said ‘bring me a drink’ and I did not want to serve him he was angry with me and drove me from his home. In that case if I had served him I would have added to my honor and had honor in my place, and now you say to me get up and serve me?! So Israel says to the nations of the world: if we had sang songs before the Holy One in our place on all the miracles which He did for us, we would have stayed in our place and not been exiled from our land. Now we should sing songs before idols?! Immediately they arose and killed heaps and heaps of them, and even though many of them were killed Israel rejoiced that they did not sing songs before the idols, as it says “…and our tormentors [asked of us] mirth…” (ibid.) At that moment the Holy One swore a whole oath to Israel. He said of Himself, so to speak,  if I do not keep my oath, as it says “If I forget you, O Jerusalem, may my right hand forget [its skill].” (Psalms 137:5) The Holy One took His hand and placed it behind Him at the moment when Israel was exiled, just as it says “He has withdrawn His right hand from the enemy…” (Lamentations 2:3) The Holy One, so to speak, did not return it to its place. And so too the Holy One said to Israel: I will forget My right hand which I placed behind Me if I do not fulfill my oath to you and not forget you among the nations. “May my tongue cling to my palate, if I do not remember you, if I do not bring up Jerusalem at the beginning of my joy.” (Psalms 137:6) In the future the Holy One will return to Jerusalem all of her joy, as it says “And the redeemed of Zion shall return, and they shall come to Zion with song, with joy of days of yore shall be upon their heads…” (Isaiah 35:10) And anyone who mourns for Jerusalem in this world will rejoice with her in the time to come, as it says “Rejoice with Jerusalem and exult in her all those who love her: rejoice with her a rejoicing, all who mourn over her.” (Isaiah 66:10) They said in the name of Abaye: joy only comes on the ninth of Av, because they mandated mourning then in this time and in the future the Holy One will make it into a holiday, as it says “…and I will turn their mourning into joy and will comfort them and make them rejoice from their sorrow.” (Jeremiah 31:12) ... “No one pitches my tent anymore, or sets up my curtains.” (Jeremiah 10:20) What is this, does it mean that the Holy Temple will not be rebuilt in the future?! No, rather it is saying that no one from among you will pitch my tent anymore nor anyone from among you shall set up my curtains. The First Temple, which was built by flesh and blood, fell at the hands of the enemy. But the final Sanctuary that will be built by the Holy One, as it says “The Lord is the builder of Jerusalem; He will gather the outcasts of Israel,” (Psalms 147:2) will not be destroyed. Therefore it says “My tent has been spoiled…” (Jeremiah 10:20)

Chapter 29

She weeps bitterly in the night (Lamentations 1:2) - Let our teacher the priests teach us - is it permitted for them to immerse for their terumah offering on the Ninth of Av? Rabbi Chanina the deputy High Priest said: It would suffice for the House of our God to forgo one immersion. (Beraisa Taanit 13a) Needless to say, we must recall the destruction of the Temple.
God said "If I forget you O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget its skill" (Psalms 137:5). And so too Jeremiah says "Remember and do not forget, my soul, and be bowed down within me" (Lamentations 3:20). As if he saw what was written regarding God's honor "The Lord God of Hosts called on that day to weeping and lamenting" (Isaiah 22:12). And so too it says "Therefore I said: Look away from me, let me weep bitterly" (Isaiah 22:4). As if the Holy One, blessed be He, said: Just as He is bowed below, so too am I bowed above, due to what has reached - as if weeping before me - that I have removed My Presence, as it says "This is My resting place for all time" (Psalms 132:14). And Jerusalem weeps over the removal of the glory of My resting place from within it, and I have removed it. Therefore she weeps. From where do we know it refers to "She weeps bitterly"?
Rabbi Tanhuma opened, saying: This is as the verse says "My eyes will flow with tears night and day, they will not cease" (Jeremiah 14:17). God said: You weep at night, while I weep day and night, for before Me there is no sleep, as it says "Behold, He who keeps Israel neither slumbers nor sleeps" (Psalms 121:4). And you shall say this matter "My eyes will flow with tears night and day." The verse does not reveal whether the prophet said "My eyes will flow with tears" or not, rather since it says "night and day" which flesh and blood cannot do. And it says "Oh, that my head were a spring of water, and my eyes a fountain of tears, so that I could weep day and night for the slain of my people" (Jeremiah 9:1). This shows it refers to God, before Whom there is no sleep.
Why "weeps bitterly"? With two weepings - weeping for her slain, and weeping for the famine that was there, that they ate the flesh of their sons and daughters, as it says (Lamentations 4:10) "The hands of compassionate women have boiled their own children." Rabbi Yochanan said: Just as the children of Zion ate the flesh of their sons and daughters, so too did the women of Samaria eat the flesh of their sons and daughters, as it says (2 Kings 6:24-29) "There was a great famine in Samaria...As the king of Israel was passing by on the wall, a woman cried out to him 'Help, my lord the king!'...Then he asked her 'What is the matter?' She answered 'This woman said to me: Give up your son, and we will eat him today...So we cooked my son and ate him."
Who would have thought, hearing this, that she had hidden her son alive to eat herself later? Rather, Rabbi Yochanan said: [The child] was already slaughtered and cooked. As it says "Give your son and we will eat him" - the verse does not say "and we will slaughter him." This implies he was already slaughtered and cooked. And [the king] said "May God do the same to me and more if the head of Elisha remains on him this day!" (2 Kings 6:31). Rabbi Yochanan said: In both the first and second destructions parents ate the flesh of their sons and daughters, and this is what Jeremiah laments over them "Therefore fathers will eat their sons within you, and sons will eat their fathers" (Ezekiel 5:10).
Another explanation: Why two instances of weeping? Weeping over Jerusalem, and weeping over the rivers of Babylon, as it says "By the rivers of Babylon we sat, also weeping when we remembered Zion" (Psalms 137:1). She weeps bitterly - weeping over herself, and weeping over Jeremiah's separation from them, because he would lighten the burden upon them.
What did he do? He would place a yoke upon his neck, and Nebuzaradan would remove it, saying to him: "You are injuring yourself - lest the king hear and say 'Did I not command you about him not to do him harm?'" (Jeremiah 39:12). He said to him: "I see three things in you - a lying prophet, a murderer, and one who flouts suffering." Jeremiah said: "Not about children." God said: The place needs to be destroyed. Jeremiah said: Through me or through others - yet he placed himself in the yoke.
Those returning [from exile] would pursue them. When they would see Jeremiah with them, they would walk slowly. And how did they pursue them? What did they do? They would take one of them, kill him, cut him into pieces, and throw those pieces before them as they walked - not for their own benefit, like bandits do when herding sheep. As it says "With ropes around our necks we are pursued" (Lamentations 5:5). Therefore: Wail! She weeps bitterly in the night. (29-30)
How lonely sits the city (Lamentations 1:1). It is written "Yet it was not Me you called upon, O Jacob, for you grew weary of Me, O Israel" (Isaiah 43:22). When the priest would come to one of them and say the idol said that you do not want to offer any of your children to it, that man would respond: they are under my control. Doesn't each of them toil in his work? Just wait - I have a young child who is not useful to me since he is in school - I shall offer that one. And he would promptly take him. This is the meaning of "You took your sons...whom you bore for Me" (Ezekiel 16:20).
God said to the nations: You offer children without toil, while with Me you toil, as it says "You have burdened Me with your sins, and wearied Me with your iniquities" (Isaiah 43:24). "You have not honored Me with sacrifices" (Isaiah 43:23) - Did I burden you to bring peace offerings? It does not say "And if you bring a peace offering" (Leviticus 3:1). If one seeks to bring a peace offering, let him bring it. "Nor sated Me with the fat of sacrifices" - I did not burden you to bring meal offerings, as it says "When a person presents an offering of meal" (Leviticus 2:1). "You have not bought Me sweet cane with money" (Isaiah 43:24) - I did not tell you to bring bushels of incense, only a handful, as it says "He shall take a handful of fine flour" (Leviticus 2:2).
"You have bought Me no fragrant reed for silver" (Isaiah 43:24) - I did not tell you to bring bushels of incense, only the morning and afternoon portions. Consider: Micah's idol stood in the west, while the Temple stood in Shiloh. He would offer incense before Micah's idol abundantly, as it says "And they are coming with their cloud of incense" (Ezekiel 8:11). But in Shiloh they would offer only the morning and afternoon portions. The two smokes would intermingle and rise to the heavens, as it says "And the scent intermingled" (Isaiah 9:17). And God would say: To which do we pay heed - this or that?
"But you have burdened Me with your sins" (Isaiah 43:24) - God said: I would call "My servant Moses" (Numbers 12:7), "He chose David His servant" (Psalms 78:70), "Do not fear, My servant Jacob" (Isaiah 44:2). But through your sins you have made Me call the wicked one "My servant," as it says "I will take Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, My servant" (Jeremiah 43:10).
Another explanation: "You have burdened Me" - God said to them: Through your sins you have made Me go into exile in Babylon, as it says "For your sake I will send to Babylon" (Isaiah 43:14). "You have wearied Me with your iniquities" - God said: Your sins have made Me sit weeping and lamenting, as it says "How alone she sits!"
Another explanation: "How alone she sits" - the whole world wonders about her, why the land was ruined, scorched like a desert without inhabitant. And He says: "It is because they abandoned My Torah" (Jeremiah 9:11-12).
A parable: A king who loved his son made him a golden medallion and hung it around his neck. The son did nothing but anger him, so his father removed the medallion and made shackles, placing them on his son's legs. So too God made the letters of the Torah like a medallion and placed them around Israel's neck, as it says "For they are a graceful wreath upon your head, a necklace about your throat" (Proverbs 1:9), "She will set upon your head a graceful wreath, crown you with a glorious diadem" (Proverbs 4:9). But Israel did nothing except abandon the Torah, as it says "They have abandoned My Torah and despised it" (Jeremiah 6:19). [God] wrote their letters as punishments and brought upon them "How alone she sits!"
Another explanation: Why does the scroll mention Jeremiah's name? There are four sons - one who seeks the honor of the father but not the son, one who seeks the honor of the son but not the father, and two who seek the honor of both son and father. Elijah sought the honor of God when he stood accusing. (29-30)
"Comfort, comfort My people" says your God (Isaiah 40:1). This is the meaning of "O that you were a brother to me" (Song of Songs 8:1) - not like Cain to Abel, nor Ishmael to Isaac, nor Esau to Jacob, nor Joseph's brothers to him. Rather, like Joseph to his brothers - despite all the evil they did to him, what is written? "Now do not be distressed or angry at yourselves...I will provide for you and your little ones" (Genesis 50:21). He comforted them and spoke to their hearts. Though ten lamps cannot extinguish one lamp, one lamp cannot extinguish ten. "He reassured them, speaking kindly to them" (Genesis 50:21).
Israel said: "Master of the Universe! Consider Joseph - despite all the evil his brothers did him, he stands and comforts them, speaking to their hearts. We too know we destroyed Your Temple through our sins...Therefore, "O that you were like a brother to me!" The prophet Asaph also said "Give ear, O Shepherd of Israel, You who lead Joseph like a flock!" (Psalms 80:2) God said to them: You request Joseph? I shall be like Joseph to you. What did Joseph do for his brothers? He comforted them and spoke to their hearts. "Comfort, comfort My people" - speak to the heart of Jerusalem!
Another explanation: "Comfort, comfort My people" - this is what the verse says "How can you console me? Your answers remain treachery" (Job 21:34). Rabbi Abba bar Kahana and the rabbis of the south [differ]: Rabbi Abba bar Kahana says: There remains deceit in them, as it says "And swears falsely" (Leviticus 5:21). The rabbis of the south say: They have no integrity - neither the first nor the last, nor the last as the first.
What is the matter? Since God would send prophets to go comfort Zion. Hosea came and said to her: "Stand and accept a cup of comfort." God sent me to you to comfort you. She said: What do you have? He said: Thus God said: "I will be like dew to Israel" (Hosea 14:6). She said: Hosea - yesterday you said "I will be to them like a lion, like a leopard I will lurk beside the way" (Hosea 13:7). And now you say "I will be like dew to Israel"!? Whom shall we believe - the first or the last? Your comforts are worthless. "How can you console me? Your answers remain treachery."
Joel came and said to her: "Stand and accept a cup of comfort." She said: What is in your cup? He said: God said when I redeem you, in the future the mountains will trickle wine and it says "On that day the mountains will drip with wine" (Joel 4:18). She said: Your comforts have been given to you! Yesterday you said to me "Wail, all drinkers of wine, over the new wine cut off" (Joel 1:5), and now you say "the mountains will drip with wine"? Whom shall we believe, the first or the last? "How can you console me? Your answers remain treachery."
Amos came and said: "Stand and accept your cup of comfort." She said: What do you have in your cup? He said: God said I will restore your captivity and rebuild the Temple, as it says "On that day, I will erect the fallen Tabernacle of David" (Amos 9:11). She said: Your comforts have been given to you! Yesterday you said "The Virgin Israel has fallen, never to rise again" (Amos 5:2). And now you say you will rebuild the Temple? Whom shall we believe? "How can you console me? Your answers remain treachery."
Obadiah prophesied about Edom, and Jonah about Nineveh. Nahum came and said to her: What do you have? He said: God told me to say to her "Your deliverance is at hand! See, upon the mountains are the footsteps of a herald announcing happiness! Judah, celebrate your festivals, fulfill your vows. For never again shall scoundrel pass through you; he has been utterly cut off." (Nahum 2:1)
She said: Nahum, your comforts have been given to you! Yesterday you said "From you emerged one who plots evil against the Lord, counselor of wickedness" (Nahum 1:11). And now you say "Never again shall scoundrel pass through you." Whom shall we believe? "How can you console me? Your answers remain treachery."
Zephaniah also came and said: "Stand and accept your cup of comfort." She said: What do you have in your cup? He said: "Cry out in gladness, O Daughter Zion! Shout joyfully, O Israel! Be glad and exult with all your heart, O daughter Jerusalem! The Lord has annulled your judgment, He has turned away your enemy; The King of Israel, the Lord, is in your midst, you have no further fear of misfortune. On that day, [God] will say to Jerusalem: Take courage, Zion! Let not your hands fall slack. The Lord your God is in your midst, a warrior who brings victory. He will rejoice over you with gladness, He will be silent in His love, He will delight in you with shouts of joy" (Zephaniah 3:14-20).
She said: Yesterday you said "I will sweep away everything from the face of the earth" (Zephaniah 1:2). And now "The Lord your God is in your midst"? Whom shall we believe? Haggai came and said: "Stand and accept your cup." She said: What do you have? He said: "Is there yet any seed left in the barn? Have the vine, fig, pomegranate, and olive trees not borne fruit? From this day on I will bless you" (Haggai 2:19).
She said: Haggai - yesterday you said "I will summon drought against the land and the hills" (Haggai 1:11). And now you say "From this day on I will bless you"? Whom shall we believe? Zechariah came and said: "Stand and accept your cup of comfort." She said: What do you have? He said: "I am extremely angry at the complacent nations" (Zechariah 1:15).
She said: Yesterday you said "I am furious with the carefree nations" (Zechariah 1:15). [Malachi came to comfort...She said: Yesterday you said "I have no desire for you" (Malachi 1:10).] They all came before God and said "We sought to comfort her but she would not accept."
God said to them: Come, I and you, let us go to her and comfort her. "Comfort, comfort My people," says your God! Another explanation: "Comfort, comfort" - Rabbi Berechiah the Priest said: Console Me, console Me, My people! In the way of the world, if a person has a vineyard and marauders come cut it down - whom do they console, the vineyard or the owner? If a person has a house and bandits come burn it down - whom do they console, the house or the owner? You are My vineyard, "For the vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is the House of Israel" (Isaiah 5:7). Nebuchadnezzar came and destroyed it, exiled you, and burned down My Temple - it is I who requires consoling! Console Me, console Me, My people!
Another explanation: "Comfort, comfort My people" - Everything Jeremiah opened with "rupture", Isaiah came and healed it. Jeremiah ruptured and said "She sits alone...she has become like a widow" (Lamentations 1:1). Isaiah came and healed "As Isaiah came and healed: "As a young man espouses a maiden, Your Builder shall espouse you" (Isaiah 62:5).
Jeremiah ruptured and said "Weep, weep at night" (Lamentations 1:2). Isaiah came and healed "The people that dwells in Zion shall weep no more" (Isaiah 30:19).
Jeremiah ruptured and said "Judah has gone into exile" (Lamentations 1:3). Isaiah came and healed "The scattered ones of Judah He shall gather" (Isaiah 11:12).
Jeremiah ruptured and said "The roads to Zion mourn" (Lamentations 1:4). Isaiah came and healed "A voice rings out: 'Clear in the desert a road for the Lord'" (Isaiah 40:3).
Jeremiah ruptured and said "Her foes have become her leaders" (Lamentations 1:5). Isaiah came and healed "Bowing before you shall come The children of those who tormented you" (Isaiah 60:14).
Jeremiah ruptured and said "Gone is all her majesty" (Lamentations 1:6) - and who is the majesty? The Holy One, blessed be He, of whom it says "Honor and majesty You don" (Psalms 104:1). Isaiah came and healed "Who is this coming from Edom...girded with triumph" (Isaiah 63:1).
Jeremiah ruptured and said "Jerusalem remembers" (Lamentations 1:7). Isaiah came and healed "The former things shall not be remembered" (Isaiah 65:17).
Jeremiah ruptured and said "Jerusalem has gravely sinned" (Lamentations 1:8). Isaiah came and healed "I wipe away your sins like a cloud" (Isaiah 44:22).
Jeremiah ruptured and said "Uncleanness clung to her skirts" (Lamentations 1:9). Isaiah came and healed - Rabbi Yehoshua ben Chanania said: Isaiah said a difficult thing "When the Lord has washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion" (Isaiah 4:4).
Jeremiah ruptured and said "An enemy has laid hands on all her treasures" (Lamentations 1:10). On the spoils of a king that are given over to plunder, there are those who plunder silver and those gold, yet the slave seeks his own vessel. So too when the Temple was destroyed, some plundered silver and some gold. Ammon and Moab sought the Torah to erase from it "No Ammonite or Moabite shall be admitted into the congregation of the Lord" (Deuteronomy 23:4). So Jeremiah said "Ammon and Moab shall not be admitted into the congregation."
Isaiah came and healed "No more shall the uncircumcised and unclean enter" (Isaiah 52:1). Jeremiah ruptured and said "All her people groan, seeking bread" (Lamentations 1:11) - like Avika ben Geviyat. (When the enemies came to besiege Jerusalem, Avika went up on the wall.) There is no end to telling of their valor. Do you wish to know of Avika ben Geviyat's valor? When the enemies came to besiege Jerusalem, Avika went up on the wall. When they would shoot a stone from a ballista, when Avika would see it coming at the wall, he would immediately become agitated and kick it back at them with his foot.
What did the enemies do? They shot it further inside so it wouldn't strike the wall but land in front of it. Avika thought it was coming powerfully, became agitated to go out and kick it back, and fell between the walls, as Jerusalem had two walls, one inside the other. When the people of Jerusalem saw Avika fall, they were frightened. Avika said to them "Do not worry, it's merely a bruise." They slaughtered an ox for him, roasted it, he ate and went back to the wall and continued fighting as before.
There was an incident with Miriam the daughter of Nakdimon, who was awaiting levirate marriage. She came before Rabbi Tzadok and he ruled she be given 25 litras of silver for spice crates and measures of wine for her stew each Shabbat. She said to him: Do you so rule for your own daughters? When the famine came, her hair fell out from starvation. Rabbi Tzadok saw her circling in the market with her father. He said: Is this not Miriam for whom I ruled this and that for Shabbat - she has cursed you! Rabbi Tzadok said: May it come upon me if I did not see her gathering grains of barley from animal dung, and I recited about her this verse: "If you do not know, O fairest of women, go follow the tracks of the sheep" (Song of Songs 1:8).
God said: In this world you have been exchanged by the famine, but in the future you will be exchanged by plenty. Seeing you today, He says: If only they could see you tomorrow - as Isaiah said "You shall enjoy the wealth of nations, and revel in their riches" (Isaiah 61:6). What is "you shall revel"? Exchange - "If he changes it..." (Leviticus 27:10).
Jeremiah ruptured and said "Is there sorrow like my sorrow?" (Lamentations 1:12) Isaiah came and healed "The ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to Zion in gladness" (Isaiah 35:10).
Jeremiah ruptured "He has set fire to my bones" (Lamentations 1:13). Isaiah healed "Till a spirit from on high is poured out on us" (Isaiah 32:15).
Jeremiah ruptured "My sins are bound, wound round my neck" (Lamentations 1:14). Isaiah healed "They who trust in the Lord shall renew their strength" (Isaiah 40:31).
Jeremiah ruptured "My heroes are defeated" (Lamentations 1:15). Isaiah healed "I will bring you relief and healing" (Jeremiah 30:17).
Jeremiah ruptured "Over all this I weep" (Lamentations 1:16). Isaiah healed "Eye to eye they behold the return to Zion" (Isaiah 52:8).
Jeremiah ruptured "Zion spreads out her hands, she has no one to comfort her" (Lamentations 1:17). Isaiah healed "Comfort, comfort My people, says your God."

Chapter 30



Chapter 31

... Teach us oh, teacher: once the Ninth of Av has ended, is everything permitted? R’ Chiyah the Great taught like this: once the Ninth of Av has ended, one is permitted to do anything. Why? Because it is like the case of a person whose dead is laid out before him, who is forbidden to eat meat or drink wine. Once the dead is buried, the mourner is permitted to do so. So to on the Ninth of Av one is a mourner – once the day has ended one is permitted to do anything. Even though we are permitted, we must always have a sigh in our hearts until the Holy One returns to her. The Holy One said to them: by your lives! I burnt her, as it says “From above He has hurled fire into my bones…” (Lamentations 1:13)  I will build her, as it says “Yet again will I rebuild you, then you shall be built, O virgin of Israel…” (Jeremiah 31:3) Zion said to Him: Behold, I have been sitting thus for many years! I have counted the days from old and I have not been redeemed, therefore I have despaired. She said that my master has abandoned me. And from where do we learn that Zion said this? From that which is written regarding it “And Zion said, ‘The Lord has forsaken me, and the Lord has forgotten me.’” (Isaiah 49:14) ... Another explanation. “And Zion said, ‘The Lord has forsaken me…” (Isaiah 49:14) What is written before this? “Sing, O heavens, and rejoice, O earth, and mountains burst out in song, for the Lord has consoled His people, and He shall have mercy on His poor.” (Isaiah 49:13) Once Zion saw that the prophet recalled His people and His poor, but did not mention Zion or Jerusalem she said ‘the Lord has forsaken me, and the Lord has forgotten me.’ Immediately the Holy One replied and said to her: just as it is impossible for a woman to forget her sucking child, so to I am not able to forget you, “Shall a woman forget her sucking child, from having mercy on the child of her womb?” (Isaiah 49:15) She said to Him: Master of the world! How is that possible? There is no end to the evils I have done! I caused Your Holy Temple to be destroyed and I killed the prophets. R’ Berachia the Kohen said in the name of Rebbe: the Holy One said to her, I will forget your evil but I will not forget your good. “…These too shall forget, but I will not forget you.” (ibid.) I have forgotten “"These are your gods, O Israel…” (Exodus32:4) but “I am the Lord, your God…” (Exodus 20:2) I will not forget.

Chapter 32

... Another explanation: “O poor tempestuous one, who was not consoled…” (Isaiah 54:11) R’ Levi said any where that it says she does not have, she has. It is written “…that is Zion whom no one seeks out.” (Jeremiah 30:17) She has, as it is written “And a redeemer shall come to Zion…” (Isaiah 59:20) “And Sarai was barren; she had no child,” (Genesis 11:30) and she had, “And Sarah conceived and bore a son to Avraham…” (Genesis 21:2) And so too “…and Peninnah had children, but Hannah had no children,” (Shmuel I 1:2) and she had, “…and she conceived and bore three sons…” (Shmuel I 2:21) And so too, “Sing you barren woman who has not borne; burst out into song and jubilate, you who have not experienced birth pangs…” (Isaiah 54:1) and she had, as it says “And you shall say to yourself, "Who begot these for me…” (Isaiah 49:21)

Chapter 33

... Teach us o teacher: toward where should one who prays orient his heart? This is what our Rabbis taught: one should orient his heart toward the place of the Holy of Holies (Berachot 4:5). R’ Eliezer ben Yaakov says: if one is praying outside of the land, he should orient his heart to the land of Israel. If one is praying within the land of Israel, he should orient his heart to Jerusalem. If one is praying in Jerusalem, he should orient his heart to the Holy Temple. If one is praying in the Holy Temple, he should orient his heart to the Holy of Holies. R’ Avin the Levi said: “our neck is like the Tower of David, built as a model (talpiyot)…” (Song of Songs 4:4) What does talpiyot mean? The hill (tel) toward which all turns (peniyot) are directed. And after all this praise, it is written “Open your doors, O Lebanon, and let the fire consume your cedars.” (Zechariah 11:1) And so too they said “He has hurled fire into my bones…” (Lamentations 1:13) Israel said to Him: Master of the World! How long will it be like this? Did You not write in Your Torah “…the one who ignited the fire shall surely pay” (Exodus 22:5)? And You are the one who ignited the fire, as it says “From above He has hurled fire into my bones…” (Lamentations 1:13) You need to rebuild it and to console us, not at the hands of an angel but You in Your glory. The Holy One said to them: by your life, so I will do! As it says “The Lord is the builder of Jerusalem; He will gather the outcasts of Israel.” (Psalms 147:2) And I am the one who consoles you. From where do we learn this? From that which they read in the prophets “I, yea I am He Who consoles you…” (Isaiah 51:12) 

Chapter 34



Chapter 35

...Another explanation. “Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion… And many nations shall join the Lord…” (Zechariah 2:14-15) R’ Chanina bar Papa said: this verse is only speaking of that hour when the Holy One judges the nations of the world in the time to come. In that hour the Holy One will bring all of the converts who converted in this world and judge the nations before them. He will say to them: why did you abandon Me and worship idols that have no substance. They will say before Him: Master of the World! If we had come to Your door You would not have accepted us. He will reply to them” let the converts who converted from amongst you and testify upon you. Immediately the Holy One will bring all the converts and they will judge them, saying before them: why did you abandon Him and worship idols that have no substance? Wasn’t Yitro an idolatrous priest? Since he came to the door of the Holy One, He received him. And were we not idol worshippers? Since we came to the door of the Holy One, He received us. Immediately all of the wicked will be ashamed due to the repentance of the converts. Judgement will be passed and they will pass from the world, as it says “But with one thing they are brutish and foolish, the vanities for which they will be punished are but wood.” (Jeremiah 10:8) Therefore it says ‘Sing and rejoice.’

Chapter 36



Chapter 37



Chapter 38

Teach us, oh teacher – if one has an argument with their friend, how shall they attain atonement on Yom Kippur? This is what our Rabbis taught: transgressions between a person and God, Yom Kippur atones; however, for transgressions between a person and another, Yom Kippur does not atone until he appeases the other person (Mishna Yoma 8:9) And if one goes to appease him and the offended party will not accept the apology, what should one do? R’ Shmuel bar Nachmani says: bring ten people and stand them in a line and say before them – there was an argument between my self and so-and-so, I tried to appease him and he did not want to accept my apology, rather he persists in his refusal. From where do we know one should do thus, it says “He declares to men, “I have sinned; I have perverted what was right; But I was not paid back for it.” (Job 33:27) The Holy One see that you are humbling yourself and gives atonement for your sins, because so long as one holds fast to their refusal to recognize their own behavior they are not forgiven. Do you want proof of this? So long as Job stood against his friends and they against him, the attribute of justice prevailed. So we find that Job said to them “But now those younger than I deride me, [Men] whose fathers I would have disdained to put among my sheep dogs.” (Job 30:1) And they said to him “Among us are gray-haired old men, Older by far than your father.” (Job 15:10) At the very moment when he forgave them and prayed for mercy upon them, the Holy One returned to him, as it says “The LORD restored Job’s fortunes…” (Job 42:10) When? “…when he prayed on behalf of his friends…” (ibid.) This is as it says elsewhere, “…show you compassion, and in His compassion increase you…” (Deuteronomy 13:18) R’ Yose ben Dormaskit said: take this sign in your hand – so long as you are merciful upon your fellows, HaMakom (God) will be merciful upon you. As soon as Avraham prayed for mercy on behalf of Avimelech, he received his own reward, as it says “Abraham then prayed to God, and God healed Abimelech and his wife…” (Genesis 20:17) Andwhat was the reward which he received? That his wife became pregnant and bore him a son, as it says “The LORD took note of Sarah as He had promised, and the LORD did for Sarah as He had spoken.” (Genesis 21:1)

Chapter 39



Chapter 40

… And He said to him ‘go away to the land of Moriah and bring him up there for a burnt offering’ (Bereshit 22:2) What is the land of Moriah? There is a whole bundle of Sages here, each saying their own answer. R’ Yanai says ‘what is Moriah? The place from which awe and fear (morah and yirah) go out to the world,’ “You are feared, O God, from Your Sanctuary…” (Tehillim 68:36) R’ Chiya the elder says ‘the land from which instruction (hora’ah) goes out to the world,’ as it says “…for out of Zion shall the Torah come forth…” (Yeshayahu 2:3) Another explanation: the land from which, in the future, the Holy One will teach that the wicked should descend to gehinnom, as it says “Like sheep, they are destined to the grave; death will devour them, and the upright will rule over them in the morning, and their form will outlast the grave…” From where? “…his dwelling place (zevul).” (Tehillim 49:15) Another explanation of the land of Moriah. R’ Yehoshua ben Levi said ‘the land from which the righteous teach (morim) and make decrees upon the Holy One which He does,’ as it says “…and David and the elders, covered with sackcloth, fell upon their faces. And David said to God, "Did I not say to count the people?…I beg that Your hand be against me and against my father's house, but not against Your people for a plague." (Divre HaYamim I 21:16-17) Another explanation of the land of Moriah. R’ Yehudah bar Padiiya said ‘Moriah - he said to Gd, where is it? He replied – to the land which I will show (mareh) you.’ Another explanation of Moriah. Avraham said to Gd, Master of the World! But am I fit to offer sacrifices? Am I a kohen? Let Shem the High Priest come and receive him from me. The Holy One replied to him – when you arrive at the place I will sanctify you and make you into a kohen. What is the meaning of Moriah? In exchange (temurah) for Shem. His replacement, as it says “He shall not exchange it or offer a substitute for it…” (Vayikra 27:10) Another explanation. What is Moriah? R’ Pinchas said ‘the land in which the master (maruto) of the world dwells,’ as it says “…and My eyes and My heart shall be there at all times.” (Melachim I 9:3) Another explanation. What is Moriah? R’ Shimon bar Yochai said ‘the land which was adorned opposite the altar above “…or cast down… (yaro yireh)” (Shemot 19:13) Another explanation. The land in which the incense is offered – “I will go to the mountain of myrrh (mor)…” (Shir HaShirim 4:6)

Chapter 41

... Teach us oh, teacher: A court which sanctified the month, but not at Eintav with witnesses, is it sanctified? R’ Abahu said in the name of R’ Chiya the great: if a court sanctified the month without witnesses, it is sanctified, as it says “…which you shall designate in their appointed time.” (Leviticus 23:4) This means whether it is with witnesses or without. Whether witnesses saw it or not it is sanctified, as it says ‘which you shall designate.’ And why did the court intercalate a month into the calendar at Eintav? Because this was the meeting place for the court. Therefore on Rosh HaShana which fell out on Shabbat the shofar is not blown anywhere except at Eintav, in the place where the court sat and intercalated the years and months. The Holy One said: Zion is the meeting place for the whole world, as it says “…for out of Zion shall the Torah come forth, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.” (Isaiah 2:3) Therefore when I redeem Zion and her exiles, as it says “Zion shall be redeemed through justice and her penitent through righteousness,” (Isaiah 1:27) they will come and blow the shofar within her. From where do we learn this? From how the prophet finished his words “Sound a shofar in Zion…” (Yoel 2:15). This is how R’ Tanchuma opened in the name of the House of R’ Aba: “The fairest of branches (nof) , the joy of the entire earth- Mount Zion, by the north side, the city of a great king.” (Psalms 48:3) What does nof mean? A bride (kloninfe). Another explanation. ‘The fairest of branches’ R’ Chanina bar Pappa said: The most beautiful in her branches, like the fig whose roots are in the land, rising up with her branches going out in every direction, she is beautiful. This is why Jerusalem is called the fairest of branches, because in the future she will be so “And it became wider and it wound higher and higher…” (Ezekiel 41:7) Another explanation. ‘The fairest of branches’ R’ Berachia said: The one who is beautiful through the waving (hanafat) of her omer offering. R’ Yitzchak said: The one who is beautiful because in the future she will wave away the nations of the world. R’ Levi said: the fairest of branches (nof) because everyone beautifies her, praises her and waves (manifim) to her. “Tyre, you said, 'I am the perfection of beauty.'” (Ezekiel 27:3) but everyone praises and says ‘how beautiful’ to Jerusalem “Is this the city that was called the perfection of beauty, the joy of all the earth?” (Lamentations 2:15) Another explanation. ‘The fairest of branches’ R’ Levi said: her branches are beautiful through the circling of the altar. Another explanation. ‘The fairest of branches, the joy of the entire earth’ R’ Yochanan said: there was a dome of accounting outside of Jerusalem, and they would take their accounts to do them outside of Jerusalem under that dome outside of the city limits. Within the city they would eat, drink and be joyful. Another explanation. ‘The fairest of branches, the joy of the entire earth’ Through the dew which comes out from there and causes the grains to wave (m’nafef), gives blessing and makes all the land rejoice. ‘The fairest of branches, the joy of the entire earth’ R’ Yonatan of Bet Guvrin went into Jerusalem with merchandise in his hands and no one was around. He said: and this is the joy of the entire earth?! He hadn’t finished saying this before he sold everything that was in his hands. “…Mount Zion, by the north side…” (Psalms 48:3) And is Zion located in the north, isn’t it actually in the south? What is ‘the north side’? That her sacrifices were offered “…on the northern side of the altar…” (Leviticus 1:11) And what does “…the city of a great king…” (Psalms 48:3) mean? The city of the Great King. Another explanation. ‘The fairest of branches, the joy of the entire earth’ R’ Levi said: joy comes from Zion, “…and they shall come to Zion with song, with joy of days of yore shall be upon their heads…” (Isaiah 35:10) The blessing comes from there, “Like the dew of Hermon, that comes down upon the mountains of Zion; for there the Lord commanded the blessing, even life forever.” (Psalms 133:3) The Torah comes from Zion “…from out of Zion comes the Torah…” (Isaiah 2:3) Help comes to Israel out Zion, “Send forth your help from the sanctuary, and support you out of Zion.” (Psalms 20:3) Life comes from Zion, “…for there the Lord commanded the blessing, even life forever.” (Psalms 133:3) Salvation comes from Zion, as it says “Oh that the salvation of Israel were come out of Zion!” (Psalms 14:7) And the shofar blast which will bring near the redemption of Israel comes out of Zion “Blow the shofar in Zion, and sound an alarm in My holy mountain; Let all the inhabitants of the land tremble; For the day of the Lord comes, for it is at hand…” (Yoel 2:15)

Chapter 42



Chapter 43

...  “He does the will of those who fear Him…” (Tehillim 145:19) Meaning that Gd does not annul his prayers and gives him what he requests. This refers to David, of whom it is written “I am a companion to all who fear You…” (Tehillim 119:63) at the time when he was troubled over the Holy Temple, as it is written “Remember, O Lord, onto David all his affliction. That he swore to the Lord, he vowed to the Mighty One of Jacob; That I shall not come into the tent of my house, and I shall not go up on the bed that was spread for me. I shall not give sleep to my eyes nor slumber to my pupils, Until I find a place for the Lord, dwellings for the Mighty One of Jacob.” (Tehillim 132:1-5) Since the Holy One saw that he stood there, troubled over the Holy Temple, He immediately sent Gad the prophet to him and showed him the place of the Holy Temple, as it is written “And Gad came to David on that day, and said to him, ‘Go up to erect an altar to the Lord in the threshing-floor of Aravnah the Jebusite.’” (Shmuel II 24:18) David went there immediately, as it says “And David went up according to the word of Gad, as the Lord had commanded. (Shmuel II 24:19) He found there the altar where Adam, the first man, made offerings, where Noach made offerings, where Avraham made offerings. Once he found it he began to measure, saying ‘from here to here will be the Courtyard, from here to here will be the Holy of Holies’ as it says “And David said, ‘This is the House of the Lord God…” (Divre HaYamim I 22:1) And how could he declare “…and this is the altar for burnt offerings for Israel” (ibid.)? This is what is meant that the Holy One does not nullify the desire of the righteous, but rather gives them what they seek in order to fulfill “He does the will of those who fear Him…” (Tehillim 145:19)

Supplement A



Supplement B

