Pesikta Rabbati
פסיקתא רבתי
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Pesikta Rabbati





Chapter 1

And it will be, from new month to new month, and from Sabbath to Sabbath, all flesh will come to bow before Me," said Hashem (Isaiah 66:23). Teach us, our teacher, a person from Israel who blessed after meals on Rosh Chodesh and forgot and did not mention Rosh Chodesh, how should he act? Teach us, our rabbis, if he forgot and did not mention Rosh Chodesh, and he completed the blessing after meals and remembered immediately before diverting his mind from the blessing, he does not need to return from the outset but concludes a small blessing at the end: "Blessed are You, Hashem our God, King of the universe, who gave new months to His nation, Israel. Blessed are You, who sanctifies Israel and the new months." Shimon ben Abba said in the name of Rabbi Yochanan: If one is uncertain whether he mentioned Rosh Chodesh or not, he does not return. And on Chol Hamoed, he must say, in the prayer of Musaf, "And grant us, Hashem our God." Behold, we have learned that new months are considered like the festivals, as it is said: "And on your joyous days and your festivals and on your new moons" (Numbers 10:10), and even like Sabbaths, new months are considered equal. New months are thus found to be equal to the festivals and Sabbaths. How do we know they are even equal to Sabbaths? From what the prophet completed: "And it will be, from new month to new month and from Sabbath to Sabbath, all flesh will come to bow." Thus Rabbi Tanchuma began: "My soul thirsts for God, for the living God; when will I come and see the face of God" (Psalms 42:3). This sustains the tradition at the beginning of Parashat Acharei Mot. Another interpretation: "My soul thirsts for God"—when You will execute judgment (in the future) [upon the nations of the world]. "God you shall not curse" (Exodus 22:27). Another interpretation: "For God"—when You return the divinity that You displayed at Sinai. I said, "You are as gods" (Psalms 82:6). Another interpretation: "For God"—when You will clothe Yourself in divinity as You did at Sinai, hasten the end and unite Your divinity in Your world, as it is said: "And Hashem will be King over all the earth" (Zechariah 14:9). How does this interpret Jacob's blessing? "And may God give you from the dew"—when the divine attributes will grant you (Genesis 27:28). Another interpretation: "For God, the living God"—He is living and eternal for all ages. Another interpretation: "For God, the living God"—He promises life, bringing rains in their time and causing dew to flourish in their season for our livelihood. Another interpretation: "For God, the living God"—to God who is living and established by His word. Rabbi Pinchas the Kohen ben Chama said: Though those who made the promises have died (these being the prophets), the God who made the promises is alive and enduring. "My soul thirsts for God, the living God; when shall I come and see the face of God?" Israel said to the Holy One, Blessed be He: "Master of the Universe, when will You restore to us the honor we had when we ascended for the three pilgrimage festivals and saw the face of the Divine Presence?" Rabbi Yitzchak said: Just as they would come to see, so too they came to be seen. As it is written: "When shall I come and see [in the spirit of holiness]." Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: Why was it called "The Joy of the Water Drawing"? Because from there they drew the spirit of holiness. They said, "When will You restore us to that honor? Behold, how much time has passed since the destruction of our Temple, and now it is already 1,151 years. When shall I come and see the face of God?" God said to them: "My children, in this world, how many times did you ascend in the year? Was it not only three times a year? But when the end arrives, I will rebuild it, and you will not ascend three times a year but every month and every Sabbath, as it is said: 'And it will be, from new month to new month, and from Sabbath to Sabbath.' Another interpretation: "And it will be, from new month to new month"—how is it possible for all flesh to come to Jerusalem every month and every Sabbath? Rabbi Levi said: In the future, Jerusalem will be like the Land of Israel, and the Land of Israel will be like the entire world. How will they come for Rosh Chodesh and the Sabbath from the ends of the earth? The clouds will come and carry them to Jerusalem, and they will pray there in the morning. This is what the prophet praises: "Who are these that fly like a cloud" (Isaiah 60:8). Another interpretation: "And it will be, from new month"—and what if Rosh Chodesh coincides with the Sabbath? The verse says: "From new month and from Sabbath"—how? Rabbi Pinchas the Kohen ben Chama said in the name of Rabbi Reuven: They will come twice, once for the Sabbath and once for Rosh Chodesh. The clouds will carry them at dawn and bring them to Jerusalem, and they will pray there in the morning. Then they will carry them [back to their homes] and return to Jerusalem. "Who are these that fly like a cloud"—this refers to the morning. "And like doves to their dovecotes"—this refers to the afternoon. "All flesh shall come"—it does not say "all Israel" but "all flesh." Rabbi Pinchas said: What is "all flesh"? It refers to anyone who subdues their desires in this world; they merit to see the Divine Presence, as it is written: "He who shuts his eyes from seeing evil" (Isaiah 33:15). What is written afterward? "Your eyes will see the King in His beauty" (ibid. 33:17). Another interpretation: "All flesh"—even the nations of the world. But not all of them—only those who did not enslave Israel. The Messiah will accept them. And by what merit will Israel attain all this honor? By the merit of settling the Land of Israel, enduring suffering among the nations of the world. You will also find that the patriarchs of the world endured suffering for the sake of burial in the Land of Israel. Rabbi Chanina said: All weights mentioned in the Torah are in sela'im, those in the prophets are in litras, and those in the writings are in kintarin, except for the weight of the silver Abraham gave to Ephron for burial—these were kintarin. "Four hundred shekels of silver" (Genesis 23:15). Come and see, Abraham gave 400 kintarin of silver for the burial plot. And similarly, Jacob—he gave all the gold he accumulated in his lifetime and all his wealth (recognized) [to ensure] that he might give it to Esau to prevent him from entering the burial cave, as it is written: "In my burial place that I have dug for myself" (Genesis 50:5). And similarly, when Jacob was nearing the end of his life, he made Joseph swear to him, saying, "Do not bury me in Egypt" (Genesis 47:29). And why did he say this? Rabbi Chanina said: There are things involved. Rabbi Yose said: There are things involved. Resh Lakish said in the name of Rabbi Eliezer HaKappar: Because the dead of the Land of Israel will be revived at the time of the Messiah, as David said: "I shall walk before the Lord in the lands of the living" (Psalms 116:9). And is the Land of Israel the "land of the living"? Do people not die in it? Is the Land outside Israel not the "land of the living"? Rather, the Land of Israel is called the "land of the living" because the dead buried in it will be revived. And since David said: "In the lands of the living," it means that the dead buried in the Land of Israel will live in the days of the Messiah. Rabbi Yose asked Resh Lakish: Even someone like Jeroboam the son of Nebat? He replied: "Sulfur and salt." Rabbi Chelbo asked Rabbi Ami: "Even someone like Jeroboam the son of Nebat?" He replied: "I asked Resh Lakish, and he told me, 'Sulfur and salt.'" Rabbi Brachia asked Rabbi Chelbo: "Even someone like Jeroboam the son of Nebat?" He replied: "I asked Rabbi Ami, and he told me, 'I asked Resh Lakish, and he told me, "Sulfur and salt."'" Rabbi Brachia said: "We do not contradict this, for what is meant by 'sulfur'? It is not a physical punishment; rather, it indicates that the Holy One, Blessed be He, will punish the wicked in Gehinnom with sulfur and salt. But the Temple was destroyed." Rabbi Yehuda bar Rabbi Elai said: "For seven years, the Land of Israel burned with sulfur and fire, as it is written: 'Sulfur and salt, a burning of its entire land' (Deuteronomy 29:22)." Rabbi Yose ben Chalafta said: "For 52 years after the destruction of the Temple, no person passed through the Land of Israel, as it is written: 'Upon the mountains... for they have been desolate, without a man passing through' (Jeremiah 9:9), and 'From the bird of the heavens to the beast, they have wandered away' (ibid.)." Why? "Because it burned with fire cast upon it, as it is written: 'From above, He cast fire into my bones' (Lamentations 1:13)." As for the punishment of Jeroboam the son of Nebat and his companions, the Holy One, Blessed be He, has already punished them during those seven years when the Land of Israel burned with fire. Thus, even Jeroboam the son of Nebat and his companions will live in the time of the Messiah. And who caused them to escape the judgment of Gehinnom and be buried in the Land of Israel? As it is written: "And He will atone for His land and His people" (Deuteronomy 32:43). Rabbi Huna the Kohen ben Avin said in the name of Rabbi Abba ben Yamina: A person who dies outside the Land of Israel and is buried outside the Land of Israel has two troubles upon him—the trouble of death and the trouble of burial, as it is written concerning Pashhur: "And you, Pashhur, and all your household, will go into captivity; in Babylon, you will die, and there you will be buried" (Jeremiah 20:6). Rabbi Chama bar Chanina said: A person who dies outside the Land but is brought to be buried in the Land of Israel has only one trouble—death. And how does Rabbi Chama bar Chanina explain "There you will die, and there you will be buried"? That the burial in the Land of Israel atones for him. Rabbi Berochia and Rabbi Eliezer ben Pedat were walking in [Ilfa], and they saw coffins coming from outside the Land. Rabbi Berochia said to Rabbi Eliezer: "What benefit do they gain by doing this? In their lives, they left it, and now in their deaths, they return to it?" Rabbi Eliezer said to him: "It is not as you say. Since they are buried in the Land of Israel, and a clod of its earth is placed on them, it atones for them, as it is written: 'And He will atone for His land and His people' (Deuteronomy 32:43)." If so, have the righteous outside the Land lost out? No, why? Rabbi Elazar said in the name of Rabbi Simai: "The Holy One, Blessed be He, makes tunnels beneath the earth, and they roll like jars, coming to the Land of Israel. And once they arrive in the Land of Israel, the Holy One, Blessed be He, gives them their souls, as it is written: 'He gives a soul to the people upon it' (Isaiah 42:5). And there is an explicit verse in Ezekiel: 'You will know that I am Hashem when I open your graves and bring you to the Land of Israel' (Ezekiel 37:13)." At that time: "I will put My spirit in you, and you shall live" (ibid. 37:14). From here, we learn that the dead of the Land of Israel will live in the time of the Messiah, and the righteous outside the Land will come into it and live there. And if so, will the nations of the world, who are buried in the Land, also live? No, as it is written in Isaiah: "And no one of the inhabitants will say, 'I am sick'; the people that dwell therein will be forgiven their iniquity" (Isaiah 33:24). The evil neighbors will not say: "We are mingled and therefore we too live with them." Rather, only the people dwelling therein, "forgiven their iniquity," shall live. Who are these forgiven their iniquity? Those of whom it is said: "Who is a God like You, forgiving iniquity and passing over transgressions for the remnant of His heritage" (Micah 7:18). And how long will the days of the Messiah be? Rabbi Akiva says: Forty years, as it is written: "He afflicted you and caused you to hunger" (Deuteronomy 8:3), and it is written: "Make us glad according to the days You have afflicted us" (Psalms 90:15). Just as the affliction mentioned here was forty years, so too the affliction here is forty years. Rabbi Avin said: What is Rabbi Akiva's reasoning? "As in the days of your coming out of Egypt, I will show him wonders" (Micah 7:15). Rabbi Eliezer says: Four hundred years, as it is written: "And they shall serve them, and they shall afflict them four hundred years" (Genesis 15:13), and it is written: "Make us glad according to the days You have afflicted us" (Psalms 90:15). Rabbi Brachia said in the name of Rabbi Dosa the Great: Six hundred years, as it is written: "As the days of the tree, so shall be the days of My people" (Isaiah 65:22). Which tree is this? It is the stump that lasts six hundred years. Rabbi Eliezer bar Rabbi Yossi the Galilean says: One thousand years, as it is written: "For a thousand years in Your eyes are but as yesterday when it is past" (Psalms 90:4), and it is written: "For the day of vengeance is in My heart, and the year of My redeemed has come" (Isaiah 63:4). The day of the Holy One, Blessed be He, is one thousand years. Rabbi Yehoshua says: Two thousand years, as it is written: "Make us glad according to the days You have afflicted us" (Psalms 90:15). And there are no "days" less than two days, and the day of the Holy One, Blessed be He, is one thousand years. Rabbi Abahu says: Seven thousand years, as it is written: "As the joy of a bridegroom over the bride, so shall your God rejoice over you" (Isaiah 62:5). And how long is the joy of a bridegroom over the bride? Seven days. And the day of the Holy One, Blessed be He, is one thousand years. Rabbi says: It is not possible to calculate. "For the day of vengeance is in My heart, and the year of My redeemed has come" (Isaiah 63:4). And how long are the days of the Messiah? 365,000 years. During these days, the children of Israel will live in the Land of Israel and eat its produce, and all the righteous from outside the Land will come through tunnels to it. Once they arrive in it, immediately the Holy One, Blessed be He, will give them their souls, and they will stand and eat together with the children of Israel, as it is written: "He who stretches out the earth and its produce, who gives a soul to the people upon it" (Isaiah 42:5). When will King Messiah come? Rabbi Elazar said: Near the time of the Messiah, ten places will be swallowed, ten places will be overturned, and ten places will be destroyed. Rabbi Chiya bar Abba said: The Messiah will not come except in a generation whose face is like the face of a dog. Rabbi Elazar said: In a generation that deserves destruction, the Messiah will come. Rabbi Levi said: Near the time of the Messiah, a great event will occur in the world.

Chapter 2



Chapter 3

... [What about all] the praise of Joseph, who exceeded in the honor of his father? And yet he did not enter into him all the time, such that were it not that they came to tell him, "Your father is sick," he would not have known! Rather this is to inform you of his righteousness. For he did not want to be alone with his father, lest he say to him, "How did your brothers act with you?" And [then] he would curse them.... Hence he did not go to his father all the time.)

Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14


Our rabbis taught: An incident once took place with a Jewish man who had one cow [which he used] for ploughing. [Then], his hand [fortune] was diminished and he sold her [the cow] to a non-Jewish man and it ploughed with him [for the] six day of the week. On Shabbat he took her out to plough with him and she laid down under the yoke. He then walked [to the cow] and hit her, and she did not move from her place. Since he saw it was so, he walked and said to the Jewish man who sold her to him: "Come [and] take your cow, perhaps she has some [debilitating] pain since [no matter] how many times I hit her and she [still] does not move from her place." The Jewish man understood [the cause of the cow's action], saying [to himself] this is for the sake of Shabbat, [for] she has learned to rest on Shabbat. He [the Jew] said to him [the non-Jew]: "Come, I will make her stand up." When he neared [the cow], he spoke into the cow's ear: "Cow, you know that when you were in my possession you would plough during the days of the week and on Shabbat you would rest. [But] now that I have been afflicted by suffering, and you are in the hands of a non-Jew I am asking you to stand up and plough." Immediately, she stood up and ploughed. The non-Jew said to him: "I had not asked you to take the cow until now, and I did not come to you to address any matter apart from this. And I will not let you go until you tell me what you did to her in her ear, [for] I struggled with her and I hit her and she did not stand up." The Jewish man began to appease him and said: "I did no magic or sorcery, rather in this specific manner did I divert her." Immediately, the non-Jew was awestruck, saying [to himself]: If a cow which does not have [the ability of] speech nor understanding can recognize her Creator, then how can I - who was formed in His image, and who was given understanding - not walk and recognize my Creator. Immediately, he went and converted. And he studied and became worthy of [teaching] Torah. And they called his name "Yochanan be Tortah" and [even] until today, our Rabbis have reported Halacha in his name. And if you will wonder how it came to be that a cow led one man to be gathered under the wings of the Divine Presence, in fact, on the account of a cow all of Israel became pure as we read concerning [the Red Heifer] "This is the statute of the Torah" (Numbers 19:2)....

Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29

She weeps bitterly in the night (Lamentations 1:2) - Let our teacher the priests teach us - is it permitted for them to immerse for their terumah offering on the Ninth of Av? Rabbi Chanina the deputy High Priest said: It would suffice for the House of our God to forgo one immersion. (Beraisa Taanit 13a) Needless to say, we must recall the destruction of the Temple.
God said "If I forget you O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget its skill" (Psalms 137:5). And so too Jeremiah says "Remember and do not forget, my soul, and be bowed down within me" (Lamentations 3:20). As if he saw what was written regarding God's honor "The Lord God of Hosts called on that day to weeping and lamenting" (Isaiah 22:12). And so too it says "Therefore I said: Look away from me, let me weep bitterly" (Isaiah 22:4). As if the Holy One, blessed be He, said: Just as He is bowed below, so too am I bowed above, due to what has reached - as if weeping before me - that I have removed My Presence, as it says "This is My resting place for all time" (Psalms 132:14). And Jerusalem weeps over the removal of the glory of My resting place from within it, and I have removed it. Therefore she weeps. From where do we know it refers to "She weeps bitterly"?
Rabbi Tanhuma opened, saying: This is as the verse says "My eyes will flow with tears night and day, they will not cease" (Jeremiah 14:17). God said: You weep at night, while I weep day and night, for before Me there is no sleep, as it says "Behold, He who keeps Israel neither slumbers nor sleeps" (Psalms 121:4). And you shall say this matter "My eyes will flow with tears night and day." The verse does not reveal whether the prophet said "My eyes will flow with tears" or not, rather since it says "night and day" which flesh and blood cannot do. And it says "Oh, that my head were a spring of water, and my eyes a fountain of tears, so that I could weep day and night for the slain of my people" (Jeremiah 9:1). This shows it refers to God, before Whom there is no sleep.
Why "weeps bitterly"? With two weepings - weeping for her slain, and weeping for the famine that was there, that they ate the flesh of their sons and daughters, as it says (Lamentations 4:10) "The hands of compassionate women have boiled their own children." Rabbi Yochanan said: Just as the children of Zion ate the flesh of their sons and daughters, so too did the women of Samaria eat the flesh of their sons and daughters, as it says (2 Kings 6:24-29) "There was a great famine in Samaria...As the king of Israel was passing by on the wall, a woman cried out to him 'Help, my lord the king!'...Then he asked her 'What is the matter?' She answered 'This woman said to me: Give up your son, and we will eat him today...So we cooked my son and ate him."
Who would have thought, hearing this, that she had hidden her son alive to eat herself later? Rather, Rabbi Yochanan said: [The child] was already slaughtered and cooked. As it says "Give your son and we will eat him" - the verse does not say "and we will slaughter him." This implies he was already slaughtered and cooked. And [the king] said "May God do the same to me and more if the head of Elisha remains on him this day!" (2 Kings 6:31). Rabbi Yochanan said: In both the first and second destructions parents ate the flesh of their sons and daughters, and this is what Jeremiah laments over them "Therefore fathers will eat their sons within you, and sons will eat their fathers" (Ezekiel 5:10).
Another explanation: Why two instances of weeping? Weeping over Jerusalem, and weeping over the rivers of Babylon, as it says "By the rivers of Babylon we sat, also weeping when we remembered Zion" (Psalms 137:1). She weeps bitterly - weeping over herself, and weeping over Jeremiah's separation from them, because he would lighten the burden upon them.
What did he do? He would place a yoke upon his neck, and Nebuzaradan would remove it, saying to him: "You are injuring yourself - lest the king hear and say 'Did I not command you about him not to do him harm?'" (Jeremiah 39:12). He said to him: "I see three things in you - a lying prophet, a murderer, and one who flouts suffering." Jeremiah said: "Not about children." God said: The place needs to be destroyed. Jeremiah said: Through me or through others - yet he placed himself in the yoke.
Those returning [from exile] would pursue them. When they would see Jeremiah with them, they would walk slowly. And how did they pursue them? What did they do? They would take one of them, kill him, cut him into pieces, and throw those pieces before them as they walked - not for their own benefit, like bandits do when herding sheep. As it says "With ropes around our necks we are pursued" (Lamentations 5:5). Therefore: Wail! She weeps bitterly in the night. (29-30)
How lonely sits the city (Lamentations 1:1). It is written "Yet it was not Me you called upon, O Jacob, for you grew weary of Me, O Israel" (Isaiah 43:22). When the priest would come to one of them and say the idol said that you do not want to offer any of your children to it, that man would respond: they are under my control. Doesn't each of them toil in his work? Just wait - I have a young child who is not useful to me since he is in school - I shall offer that one. And he would promptly take him. This is the meaning of "You took your sons...whom you bore for Me" (Ezekiel 16:20).
God said to the nations: You offer children without toil, while with Me you toil, as it says "You have burdened Me with your sins, and wearied Me with your iniquities" (Isaiah 43:24). "You have not honored Me with sacrifices" (Isaiah 43:23) - Did I burden you to bring peace offerings? It does not say "And if you bring a peace offering" (Leviticus 3:1). If one seeks to bring a peace offering, let him bring it. "Nor sated Me with the fat of sacrifices" - I did not burden you to bring meal offerings, as it says "When a person presents an offering of meal" (Leviticus 2:1). "You have not bought Me sweet cane with money" (Isaiah 43:24) - I did not tell you to bring bushels of incense, only a handful, as it says "He shall take a handful of fine flour" (Leviticus 2:2).
"You have bought Me no fragrant reed for silver" (Isaiah 43:24) - I did not tell you to bring bushels of incense, only the morning and afternoon portions. Consider: Micah's idol stood in the west, while the Temple stood in Shiloh. He would offer incense before Micah's idol abundantly, as it says "And they are coming with their cloud of incense" (Ezekiel 8:11). But in Shiloh they would offer only the morning and afternoon portions. The two smokes would intermingle and rise to the heavens, as it says "And the scent intermingled" (Isaiah 9:17). And God would say: To which do we pay heed - this or that?
"But you have burdened Me with your sins" (Isaiah 43:24) - God said: I would call "My servant Moses" (Numbers 12:7), "He chose David His servant" (Psalms 78:70), "Do not fear, My servant Jacob" (Isaiah 44:2). But through your sins you have made Me call the wicked one "My servant," as it says "I will take Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, My servant" (Jeremiah 43:10).
Another explanation: "You have burdened Me" - God said to them: Through your sins you have made Me go into exile in Babylon, as it says "For your sake I will send to Babylon" (Isaiah 43:14). "You have wearied Me with your iniquities" - God said: Your sins have made Me sit weeping and lamenting, as it says "How alone she sits!"
Another explanation: "How alone she sits" - the whole world wonders about her, why the land was ruined, scorched like a desert without inhabitant. And He says: "It is because they abandoned My Torah" (Jeremiah 9:11-12).
A parable: A king who loved his son made him a golden medallion and hung it around his neck. The son did nothing but anger him, so his father removed the medallion and made shackles, placing them on his son's legs. So too God made the letters of the Torah like a medallion and placed them around Israel's neck, as it says "For they are a graceful wreath upon your head, a necklace about your throat" (Proverbs 1:9), "She will set upon your head a graceful wreath, crown you with a glorious diadem" (Proverbs 4:9). But Israel did nothing except abandon the Torah, as it says "They have abandoned My Torah and despised it" (Jeremiah 6:19). [God] wrote their letters as punishments and brought upon them "How alone she sits!"
Another explanation: Why does the scroll mention Jeremiah's name? There are four sons - one who seeks the honor of the father but not the son, one who seeks the honor of the son but not the father, and two who seek the honor of both son and father. Elijah sought the honor of God when he stood accusing. (29-30)
"Comfort, comfort My people" says your God (Isaiah 40:1). This is the meaning of "O that you were a brother to me" (Song of Songs 8:1) - not like Cain to Abel, nor Ishmael to Isaac, nor Esau to Jacob, nor Joseph's brothers to him. Rather, like Joseph to his brothers - despite all the evil they did to him, what is written? "Now do not be distressed or angry at yourselves...I will provide for you and your little ones" (Genesis 50:21). He comforted them and spoke to their hearts. Though ten lamps cannot extinguish one lamp, one lamp cannot extinguish ten. "He reassured them, speaking kindly to them" (Genesis 50:21).
Israel said: "Master of the Universe! Consider Joseph - despite all the evil his brothers did him, he stands and comforts them, speaking to their hearts. We too know we destroyed Your Temple through our sins...Therefore, "O that you were like a brother to me!" The prophet Asaph also said "Give ear, O Shepherd of Israel, You who lead Joseph like a flock!" (Psalms 80:2) God said to them: You request Joseph? I shall be like Joseph to you. What did Joseph do for his brothers? He comforted them and spoke to their hearts. "Comfort, comfort My people" - speak to the heart of Jerusalem!
Another explanation: "Comfort, comfort My people" - this is what the verse says "How can you console me? Your answers remain treachery" (Job 21:34). Rabbi Abba bar Kahana and the rabbis of the south [differ]: Rabbi Abba bar Kahana says: There remains deceit in them, as it says "And swears falsely" (Leviticus 5:21). The rabbis of the south say: They have no integrity - neither the first nor the last, nor the last as the first.
What is the matter? Since God would send prophets to go comfort Zion. Hosea came and said to her: "Stand and accept a cup of comfort." God sent me to you to comfort you. She said: What do you have? He said: Thus God said: "I will be like dew to Israel" (Hosea 14:6). She said: Hosea - yesterday you said "I will be to them like a lion, like a leopard I will lurk beside the way" (Hosea 13:7). And now you say "I will be like dew to Israel"!? Whom shall we believe - the first or the last? Your comforts are worthless. "How can you console me? Your answers remain treachery."
Joel came and said to her: "Stand and accept a cup of comfort." She said: What is in your cup? He said: God said when I redeem you, in the future the mountains will trickle wine and it says "On that day the mountains will drip with wine" (Joel 4:18). She said: Your comforts have been given to you! Yesterday you said to me "Wail, all drinkers of wine, over the new wine cut off" (Joel 1:5), and now you say "the mountains will drip with wine"? Whom shall we believe, the first or the last? "How can you console me? Your answers remain treachery."
Amos came and said: "Stand and accept your cup of comfort." She said: What do you have in your cup? He said: God said I will restore your captivity and rebuild the Temple, as it says "On that day, I will erect the fallen Tabernacle of David" (Amos 9:11). She said: Your comforts have been given to you! Yesterday you said "The Virgin Israel has fallen, never to rise again" (Amos 5:2). And now you say you will rebuild the Temple? Whom shall we believe? "How can you console me? Your answers remain treachery."
Obadiah prophesied about Edom, and Jonah about Nineveh. Nahum came and said to her: What do you have? He said: God told me to say to her "Your deliverance is at hand! See, upon the mountains are the footsteps of a herald announcing happiness! Judah, celebrate your festivals, fulfill your vows. For never again shall scoundrel pass through you; he has been utterly cut off." (Nahum 2:1)
She said: Nahum, your comforts have been given to you! Yesterday you said "From you emerged one who plots evil against the Lord, counselor of wickedness" (Nahum 1:11). And now you say "Never again shall scoundrel pass through you." Whom shall we believe? "How can you console me? Your answers remain treachery."
Zephaniah also came and said: "Stand and accept your cup of comfort." She said: What do you have in your cup? He said: "Cry out in gladness, O Daughter Zion! Shout joyfully, O Israel! Be glad and exult with all your heart, O daughter Jerusalem! The Lord has annulled your judgment, He has turned away your enemy; The King of Israel, the Lord, is in your midst, you have no further fear of misfortune. On that day, [God] will say to Jerusalem: Take courage, Zion! Let not your hands fall slack. The Lord your God is in your midst, a warrior who brings victory. He will rejoice over you with gladness, He will be silent in His love, He will delight in you with shouts of joy" (Zephaniah 3:14-20).
She said: Yesterday you said "I will sweep away everything from the face of the earth" (Zephaniah 1:2). And now "The Lord your God is in your midst"? Whom shall we believe? Haggai came and said: "Stand and accept your cup." She said: What do you have? He said: "Is there yet any seed left in the barn? Have the vine, fig, pomegranate, and olive trees not borne fruit? From this day on I will bless you" (Haggai 2:19).
She said: Haggai - yesterday you said "I will summon drought against the land and the hills" (Haggai 1:11). And now you say "From this day on I will bless you"? Whom shall we believe? Zechariah came and said: "Stand and accept your cup of comfort." She said: What do you have? He said: "I am extremely angry at the complacent nations" (Zechariah 1:15).
She said: Yesterday you said "I am furious with the carefree nations" (Zechariah 1:15). [Malachi came to comfort...She said: Yesterday you said "I have no desire for you" (Malachi 1:10).] They all came before God and said "We sought to comfort her but she would not accept."
God said to them: Come, I and you, let us go to her and comfort her. "Comfort, comfort My people," says your God! Another explanation: "Comfort, comfort" - Rabbi Berechiah the Priest said: Console Me, console Me, My people! In the way of the world, if a person has a vineyard and marauders come cut it down - whom do they console, the vineyard or the owner? If a person has a house and bandits come burn it down - whom do they console, the house or the owner? You are My vineyard, "For the vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is the House of Israel" (Isaiah 5:7). Nebuchadnezzar came and destroyed it, exiled you, and burned down My Temple - it is I who requires consoling! Console Me, console Me, My people!
Another explanation: "Comfort, comfort My people" - Everything Jeremiah opened with "rupture", Isaiah came and healed it. Jeremiah ruptured and said "She sits alone...she has become like a widow" (Lamentations 1:1). Isaiah came and healed "As Isaiah came and healed: "As a young man espouses a maiden, Your Builder shall espouse you" (Isaiah 62:5).
Jeremiah ruptured and said "Weep, weep at night" (Lamentations 1:2). Isaiah came and healed "The people that dwells in Zion shall weep no more" (Isaiah 30:19).
Jeremiah ruptured and said "Judah has gone into exile" (Lamentations 1:3). Isaiah came and healed "The scattered ones of Judah He shall gather" (Isaiah 11:12).
Jeremiah ruptured and said "The roads to Zion mourn" (Lamentations 1:4). Isaiah came and healed "A voice rings out: 'Clear in the desert a road for the Lord'" (Isaiah 40:3).
Jeremiah ruptured and said "Her foes have become her leaders" (Lamentations 1:5). Isaiah came and healed "Bowing before you shall come The children of those who tormented you" (Isaiah 60:14).
Jeremiah ruptured and said "Gone is all her majesty" (Lamentations 1:6) - and who is the majesty? The Holy One, blessed be He, of whom it says "Honor and majesty You don" (Psalms 104:1). Isaiah came and healed "Who is this coming from Edom...girded with triumph" (Isaiah 63:1).
Jeremiah ruptured and said "Jerusalem remembers" (Lamentations 1:7). Isaiah came and healed "The former things shall not be remembered" (Isaiah 65:17).
Jeremiah ruptured and said "Jerusalem has gravely sinned" (Lamentations 1:8). Isaiah came and healed "I wipe away your sins like a cloud" (Isaiah 44:22).
Jeremiah ruptured and said "Uncleanness clung to her skirts" (Lamentations 1:9). Isaiah came and healed - Rabbi Yehoshua ben Chanania said: Isaiah said a difficult thing "When the Lord has washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion" (Isaiah 4:4).
Jeremiah ruptured and said "An enemy has laid hands on all her treasures" (Lamentations 1:10). On the spoils of a king that are given over to plunder, there are those who plunder silver and those gold, yet the slave seeks his own vessel. So too when the Temple was destroyed, some plundered silver and some gold. Ammon and Moab sought the Torah to erase from it "No Ammonite or Moabite shall be admitted into the congregation of the Lord" (Deuteronomy 23:4). So Jeremiah said "Ammon and Moab shall not be admitted into the congregation."
Isaiah came and healed "No more shall the uncircumcised and unclean enter" (Isaiah 52:1). Jeremiah ruptured and said "All her people groan, seeking bread" (Lamentations 1:11) - like Avika ben Geviyat. (When the enemies came to besiege Jerusalem, Avika went up on the wall.) There is no end to telling of their valor. Do you wish to know of Avika ben Geviyat's valor? When the enemies came to besiege Jerusalem, Avika went up on the wall. When they would shoot a stone from a ballista, when Avika would see it coming at the wall, he would immediately become agitated and kick it back at them with his foot.
What did the enemies do? They shot it further inside so it wouldn't strike the wall but land in front of it. Avika thought it was coming powerfully, became agitated to go out and kick it back, and fell between the walls, as Jerusalem had two walls, one inside the other. When the people of Jerusalem saw Avika fall, they were frightened. Avika said to them "Do not worry, it's merely a bruise." They slaughtered an ox for him, roasted it, he ate and went back to the wall and continued fighting as before.
There was an incident with Miriam the daughter of Nakdimon, who was awaiting levirate marriage. She came before Rabbi Tzadok and he ruled she be given 25 litras of silver for spice crates and measures of wine for her stew each Shabbat. She said to him: Do you so rule for your own daughters? When the famine came, her hair fell out from starvation. Rabbi Tzadok saw her circling in the market with her father. He said: Is this not Miriam for whom I ruled this and that for Shabbat - she has cursed you! Rabbi Tzadok said: May it come upon me if I did not see her gathering grains of barley from animal dung, and I recited about her this verse: "If you do not know, O fairest of women, go follow the tracks of the sheep" (Song of Songs 1:8).
God said: In this world you have been exchanged by the famine, but in the future you will be exchanged by plenty. Seeing you today, He says: If only they could see you tomorrow - as Isaiah said "You shall enjoy the wealth of nations, and revel in their riches" (Isaiah 61:6). What is "you shall revel"? Exchange - "If he changes it..." (Leviticus 27:10).
Jeremiah ruptured and said "Is there sorrow like my sorrow?" (Lamentations 1:12) Isaiah came and healed "The ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to Zion in gladness" (Isaiah 35:10).
Jeremiah ruptured "He has set fire to my bones" (Lamentations 1:13). Isaiah healed "Till a spirit from on high is poured out on us" (Isaiah 32:15).
Jeremiah ruptured "My sins are bound, wound round my neck" (Lamentations 1:14). Isaiah healed "They who trust in the Lord shall renew their strength" (Isaiah 40:31).
Jeremiah ruptured "My heroes are defeated" (Lamentations 1:15). Isaiah healed "I will bring you relief and healing" (Jeremiah 30:17).
Jeremiah ruptured "Over all this I weep" (Lamentations 1:16). Isaiah healed "Eye to eye they behold the return to Zion" (Isaiah 52:8).
Jeremiah ruptured "Zion spreads out her hands, she has no one to comfort her" (Lamentations 1:17). Isaiah healed "Comfort, comfort My people, says your God."

Chapter 30



Chapter 31



Chapter 32



Chapter 33



Chapter 34



Chapter 35



Chapter 36



Chapter 37



Chapter 38

Teach us, oh teacher – if one has an argument with their friend, how shall they attain atonement on Yom Kippur? This is what our Rabbis taught: transgressions between a person and God, Yom Kippur atones; however, for transgressions between a person and another, Yom Kippur does not atone until he appeases the other person (Mishna Yoma 8:9) And if one goes to appease him and the offended party will not accept the apology, what should one do? R’ Shmuel bar Nachmani says: bring ten people and stand them in a line and say before them – there was an argument between my self and so-and-so, I tried to appease him and he did not want to accept my apology, rather he persists in his refusal. From where do we know one should do thus, it says “He declares to men, “I have sinned; I have perverted what was right; But I was not paid back for it.” (Job 33:27) The Holy One see that you are humbling yourself and gives atonement for your sins, because so long as one holds fast to their refusal to recognize their own behavior they are not forgiven. Do you want proof of this? So long as Job stood against his friends and they against him, the attribute of justice prevailed. So we find that Job said to them “But now those younger than I deride me, [Men] whose fathers I would have disdained to put among my sheep dogs.” (Job 30:1) And they said to him “Among us are gray-haired old men, Older by far than your father.” (Job 15:10) At the very moment when he forgave them and prayed for mercy upon them, the Holy One returned to him, as it says “The LORD restored Job’s fortunes…” (Job 42:10) When? “…when he prayed on behalf of his friends…” (ibid.) This is as it says elsewhere, “…show you compassion, and in His compassion increase you…” (Deuteronomy 13:18) R’ Yose ben Dormaskit said: take this sign in your hand – so long as you are merciful upon your fellows, HaMakom (God) will be merciful upon you. As soon as Avraham prayed for mercy on behalf of Avimelech, he received his own reward, as it says “Abraham then prayed to God, and God healed Abimelech and his wife…” (Genesis 20:17) Andwhat was the reward which he received? That his wife became pregnant and bore him a son, as it says “The LORD took note of Sarah as He had promised, and the LORD did for Sarah as He had spoken.” (Genesis 21:1)

Chapter 39



Chapter 40



Chapter 41



Chapter 42



Chapter 43

<b>"For the LORD remembered Hannah, and she conceived and bore three sons and two daughters" (1 Samuel 2:21)</b> <br>Let our teacher instruct us: For how many days do we bless the new month? Our rabbis have taught us: Rabbi Acha said in the name of Rabbi Asi, until its defect is filled, which means for fourteen days, until it is renewed and grows. Until that time, we bless the new month. <br>The Holy One, Blessed be He, said: Be careful to bless Me for everything, and if you are careful with blessings, I too will come to you and bless you, as it is said: <i>"In every place where I cause My name to be mentioned, I will come to you and bless you"</i> (Exodus 20:21). <br>You find that Abraham, what is written about him? <i>"Because Abraham obeyed My voice"</i> (Genesis 26:5). And I blessed him: <i>"And the LORD had blessed Abraham in all things"</i> (Genesis 24:1). Not only that, but he saw in his horoscope that he would not have children, as it is said: <i>"And I go childless"</i> (Genesis 15:2). The Holy One, Blessed be He, said: "You look well, but Abram will not beget children. What shall I do for you? I will change your name, and you will beget children, as it is said: <i>'Your name shall no longer be called Abram, but your name shall be Abraham'"</i> (Genesis 17:5). <br>Similarly, Sarai could not bear children, as it is said: <i>"Now Sarai was barren"</i> (Genesis 11:30). But Sarah could bear children, as it is said: <i>"And the LORD remembered Sarah"</i> (Genesis 21:1). <br>And Hannah, because she was accustomed to going up and praying in the Temple and pleading before the Holy One, Blessed be He, He heard her prayer and remembered her. How do we know this? From what we read in the matter: <i>"For the LORD remembered Hannah."</i> <br>Thus opened Rabbi Tanchuma bar Abba: <i>"The LORD is near to all who call upon Him, to all who call upon Him in truth. He will fulfill the desire of those who fear Him; He also will hear their cry and save them"</i> (Psalms 145:18-19). "The LORD is near to all who call upon Him" - could it be to all? The verse teaches, "to all who call upon Him in truth." <br><i>"Surely God is good to Israel"</i> (Psalms 73:1) - could it be to all? The verse teaches, "to such as are pure in heart." <br><i>"The LORD is good"</i> (Lamentations 3:25) - could it be to all? The verse teaches, "to those who wait for Him." <br><i>"Happy is the man who has strength in You"</i> (Psalms 84:6) - could it be to all? The verse teaches, "in whose heart are the highways to Zion." <br>"He will fulfill the desire of those who fear Him" - why? Because the Holy One, Blessed be He, does not annul their prayer and gives them what they ask for. This is David, about whom it is written, <i>"I am a companion of all who fear You"</i> (Psalms 119:63). When he was distressed about the Temple, as it is written, <i>"Remember, O LORD, for David, all his afflictions... If I enter the tent of my house... If I give sleep to my eyes... Until I find a place for the LORD, a dwelling place for the Mighty One of Jacob"</i> (Psalms 132:1-5). As soon as the Holy One, Blessed be He, saw that he was distressed about the Temple, He immediately sent to him Gad the prophet and showed him the place of the Temple, as it is written, <i>"And Gad came to David on that day and said to him, 'Go up, erect an altar to the LORD on the threshing floor of Araunah the Jebusite'"</i> (2 Samuel 24:18). David immediately went up, as it is written, <i>"So David went up according to the word of Gad, as the LORD commanded"</i> (2 Samuel 24:19). <br>He found there the altar on which Adam, the first man, had sacrificed, and on which Noah had sacrificed, and on which Abraham had sacrificed. When he found it, he began to measure and said, "From here to here will be the courtyard, from here to here will be the Holy of Holies," as it is written, <i>"Then David said, 'This is the house of the LORD God, and this is the altar of burnt offering for Israel'"</i> (1 Chronicles 22:1). Thus, the Holy One, Blessed be He, does not frustrate the spirit of the righteous, but gives them all that they ask for, to fulfill what is said, <i>"He will fulfill the desire of those who fear Him."</i> <br><b>Another interpretation of "He will fulfill the desire of those who fear Him"</b>: Who was this? It was Hannah, who prayed before the Holy One, Blessed be He, and the Holy One, Blessed be He, did not send her away empty from her prayer, but the Holy One, Blessed be He, heard her prayer and gave her all that she asked of Him. <br><i>"And she vowed a vow and said, 'O LORD of hosts'"</i> (1 Samuel 1:11). What is meant by "LORD of hosts"? Rabbi Judah bar Simon said: Hannah said before the Holy One, Blessed be He, "Master of the Universe, there are hosts above and hosts below. The hosts above neither eat nor drink, nor are fruitful and multiply, nor die, but live forever. And the hosts below eat and drink, and are fruitful and multiply, and die. And I do not know from which host I am, whether from that above or from that below. If I am from the host above, I will neither eat nor drink, nor give birth, nor die, but live forever as they live forever. And if I am from the host below, I will eat and drink, and give birth, and die as they eat and drink and are fruitful and multiply and die." This is the meaning of "LORD of hosts." <br><b>Another interpretation of "LORD of hosts"</b>: Rabbi Judah bar Simon said: At the festivals, Hannah went up to the Temple and saw all Israel there. She said before the Holy One, Blessed be He, "Master of the Universe, all these hosts You have, and You have not given me one among them." <br><i>"If You will indeed look"</i> (1 Samuel 1:11) - if You look, well and good; and if not, You will see against Your will. She said before Him, "It is better that You see willingly before You see unwillingly." She said, "If You do not remember me, I will go and seclude myself with another man, and my husband will see me and suspect me, and he will take me to the priest and make me drink the bitter waters. I will be found innocent, and You will be obligated to remember me and give me a son, for You have written in Your Torah, <i>'But if the woman has not defiled herself and is clean, then she shall be free and shall conceive seed'</i> (Numbers 5:28)." Thus, <i>"If You will indeed look"</i> - see willingly before You see unwillingly. <br><i>"And remember me, and not forget Your maidservant"</i> (1 Samuel 1:11). Rabbi Samuel bar Nachman said: Three times it is written in this verse "Your maidservant, Your maidservant, Your maidservant," corresponding to the three commandments that our Rabbis taught that women are obligated to observe: the laws of menstruation, the separation of challah, and the lighting of the Sabbath candle. Hannah said, "Master of the Universe, has not Your maidservant been careful in all three of them?" What is meant by "And remember me"? With males. "And not forget Your maidservant" - with females. Thus it is written, <i>"For the LORD had remembered Hannah, and she conceived and bore three sons and two daughters."</i> <br><b>Another interpretation of "For the LORD had remembered Hannah, etc."</b>: This is what Scripture says, <i>"He settles the barren woman in her home as a joyful mother of children"</i> (Psalms 113:9). The Holy One, Blessed be He, said, "I made Sarah barren in the house, as it is said, 'Now Sarai was barren' (Genesis 11:30), in order to gladden her with children." But did Sarah have many children? She only bore Isaac, as it is written, <i>"And Sarah conceived and bore Abraham a son in his old age"</i> (Genesis 21:2). So what is meant by "a joyful mother of children"? Rather, when Sarah gave birth to Isaac, the nations of the world were saying, "He is the son of a handmaid, and she pretends as if she is nursing him." At that moment, Sarah said, "What are you standing for? This is not a time for modesty. Rather, stand and expose yourself for the sanctification of the Name." Sarah stood and exposed herself, and her two breasts were flowing with milk like two springs of water, as it is written, <i>"Who would have said to Abraham that Sarah would nurse children?"</i> (Genesis 21:7). <br>Rabbi Pinchas the Priest, son of Hama, said in the name of Rabbi Hilkiah: Abraham's stature withered and became like stubble. "Who would have declared to Abraham?" The nations of the world were bringing their children to Sarah for her to nurse them, to fulfill what is said, "Sarah would nurse children." Some of them brought their children in truth for her to nurse them, and some of them brought their children to test her. Neither these nor those lost out. Rabbi Levi said: Those who came in truth converted. This is what is meant by "nursed children" - they were built up in Israel. And those who came to test her, our Rabbis said, became great in this world as governors, and all the converts who convert in the world and all the God-fearers in the world are from those who nursed from Sarah's milk. Thus, "a joyful mother of children" - this is Sarah. <br><b>Another interpretation of "He settles the barren woman in her home"</b>: Rabbi Berechiah said in the name of Rabbi Samuel bar Nachman: This is Jochebed. Was she barren? Didn't she give birth to Aaron and Miriam? But you find that when Pharaoh decreed, <i>"Every son that is born you shall cast into the river"</i> (Exodus 1:22), when Amram heard this, he and his court at that time decreed and prevented Israel from being fruitful and multiplying, and they sent out their wives. <i>"The women you drive out from their pleasant houses"</i> (Micah 2:9). Therefore, it calls Jochebed barren, for she was uprooted from her house. Miriam was six years old at that time and said, "Father, father, Pharaoh's decree was better for Israel than yours. Why? Pharaoh decreed on the males, and you on the males and females. Pharaoh's decree may or may not be fulfilled, but your decree is certainly fulfilled." When Amram heard her words, he brought her before the Sanhedrin, and she spoke before them. They said to him, "Amram, you forbade, and you must permit the matter." He said to them, "And what do you say to me? Shall we return secretly?" They said to him, "And who will inform all of Israel?" Rabbi Judah bar Zevida said: Amram seated her [Jochebed] on a litter, and Aaron was on one side and Miriam on the other, carrying torches and walking before her. And the Holy Spirit cried out, <i>"He settles the barren woman in her home as a joyful mother of children."</i> And why did Amram do this? So that Israel would know and bring back their wives. And when they saw, they sang praise to the Holy One, Blessed be He. And they did not sing praise, but they said, "Now Moses the redeemer is born, and we will be redeemed from Egypt. Hallelujah, when Israel went out of Egypt." <br><b>Another interpretation of "He settles the barren woman in her home"</b>: The Holy One, Blessed be He, said, "I settled Miriam, daughter of Tanchum, as barren in order to gladden her with her children in the future to come." Our Rabbis said: There was an incident with Miriam, daughter of Tanchum, in the time of persecution, who had seven sons. They seized the first and said to him, "Come and bow down to the idol." He said to them, "I do not deny God." Immediately they took him and put him in a frying pan and fried him. And so they seized the second and said, "Come and bow down to the idol." He said to them, "I do not deny the Holy One, Blessed be He." Immediately they did to him as they had done to the first. So they did to the third and the fourth and to all of them. The youngest of them remained. They said, "Come and bow down to the idol, and if not, we will do to you as we did to your brothers." He said to them, "I will go and consult with my mother." He went to his mother and said to her, "What do you say? Shall I bow down to the idol or not?" His mother said to him, "My son, what do you want? That all your brothers should be in Abraham's bosom in the future to come?" Immediately he went and did not seek to bow down to the idol. Immediately they took him and did to him as they had done to his brothers. They took Miriam their mother and killed her. The Holy One, Blessed be He, said, "In the future to come, I will gladden her with her children." <i>"A joyful mother of children."</i> <br><b>Another interpretation of "He settles the barren woman in her home"</b>: This is Hannah, as it is written, <i>"And Peninnah had children, but Hannah had no children"</i> (1 Samuel 1:2), who was barren in the house in order to gladden her with children. <i>"A joyful mother of children."</i> <i>"For the LORD had remembered Hannah, and she conceived and bore three sons and two daughters."</i> Hannah said to Him, "Master of the Universe, what should I do to say to You songs and praises?" <i>"And Hannah prayed and said: My heart exults in the LORD; my horn is exalted in the LORD"</i> (1 Samuel 2:1). <br><b>Another interpretation of "For the LORD had remembered Hannah"</b>: What is written above this matter? <i>"And her rival provoked her grievously"</i> (1 Samuel 1:6), for Peninnah provoked Hannah, provocation upon provocation. And what did she do? Rabbi Nachman bar Abba said: Peninnah would rise early and say to Hannah, "Are you not getting up to wash your children's faces so that they can go to school?" And at six o'clock, she would say, "Are you not getting up to receive your children who have come from school?" This is <i>"And her rival provoked her grievously."</i> Rabbi Tanchuma bar Abba said: They were sitting to eat, and Elkanah would give each of his children their portion. What would Peninnah do? She would intend to provoke Hannah. She would say to Elkanah, "Give this son of mine his portion, and to this son of mine you haven't given his portion." Why? <i>"In order to make her fret"</i> (1 Samuel 1:6). <br><b>Another interpretation of "In order to make her fret"</b>: [To make her fret] against God for her good. The Holy One, Blessed be He, said to her, "You provoke her against Me? By your life, there are no thunders that are not followed by rain. Immediately I will remember her." <i>"For the LORD had remembered Hannah, and she conceived and bore three sons and two daughters."</i>

Supplement A



Supplement B

