Ahavat Yehonatan
אהבת יהונתן
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Ahavat Yehonatan

Introduction



Parashat Bereshit



Haftarah of Bereshit



Haftarah of Noach



Parashat Lech Lecha



Haftarah of Lech Lecha



Haftarah of Vayera



Haftarah of Chayei Sara



Haftarah of Toldot



Haftarah of Vayetzei



Haftarah of Vayishlach



Haftarah of Vayeshev



Haftarah of Miketz and Chanukah



Haftarah of Vayigash













<b>And I will make a covenant of peace with them; it shall be an everlasting covenant with them:</b> It explains how it is that they should live [forever] naturally; that it is understood according to the verse that the Holy One, blessed be He, said to Pinchas (Numbers 25:12), "behold, I give him My covenant of peace." For the matter of natural death is from the inferior quality of [man's] makeup. As he is not perfect in his composition, so that [his] components do not equally fit his makeup. So he acquires one of the circumstances [that compromise his health] that exist in the world and the days of old age and senescence come upon him, such that the body encounters deterioration. Yet the whole entire Torah is built upon guarding the body from [these] circumstances. And you should know that 'one who keeps the commandment does not know a bad thing.' And this is what the Holy One, blessed be He, said to Pinchas, "behold, I give him My covenant of peace." For it is peace among the components [of his body]. And that is why we say that Pinchas is Eliyahu and that Eliyahu lives and survives forever. So that is what it informs us here, "And I will make a covenant of peace with them." And it is easy to understand.

Haftarah of Vayechi



Haftarah of Shemot



Haftarah of Vaera



Haftarah of Bo



Haftarah of Beshalach



Haftarah of Yitro



Haftarah of Shekalim



Haftarah of Terumah



Haftarah of Zachor



Haftarah of Parah



Haftarah of HaChodesh



Haftarah for Shabbat Erev Rosh Chodesh



Haftarah of Vayikra



Haftarah for Shabbat Rosh Chodesh



Haftarah of Shmini



Haftarah of Tazria Metzora



Haftarah of Achrei Mot Kedoshim



Haftarah of Emor



Haftarah of Behar Bechukotai



Haftarah of Bamidbar



Haftarah of Nasso



Haftarah of Beha'alotcha



Haftarah of Sh'lach



Haftarah of Korach



Haftarah of Chukat



Haftarah of Balak



Haftarah of Pinchas



Haftarah of Matot Masei



Haftarah of Devarim



Haftarah of Vaetchanan



Haftarah of Eikev



Haftarah of Re'eh



Haftarah of Shoftim



Haftarah of Ki Teitzei



Haftarah of Ki Tavo



Haftarah of Nitzavim



Haftarah for the First Day of Rosh Hashanah



Haftarah of Shabbat Shuva



Haftarah of Ha'azinu



Haftarah for the First Day of Sukkot



Haftarah for the First Day of Pesach



Haftarah for the Second Day of Pesach



Haftarah for the Seventh Day of Pesach



Haftarah for the Eighth Day of Pesach



Haftarah for the Second Day of Shavuot

