Notes by Rabbi Yehoshua Hartman on Ohr Chadash
פירושים והערות מהרב יהושע הרטמן על אור חדש
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Notes by Rabbi Yehoshua Hartman on Ohr Chadash

Introduction



Preface







Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Verse 1



Verse 2



Verse 3



Verse 4



Verse 5



Verse 6



Verse 7















































































(290) Like they said in the Gemara (Megillah 6b), "Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says in the name of Rabbi Yosei, 'They even read it again during the second Adar, as all commandments that are practiced during the second Adar are not practiced during the first...' The reason of Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel is that juxtaposing a redemption to a redemption is preferable." And Rashi there explained, “A redemption to a redemption: Purim to Pesach” (see note 242 above). Behold Purim is connected to Pesach, so the month of Adar is automatically connected to the month of Nissan. And see the next note. 
(291) In Bnei Yissaschar (Essays on the Months of Kislev/Tevet, Essay 4), he wrote, “Behold you will find that because of this the Sages, may their memory be blessed, were exacting to fix this holiday specifically in the (second) Adar that is adjacent to Nissan – ‘juxtaposing a redemption to a redemption is preferable’ (Megillah 6b). That is to juxtapose the idea of providence and a concealed redemption to the idea of a revealed redemption. ‘One God created them; one Maker made them.’ And this hinted to in the Egyptian Hallel, ‘O Lord, save please (<i>na</i>), etc. bring success please (<i>na</i>)’ (Psalms 118:25). The acrostic of Nissan Adar is <i>na</i>! That is that there should be salvation and success in both configurations, both in the miraculous configuration of the miracles of Nissan and the configuration of the hidden miracles of Adar.” And in Divrei Sofrim by Rabbi Tzadok HaKohen, he writes (at the end of Section Lamed), “And this is great advice for all who need salvation: Even though one is not able to leave his wallowing – by way of strengthening himself in the faith that God, may He be blessed, is with him in every place that he is, then automatically even when he is in the dark, there is no Satan and no bad occurrence, since God provides him with light. And through this, the light keeps progressing until the day is established and it provides him fully with light. As this is why we ‘juxtapose a redemption to a redemption, of Adar and Nissan. For through the revelation of the hidden light and joy of Purim, one merits afterwards the revelation of the clear light of Nissan, in which they were delivered and in which they will be completely delivered in the future.” Rise and see how the words of the Bnei Yissaschar and Rabbi Tzadok HaKohen point with their finger at how the Jewish people’s end in the month of Adar assures their preservation. And see below, note 328. 