Kinnot for Tisha B'Av (Ashkenaz)
קינות לתשעה באב (אשכנז)
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Kinnot for Tisha B'Av (Ashkenaz)

Kinot for Tisha B'Av Night



Chapter 1

Remember, LORD, what has occurred to us, Alas! Look and see our disgrace. Alas! what has occurred to us.
Our property has been handed over to strangers, Alas! Our homes to foreigners. Alas! what has occurred to us.
We have become orphans without a father. Alas! Our mothers mourn in the month of Av. Alas! what has occurred to us.
We had to purchase water to drink. Alas! Because we abused the water libation. Alas! what has occurred to us.
We had yokes put on our necks, Alas! Because we hatefully persecuted others. Alas! what has occurred to us.
To the Egyptians we stretched out our hand, Alas! And the Assyrians trapped us like a hunter. Alas! what has occurred to us.
Our ancestors have sinned and are no more, Alas! And we suffer for their sins. Alas! what has occurred to us.
Slaves rule over us, Alas! Because we did not release our slaves. Alas! what has occurred to us.
We risk our lives to get our bread. Alas! Because we closed our hands to the needy. Alas! what has occurred to us.
Our skin has shriveled as from the heat of an oven. Alas! Because they exchanged their honour for disgrace. Alas! what has occurred to us.
They tortured the women of Zion. Alas! Because we violated our friends wives. Alas! what has occurred to us.
Princes were hung by their hands. Alas! Because they were violent and robbed the poor. Alas! what has occurred to us.
Our young men were forced to carry millstone. Alas! Because they were found in the houses of harlots. Alas! what has occurred to us.
The elders ceased to be at the city gates. Alas! Because they perverted the judgements against the orphan and widow. Alas! what has occurred to us.
The joy in our heart has ceased, Alas! Because we annulled our pilgrimages to the Temple. Alas! what has occurred to us.
The crown has fallen from our head, Alas! Because our Holy Temple has burnt down. Alas! what has occurred to us.
It is due to this that we became faint hearted, Alas! Because the honour of our beloved House has been removed. Alas! what has occurred to us.
For Mount Zion has become desolate, Alas! Because we have placed an abomination on it. Alas! what has occurred to us.
For You, LORD, shall reign forever, for Your throne endures from generation to generation.
Why have You forgotten us for ever and forsaken us for so long?
Return us to You, LORD, and we will return. renew our days as of old.
For if You utterly despised us, with a exceedingly furious anger against us.
Return us to You, LORD, and we will return. renew our days as of old.

Kinot for Tisha B'Av Day



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17

If women could eat the fruit of their womb, the little babes clapping their hands...
Alas for me!
If women so full of compassion could boil their children, measured hand height by hand height...
Alas for me!
If the fine locks of their heads could be shorn and bound as decorations for horses...
Alas for me!
If the tongue of a nursing baby could glue to his palate from blinding white thirst...
Alas for me!
If one could sigh one to another: "Come on and let's boil our screeching sons...
Alas for me!
If one could ask of another: "Give over your son to eat" but he's already hidden, sliced into slices...
Alas for me!
If fathers, now meat, could be seasoned for their sons in caves and trenches...
Alas for me!
If daughters could be dandled in the breasts of their mothers, distended bellies...
Alas for me!
If the ghosts of children, bloated with rot, floated in the streets of the city...
Alas for me!

Chapter 18



Chapter 19

Yours, my Lord, is the righteousness, because of the wondrous signs You have displayed from then until now;
and ours is the shamefacedness, because of the trial with which You sought to refine us, (but as a result of our failure) You despised us.
Yours, my Lord, is the righteousness because You have taken (our) nation from amidst another nation, with miracles;
and ours is the shamefacedness, because of the hypocrisy to be found within us as we emulated (Egypt's abominable) deeds.
Yours, my Lord, is the righteousness because God went out to redeem us as a people unto Himself;
and ours is the shamefacedness, because they (our forefathers) rebelled on the shore of the Sea of reeds, the nation sinning against its God!
Yours, my Lord, is the righteousness when we recall the proclamation, 'You are witnesses, and I am God!'
and, ours is the shamefacedness, because we blasphemed Hashem in (the Wilderness of) Sin (when we demanded of Aaron), 'Arise and create a god for us!'
Yours, my Lord, is the righteousness because You fed us (the manna) that tasted like dough fried in honey;
and ours, is the shamefacedness, because on the day (we made the Golden Calf), we brought it an offering of fine flour with oil and honey.
Yours, my Lord, is the righteousness because you provided us with the manna, the well and the pillar of clouds;
and ours is the shamefacedness because our forefathers grumbled in their tents about (the manna and called it) the destructive bread.
Yours, my Lord, is the righteousness because in the wilderness we lacked for nothing;
and ours is the shamefacedness because we defied You as Laban, Hazeroth, and Di-zahab as related (by Moses),
Yours, my Lord, is the righteousness because of (how You waged war for us with) Sihon and Og and all the kings of Canaan;
and ours is the shamefacedness because of Achan who appropriated for himself from the forbidden spoils (of Jericho) and found no excuse (for his crime).
Yours, my Lord, is the righteousness because of all that You accomplished through the fourteen saviors(-Judges);
and ours is the shamefacedness because of Micah's idol through which we transgressed.
Yours, my Lord, is the righteousness because You erected (Tabernacles) at Shiloh, Nob, Gibeon and the Eternal Temple (in Jerusalem);
and ours is the shamefacedness because the evil in our midst caused each one's destruction, and in their loss, we have been humiliated.
Yours, my Lord, is the righteousness because although the Destructions of the two Temples were caused by our corruption, we ourselves were spared;
and ours is the shamefacedness because we should have repented to You wholeheartedly so that You would return to us in compassion.
Yours, my Lord, is the righteousness because of the (almost) nine centuries throughout which You withheld Your anger (over our sins) and didn't broadcast it;
and ours is the shamefacedness because (Daniel) the man of delights pleaded with You (to end the Babylonian Exile after a mere seventy years, even though we were not worthy,) saying, 'Incline Your ear, O my God, and hear!'

Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29



Chapter 30



Chapter 31



Chapter 32



Chapter 33



Chapter 34



Chapter 35



Chapter 36



Chapter 37



Chapter 38



Chapter 39



Chapter 40



Chapter 41



Chapter 42



Chapter 43



Chapter 44



Chapter 45

Mourn for Zion and her cities, like a woman giving birth, like a maiden wrapped in sack-cloth for the husband of her youth
Mourn for the palace that was abandoned like a sheep’s negligence of its flock, 
and for the entry of God’s blasphemers into her holy sanctuary. 
Mourn for God’s exiled servants who beautifully sang her songs,  
and for their blood that was spilled like the waters of her rivers. 
Mourn for the chatter of her dancers whose silence fills her cities,
and for the assembly that was destroyed and the abolition of her  Sanhedrin.
Mourn for the daily sacrifices and the redemption of her firstborn,
and for the desecration of the Temple vessels and the altar of her incense.
Mourn for the babes of her kings, noble children of David,
and for their beauty that was darkened at the time of the removal of her crowns.
Mourn for the glory that was dispelled at the time of the  destruction of her Holy of Holies,
and for the oppressor who tormented her whilst girding her in sackcloth.
Mourn for the wounds and the many blows that struck her sainted ones,
and for the smashing on the rock of her young children.
Mourn for the joy of her haters who rejoiced over her downfall,
and for the torment of her pure and noble citizens.
Mourn for the sins that caused her to deviate from the true path,
and for her numerous congregations, which were tarnished and blackened.
Mourn for the voices of her abusers as her rising corpses mounted,
and for the jeering mobs within her holy courtyards.
Mourn for Your name which was desecrated in the mouths of those who stand against her,
and for their prayers which they cry out to you, heed and hear her words....
Mourn for Zion and her cities, like a woman giving birth, like a maiden wrapped in sack-cloth for the husband of her youth