Duties of the Heart
חובות הלבבות
Duties of the Heart, trans. by Rabbi Moses Hyamson, New York, 1925
http://dafyomireview.com/article.php?docid=417

Duties of the Heart

Introduction of the Author



First Treatise on Unity

Introduction







Second Treatise on Examination

Introduction

The author says: Since we began in the previous treatise, with the various ways in which the Unity of G-d can be demonstrated so that it shall be wholeheartedly acknowledged, and we found that the examination of the wisdom manifested in the universe is the nearest way to clarify His existence and the clearest path to know His reality. [Therefore] we deem it our duty to deal with this theme, so that to each treatise, the one most nearly resembling it should be joined, and each topic should be followed by the most appropriate topic - this being among the subjects which we have to deal with in regard to the Almighty's service, the purpose for which we were created, as the wise man said (Kohelet 3:14) "And G-d has so made it that man should fear before Him". 
First we have to note that though the benefits G-d bestows upon His creatures are all-embracing, as Scripture says "The L-ord is good to all" (Tehilim 145:9), nevertheless, the majority of mankind are too blind to recognize these benefits or comprehend their high excellence, and they do not think over their matters due to three reasons. 
1. One of these reasons: their absorption in matters of this world and its pleasures, their lusting for what they will not attain of it, their neglect to look onto the benefits G-d bestows upon them because their hearts are preoccupied with what they hope for, of satisfying their lusts and fulfilling their wishes. For whatever level they have attained of it, they proceed to seek what is higher than it, and strive for what is after it. The many benefits bestowed on them are, in their view, but few. The great gifts already given to them, they deem small. Until they consider any advantage possessed by another person as if it was taken away from them, and when others attain some benefits, it is as if evil befell them. They do not understand the works of G-d who bestows good to them, as Scripture says (Tehilim 10:4) "The wicked, in his high arrogance, does not enquire. G-d is not in any of his thoughts". 
2. The second reason is that human beings when they come into this world are like foolish beasts and a donkey's colt, as scripture says (Iyov 11:12) "Like a wild donkey's colt is man when born". They grow up with an abundance of continuous and recurring Divine favors which they experience constantly, and to which they become so used to and familiar with that they come to regard these as intrinsic parts of their being, not to be removed or separated from themselves during the whole of their lives. Though their intelligence develops and their mental faculties become strong they foolishly ignore the benefits the Creator has bestowed on them and do not consider the obligation of gratitude for Divine beneficence, for they are unaware of the immense degree of the benefit, and of the infinite greatness of the Benefactor who bestowed it upon them. 
In this respect, they resemble an infant, found in the desert by a kind hearted man. The man had pity on the infant, brought it into his home, raised it, fed it, clothed it, and generously provided all that was good for it until it grew up and understood the ways of the many benefits it had received. 
Afterwards the [same] kind hearted man heard about a man who fell in the hands of his enemy who for a long time treated him with utmost cruelty, starved, and kept naked. The prisoner's suffering aroused the kind hearted man's pity. He appeased the enemy until the enemy freed the prisoner and forgave his debt. The benevolent man brought the man into his home and benefited him to a lesser extent than that which he bestowed on the infant. Yet, the man recognized the good more and was more thankful than the infant who grew up with them. The reason is because he went from a situation of destitution and suffering to one of goodness and tranquility while his mental faculties were mature. Therefore, he fully recognized the goodness and the kindness of his benefactor. But the infant did not realize the great extent of the goodness even after his perception and understanding had matured because he was used to them since his childhood.
No person with intelligence will doubt that the kindness to the child was wider in scope and more clearly recognizable, and that consequently there was in its case a greater obligation of constant gratitude and praise to the benefactor. 
This is similar to what scripture says (Hosea 11:3) "And I carried Ephraim, taking them in my arms, but they knew not that I healed them." 
3. The third reason is that human beings are struck in this world with various mishaps and damages to their bodies and possessions and they do not understand the ways in which these misfortunes are a means to benefit them, nor the benefits of trial and suffering, as Scripture says "Happy is the man whom You, O L-ord, chastens and teaches out of Your Law" (Tehilim 94:12). 
They forget that they themselves and all they have are benefits which the Creator in His generosity and loving-kindness has bestowed on them, and that He decreed on them justly in accordance with His wisdom. They are resentful when His judgment is visited upon them and they do not praise Him when His mercy and loving-kindness are manifested to them. 
Their foolishness leads them to deny the benefits and the Benefactor. Their folly may even bring many of them to speculate that they know better concerning G-d's work and the various creations which He created for their well-being. 
In this regard, how like are they to blinded people who were admitted into an institution specially built for them and furnished with everything needed for their comfort. Every single thing was in its right place and arranged for their advantage in the way that might best serve the specific purpose of improving their condition. Useful healing potions had also been provided and a skilled physician appointed to heal them by the application of these potions so that their sight may be restored. They however neglected to toil in the healing of their eyes and did not heed the directions of the physicians who sought to cure them.
They wandered about aimlessly in the institution, miserable because of their blindness. Often as they were walking, they would stumble over objects that had been placed there for their benefit, and fall down on their faces. Some were bruised, others suffered broken limbs. Their pains and injuries increased and multiplied. Then they burst forth in complaints against the owner and the builder of the home, condemned his work, charged him with falling short in the fulfillment of his duty and condemned him as a bad manager. They persuaded themselves that his aim and purpose had not been to do them good and show them kindness, but to cause them pain and injury. This attitude of mind caused them at last to deny his goodness and kindliness, even as the wise man said (Koheles 10:3) "Yea also, when a fool walks by the way, his understanding fails him and he declares to everyone that he is a fool". 
Since this is so, men of wisdom and knowledge have deemed it their duty to arouse those who did not understand the Creator's beneficence and instruct human beings to realize through their own intellect the high degree. For many benefits fail to be enjoyed altogether or their enjoyment is marred because they are not realized and their high degree is not known. But when the attention of the beneficiaries is called to their high degree and what had been hidden from them is revealed to them, they will offer, in more abundant measure, laudation and thanksgiving to their divine Benefactor, and so will have pleasure and happiness in their life here and receive their good reward in the hereafter. 
The wise man already said on this subject: "The words of the wise are like goads; and like nails, firmly fixed, are the compilers (Baale Asufoth)" (Koheles 12:11). The words of the wise are compared by the sage to goads, because they arouse and stir up; they are also compared to nails firmly fixed, because they fix wisdom in their hearts always, and their wisdom endures in them.
The phrase "Baale Asufoth" means, according to the commentators, compilers of books. The term "Divre" in the first half of the verse also applies to its second half; which should be rendered: "and like firmly fixed nails are the words of compilers". For books authored on the branches of wisdom endure, their benefit is without interruption (for all generations) and therefore they are compared to nails firmly fixed. 
We must now discuss six topics on the subject of examination (of created things)
1. What is to be understood by the examination and its true meaning?
2. Is examination of created thing a duty or not?
3. What are the various ways in which it is to be conducted?
4. How many are the diverse marks of divine wisdom in created things which we should examine?
5. Which one of these is closest to us and should receive more attention than the rest?
6. The factors that are detrimental to the examination and its results.






Chapter 1

What is the examination? Contemplating the marks of the Creator's wisdom manifested in the created things and evaluating these marks according to one's mental capacity. 
For [divine] wisdom, though varied in its manifestations in created things, is fundamentally and essentially one - just as the sun is one body, while the appearance of its rays when passing through glasses that are white, dark, red or green, varies and assumes respectively the color of each medium, and just as water with which a park is sprinkled assumes the color of the blooms on which it falls. 
Therefore, contemplate G-d's creations, from the smallest of them to the largest, and reflect on those matters which are at present hidden from you; and, with the help of the Almighty, you will find that they are as I have told you. And because these marks of divine wisdom vary in created things, it is our duty to contemplate them and think on them until the whole matter becomes established in our souls and abides in our consciousness. 
If these marks [of divine wisdom] were the same in all created things, no man would have any doubt in them [that they all stem from one Source]. The wise and the fool would be equal in their recognition. The reason being that when one and the same thing is always being produced in the same way, it is clear that the maker is not a voluntary agent but a force acting according to the nature imposed upon it - compelling it to act in a definite way which it has no power to alter, just like fire whose sole function is to burn, or water whose nature is to cool. But one who has the power to do as his will prompts him will act in various ways at various times. 
Since the Creator has free will in whatever He does, is not forced, needs nothing and is not forced by any nature, therefore He created things diverse, according as His wisdom each time dictated; so that the variety shall point to His unity and His free-will in whatever He does, as it is said "Whatsoever the L-ord pleased, has He done in heaven and on earth" (Tehilim 135:6). 
G-d alone knows if it is on this account only that all creatures have not been made in one form and likeness; rationally it would seem that this is the purpose of the variety in the marks of wisdom exhibited in created things. But the Creator's wisdom is too exalted for us. What we have just mentioned is only one out of many other reasons to the knowledge of which we have not attained. Complete wisdom belongs to G-d alone, and there is no power beside Him. 

Chapter 2

Is it our duty to study created things or not? We reply that the examination of created things and deducing from them the wisdom of the Creator is a duty which can be demonstrated from Reason, Scripture, and Tradition (the oral torah).
From Reason: For our reason bears witness that a rational creature's superiority over an irrational one consists in the former's superior ability to perceive, understand and acquire knowledge of the marks of wisdom found throughout the universe, as Scripture said "Who teaches us more than the beasts of the field, and makes us wiser than the fowls of heaven" (Job 35:11).
And when a man thinks of, and reflects upon, these foundations of wisdom and examines its marks in the universe, his superiority over the animals rises in proportion to his understanding. But if he neglects to observe and reflect, he is not equal to the beast, but inferior to it, as Scripture said "The ox knows his owner, and the donkey his master's crib, but Israel does not know, my people do not consider" (Yeshaya 1:3). 
From Scripture: The same can be demonstrated from Scriptures, as it is said, "Lift up your eyes on high and behold, who created these?" (Yeshaya 40:26). And again "When I behold Your heavens, the work of Your fingers, the moon and the stars, which You have established" (Tehilim 8:4). Scripture also said "Have you not known? have you not heard? has it not been told you from the beginning? [have you not understood from the foundations of the earth?]" (Yeshaya 40:21) Further "Hear O deaf, look O blind, that you may see" (Yeshaya 42:18); "Better to go to the house of mourning than to go to the house of feasting, since that is the end of all men, and the living will take it to his heart" (Koheles 7:2); "The wise man, his eyes are in his head; but the fool walks in darkness" (Koheles 2:14). "But the path of the righteous is as the light of dawn that shines more till the day is perfect. The way of the wicked is as darkness; they know not at what they stumble" (Mishlei 4:18-19). 
From Tradition: The sages said (Sabbath 75a) "He who is capable of calculating the courses of the stars and planets and does not do so - of such a one, Scripture said (Yeshaya 5:12) 'And the harp, and the lyre, the timbrel, and flute, and wine, are in their feasts: but they regard not the work of the L-ord, nor do they contemplate the work of His hands'". And they say further (Sabbath 75a) "From where do we know that it is a duty to calculate the courses of the stars and planets?" Because it is said (Devarim 4:6) 'Observe therefore and do them, for this is your wisdom and understanding in the sight of the nations that, when they hear all these statutes, they shall say: 'Surely this great nation is a wise and understanding people'. This verse refers to the duty of making astronomical calculations."
Further they said (Pirkei Avos 2:1) "Consider the loss from doing a mitzvah (precept) against its reward and the gain from doing a sin against the loss it involves". 
And they further said (Eruvin 100b) "If the Torah had not been given to the Jews, we could have learned decency from the cat, chastity from the dove, etiquette from the rooster and honesty from the ant". 
Thus far it has been demonstrated that it is a duty to examine created things and draw the deductions from the marks of Divine Wisdom exhibited in them. Note it well!

Chapter 3

How are the several ways of examination to be conducted?
Examination of created things means a close study of the elements of which the Universe is composed; the products that result from the combination of these elements; the character of the constituents of each composite; the ways in which it is useful; the marks of wisdom exhibited in its production, form and shape, and in the purpose for which it was created; the beautiful spirituality of this world; its causes and effects; and the complete perfection for which it was created; to know its contents - spiritual and physical, rational and irrational, the immobile and the mobile (solid and fluid), minerals and plants; its higher and lower parts; and to realize that the Creator created the Universe in a perfect and orderly combination - each of its parts distinctly recognizable, - so that it hints and teaches on the Creator, as a work points to the workman, or a house indicates the builder. 
It is proper that you should know that the whole world is synthesized of the physical and the spiritual, so intimately mixed and fused, that each of them sustains the other, like body and soul in living creatures. 
The marks of wisdom exhibited in all of this are of three kinds.
(1) Those of the first kind are clear and apparent, and do not escape the notice even of the fool, and of course not of the thinking person. An example is the [relative] movement of the sun above the earth to illuminate the habitable portion of the globe, to benefit the creatures that live there; as Scripture said (Tehilim 104:22-24) "The sun arises, they assemble and crouch in their dens. Man goes forth unto his work and to his labor until the evening. How manifold are Your works, O L-ord! With wisdom have You made them all. The earth is full of Your possessions".
(2) The second kind consists of marks of wisdom, whose benefit and necessity is hidden from most people and known only to the intelligent person who comprehends that they are right. Such as death, the fate that overtakes all flesh and which is necessary for the welfare of the world. As our sages expounded the verse: (Bereishis 1:31) " 'And G-d saw everything that He had made, and behold it was very good'. 'Behold it was very good' - this refers to death." (Bereishis Raba 9:5). So, too, the wise king said "wherefore I praised the dead which are already dead more than the living which are yet alive" (Koheles 4:2). 
(3) The third kind consists of marks of wisdom that are partly obscure and partly clear. The man endowed with but little mental power will not recognize them unless he ponders them and studies them in minute detail. An example is the changes that take place in the year, its four seasons etc. 
The wise and intelligent man will choose from the world for study its fine and spiritual elements; use them as a ladder by which to obtain proofs of the existence of the Creator of all, to Whose service he will then cling to according to his heartfelt recognition of the greatness and exaltedness of the Creator, and his realization of the Almighty's gracious benevolence to all of His creations and that G-d has graciously bestowed abundant benefits to him, and has elevated him (above the animals, etc.) while he had done nothing nor possessed any moral quality that would entitle him to deserve any divine reward. 
Afterwards, he will select for himself, of the material things, only those that promote his physical benefit and material well-being, but only to the extent needful and sufficient. He will abandon the rest, of the superfluities and worldly desires which turn the heart away from G-d. He will rather busy himself with working for his final home, the place to which he will go after his death. The world and its possessions, he will regard as a means of providing for his appointed day, his latter end. He will take of this world only what can accompany him on his journey. 
But a person ignorant of the ways of the world and of its evidences of divine wisdom, regards it as his everlasting home and fixed abode. He busies himself with it strenuously, sets all his heart and concentrates all his energies upon it, thinking that he is rapidly furthering his own interests and does not realize that the fruits of his toil and the superfluity that he has gathered will go to others possibly during his lifetime and undoubtedly after his death. And thus he totally neglects his interests hereafter. 
How analogous these types are to two brothers who inherited from their father a piece of land that needed cultivation. They divided it between themselves. Neither of them possessed anything else. One of them was sensible and industrious; the other was the opposite.
The sensible brother realized that if he occupied himself solely with his plot of land, this would prevent him from earning his livelihood and attaining his immediate needs. So he hired himself out as a day-laborer in a field belonging to another person and was thus able to subsist on the wages he received. After he had finished his daily task he worked an hour every evening in his own field industriously and zealously. When he had saved enough out of his wages to keep him for one or more days, he stopped working for others and labored on his property with the utmost energy and zeal. In this course he persevered until his plot was in a proper state of cultivation. When the harvest time came he gathered the products of his field and orchard, stored them and had sufficient produce to support himself for the next year. Then he cultivated his land as he desired and planted more trees until it not only produced enough for his maintenance, but yielded a surplus with which he bought additional land.
The foolish brother, recognizing that working on his land alone would prevent him from earning a living, neglected his property completely, hired himself out to others as a field-laborer, spent the whole of the wages he received and saved nothing. Whenever he had enough left of his earnings to provide him with food for a single day, he turned it into a day of rest, idleness and amusement, never giving a thought to his property. The hours during which he was free on the days when he worked, he spent in the bath. His land remained waste and yielded nothing. It was all covered with thorns and thistles. Its fences were broken. Its trees were swept away by a flood. It was in the condition described by the wise man in the text (Mishlei 24:30-31) "I passed by the field of the slothful and by the vineyard of the man void of understanding and behold, it was all overgrown with thorns; nettles had covered the face thereof, and the stone wall thereof was broken down." 
The intelligent reader who reflects intently upon this parable will draw from it the lesson as to his final end, which is his true home, and he will work on it with all his might. While for his earthly needs, he will work as one does for others, in moderation and only to the extent absolutely necessary. The fool, however, acts oppositely in two ways. His interests here on earth he pursues with zeal and diligence while for his welfare in the hereafter he utterly ignores; even as the wise man said, when he observed the fool (Mishlei 24.32), "Then I saw and considered it well. I looked upon it and drew lessons". 


Chapter 4

How many are the marks of divine wisdom in created things which we can examine?
To this we reply that even though there are many kinds of created things and each kind has many constituents, the cornerstones of wisdom found in them are seven classes.
One of these is the mark of wisdom apparent in the primary and fundamental elements of the universe. The Earth, we observe is at the center; close to it and above it is water; close to the water is the atmosphere; above all is fire in a just and unchanging balance and measure. Everyone of these elements maintains its proper position appointed for it. The ocean bed, with the waters imprisoned therein, stays in its place and does not pass beyond its boundaries despite the roaring of the waves and the raging of the winds, as it is written "And I prescribed for it My decree, and set bars and doors; and said: 'Thus far you shall come, but no further, and here shall your proud waves be stayed'"(Iyov 38:9-11). 
Concerning the stability of heaven and earth, Scripture said (Ps. 119:89-91) "Forever, O L-ord, Your word stands fast in heaven, Your faithfulness is unto all generations; You have established the earth and it stands. They stand this day according to Your ordinances; for all things are Your servants". David also dwelt on this theme in his Psalm (104) beginning "O my soul, bless the L-ord. [He dons light like a garment, spreads the heavens like a curtain]". 
The second cornerstone is the mark of wisdom apparent in the human species, - a universe on a small scale that completes the ordered series of creation, and constitutes its crowning beauty, glory and perfection. David, peace be on him, referred to Man when he acclaimed "O Eternal, our L-ord, how glorious is Your Name in all the earth." (Tehilim 8:1). 
The third cornerstone is the mark of wisdom apparent in the formation of the individual human being, - his physical structure the faculties of his nefesh (lower soul) and the light of reason with which the Creator has distinguished him and thus given him superiority over other living creatures that are irrational.
Man resembles the large universe, being like it fundamentally and in its original elements. To this Job refers when he said (Job 10:10-12) "Have You not poured me out as milk and curdled me like cheese? With skin and flesh have You clothed me, and with bones and sinews have knit me together? Life and favor have You granted me, And Your providence has preserved my spirit". 
The fourth cornerstone is the mark of wisdom manifested in other species of living creatures, from the least to the greatest. Those that fly or swim or creep or move on four feet, with their various forms, traits, uses, benefits, and purpose in the world. This is mentioned in the speech in which the Creator rebuked Job in order to arouse him to his duty (Job 38:41) "who provides for the raven his prey?, etc." and the further references (Job 39) to various species of animals that live in the deserts and the seas. 
The fifth is the mark of wisdom displayed in plants and other natural products (ex. minerals) that have been provided for the improvement of the human race, because of their usefulness to man in various ways, according to their natures, constitutions and powers. The ancients already expounded this subject in their works, according to their conceptions. Thus it is said (Melachim 5:13) "And he (Solomon) spoke of trees from the cedar that is in Lebanon even unto the hyssop that springs out of the wall: he spoke also of beasts, and fowl, and of creeping things and of fishes". 
The sixth is the mark of wisdom discernible in the sciences, arts and crafts which the Creator, blessed be He, provided for man, to contribute to his improvement, to enable him to obtain a livelihood and gain other benefits of a general and particular character. To this mark of divine wisdom Scripture refers in the texts (Job 38:36) "Who has put wisdom in the inward parts? Or who has given understanding to the mind?" and again (Prov. 2:6) "For the L-ord gives wisdom; out of His mouth comes knowledge and discernment". 
The seventh is the mark of wisdom exhibited in the appointment of the Torah and its statutes, to teach us how to serve the Creator and secure for one who diligently lives according to their dictates, immediate happiness here, and reward in the hereafter, as it is written (Is.55:2-3) "Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good and let your soul delight itself in pleasantness. Incline your ear and come to Me; Hear and your soul shall live." To this should be added the customs by which the government of other nations is regulated together with their useful features. For those nations, these customs take the place of the Torah - but only in secular matters. 
It has been stated that the relation of nature to the Torah is that of a servant to his master. The forces of nature in the universe operate in harmony with the teaching of the torah, as it is said (Shemot 23:25) "And you shall serve the L-ord your G-d, and He will bless your bread and your water; and I will take away sickness from your midst". And again, (ibid. 15:26) "If you will diligently hearken to the voice of the L-ord your G-d, and will do that which is right in His sight and will give ear to His commandments and keep all His statutes, none of the diseases which I have brought upon the Egyptians will I bring upon you, for I am the L-ord that heals you", and many other passages like this. 
Some are of the opinion that when the wise man said (Mishlei 9:l) "Wisdom has built her house; she has hewn out her seven pillars", he had in mind the seven cornerstones which we have mentioned.

Chapter 5

Which class [of Evidences of Divine Wisdom] is nearest to us, so that it is our duty to examine it more? To this we reply that, while the close study of each and everyone of the [seven] classes previously enumerated is necessary and obligatory more, the evidence of divine wisdom which is nearest and clearest to us is that manifested in the human species, a microcosm of the universe, the closest cause (ultimate purpose) to the existence of the larger world. 
Hence, it is our duty to study the beginning of a human being, his birth, the compositions of his parts, the joining together of his limbs, the purpose of each limb/organ and the necessity which caused his being made in its present form. Next, we should study man's advantages, his various temperaments, the faculties of his nefesh (lower soul), the light of his intellect, his qualities - those that are essential and those that are incidental; his lusts, and the ultimate purpose of his being. When we have arrived at an understanding of the matters noted in regard to man, much of the mystery of this universe will become clear to us, since the one resembles the other. 
And thus some sages declared that philosophy is man's knowledge of himself, which means, knowledge of what we have mentioned regarding the human being, so that through the evidence of divine wisdom displayed in himself, he will become cognizant of the Creator; as Job said (Job 19:26) "From my flesh, I see G-d". 
Since this is so, it is proper that we should call a bit of attention to each of the topics noted in regard to man, in order to arouse the negligent person to what it is his duty to always have in mind; and thus he will be induced to investigate further into matters that I have not mentioned. And then, realizing the abundance of G-d's loving kindness and goodness toward him, he will be filled with the spirit of humility and submission towards the Creator, and his gratitude towards his Maker will abound, as David, peace be upon him, said: "I will give thanks to You for I am fearfully and wonderfully made; wonderful are Your works; and that, my soul knows right well. My frame was not hidden from You, when I was made in secret, and wrought in the lowest parts of the earth. My unformed substance Your eyes did see; and in Your book were they all written, in the days when they would be fashioned, while as yet there was none of them." (Tehilim 119:14-16) 
The first topic to which it is right that you direct your attention is the origin of a human being and the earliest processes of his development. You will then see that it is the divine loving-kindness that has brought him into existence out of nothing. The fundamental elements of the world, out of which he is formed, pass into the vegetable state which becomes nourishment and changes into seed and blood. This is transformed into general life which finally assumes the form and nature of a human being - living, rational and mortal - who travels through life, experiencing changes and metamorphoses and continually varied conditions and circumstances that are connected according to a properly thought out and coordinated plan. 
When you will contemplate this and will see the evidence of the Creator's goodness, wisdom and power manifested in everything, consider and reflect upon the visible constituents of man's being, namely his body and his soul. You will observe that his body is composed of various elements with dissimilar qualities. These the Creator put together by His Almighty power, combined by His wisdom, and formed out of them a stable organism which in appearance has the character of unity but his body is composed of various elements with diverse natures. To this human body, G-d has joined a spiritual and intangible essence akin to the spirituality of the higher beings (angels). This essence is his soul, bound up in him with the body by means adapted to serve both these extremes. These means are the Ruach Chaim (spirit of life), natural heat (life force), the blood, the veins, nerves, and arteries. To protect and guard them against injuries, G-d has provided flesh, bones, sinews, skin, hair and nails. All these are shields and defenses to ward off injuries. 
After this, reflect on the favor shown by the Creator in His providential guidance of man.
At the beginning of a human being's existence, the Creator appointed the mother's body to serve as a crib for the fetus so that it might abide in a safe place, a strongly guarded fortress, as it were, where no hand can touch it, where it cannot be affected by heat or cold, but is shielded and sheltered and where its food is ready for it. Here it continues to grow and develop, even becomes capable of moving and turning, and receives its nourishment without any effort or exertion. This nourishment is provided for it in a place where no one else can in any way reach it, and is increased as the fetus develops until a definite period. 
Then it goes out from its mother's belly through a narrow track without any contrivance or help on its part, but solely by the power of the wise, merciful and gracious One who shows compassion to His creatures; as He said to Job (39:1-2) "Do you know the time when the wild goats of the rock-bring forth? Or can you mark when the hinds do calve? Can you number the months that they fulfill? Or do you know the time when they bring forth?" 
Afterwards, the infant emerges into this world - all its senses, except those of touch and taste, being weak - the Creator provides for it food from its mother's breast. The blood which had been its nourishment before it was born, is now converted into milk in the mother's breast, pleasant and sweet, flowing like a gushing spring whenever needed. The milk is not so abundant that it might become burdensome on the mother and drip out without suction, nor so scarce as to tire the child when taking the breast. 
Divine grace is also manifested in His having made the orifice of the nipple like the eye of a needle, not so wide that the milk would run out without suction, in which case the child might be choked while being suckled, nor so narrow that the infant would have to exert itself in drawing its nourishment.
Afterwards, the infant's physical faculties grow stronger, so that it is able to distinguish sights and sounds. G-d inspires the parents' hearts with kindness, love and compassion for their offspring, so that raising it is not overly burdensome to them. They are more sensitive to its needs in regard to food and drink than to their own requirements. All the labor and trouble involved in bringing it up, bathing and dressing it, gently leading it, and warding off everything harmful, even against its will, is of little account in their sight. 
Afterwards, the offspring passes from infancy to childhood. His parents do not tire of him nor become angry at his numerous needs and little recognition of the burden which they bear in caring and providing for him. On the contrary, the concern they feel on his behalf increases until he reaches adolescence, when he has already learned to speak correctly and properly, and his physical senses and mental faculties have become strong enough to acquire wisdom and knowledge. Then he apprehends some physical phenomena with his senses, and some intellectual ideas with his mental faculties, as the wise King said (Prov. 2:6) "For the L-ord gives wisdom: out of His mouth comes knowledge and discernment." 
Among the many benefits to a human being is that during his childhood he is not a thinker and is unable to distinguish good from evil. For had he, while growing up, been endowed with a ripe intellect and mature powers of perception and had he been able to discern the superiority of adults, in their ability to manage for themselves, move freely and keep clean, and realized the opposite case presented by his condition in all these respects, he would have died of worry and sorrow. 
Remarkable too it is that crying, according to what learned physicians state, is beneficial to an infant. For in the brains of infants there is a humor (mucous), which, if it remained there undischarged, would produce evil results. Weeping dissolves this humor and drains it away from the brain, and thus the infants are saved from its injurious effects.
The Creator's abounding grace to man is also manifested in that the new teeth come out singly, one after another, and so the gradual falling out of the old teeth during the process of replacement does not interfere with his ability to chew.
Later on he is subjected to illnesses and meets with painful incidents so that he recognizes the world, and that its nature is not concealed from him. Thus he is put on his guard against trusting in this world thereby permitting his lusts to rule over him, in which case he would become like the animals that neither think nor understand; as it is written "Be ye not as the horse or as the mule which have no understanding" (Tehilim 32:9). 
One should then consider and reflect upon the usefulness of the limbs and organs and the ways of his rectification through them - the hands serving for taking and giving; the feet for walking the eyes for seeing; the ears for hearing; the nose for smelling; the tongue for speaking; the mouth for eating; the teeth for chewing; the stomach for digestion; the liver for purifying the food; the tubes for removing superfluities; the bowels for retention. The heart is the sanctuary of the natural heat and the well-spring of life. The brain is the seat of the spiritual faculties, the well-spring of sensation, and the root from which the nerves begin.
The womb (in a woman) serves to preserve and develop the seed. And so it is with the rest of the bodily organs. They all have their specific functions, of which more are unknown than are known to us. 
So too, one who reflects on these matters will take notice of the natural processes by which the nourishment received by the body is apportioned to every one of its parts. These marks of wisdom observed by him will stir him to thank His Creator and praise Him for them, as David said "All my bones shall cry out: 'O G-d, who is like You' " (Tehilim 35:10). Thus the food passes into the stomach through a tube that is utterly straight, without bend or twist. This tube is called the esophagus. The stomach grinds the food more thoroughly than the teeth had already done Then the nutriment is carried into the liver through fine intermediate veins which connect these two organs (bile ducts), and serve as a strainer for the food, permitting nothing coarse to pass through to the liver. The liver metabolizes the nutrient it receives into the blood which it distributes all over the body, sending the vital fluid to all parts of the body through conduits formed for this purpose, and resembling water-pipes.
The waste substances that are left are eliminated through canals specifically adapted to that purpose. What belongs to the green gall goes to the gall bladder. What belongs to the black gall goes to the milt (spleen); other substances and fluids are sent to the lungs. The refuse of the blood passes into the bladder.
Reflect, my brother, on the wisdom of the Creator manifested in the formation of your body; how He set those organs in their right places; to receive the waste substances, so that they should not spread in the body, and cause it to become sick.
Then consider the formation of the vocal organs, and instruments of speech. The trachea, hollow for the production of sound; the tongue, lips, and teeth serving for the clear enunciation of consonants and vowels. These organs have other uses also. The air enters the lungs through the trachea; the tongue is the organ which enables one to taste things, and aids also in the moving around of the solid and liquid food. The teeth serve to chew solid food. The lips enable one to retain liquids in the mouth, and swallow the quantity desired, and only when one wishes to do so. In regard to the other organs, the uses of some are known to us while others are unknown.
Then, my brother, reflect on the four bodily faculties with their respective functions: (1) the drawing faculty by which food is received and carried into the stomach; (2) the faculty of retention by which food is retained in the body till nature has done her work on it; (3) the digestive faculty which digests the food, extracts the finer elements, separates it from the useless refuse, and distributes the former to all parts of the body; (4) the excretory faculty which ejects the refuse that remains after the digestive processes have taken from the food all that the body needs. 
Observe how all these faculties have definite functions, whose purpose it is to promote physical well-being. It is just like a King's court where there are servants and officers appointed over the royal household. One of them is charged with the duty of supplying the servants' need and delivering these to the king's steward. The second official has to receive the necessaries brought in by the first, and place them in the store-room, until they are prepared. The business of the third official is to prepare the stores and, after rendering them fit for use, distribute them among the servants. The task of the fourth servant is to sweep and cleanse the palace of all dirt and refuse, which he has to remove. 
Afterwards, reflect on the faculties of the soul and their place among the benefits bestowed on man - the faculties of thought and memory, the power of forgetting, the feeling of shame, the faculties of understanding and speech. Picture to yourself, what would a man's condition be if even one of these were lacking. Take memory, for instance. How much loss a person would suffer in all his affairs if he were unable to remember what he owned and what he owed; what he had taken and what he had given; what he had seen or heard; what he had said and what had been said to him; if he could not remember the one who had done a benefit to him and the one who had brought him harm; the one who had rendered him a service, or inflicted upon him an injury. Such a person would not recognize a road even if he had frequently traversed it, nor remember any wisdom though he had studied it all his lifetime. Past experience would not be of any benefit to him. He would not weigh any matter by what had happened in the past. Nor could he estimate future events by what was taking place in the present. Such a person would be almost entirely outside the class of human beings.
Among the benefits of forgetting: Were it not for the ability to forget no man would ever be free from sorrow. No joyous occasion would dispel his sadness. The events that should bring him joy would give him no pleasure, when he recalled the troubles of life. Even from the realization of his hopes he could not hope to derive rest and peace of mind. He would never refrain from grieving. Thus you see how memory and forgetfulness, different and contrary to each other as they are, are both benefits bestowed upon man, and each of them has its uses. 
Afterwards, reflect on the feeling of shame with which man alone has been endowed. How high is its value! How numerous are its uses and advantages. Were it not for this feeling, men would not show hospitality to strangers. They would not keep their promises, grant favors, show kindness, nor abstain from evil in any way. Many precepts of the Torah are fulfilled only out of shame. A large number of people would not honor their parent if it were not for shame, and certainly would fail to show courtesy to others. They would not restore a lost article to its owner, nor refrain from any transgression. For whoever commits any of the disgraceful acts which we have mentioned, does so only when he has cast off the garment of shame. As Scripture said: "Yea they are not at all ashamed, neither know they how to blush" (Yirmiyahu 6:15), and "The sinner knows no shame" (Tzefania 3:5). 
It is a great amazement that G-d has implanted man with shame in the presence of other human beings due to the advantages we mentioned and others we did not mention, and yet G-d did not implant man with shame in the presence of his Creator who observes him continually. The reason for this is so that a human being would not be forced in the service of G-d whereby its reward would not be deserved. It is, however, our duty to feel shame in the presence of the Creator, as a result of reflection, realization of the service we owe to Him, and our consciousness that He observes every thing that we do openly or secretly; as Scripture said "Be ashamed and humiliated of your ways, O House of Israel" (Yechezkel 36:32). 
The abounding goodness of G-d to us is manifested in, the capacities of thought and perception with which he has uniquely endowed us and distinguished us from other living creatures. The value of these faculties in the care of our bodies and ordering of our activities is known to all, with the exception of those who have suffered a loss of these faculties due to brain damage.
The traits which we can attain through the understanding are many. Through the understanding we know that we have a Creator, wise, everlasting, [absolutely] One, who has existed from all eternity; infinite in power, unbound to time and space; exalted above the qualities of His creatures and beyond the conception of all existing beings; merciful, gracious and beneficent; resembling nothing nor does anything resemble Him. 
It is through the understanding that we realize the Creator's wisdom, power and mercy, of which the universe provides clear evidence. It is the understanding which shows us that we ought to serve Him, because service is rightly due to Him, and because of His beneficence, bestowed upon all universally and on each one specifically. Through the understanding we are confirmed in our faith in the truth of the Book of G-d's Law given to Moses, His prophet, peace be upon him. Because of a human being's faculty of reason and perception, he is an accountable creature whom his Creator will hold to a strict reckoning. A person who has lost his understanding, loses all the excellencies of a human being and is exempt from the mitzvot (precepts), and reward and punishment. 
Among the benefits of the understanding: through understanding man obtains his knowledge of all things perceived by the senses or apprehended by the intellect.
By the understanding he discovers aspects of visible objects, unrevealed to the physical senses, as for instance, the movement of the shadow (on a sun-dial), or the action of a single drop of water on the hard rock. 
By the understanding man distinguishes between truth and falsehood, between excess and deficiency, between good and evil, between the praiseworthy and the disgraceful, between the necessary, the possible and the impossible. 
By his understanding, man makes other living creatures work for his benefits and pleasures. By the use of this faculty, he recognizes the position of the planets, determines their distances and their movements in their orbits, comprehends the relations and comparisons treated in the sciences of mathematics and engineering, the figures and modes of demonstration [syllogisms] set forth in logic, and other sciences and arts too numerous to mention.
So too, all the other faculties of man, if you study them, you will find, display the utmost perfection and are of the utmost benefit to him, as we have shown, regarding the understanding. 
Afterwards, reflect further on the benefits G-d has bestowed on man by the gift of speech and the orderly arrangement of words, whereby he gives expression to what is in his mind and soul and understands the conditions of others. The tongue is the heart's pen and the mind's messenger. Without speech, there would be no social relations between one person and another; a human being would be an animal. Through speech, the superiority of an individual among his fellows becomes apparent. The pacts between man and his fellow are made through speech, and likewise between G-d and His servants. By means of speech, a man turns away from his perverseness and seeks forgiveness for his iniquities. Speech is the greatest evidence of a man's nobility or ignobility. Man, it has been said, is heart and tongue. And this completes the definition of a human being. For a human being is defined as a "living, speaking, mortal creature" and by speech, he is differentiated from the brute animals.
Then consider the advantages derived from written characters and the art of writing. By their aid, the deeds and affairs of those who have passed away and of those who are still existing are recorded for the benefit of those who will come after them; communications reach the absent, and information is received concerning those far away and concerning relatives in another country; and it is possible that the receipt of this information may save their lives or deliver them from misfortune and mishaps. By this means, knowledge of the sciences is preserved in books; dispersed thoughts are gathered together. Men write down their dealings with each other in commercial transactions, in loans, purchases, marriages, divorces. The subject is too wide to be dealt with completely.
Among the completing benefits bestowed on man is that he has been provided with hands and fingers, with which he can draw, write, embroider, kindle fire and perform other acts and fine operations that are beyond the capacity of other living creatures, because these are not needed by them. 
I assert that there is not one of these organs the uses of which I have mentioned that does not show to one who reflects on them marks of divine wisdom in its structure, form and combination with other organs. They display strong evidence and clear proof of the Creator's mercy towards us. Galen, in numerous treatises, has expounded the functions of the bodily organs. Were we to do so in the case of one of these, we would depart from our goal of conciseness. What we have brought with G-d's help, is sufficient to arouse any one to whom the Creator will teach the way of His salvation. 
The study of the other species of living creatures, their habits and their sustenance will not be concealed by one who observes them and reflects upon the marks of divine wisdom manifest in them. Hence, the scriptures repeatedly refer to them when mentioning G-d's wonders: "Who provides for the raven his prey when his young ones cry unto G-d" (Job 38:41), and "He gives to the beast his food, and to the young ravens which cry" (Tehilim 147:9). There are many other similar passages. 
And so too, when one studies the course of the heavenly spheres, distinguished by their various movements and the individual luminaries all contributing to the order of the Universe - he will see in them evidences of power and wisdom, such as the human mind cannot grasp and would become weary in attempting to describe. As David, peace be upon him, said, "The heavens declare the glory of G-d, and the firmament show forth His handiwork" (Tehilim 19:2), and "When I behold Your heavens, the work of Your fingers, the moon and the stars which You have established" (Tehilim 8:4) .
It is a wonder that among all the great works of the Creator, which the human eye beholds, the heavens are always present For wherever on earth a man stands, he sees above his head a hemisphere of firmament encompassing the earth. And when he contemplates it thoughtfully, he will realize that the One who created it by His Will is infinite in power, wisdom and greatness. 
For the sight of any example of architecture of the ancients arouses in us wonder at their ability to make anything like it, and indicates to us the physical strength and fine souls of those who constructed a strong fortress for themselves. Now if such very small and petty work that transcends our capacity by only little, looms so large in our sight, how exceedingly indeed should we marvel at the infinite greatness of Him who created the heavens and the earth and all that therein is, without effort or exertion, labor or fatigue, out of nothing, with [the aid of] nothing, solely by His will and wish. As it is said "By the word of the L-ord were the heavens made; and all the host of them by the breath of His mouth" (Tehilim 33:6). 
Among the benefits bestowed upon man, the following is to be noted. When you contemplate the marks of divine wisdom in created things, you will find that, besides testifying to the divinity and might of the Creator they all without exception are in various ways useful to man and contribute to his improvement. Only that some of these uses are evident, while others are obscure. Take light and darkness for instance. The benefits of light are obvious and evident, but those of darkness are hidden. For human beings are weary in the dark; their activities and movements are interrupted at its arrival. But were it not for the darkness of night, the bodies of most living beings would be worn out by their incessant toil and protracted movements. Through the recurrence of night, one interval of time is separated from another. It gives knowledge of periods which would otherwise be unknown, (e.g. counting days and weeks;) and makes known the respective length or brevity of human lives.
If time were uniform (i.e. without alternation of day and night,) there would be no commandments for special seasons, such as Sabbaths, festivals or fasts; no appointments could be made for a definite date; most of the sciences related to time would be unknown. Even food would not be perfectly digested by any living creature.
As man however needs light at night to do some of his work, and to nurse the sick, the Creator has provided him with a substitute in the light of fire which he can kindle at any time and extinguish whenever he pleases. 
Wondrous too it is that the hue of the sky belongs to the colors that strengthen the sight, For it inclines to black which has the special quality of gathering together and strengthening the light that enters the eyes Had the color of the sky been white, it would have injured the eyes of living creatures and weakened them. Similarly, other marks of wisdom are exhibited by other created things.
Out of G-d's abounding goodness to mankind, He put the fear of man into other creatures that are dangerous, as it is said (Bereishis 9:2) "And the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth," so that an infant is secure against hurt by a cat or rat or similar creature, while a grown-up man, after death, is not safe from their attacks; even as our sages said: "A living child, a day old, need not be guarded against rats; Og, [the giant] king of Bashan, dead, needs such protection." 
What you should also realize is the exalted [or mysterious] property in all things created - the higher and the lower, from the smallest to the greatest - by which the entire universe is ordered and perfected, and which is not apprehended by the physical senses. This is the quality of motion (change), inherent in everything composite. None of the bodily senses can grasp it, but the intellect grasps it by inference from the moving/changing object which the senses detect. Had there been no motion, not one of existing things would have been brought into complete being, nor could any of them suffer destruction. A philosopher said that the majority of physical things are in a state of motion. 
When you will understand the mystery of motion, comprehend its true essence and spiritual character, realize that it is one of the marvels of divine wisdom and recognize in it the Creator's abundant compassion towards His creatures, it will become clear to you that all your movements are tied to the Creator's desire, guidance and will, whether these movements be great or small, visible or invisible, with one exception only, namely those movements that He has left to your free will, in the choice of good or evil. 
And when this will have become clear to you, watch yourself in every movement that you make. Be ever conscious of the bond by which the Creator has attached you to Him; always feel abashed in His presence; fear Him; submit to His judgment; accept His decrees. And so you will attain His favor, and your final end will be good, as it is said (Tehilim 32:10) "... But he that trusts in the L-ord, will be surrounded by kindness." 
In regard to secular matters, it is proper that you should always look to the final outcome of hard experiences. You will discover the surprising fact that many seemingly adverse events turn out in the end to be to our advantage, and vice versa. A story is told of a company of travelers who lay down near a wall to rest overnight. A dog, passing by, wetted one of them. The man awoke and got up to wash off the uncleanliness. After he had gone some distance from his fellows, the wall fell down on his companions and killed them, while he alone escaped. Events frequently happen in similar fashion and vice versa. 
One of the most important subjects on which you should reflect is the wonderful gift of G-d to living creatures and plants - the rain, which besides falling in its due season, descends in showers when needed. As Scripture said, (Yirmiya 14:22) "Are there any among the vanities of the nations that can cause rain? or can the heavens give showers? are You not He, O L-ord our G-d? therefore we will hope unto You: for You have made all these things" (Yirmiya 5:24) "Neither say they in their heart: Let us now fear the L-ord, our G-d, that gives rain, both the former and the latter, in due season; that reserves for us the appointed weeks of the harvest." The importance of the rain, you will find also emphasized in the text (Job 5:9-11) "Who does great things and unsearchable; marvelous things without number: Who gives rain upon the earth and sends water upon the fields; so that He sets upon high those that are low, and those that mourn are exalted to safety."
How astonishing too is the growth of foods from seeds. A single grain that has been saved from mishaps, produces a thousand grains and more. It has even been stated that out of one grain of wheat, as many as three hundred ears will spring up, each containing over twenty grains. We also come across gigantic trees whose roots have sprung out of a single seed or a single shoot and have increased many times as much as those mentioned. Praised be the All-Wise and Gracious One who brings into existence such vast effects from causes so small and weak, as Scripture said (Shmuel 2:3) "And by Him actions are weighed." The foods assigned to different living creatures are too numerous to specify. The wise man, when he reflects on them and understands their causes, will recognize the supreme wisdom of the Creator's plan. Concerning these things David said (Tehilim 124:27-28) "All of them wait for You, that You may give them their food in due time. You give it unto them they gather it; You open Your hand, they are satisfied with good". He says further (Tehilim 145:16) "You open Your hand, and satisfy every living thing with favor". I will clarify this topic further in the "Gate of Trust" with G-d's help. 
The greatest of the benefits that the Creator has bestowed upon man and the strongest proof of His existence is the Torah that was delivered to Moses, His prophet, peace be upon him, and the manifestation of [supernatural] signs by him - changes in the normal natural phenomena, and exhibition of awe-inspiring miracles to bring faith in the Creator, blessed be He, and in His prophet; as it is said (Shemot 14:31) "And Israel saw the great work which the L-ord wrought upon the Egyptians, and the people: feared the L-ord, and they believed in the L-ord and in Moses, His servant. (Deut. 4:35-36) "Unto you it was shown, that you may know that the L-ord, He is G-d; there is none else beside Him. Out of Heaven He made you to hear His voice, that He might instruct you; and upon earth He made you to see His great fire; and you did hear His words out of the midst of the fire." 
If any one seeks evidence at the present day similar to those just mentioned, let him look with candid eyes at our position among the nations since the Exile began and our orderly condition in their midst, notwithstanding that we do not agree with them in belief or practice - of which disagreement they are aware. Observe that even so, our financial situation is close to theirs, and perhaps even better than theirs. You will see that an average person among them must toil more for his livelihood than an average or even a below-average among us. This is like our Creator promised us: "And yet for all that, when they are in the land of their enemies, I will not reject them neither will I abhor them, utterly to destroy them and to break my covenant with them for I am the L-ord their G-d" (Vayikra 26:44), and "For we are bondmen; yet our G-d has not forsaken us in our bondage" (Ezra 9:9). "If it had not been the L-ord who was for us, let Israel now say, if it had not been the L-ord who was for us, when men rose up against us, then they had swallowed us up alive, when their wrath was kindled against us" (Tehilim 124:1), and the rest of the Psalm. In the Gate of the "Service of G-d", I will expand on the exceeding favor G-d has bestowed upon us in His Torah which he gave to us. 
What you should also attentively consider and examine is the fact that despite the wide diversity of dispositions among human beings there is whole-hearted agreement among them in the appointment of one of their number to rule over them (a king); they assume the option to serve him, and render him obedience in all that he commands and charges them. He on his part protects them, treats them with sympathy, judges their causes righteously, governs them for their common good, so that their interests shall not suffer and no enemy prevail against them. If every individual only cared for himself and only troubled to ward off hurt from his own person, men would never agree or build a tower or wall, and their common interests would be unprotected. This also is to be noted that the ruler himself observes the statutes, governs his people in accordance with righteous judgments and in good and upright ways, and overall is a servant of the law and observes righteousness. So conducting himself, his dominion will be established and his sovereignty endure, as it is said (Mishlei 20:28) "Mercy and Truth preserve the king." Our sages also have said "Pray for the welfare of the government; since if not for the fear thereof, men would swallow each other alive" (Pirkei Avot 3:2). 
Another subject that you need to examine, and understand from it marks of the divine wisdom and beneficence, is the agreement of human beings to buy and sell goods for gold and silver which, through G-d's mercy they endeavor to accumulate and thus improve their positions, though their actual needs cannot be satisfied with gold or silver. For when any one is afflicted with hunger and thirst through want of food or lack of water, an abundance of gold and silver will not avail him or cure his lacking. And if any one suffers pain in any of his limbs, he will not be cured by silver and gold; for while other minerals are largely used for medicinal purposes, this is less so in the case of gold or silver. 
A wondrous evidence of wisdom is also that, while a few individuals possess large amounts of these precious metals, the majority of mankind have but little of them. If all human beings possessed them in abundance they could not use them as a medium for obtaining what they desire. Some people have much and others have little. They are precious from one point view and of little account from another, because intrinsically they are useless. This too is within the plan of the Creator's supreme wisdom. 
Then consider carefully the things on which depend the life of human beings and continuance of their normal state and condition until the end of their lives. You will find that all things are more or less plentiful in proportion to the need for them. Whatever is greatly needed is readily at hand. Whatever, on the other hand can be dispensed with, or one can for a time do without, is scarcer and harder to obtain. 
For example, the air that is breathed - since one cannot possibly exist without air for any length of time, the Creator has so provided, that at no time and in no place shall a human being be deprived of it. And since human beings, while also needing water, can exist without it for a longer period than they can without air, the Creator distributed it over the entire surface of the earth, collecting it however in particular places to which creatures go and from which they are not excluded. But such places where water is collected are not found everywhere as is the case with air. Water has to be bought with money by some people. This is not the case with air. Water is more readily obtained by some than by others, air exists for all and is obtained by all equally and in the same way.
Food is also a necessity from which however we can abstain and for which we can find a substitute for a longer time than is possible in regard to air or water. Hence food is scarcer and harder to procure than water. But normally it is abundant and human beings are not deprived of it altogether.
So too with regard to garments of skin, wool and vegetable fiber. Substitutes for some of these can be more easily obtained than in the case of food; and clothes take time to make up, the reason being that for a short period a person can dispense with a new supply of clothing, and content himself with a scanty wardrobe for a longer period than he can with a small supply of food. 
But precious stones, gold and silver and other minerals are essentially little needed. Their occasional use is due to convention. Hence a smaller quantity of these minerals is found among a multitude of human beings than of the food possessed by a single individual. The reason is, as we have stated, that a human being can do without these things. 
Praised be the All-Wise and Compassionate Creator who shows mercy to His servants towards whom He directs His beneficent regard for all that is for their improvement. Even as He said to Yona (4:10), "you have had pity on the gourd, for which you have not labored, neither made it to grow, which came up in a night, and perished in a night; and should not I have pity on Nineveh, that great city...?" And David said "The L-ord is good to all and His mercies are upon all His creatures." 

Chapter 6

As to the detriments to the examination of created things and matters connected therewith, I would say that all the factors noted in the first treatise as detrimental to the study of the Unity of G-d are equally injurious to the study of His works. In addition, there are the three circumstances mentioned at the beginning of this treatise. Another detrimental factor is the arrogant attitude towards the Creator's favours which the simple fool thinks are his due, and yet more beside. He does not examine these favours nor recognize any obligation on his own part to render praise and thanks to the Creator for them. Of such a person, the wise man said (Prov. 16:5) "Every one that is proud in heart is an abomination to the L-ord." The results of this examination will be that a person will understand the benefits he receives from G-d and will assume the obligation of serving Him that follows from that recognition. He will constantly recall the marks of divine wisdom and will never cease to think of them and investigate them-both those that can be apprehended by the senses and those comprehended only by the intellect And so he will discover every day a new mark of divine wisdom, as David said (Ps. 19.3) "Day unto day uttereth speech. You should know that what I have called your attention to in this treatise, is but a small portion of the vast knowledge concerning the mysteries of wisdom you can acquire by your own understanding-mysteries which will be revealed to you if you preserve cleanliness of heart and purity of soul. When you have attained in these matters the utmost knowledge of which you are capable, you should realize that all this knowledge which you have acquired of the Creator's wisdom and power, as manifested in this universe, is as nought compared to His real power and wisdom For only that is apprehended, which it is necessary for a human being to know for his own benefit. But such knowledge has no relation whatever to the extent of divine power, which is infinite. Hence you should think of the awe-inspiring nature of G-d and His infinite might as they essentially are, not as you with your limited intelligence can conceive them. Imagine rather that your condition here on earth is like that of a child born in a prison belonging to a king. The monarch took pity on the infant and ordered that it should be provided with everything good for it and needed for its well-being till it grew up and attained mature intelligence. But the child had knowledge of nothing except the prison and its contents. A royal officer visited the lad regularly, brought him all necessaries-light, food, drink, clothing; and informed him that he was a servant of the king, and that the prison and all it contained as well as the food brought him, belonged to the king; and that therefore he was under an obligation to thank his royal benefactor and laud him. The lad replied, "I praise the owner of this prison who has accepted me as his servant, singled me out for all his bounties and favoured me with special notice and regard." Said the officer, "Do not say so lest you sin. For the royal domain does not consist of this prison alone; but his widely extended lands infinitely exceed its limited area. Nor are you his only servant, for his subjects are countless. And the benefactions and kindnesses you have received are insignificant compared to those he has bestowed on others. The care that he has taken of you is of no account beside his care of others." "I know nothing of what you mention, the lad replied. "As to the king, I can only understand what I have myself experienced of his goodness and authority." The officer then said to the lad: "Say, I praise the august sovereign to whose dominion there are no bounds and whose goodness and kindness are without limit. Among his multitudinous hosts, I am of no account, and in the greatness of his might my affairs are nought.' " The lad now obtained some understanding - such as he had never had before - of what the king was, and thus his respect for the sovereign's exalted state increased. Reverence for the ruler penetrated his consciousness. Owing to the lads realization of the king's high position and his own utter insignificance, the royal goodness and benefits extended to him as well as the gifts bestowed upon him were magnified in his eyes. O my brother, pay attention to this tale when you consider the sphere that encompasses the earth. What exists in a small area on earth we cannot comprehend. How much less can we understand the whole of the earth and what is beyond this globe. Consider, brother, the parable. Study it thoroughly, and then think of the Creator as He is, and His goodness and loving-kindness with which He has favoured you will be more appreciated by you. From among all His creatures, He has taken special notice of you for your benefit. Look to His Scriptures, His commandments and statutes with a broad vision. Consider the great awe and respect you feel towards any man who has acquired more of worldly goods than you have. For the higher his position is compared with yours, and the less he stands in need of you, the more will you esteem his greatness and his beneficence; the more will you respect his commandments and prohibitions; the more energetically will you strive and labour in his affairs. Think and reflect and, with the divine help, you will find. And may G-d set us among those who are in His service and who realize His goodness, mercies and kindnesses. AMEN.

Third Treatise on Service of God

Introduction

Having, in the previous treatises, expounded the obligation of wholeheartedly acknowledging the unity of G-d and the obligation of examining the various modes of His benefits to mankind, we have next to indicate what a human being's conduct should be, once the foregoing has become clear to him - and that is to assume the obligation of the service of G-d, as reason would require from a beneficiary to his benefactor.
It is proper to open this treatise with an exposition of the various kinds of benefits human beings render each other, and the corresponding obligations of gratitude. We shall then ascend to the consideration of what we owe to the exalted Creator in praise and thanksgiving for His abounding kindness and great goodness to us. 
We assert, as a truth generally recognized, that if anyone benefits us, we are under an obligation of gratitude to him in accordance with his intent to help us. Even if he actually falls short, owing to some mishap which prevents his benefiting us, we are still bound to be grateful to him, since we are convinced that he has a benevolent disposition towards us and his intention is to be of benefit to us. On the other hand, should we obtain any benefit through one who had no such intention, the duties of gratitude to that person would cease and we are under no such obligation. 
When we consider the benefits human beings render each other, we find that these fall into five classes:
(1) a father's beneficence to his child;
(2) a master's to his servant;
(3) a wealthy man's beneficence to the poor for the sake of heavenly reward;
(4) the beneficence rendered by human beings to each other in order to gain a good name, honor and worldly reward;
(5) the powerful man's beneficence to the weak, induced by pity for the latter and sympathy with his condition. 
Let us now consider the motive in each of the classes mentioned:
Is it disinterested, the sole aim being to help the beneficiary, or is it not so?
First, a father's beneficence to his child: It is obvious that the father's motive in this is to further his own interest. For the child is a part of the father, whose chief hope is centered in his offspring. Do you not observe that in regard to its food, drink, clothing and in warding off all hurt from it, a father is more sensitive about his child than about himself? To secure ease for it, the burden of toil and weariness is lightly borne by him, the feelings of tenderness and pity for their offspring being naturally implanted in parents. 
Nevertheless, the Torah and reason impose upon children the duty of serving, honoring and revering their parents, as Scripture says: "Ye shall, everyone, revere his father and his mother" (Vayikra 19:3); "Hear, O my son, the instruction of your father and forsake not the law of your mother" (Mishlei 1:8) ; further, "A son honors his father, and a servant his master" (Malachi 1:6). (And these duties are enjoined) despite that the father is impelled by a natural instinct and the benefaction comes from G-d, while the parent is only the agent. 
The kindness of a master to his servant: It is obvious that the master's intent is to improve his property by an outlay of capital, since he needs his servant's work, and his motive in this is to further his own interest. Nevertheless, the Creator, blessed be He, imposes upon the servant the duties of service and gratitude, as it is said, "A son honors his father and a servant his master" (Malachi 1:6). 
The rich man's beneficence to the poor man for the sake of a heavenly reward: He is like a merchant who acquires a great and enduring pleasure which he will enjoy at the end of a definite time by means of a small, perishable and inconsiderable gift which he makes immediately. So the rich man only intends to win glory for his soul at the close of his earthly existence by the benefaction which G-d entrusted to him, in order to bestow it upon anyone who will be worthy of it. Yet it is generally recognized that it is proper to thank and laud a benefactor. Even though the latter's motive was to gain spiritual glory hereafter, gratitude is, nevertheless, due to him, as Job said: "[because I delivered the poor who cried for help, and the fatherless who had none to help him;] the blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me" (Job 29:13); and further, "did not his heart bless me, when he warmed himself with the fleece of my sheep?" (Job 31:20). 
Kindness men show each other for the sake of praise, honor and worldly rewards: This is as if one were to deposit an article in another's care or entrust him with money, because of the depositor's apprehension that he may need it later on. 
Although, in benefiting another person, the aim is to further his own interests, the benefactor is nevertheless entitled to praise and gratitude for his kindness, as the wise king said, "Many beseech the generous man, and everyone is a friend to him that gives gifts" (Mishlei 19:6) ; and he also said, "A man's gift makes room for him and brings him before great men" (Mishlei 18:16). 
The kindness of one who has compassion on a poor man in pain: The benefactor's motive is to get rid of his own distress that results from depression and grief for the one he pities. He is like one who cures a pain which has attacked him by means of the bounties that G-d bestowed upon him. Nevertheless, he is not to be left without praise, as Job said, "Could I see any perish for want of clothing or any poor without covering? Did not his heart bless me, when he warmed himself with the fleece of my sheep?" (Job 31:19-20). 
From what has here been advanced, it is clear that anyone who bestows benefits on others has first his own interest in mind - either to secure an honorable distinction in this world or hereafter, or relieve himself of pain, or improve his material possessions. Yet all these considerations do not absolve the beneficiaries of their duty of praising, thanking, respecting and loving their benefactors and making them some return. And this, despite that the benefit was only loaned to the benefactors; that they were compelled to dispense it, as we have pointed out; and that their beneficence is not permanent, their generosity not prolonged, and their benevolence is mixed with the intent either to further their own interest or to ward off harm. If so, how much more then does a human being owe service, praise and gratitude to Him who created the benefit and the benefactor, whose beneficence is unlimited, permanent, perpetual, without any motive of self-interest, or purpose of warding off injury, but only an expression of grace and loving-kindness emanating from Him towards all human beings. 
We should furthermore come to understand that any human being who renders a kindness to another in any of the modes above specified is not superior to the person whom he benefits, except in some incidental detail, while in their humanity and essence they are alike and akin to one another, in substance and form, in physical construct and figure (or mentality - Gen. 1:27) in their natures and in a larger part of what happens to them. Nevertheless the beneficiary, as we have set forth, is under an obligation of service to his benefactor.
And if we thought that the beneficiary was extremely defective and imperfect in his physical conformation, figure and appearance [we would conclude that], the obligation of service on his part would be so much the greater. So also, if we should deem the benefactor the best and most perfect of all beings, while the beneficiary was the most defective of all things and the weakest of all creatures, reason would require that the service to the benefactor should be increased to an infinite degree.
Following this analogy, when we investigate, through reason, the relation of the Creator, blessed be He, to human beings, we will find that the Creator, blessed be He, is infinitely exalted and glorified above everything existing, above all that can be apprehended by the senses or conceived by the intellect as has been expounded in the first treatise of this book; and that a human being, in comparison with other species of animals, is the most defective and weakest of them all.
This can be demonstrated in three respects:
(1) In respect to his infancy and early childhood: For we find that other species of living creatures are stronger than he is, better able to endure pain and move independently, and do not trouble their parents in their period of growth to the same extent as a human being does.
(2) In respect to the filth and foulness within the human body and the similar appearances on the skin when one has neglected to wash and cleanse himself for a length of time, as also in respect to the state of the body after death-the discharge of a human corpse being more nauseating than that of the carcasses of other creatures, and a human being's excrement more offensive than that of other creatures. Likewise for his other waste matter. 
(3) In respect to a human being's incompetence when, due to a brain injury, he loses the rational faculty which G-d bestowed upon him and which constitutes his superiority to the other creatures that are irrational. For at such times he is stupider and more senseless than other animals. He may inflict serious injuries on himself and even kill himself. Most animals, too, we find, possess an apprehension of what will be to their advantage, and show an ingenuity in obtaining their food, while many intellectual men fall short in this regard, not to speak of one who has lost his intellect. 
When we comprehend in our thoughts on the greatness of the Creator, exalted be He, on His infinite might, wisdom and wealth [i.e. resources]; and then turn our attention to a man's weakness and deficiency, in that he never attains perfection; when we consider his poverty and lack of what he needs to supply his wants and then investigate the numerous benefits and favors which the Creator has bestowed on him; when we reflect that the Creator has created man as he is with deficiencies in his very being - poor and needing for his development all necessities which he can only obtain by exerting himself - this too stems from the Creator's mercy to him, so that he may know himself, examine all his conditions and cleave, under all circumstances, to the service of G-d, and so receive for it the reward of the world to come, for the attainment of which he was created, as we have already set forth in the second treatise of this book - how much indeed then does a human being owe to the blessed Creator, in service, thanksgiving and continuous praise, in view of the demonstration already given of the obligation of praise and gratitude that human beings owe to each other for favors rendered them. 
Should anyone be so foolish as to contest this obligation of a human being towards the Creator - when he examines and closely studies the subject, and acknowledges the truth to himself, the sleeper will surely awake, the negligent will be aroused, the ignorant will investigate, the intelligent will understand, the demonstration of the obligatory character of the service of G-d, through the clear proofs, well known testimony, and true signs; as the prophet, peace be unto him, said concerning one who neglects to reflect upon the obligation of the service of G-d, "Do you thus repay the L-ord, O foolish and unwise people? [is not he your Father that has acquired you? has He not made you, and established you?]" (Devarim 32:6).
Thus the obligation to assume the service of G-d, incumbent on human beings in view of the continuous benefits He bestows on them, has been demonstrated.
In dealing with the subject-matter of this treatise, we have now to expound ten topics:
(1) the necessity of arousing men to G-d's service, and the methods to be employed to this end;
(2) the need for each of these methods;
(3) definition of the service (of G-d); its divisions and degrees;
(4) the form which the Torah takes to arouse us; its divisions; and the excellencies which men attain through knowledge of the Torah and comprehension of its contents;
(5) the way in which the exercise of our reasoning faculties prompts us in this regard, set forth in the form of questions and answers;
(6) the various classes of obligations to the service of G-d, corresponding to the various kinds of benefits received, and their divisions;
(7) exposition of the minimum of service which the recipient of any benefit owes to the benefactor;
(8) the difference in the views of the learned in regard to (the problem of) necessity and (divine) justice, and which of these views is nearer the truth;
(9) the mystery of the purpose for which the human species was created on earth, concisely set forth;
(10) an account of the use we should make of all our capacities, each in its right place. 





Chapter 1

Arousing man to G-d's service and its various branches are necessary on the following grounds. The understanding and the faculty of perception both instruct on human beings the duty of serving G-d. But between the time when the benefits that man receives and the time when he has sufficient intelligence to realize the services he should render in return for them, a long period intervenes. Hence, it is a duty to arouse human beings to their obligations of deeds and inward faith which make the service of G-d complete, so that a human being should not be without religion up to the time when his mental powers have become fully developed. 
(now he will explain the 2 divisions of this arousing:) <br> This calling attention is twofold.
(1) One of them is inherent in the understanding, implanted in the human faculty of cognition, innate from the beginning of his existence. 
(2) The other is acquired through instruction, namely, the torah, which the prophet conveys to human beings, so as to teach them the mode of service which it is their duty to render to the Creator, blessed be He. 

Chapter 2

Both methods of calling attention to the service of G-d are necessary because the innate urge of the understanding is weak in three respects; and we are therefore under duty to strengthen it by religious instruction.
First, man is made up of diverse entities, natures conflicting and mutually antagonistic. These entities are his soul and his body. 
The Creator has implanted in his soul qualities and forces which make him yearn for things, the use of which will promote his physical well-being, so that he will develop vigor to populate the earth, in order that the race may continue while individuals perish. This quality is the desire for bodily pleasures common to all living creatures that propagate their species. 
The Creator has also engrafted in the human soul other qualities and forces, which, if he uses them, will make him loathe his position in this world and yearn to separate himself from it. This is the desire for perfect wisdom. 
Since, however, bodily pleasures come to a man's soul first, already in early youth, and the attachment to them is, from the outset, strong, great and extremely urgent, the desire for sensual pleasure overcomes his other faculties, until it overpowered the intellect, for the sake of which man was created. And so his spiritual sight fails and the indications of his desirable qualities disappear. 
Man therefore needs external means, by the aid of which he may resist his despicable instinct - the lust for animal enjoyments - and vitalize the marks of his noblest endowment - the intellect. These aids are the contents of the Torah, whereby G-d, through His messengers and prophets, taught His creatures the way to serve Him. 
Secondly, the intellect is a spiritual entity, originating in the higher, spiritual world. It is a stranger in this world of gross material bodies. Sensual lust in man is the product of natural forces and of a combination of his physical elements. Its foundation is in this world, its root in this abode. Food gives it strength. Physical pleasures add to its vigor, while the intellect, because it is a stranger here, stands without support or ally, and all are against it. Hence it follows that it must become weak and that it needs an external means to repel the mighty power of lust and overcome it. The Torah is the remedy for such spiritual maladies and moral diseases. 
The Torah therefore prohibits many kinds of food, clothing, sexual relations, certain acquisitions and practices, all of which strengthen sensual lust; it also exhorts us to use those means which resist lust and are its opposite. These are prayer, fasting, charity-giving, [acts of] kindness; by which the intellectual faculties are revived and man is aided in this world and for the world to come, as David said: "Your word is a lamp to my feet and a light to my path" (Tehilim 119:105) ; "For the commandment is a lamp and the torah is light" (Mishlei 6:23) ; "I saw that wisdom is preferable to folly as light is preferable to darkness" (Koheles 2:13). 
Third, the sensual desire, constantly employed in feeding the body, never ceases working by day or night. The intellect, on the other hand, is only called into activity to help one gratify his passions. Now it is well known that physical faculties which are constantly exercised in accordance with their nature, improve and become more efficient, while those that are less frequently used deteriorate and become inefficient. It logically follows therefore that the sensual desire would become stronger because it is continually exercised, while the intellectual faculty would weaken, because it is so seldom used, and so little for its proper purpose. 
Hence it was necessary for there to exist something, whose true (proper) use would not involve man's physical organs nor the animalistic lusts, but only the exercise of his intellect, freed from the predominance of lusts. This aid is the Torah, the study of which will make the intellect stronger, purer, and more luminous and will drive away from man the folly that masters his soul and prevents him from seeing things as they really are and placing them in their proper relations. As the Psalmist said, "The law of the L-ord is perfect, restoring the soul; the testimony of the L-ord is faithful, making wise the simple; the ordinances of the L-ord are right, rejoicing the heart; the commandment of the L-ord is pure, enlightening the eyes" (Ps. 19:8-9). 
From what has been said, it is clearly established how necessary it is that a human being should be aroused to the service of G-d by the Torah, which includes rational precepts as well as those accepted on authority (prophecy), so that through these we may rise to the service of G-d which, our reason demonstrates, is man's duty and the main purpose for which the human species has been called into existence in this world.

Chapter 3

Definition of the Service of G-d; explanation of its parts; the merits of each of these parts.
Service may be defined as a beneficiary's submission to his benefactor, expressed in rendering good that is within his power to the latter in return for the favor received . This submission is of two kinds. The first is submission induced by fear, hope, necessity or compulsion. The second is submission arising from a sense of duty, from the conviction that it is right to aggrandize and exalt the person to whom submission is rendered. 
Of the first kind is that submission to G-d which has been induced by an external stimulus (the torah), as we have mentioned, and the obligation of which arises from hope of reward or fear of punishment in this world and the next. But the second kind is the submission which arises from an inward urge in the intellect (conscience), innate in the nature of a human being in whom body and soul are joined together. 
Both kinds of submission are praiseworthy and lead to salvation in the life hereafter, the world of eternal rest. But one of these leads to the other and is a step by which we ascend to it. The former is the submission induced by the study of the Torah. The [latter] submission which is induced by the urge of the understanding and based on rational demonstrations, is nearer to G-d and more acceptable on seven grounds: 
(1) First, For the service (of G-d) induced by the study of the Torah, it may be that the person will be l'shem shamayim (devoted to G-d alone). It may, however, be hypocritical; the aim may possibly be to obtain praise for it and honor among one's fellow-men, since this kind of service is rooted in, and founded on, hope (of reward) and fear (of punishment). But the service of G-d induced by the intellectual urge is wholly and solely devoted to G-d. No hypocrisy is mingled with it, nor any false pretense for the sake of self-glorification, since this service is not founded on hope or fear, but is based on wisdom and knowledge of what service a created being owes to its Creator. 
(2) Secondly, service of G-d induced by the Torah is only rendered as the result of hope of reward or fear of punishment; but the service urged by the understanding comes from volunteering of the soul and and its desire to strive with all its might to serve its G-d for His own sake after knowledge and comprehension. For the soul will not freely give all it has, unless it is convinced that what it receives in exchange is greater than what it gives, and this [reward] is that G-d is pleased with it. 
Third, the service due to the urge of the Torah is manifested in external good deeds rather than in inward thoughts and feelings, hidden in the heart. But in the service induced by the understanding, that which is hidden in the heart, namely, the duties of the heart, is many times as much as what is seen in the external activity of the bodily limbs. 
Fourth, the service induced by the Torah is to be regarded as a path to the service prompted by the understanding. The former is like seed planted in the ground. The study of the Torah is as cultivation is to the soil - ploughing and clearing it. The aid that comes from G-d is like the rain that waters the field. And the fruit that is produced and brought forth is what establishes in the heart - the service of G-d for His sake only, and not prompted by hope (of reward) or fear (of punishment). So our wise men have exhorted us, "Be not like servants who minister to their master upon the condition of receiving a reward . . . and let the fear of Heaven be upon you." (Ethics of the Fathers 1:3). 
Fifth, the commandments of the Torah are limited. They are a known number, 613 precepts. But the duties imposed by the understanding are almost countless, for a person daily increases his knowledge of them; and the more his faculty of perception develops and the more he comprehends G-d's beneficences, mighty power and sovereignty, the more will a man submit and humble himself before Him. Hence you find that David (peace be upon him), besought G-d to arouse him to the knowledge of these duties and remove the curtain of folly from his eyes; as it is said, "Open my eyes that I may gaze at the wonders of Your Torah" (Tehilim 119:18); "Teach me, O L-ord, the way of Your statutes..." (ibid. 119:33); "Incline my heart unto Your testimonies, and not to covetousness" (ibid. 119:36). Furthermore it is said "To all perfection have I seen an end; but Your commandment is exceedingly broad" (ibid. 119:96); that is to say, our obligation of service to You for Your continual benefits to us is without limit because there is no limit to the varieties of Your favors to us. 
It is also related of some ascetics that they spent the whole of their lives in repentance. Each day they were moved to renewed repentance, because every day their recognition of G-d's greatness increased, and they realized how much they had fallen short in the fulfillment of their obligation of service in the past, as David said, "Day communicates knowledge unto day" (Ps. 19:2). Furthermore, it is said, "Streams of water run down mine eyes, because they kept not Your laws." (Ps. 119:136). 
Sixth, the service instructed by the Torah is within the range of a human being's capacity. Provided he is intent upon it and sets about it, it is not withheld from any one who seeks to fulfill it. But the service prompted by the understanding can only be performed with great strength and with the help of G-d, since human power is insufficient to attain it. Hence you find that David repeatedly imploring G-d in Psalm 119 to give him this aid. 
Seventh, when service is only derived from the Torah, a person can never be sure that he will not stumble. For in that kind of service, the force of evil passion is always lurking in ambush, waiting for the time when he will neglect it. But when the service is prompted by the understanding, a man can be sure that he will not stumble and sin, for the soul is attracted to service of G-d only after physical lust has been slayed (overcome) and the intellect has obtained the victory over it, and controls it according to his will and desire. Hence, this type of service affords a guarantee against stumbling, and one who has attained it, is guarded from sin, as Scripture says, "There shall no evil happen to the righteous" (Mishlei 12:21). 
It is necessary, however, that I should expound some of the advantages of instruction in the Torah, as these occur to me. The grounds that necessitate the urge of the Torah to service of G-d are also seven. 
First, man is composed of soul and body. Among his tendencies there are some that tempt him to surrender himself to physical pleasures, indulge in lowly desires, and break the restraining bonds of the understanding. There are also other tendencies that will make him abhor this world and renounce society, because of reverses that he has sustained and continued troubles and sorrows that have befallen him, and so he would turn to the higher spiritual life. 
Neither of these plans is praiseworthy. The latter (if generally followed) would bring about destruction of the societal order. The former would lead to his ruin in this world and in the next. The exalted Creator, in His compassion and infinite goodness to man, favored him with a means by which he may improve his condition and direct aright his ways, leading to happiness here and hereafter. This means, which points out the middle road between the understanding and physical desire, is the Torah which is faithful, preserves righteousness outwardly and inwardly, keeps man away from his lusts in this world and reserves for him his reward at his latter end, as Scripture says, "Incline your ear and hear the words of the wise ... or it is a pleasant thing if you keep them within you . . . That your trust may be in the L-ord, I have made known to you this day . . . Have not I written to you excellent things in counsels and knowledge, That I might make you know the certainty of the words of truth; that you might answer the words of truth to them that send unto you" (Mishlei 22:17-21).
Second, the inducing by the understanding does not lead to the recognition of active obligations in the service of G-d such as prayer, fasting, tzedaka (charity), maaser (tithing), acts of kindliness. Nor does one attain knowledge of the types of punishments incurred by one who is negligent in the service. In all this, there is need of a framework and a boundary in the way set forth by the Torah and the prophet's instruction, so that by their combination the Divine purpose may be explained in orderly fashion - that purpose being the service of G-d, exalted be He, as it is said, "And G-d made it, so that man should fear before Him" (Koheles 3:14) ; that is to say, G-d gave us a law to teach us His service. 
Third, the intellectual urge cannot include equally all who are under the obligation of service, because some human beings are of limited intelligence, while some are superior in understanding. But the urge of the Torah applies equally to all who have reached the status subjecting them to this service, even though they vary in their understanding of it, as we have noted at the close of the first treatise of this book. 
It sometimes also happens that an individual falls short in some duties and exceeds in others. The intellectual stimulus varies in different individuals in accordance with their capacity of recognition. But the urge of the Torah is not subject to variation. Its form is the same for the child, the youth, one advanced in years and the old man, the wise and the foolish, even though the resulting practice varies in different classes of individuals. And so Scripture says in regard to the all encompassing character of the instruction of the Torah for all the people, "Gather the people together, men and women, and children, and the stranger that is within your gate, (that they may hear and that they may learn and fear the L-ord your G-d . . .)" (Devarim 31:12). Further, it is said, ". . . you shall read this law before all Israel in their hearing." (Devarim 31:11). 
Fourth, it is recognized that the obligations of human beings to render service are proportionate to the degrees of benefits bestowed upon them. In every period there have been events which occasioned one people to be singled out from all other peoples for special benefits that G-d bestowed on it. It follows that individuals belonging to that people are on that account under special obligation to render additional service to the Creator beyond that required of other peoples. There is no way of determining by the intellect alone what this service should be. Thus G-d chose us from among other nations by bringing us out of the land of Egypt, dividing the Red Sea and bestowing other benefits subsequently, too well known to be mentioned. Furthermore, the exalted Creator specially distinguished us from all other nations by designating us for the service for which we are under an obligation of gratitude to Him; and, in return for our acceptance of this service, He has assured us a reward in this world and in the next, - an abundance of grace and goodness, emanating from Him, that is indescribable. All this can only be clearly made known to us by the Torah, as Scripture says, "You have seen what I did unto the Egyptians and how I bore you on eagles' wings, and brought you unto Myself. Now, therefore, if you will obey My voice indeed, and keep My covenant, (then you shall be a treasure unto Me above all people) and you shall be unto Me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation" (Ex. 19:4-6).
Fifth, the stimulus of the Torah is a preparation for, and introduction to that of the Understanding, the reason being that a man in his youth needs training and guidance, and restraint from yielding to his passions, until the time comes when his understanding has become strong and firm. So, too some women and frivolous (superficial) men do not follow the intellectual lead, because its control over them is weak and loose. This condition made it necessary to provide guidance of a medium character which they can endure and which will not be impossible for them to stand. Hence, the instructions of the Torah revolve around hope and fear - the poles of its axis. 
Whoever does not fall short in fulfilling the obligations of this service belongs to the class of the pure pious ones and is worthy of reward in this world and in the next. But one who rises from this stage to the service of G-d, induced by reason, reaches the degree of the prophets and the elect of the Supreme - the saints. His reward here on earth is joy in the sweetness of the service of the L-ord, as the prophet said, "Your words were found, and I did eat them; and Your word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of my heart; for I am called by Your name, O L-ord G-d of hosts" (Jeremiah 15-16); furthermore, "The righteous shall be glad in the L-ord and trust in Him; and all the upright in heart shall glory" (Ps. 64:11) ; furthermore, "light is sown for the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart" (Ps. 97:11). His reward in the world to come will consist in his attaining the highest illumination which we are unable to describe or picture, as it is said, "If you will walk in My ways and if you will keep My charge... I will give you a place to walk among these that stand by" (Zachariah 3:7); further, "How great is Your goodness which You have laid up for them that fear You, which You have done for them that trust in You before the children of men" (Ps. 31:20). Furthermore, "Eye has not seen, O G-d, beside You, what He will do for one that waits for Him" (Isaiah 64:3).
Sixth, the Torah includes matters, the obligation of which reason cannot explain, namely, the received commandments and the general principles, of the roots of rational precepts. This is because the people to whom the Torah was given were at that period in such a condition that animal lusts dominated them and they were too weak in their knowledge and perceptive faculties to understand many of the rational precepts. The Torah, therefore, used one method only for both the rational precepts and the received commandments. The people were stimulated in the same way in regard to both classes of duties. An individual whose understanding and perception are strong, will exert himself and undertake the obligation of fulfilling them on both grounds that they are rational and received. And one whose intellect is too weak to perceive their rational ground will accept them because the Torah exhorts him, and will treat them as received precepts. Thus all classes will be benefited, as it is said, "Its ways are ways of pleasantness, and all its paths are peace" (Mishlei 3:17). 
Seventh, we come to the Torah through a human intermediary (Moses) by whom were shown signs and miracles equally perceived by all the people with their senses, the evidence of which they could not deny. Hence, the message which he brought with him in the name of G-d was demonstrated to them through the senses as well as the intellect. The demonstration through the senses was an addition to the intellectual stimulus which human beings naturally possess. 
Whoever considers G-d's bounties, bestowed upon him, which are in common with all other human beings, will faithfully accept the obligation of the service of G-d in the ways indicated by his intellect. Whoever reflects on the Creator's special bounties to him by which his nation has been distinguished from other nations, will faithfully accept the special obligation to obey the precepts that are binding on his people, on the authority of the Torah (i.e. the received commandments in the torah) and which are not binding on other peoples (except the 7 commandments of Bnei Noach).
And when one considers G-d's bounties to him, by which his tribe has been distinguished from the remaining tribes of his people, such as, priesthood (for a Kohen) or the Levitical degree (for a Levi), he will faithfully accept the obligation to fulfill precepts by which G-d has distinguished his tribe. Hence you find twenty four priestly ordinances corresponding to twenty-four special benefits which the Creator bestowed upon the priests. These are the twenty-four priestly dues.
Analogously, any individual whom G-d has distinguished by special favors beyond those enjoyed by other human beings, should undertake a special service not incumbent on them, striving at the same time, according to his capacity and perception, to fulfill the duties in the obligation of which he is included with them and thanking G-d, blessed be He, for the benevolence with which G-d specially favored him. Thus will he insure its continuance and increase, and will also receive his reward in the world to come. 
A person should not behave like the one of whom it is said, "And silver I gave her in abundance and gold which they prepared for Baal (idols)" (Hosea 2:10). One who falls short in the special service which he has to render for the bounty with which he has been specially favored, will be induced to fall short in the service specially incumbent upon his tribe and afterwards in that incumbent upon his people, and at last he will renounce the Torah altogether. Not accepting the Torah, he will not even accept the obligation of the precepts that reason dictates.
And when he does not accept the obligations dictated by the understanding with which he is endowed, and its rebuke, he loses the character of a rational creature; and the cattle understand how to improve their condition better than he does, as it is said, "The ox knows his owner, and the donkey his master's trough; but Israel does not know; My people does not consider" (Isaiah 1:3). Such a person's fate will be like that of one, concerning whom it is said, "But the wicked shall perish; and the enemies of the L-ord shall be as the fat of lambs, they shall be consumed; into smoke shall they be utterly consumed" (Psalm 37:20). 

Chapter 4

It is now proper for us to explain the form in which the Torah urges one to the service of G-d, and its divisions; the various levels attained by those who study the Torah, their characters, their faith in the Torah and their acceptance of it. 
I assert that the urge of the Torah is a revelation from G-d, through the medium of a certain individual who, among them, was good in G-d's eyes, a revelation which makes known to human beings the service to be rendered by them to Him, so that, out of His kindness, generosity, and goodness, He may bestow upon them, for their acceptance of it, a reward in this world and in the world to come. 
The Torah divides human actions into three classes: (1) those that are commanded, (2) prohibited and (3) permitted.
These commanded fall into two divisions.
(1) One of these consists of duties of the heart. These, which are grounded in genuine faith are: acceptance of the Unity of G-d; being whole-heartedly with Him, trusting in Him, surrendering to Him, accepting His decrees, believing in His prophets and in His law, revering Him, keeping His commandments, meditating on His wondrous deeds, examining His beneficence and many more duties of the same character too numerous to set forth in detail. 
(2) The second, those duties that involve devotion of the heart together with physical activities, such as consistency in speech and thought, reading and studying the book of the Torah; praying, fasting, giving tzedaka (charity); rest from labor on Sabbaths and Festivals, building a Tabernacle (Sukkah), taking the Lulav (palm-branch, and the three other plants on the festival of Sukkot); wearing Tzitzit, and similar precepts. 
Prohibitions also fall into two divisions. 
(1) One division consists of duties of the heart. (2) The other comprises active duties. 
Prohibitions in the category of duties of the heart are, for example, associating with G-d either secretly or by flattery, loving to do that which G-d has forbidden; pride, haughtiness, arrogance contempt for human beings, mocking the prophets and the messages they utter which come from G-d; abhorring good and those who do good; finding pleasure in evil doers; jealousy, covetousness, desiring to hurt human beings; resentment at the Creator's decrees, and many sentiments and emotions of a similar character. 
The following are examples of prohibitions of actions: revealed association of anyone with G-d, false swearing, lying, tale bearing, eating forbidden food, forbidden relations, bloodshed, and many offenses of similar character. 
Things permissible also fall into three divisions, namely, the sufficient, the excessive and the deficient. The sufficient is that which is indispensable for preservation of the body or management of one's affairs, in food and drink, clothing and covering; necessary speech in conducting one's business, activities and commercial transactions; all kinds of physical movements and their proper employment to the extent needed for the proper maintenance of one's welfare, as Scripture says, "Good is a man who is gracious and lends; he measures his affairs with measure?" (Tehilim 112:5). 
The second division applies to cases where one crosses the border of the sufficient to the domain of the superfluous which one has no need for, such as excess in food and drink, against which the sage warned us when he said, "Be not among winebibbers; among gluttonous eaters of meat" (Mishlei 23:20). So, too, extravagance in personal adornment, dress, luxurious homes, and superfluity in speech, in regard to which there is no assurance that one will not stumble because of them, as the wise man said, "In the multitude of words there lacks not sin" (Mishlei 10:19). Furthermore, excess in sexual relations, concerning which the sage said, ". . .He that keeps company with harlots destroys his substance" (Mishlei 29:3), and "do not give your strength to women" (Mishlei 31:3). It is also said concerning kings, "Neither shall he multiply wives unto himself" (Devarim 17:17).
Striving for large possessions and accumulation of money, of which it is said, "Labor not to be rich, cease from your own wisdom" (Mishlei 23:4). Concerning the king, it is said, "Neither shall he greatly multiply to himself silver and gold" (Devarim 17:17). All these superfluous things we mentioned which are for the improvement and enjoyment of the body transform in the end to evil because they mislead one to that which the Creator warned us against, and forbade (as written: "But Jeshurun grew fat, and kicked: you are grown fat, you are grown thick, you are covered with fatness; then he forsook G-d who made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his salvation" (Devarim 32:15). 
The third division in the use of things permitted is the deficient. 
This is the case when a person denies himself what is sufficient in food and drink, clothing, sexual relations, speech, sleep, or in the occupation by which he will obtain what he needs for his maintenance in food and other requisites. Deficiency falls into two subdivisions. It may be motivated by piety or by worldly considerations.
If the motive is a pious one, proceeding from a longing for nearer and closer communion with G-d by asceticism, it is laudable and will be rewarded, as the sage said, "The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning; but the heart of fools is in the house of merrymaking" (Koheles 7:4). 
If the motive is worldly, namely, to increase his money, or be praised as one who abstains from what is permitted and takes from the world less than he needs in food, it is reprehensible, for a person who acts thus departs from the path of the middle way, and robs his body of its needs. All this comes from excessive love of this world, in reference to which a sage said, "He who separates himself from the world, out of love for the world, is like one who would extinguish a flame with straw." 
But to be sparing in speech and in sleep is praiseworthy; in speech, because in the end silence is better, as the wise man said, "Be not rash with your mouth, and let not your heart be hasty to utter anything before G-d; for G-d is in heaven and you are on earth; therefore let your words be few" (Koheles 5:1). 
Similarly, in regard to sleep, it is said, "Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep. [So shall your poverty come as a traveler, and your want as an armed man (who arrives suddenly)]" (Mishlei 6:10).
In what has been mentioned, it has thus been demonstrated that all human activities belong either to those (1) commanded, (2) forbidden or (3) [permitted which is] sufficient. For whatever is not in the category of [permitted which is] "sufficient", and is either superfluous or deficient, must necessarily belong to the category of what is commanded, if done for the sake of G-d; or it belongs to the category of the forbidden, if it is not done for His sake. 
Enquiring more closely into what is "sufficient", for example, in obtaining a livelihood, we find this too in a commandment, set forth in the account of Creation, "And G-d blessed them, and G-d said unto them: 'Be fruitful and multiply, fill the land and conquer it.'" (Genesis 1:28). And it continues, "Behold, I have given you every herb bearing seed, which is upon the face of all the earth [.. to you it shall be for food]" (ibid. 1:29). Hence, to seek a sufficiency in food belongs to the class of the commanded. 
This being the case, it has been demonstrated that all human activities are either in the category of what is commanded or in the category of what is prohibited. If what is done is in the category of the commanded, it is a good deed. If one is able to do it but neglects his obligation, he falls short in his duty. So, too, if one does one of the things that are prohibited, he is a sinner. If he abstains from doing it, he is a righteous man, provided that he abstains out of fear of G-d, as Scripture says, "They also do no iniquity. They walk in His ways." (Tehilim 119:3).
And so, if one does one of the things permitted, in the right and proper way, he is righteous, as the Psalmist said, "A good man is gracious and lends; he conducts his affairs with measure" (Tehilim 112:5). If he, however, exceeds and goes beyond what is sufficient, he falls short in his duty, because this will mislead him to what G-d warned against. So, too, if he denies himself what is sufficient when he is in a position to obtain it, his aim being to train himself in the service of G-d and to reign over his lusts, so as to come nearer to G-d or separate himself from this world and direct his attentions to the better world hereafter, he is righteous and his conduct is good. But if he does this not for the sake of G-d, he falls short in the fulfillment of his duty, and his conduct is reprehensible.
Hence, human actions fall into the categories of good and bad. The intelligent person is one who weighs his actions before he does them, as is here set forth, examines them carefully with his mind and recognition, chooses what is good among them and abandons what is not good, as David, peace be unto him, said: "I thought on my ways and turned my feet unto Your testimonies. I made haste and did not delay to keep Your commandments" (Tehilim 119:59-60). 
That this division of deeds into good and evil is correct is proved in the wise man's statement: "For G-d will bring every deed into judgment with every secret thing, whether it be good or evil" (Koheles 12:14). The sage thus places all actions under two categories, good and bad; this coinciding with what we call praiseworthy and reprehensible. 
Hence it has been demonstrated that all human actions fall into only the two categories of the torah, namely, commandments and prohibitions.
And since the Torah consists of words and matters, individuals, in respect to their understanding of its wisdom, fall into ten graded classes. 
The beginner's class consists of those who have learnt the Torah (five books of Moses) and the rest of the Scriptures and are satisfied with their ability to read the text without any understanding of the contents. They do not know the meaning of the words nor have they any acquaintance with the grammar of the language. They are akin to a donkey laden with books. 
The second class consists of those who have tried to learn to read correctly, pay heed to the vowels and specially concentrate their attention on the right position of the accent. They [may be said to] belong to the class of Punctuators and Massorites. 
The third class consists of those who have noted the insufficiency of the previous classes and have striven to know the principles of punctuation and musical accentuation (neginoth). They have in addition sought to acquire knowledge of the correct use of the language and its grammar, nouns and verbs, modifying parts of speech (prepositions, conjunctions and adverbs) absolute and construct forms (of nouns and adjectives) ; use of the future to express the past and of the infinitive to express the imperative; the various classes of verbs: complete (all three letters sounded), defective (one letter omitted), silent (one or two letters not sounded), duplicate (verbs with the second and third letters the same) ; the apparent and the hidden. (i.e. Closed and open syllables; the former ending in a consonant, the latter in a vowel sound.) 
The fourth class consists of those individuals who have advanced beyond the preceding classes in their ability to explain words of doubtful meaning in the Holy Scriptures, and in their understanding of the plain sense of the text. They have also investigated the figurative and the literal meaning of words in the Hebrew language; homonyms and synonyms; derivative nouns (derived from other words), primary nouns, foreign nouns; and so with adjectives and verbs. 
The fifth class consists of those who have advanced beyond the preceding classes in their knowledge of the subject-matter of the Holy Scriptures, have sought to understand its fundamental principles and have endeavored to investigate the metaphorical sense and the true meaning of its contents with regard, for instance, to the anthropomorphic expressions in the Bible. They are those who attempt to explain the Scriptures of G-d according to the plain meaning without relying on the received Tradition (Oral Torah). 
The sixth class consists of those who rely on the ancient Tradition as contained in the Mishnah, so that they have attained knowledge of some of the duties, commandments and laws of the torah without studying the Talmud.
The seventh class comprises those who have added to what we have just mentioned an intense study of the Talmud and devoted themselves to a knowledge of its text, reading its decisions without attempting to answer its questions and clearing up its difficulties.
The eighth class consists of those who were not satisfied with the knowledge of the Torah, which had been sufficient for the previous class, but exerted themselves to comprehend the words of the Talmudic sages, resolve the doubtful points and elucidate the obscurities, with the purpose of winning a name and glory. But they ignore the duties of the heart. They pay no attention to what would be detrimental to their religious and moral activities. They spend their days in the study of singular deductions from the legal principles and of what is strange and difficult in the final decisions; they cite the conflicting views of the Talmudic authorities on novel points of law while they neglect topics which they have no permission to do - topics that affect their spiritual interests which it is their duty to investigate, such as the truth of the prophet's signs and of tradition, and the modes by which it can be demonstrated; the obligation which the Creator has imposed upon us to bring proofs with our reasoning faculties of His existence and to serve Him with a perfect heart, and many similar points that can be intellectually understood and which I will explain in this treatise. 
The ninth class consists of those who have exerted themselves to know the duties of the heart as well as the active duties and also what is detrimental to right conduct; who understand the plain sense of the Holy Scriptures as well as their inner meaning, and have arrived at a conviction of the truth of tradition, based on Scripture and on reason; have arranged the laws into an orderly system, divided the practical duties in accordance with circumstances of time and place, as a result of their understanding of the fundamental principles of the Pentateuch; scrupulously observe the duties and exhort others (to do likewise); cherish truth inwardly and outwardly, and follow it wherever it may lead them. They are the Talmudic teachers and the Geonim who continued their predecessors' customs.
The tenth class consists of those who received the wisdom of the Torah from the prophets, with all its interpretations and detailed results of fundamental principles. They are the men of the Great Assembly and their successors (the Tanaim) who received the traditions from them, the authorities named in the Mishnah and Beraithoth (additional teachings and views not incorporated in the Mishnah) as set forth in the Ethics of the Fathers: "Moshe received the Law from Sinai and delivered it to Yehoshua; Yehoshua to the elders; the elders to the prophets; the prophets to the men of the Great Assembly; the men of the Great Assembly to Shimon the Just; Shimon the Just to Antigonos; Antigonos to Joseph son of Joezer and Yosi son of Jochanan the Jerusalemite; they delivered it Joshua, son of Perachiah and Nittai the Arbelite; they delivered it to Judah son of Tabbai and Shimon son of Shetach; they delivered it to Shemaiah and Avtalion; from them it passed to Shammai and Hillel; from them to Rabban Yochanan ben Zakai; from him to Rabbi Eliezer, Rabbi Yehoshua, Rabbi Gamaliel, Rabbi Elazer ben Arach, Rabbi Yosef the Priest: and Shimon, son of Nathanel; from them it passed to Rabbi Akiba, Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah, Rabbi Tarfon, Rabbi Shimon ben Gamaliel; from them to Rabbi Meir, Rabbi Judah, Rabbi Yosi, Rabbi Shimon [bar Yochai], Rabbi Judah the Prince". The last is our sainted teacher who gathered together the dicta of the Mishnah, arranged them in order, divided them into chapters and compiled them in a work. This compilation is the essential element of the whole tradition on which we rely in our Torah.
The outlooks of those who owe allegiance to the Torah fall into ten classes of varying degrees in their faith and in their acceptance of the service of G-d. 
Of the lowest degree are those who are misled by foolishness and the overwhelming force of evil passions to reject the Torah which they consider to be similar to the laws by which other peoples are guided and the simple kept in check. This attitude results from the powerful hold that sensual lust has obtained over their understanding, and from their gross nature; they do not submit to the yoke of the Torah, nor will they be bound by the restraints of reason, due to their longing for unrestrained license. Of people of this sort the sage says, "A fool has no delight in understanding but only that his heart may discover itself (follow its impulses)" (Mishlei 18:2). 
Of the second degree are those who cannot deny the signs and wonders that were manifested by the prophets, because of their publicity, but they doubt the truthfulness of the Torah, and express views that approach those of the foregoing class, namely, that G-d only wished to point out to His creatures a way by which they would improve their condition in this world, and therefore stirred the prophet (Moses) to guide them with statutes that they needed, and granted him signs and wonders, so that they should listen to his words and accept his ordinances. The members of this second class do not believe in reward and punishment. 
I will give here briefly the answers to these views by refutation and also alternatively by agreement, (for argument's sake).
By refutation: The Creator is too exalted to alter the course of nature for the sake of one who resorts to falsehood in regard to Him and utters in His name things which He had not said, even if that person aims, by means of these falsehoods about G-d, to direct people in the right way. For the vision of the truth manifested to the prophet is not more wondrous or harder to apprehend than a change in the order of nature that takes place for the prophet's sake. 
By agreement (for argument's sake): If it were clearly demonstrated by an irrefutable proof that the fact was as these people say (that the Torah was not revealed to the prophet, but was the prophet's own invention), it would even then be right to follow him, for the exalted Creator would not change the order of nature and manifest a wonder through one who does not know the good and right way. And if the exalted Creator has chosen one to teach us the good and right way and guide us, after wondrous signs had been manifested by him, he is sufficiently worthy that we should rely upon him in our behavior and way of life. Seeing that we owe this to a king or governor, even if he is not endowed with wisdom, as it is said, "O, my son, fear the L-ord and the king" (Mishlei 24:21), how much more is this our duty toward one through whom a wonder has been shown. Thus, from both points of view, we are under an obligation to accept the Torah. Concerning people of this class, the wise man says, "O, ye simple, understand wisdom: and ye fools, be of an understanding heart" (Mishlei 8:5). 
Of the third degree are those who are convinced of the truthfulness of the Torah but think that it was given as a favor of G-d, to direct aright His creations and guide them exclusively in this world, but not for the sake of reward in the world hereafter. Their reason for this view is that in the prophetical books, reward and punishment in this world are frequently mentioned but there is no mention of retribution in the next world. Our teacher, Saadyah, in his commentary on the weekly portion Behukothai (Vayikra, Chapters 26 and 27) expounded on this topic and clearly demonstrated the nullity of the views expressed by these people.
The prophetical books contain clear indications of reward and punishment in the world to come. The following are examples: "For G-d shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good or evil" (Koheles 12:14). "And you shall tread down the wicked; for they shall be ashes under the sole of your feet" (Malachi 3:21). "[behold a day is coming, it burns as a furnace and all the wicked shall be as stubble...] then shall you return and discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serves G-d and him that serves Him not." (Malachi 3:18). "And they shall go forth and look upon the carcasses of the men that have transgressed against Me; for their worm shall not die. neither shall their fire be quenched, and they shall be an eternal abhorrence unto all flesh" (Yeshaya 66:24). "How great is Your goodness, which You have laid up for them that fear You, which You have wrought for them that trust in You before the children of men" (Tehilim 31:20). "Thus says the L-ord of Hosts, if you will walk in My ways . . .I will give you places to walk among these that stand'" (Zach. 3:7). "Eye has not seen, O G-d, beside You, what He had prepared for him that waits for Him" (Yeshaya 64:3). "And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt" (Daniel 12:2). "Your righteousness shall go before you; the glory of the L-ord shall be your reward" (Yeshaya 58:8). And there are many passages to the same effect, too numerous to mention.
Of the fourth degree are those in whose consciousness the genuineness of the Torah and the truthfulness of reward and punishment in the world to come are firmly established. But their disposition inclines them to love of the world and its lusts; and they use the practices of the service of G-d as snares with which to obtain worldly advantages. They accept the Torah outwardly but not inwardly, with their tongues and not with their hearts. Of such people it is said, "One speaks peaceably to his neighbor with his mouth, but in his heart he waits in ambush for him" (Yirmiya 9:7). Further, "With mouth and lips, they honor Me; but their heart is far from Me" (Yeshaya 29:13). 
Of the fifth degree are those who are convinced on all the points we have mentioned in regard to the Torah and of the truth of reward and punishment in the world to come. But their disposition inclines them to love of the world; they indeed accept the Torah; but in their acceptance their intent is to obtain reward from G-d as well as praise and honor from human beings. This is one of the branches of hypocrisy, namely, the concealed joint worship [of G-d and something else]. 
Of the sixth degree are those who in their religious practice aim at a reward from the Creator solely in this world, because of their love for it, and because they prefer its delights. They do not comprehend the reward hereafter and its bliss. 
Of the seventh degree are those who are convinced of all that we have mentioned. But their motive in the service of G-d is the expectation of reward in this world and in the world to come. They have no conception whatever of service of the Almighty for His own sake, to magnify, honor and exalt Him, as alone befits the worship of Him. Of these, our wise men have said, "Be not like servants who serve the master upon the condition of receiving a reward; but be like servants who serve the master without any condition of receiving a reward; and let the fear of Heaven be upon you" (Ethics of the Fathers: 1:3). 
Of the eighth degree are those who are convinced of all that has been mentioned, but they accept the service of G-d out of fear of His punishment in this world and the next. We have already pointed out how reprehensible these two views are 
Of the ninth degree are those who believe in the Torah and in reward and punishment in both worlds. In serving G-d, their intent is to do so for His Name's sake and in the way befitting Him alone, but they are not careful to avoid whatever is detrimental to this service, and when detriments have caused injury they do not know from where the trouble came. This is suggested in the verse: "Dead flies make the apothecary's oil to ferment and send forth a foul odor; so a little folly outweighs the rarest wisdom and honor" (Koheles 10:1). Further, "One sinner destroys much good" (ibid. 9:18). 
One of the pious once said to his disciples, "If you would be absolutely free of sins, I would be anxious about you and fear something worse than sins." They said to him: "What is worse than sins?" He replied: "Haughtiness and pride," as Scripture says, "An abomination unto the L-ord is everyone that is proud in heart" (Mishlei 16:5). 
The tenth degree, those people for who it has become clear to them the truth of the Torah and all the rewards and punishments which they will incur on account of it in both worlds, and who have become aroused out of their neglect [of it]. Their hearts have seen what they owe to their Creator in return for His great benevolence and loving kindness towards them. They do not fix their hearts on reward or punishment, but hasten to fulfill the service of G-d for His Name's sake, to aggrandize and exalt Him with longing and wholehearted devotion, because they know Him and recognize His matter. 
This is the highest degree to be attained by the men of the Torah. This is the degree that was attained by the prophets and chasidim (pious ones) who devoted themselves to G-d, made a covenant with Him, were always communing with Him, accepted His ruling, gave up to Him themselves, their children, their possessions, and firmly kept their faith in all that they undertook, even to the surrender of their lives. Concerning these, Scripture says, "Gather My saints together unto Me; those that have made a covenant with Me by sacrifice" (Tehilim 50:5). 
This is the form of the inducing of the Torah in urging the service of G-d, and these are the degrees of those men of wisdom who devote themselves to the study of the holy books of the Torah and the excellencies of those who believe in it. It is possible that there may be other degrees among men of understanding in the Torah, other than those that we have set forth. But we only mentioned those degrees that are found among the large majority of the people. Still, the list of degrees that we have given will be of use to one who seeks the right way, for, when he finds in this list a degree to which he is near, he will know what is the next higher degree and will strive to rise to it, then notes the distance between the degree that he has attained and the highest of the degrees, and strives to ascend to it gradually, one degree after another-he will find the ascent easier to accomplish. 


Chapter 5

It is now proper for us to proceed to explain the mode in which the intellect urges us to the service of G-d in the form of questions and answers - this method being most suitable to a clear presentation of the topic we are investigating. 
We will assert that the urge of the intellect means that G-d reminds a human being through his intellect, of his duty to know Him, and to become cognizant of the marks of His divine wisdom. This call of G-d comes to one who has taken the Torah as the light of his path, attained intellectual maturity and capacity for clear perception, yearns to gain the Almighty's favor and rise to the spiritual heights of the saints, and turns his heart away from worldly cares and anxieties. 
The things through which a person will experience the intellectual urge are as follows: that a person should come to realize what the Creator has implanted in the human mind, namely: to esteem truth and detest falsehood,  to choose righteousness and avoid injustice. to repay benefactors with good deeds and express gratitude to them, and to punish the wicked and condemn them. to keep at peace with all human beings and act beneficently towards them, estimate good deeds [in comparison] with the resulting praise, righteous deeds with their reward, wrongdoings with their punishment, the superiority of one reward over another, the severity of one punishment compared with another and forgiveness of transgressors when they truly repent. 
After these concepts have been clearly established in a man's soul through his reasoning ability and power of perception, his intellect will have become sound and his perception strong. And when G-d will remind him of the way of His goodness, that person will arouse his mind and soul to appreciate G-d's kindnesses to him, and his recognition of them will become stronger. And when he will attempt to recount them and realize them with his understanding and will find himself unable to do so, because of their universality, multitude, continuity and permanence, he will make demands upon his soul in regard to his duty of gratitude towards benefactors, as pointed out to him by his intellect, and his duty to act righteously. He will then resolve to make a return to the exalted G-d for the multitude of benefits he has received from Him. 
And when he perceives with his mind's eye that he does not have the ability to do so, for the Creator has no need of him, then he will feel the obligation to humble himself and become conscious of his lowliness and insignificance, and he will then insist of his understanding concerning what he has to do, that it may be possible for him to approach and draw near to G-d in order that communion with Him may serve as a substitute for the return due to G-d, and his understanding will aid him to the right path in this regard. 
It (the Understanding) will say to his soul (nefesh):
Is it clear to you and firmly fixed in your mind that you are pledged to your Creator for His goodness and belong to Him because of the multitude of His kindness and His great favors?
The Soul (nefesh): Yes. 
The Understanding: Is it your intention to repay a portion of what you owe to the Creator? 
The Soul: Yes. 
The Understanding: How is this possible when your longing for this is so weak. Only a person who longs for health will put up with the bitterness of a medicine; but one who does not long for health will not submit to bearing the severity of the treatment. 
The Soul: My yearning is strong and my pain is great, to repay as much as I can of what I owe to my G-d; therefore continue to exhort me. 
The Understanding: If you are telling the truth in what you are saying, the treatment may possibly be successful in your case. But if it is not the truth, why should you deceive yourself? For a sick person who lies to his physician only cheats himself, wastes the physician's efforts and aggravates his sickness.
The Soul: And how can it be determined whether my longing is strong or weak. 
The Understanding: If your longing stems from a clear realization how great is your debt to repay G-d, how little it is in your power to fulfill it and that your neglect of it is your downfall, while your striving to fulfill it is your salvation and life - your longing is genuine and your want is urgent; if not, it is false. 
The Soul: My want was never other than lax, and my longing was always false, from the time when my only inducements (to the service of G-d) were the records of former ages that have passed away up to the time when the truth of what you have stated has become rationally clear to me, first through the exhortation of the Torah, and later by rational demonstration, so that my longing now is genuine and my want is clear. 
The Understanding: If what you say is true, then prepare yourself to bear the pain of the treatment, and endure the bitter taste of the medicine and its unpleasantness, after you will have first given up the bad diet to which you were accustomed. 
The Soul: What is the bad diet to which I was accustomed ? 
The Understanding: It is the bad disposition (trait) which has mastered you from your beginning and the forces which have maintained it, from the earliest years of your growth. 
The Soul: What disposition is this, and what are the forces that maintain it? 
The Understanding: The reprehensible dispositions in you are many. But the root and stock from which they spring are two. One of them is love of physical pleasures - eating, drinking, marital relations and other bodily needs. This disposition you have acquired from your bad neighbor, the body. 
The second disposition is love of domination and superiority - pride, haughtiness, jealousy. This brings you to refrain from making a return to your Benefactor. This disposition you have acquired from your associates, among whom you have grown up, namely, your siblings and [other] relatives.
The Soul: What are the forces that I need to keep far from me? 
The Understanding: The forces that maintain the former evil disposition are superfluity in eating, drinking, dress, sleep, rest, tranquility and other similar things. The forces that uphold the latter evil disposition are superfluity of speech, excessive socializing, approval seeking [of human beings], love of praise and honor, jealousy of others because of their material possessions, even if what they possess consists only of sheer necessaries; contemptuousness, picking on the faults of others, and so forth. If what you have said of your strong desire and yearning to make a return for the benefits G-d has bestowed upon you is true, keep far from you, with all your strength, the forces and dispositions that I have mentioned to you, and I will then bring you to the first gate leading to recovery. 
The Soul: To renounce these faults would be very hard for me, on account of the long time that I have been habituated to them; therefore be kind enough to show me in what way I can do so more easily. 
The Understanding: Surely you know that a sensible man will consent to the cutting off of one piece of flesh or to the loss of one of his limbs, if it is attacked by some disease which he fears will spread and affect the remaining limbs, as soon as he considers the difference between the two states and realizes the inequality of the two evils. So, too, if you wish that the separation which is so hard should seem easy to you, concentrate your mind and employ your intelligence in weighing the good you will derive from the separation and the evil which will befall you if you continue your association with it; and then separation from your reprehensible disposition, which seems so hard, will be easy. 
The Soul: What is the good that separation from it will bring me, and what is the evil that will befall me if I continue to keep it?
The Understanding: The good will consist in your spiritual tranquility and relief from the darkness of this gloomy world, the pleasures of which are mixed with grief, while its lusts soon cease; also, that your strengthened power of perception will finally lead you to realize your destiny in the place of your rest (the life hereafter) and that therefore you should busy yourself and be concerned about it. This is one of the gates on which depend your salvation and your life. 
The evil [resulting from not renouncing your bad tendencies] is recurrence of your anxiety, multiplication of your grief, continuance of your mourning at the non-fulfillment of your desires in this world which, if they were satisfied, would only bring you something that is vain, without permanence or continuance, and which will undoubtedly pass to someone else; so that nothing will remain to you of this world nor will you secure the world hereafter; and, what is more obvious, you will not fulfill your wishes, however long you strive for them.
The Soul: I understand what you have said. I hope that the separation which previously was so hard will now become easier for me. Continue now to lead me to the second part of the healing methods which will teach me what I desire to learn of the service of G-d. 
The Understanding: The ruling principle and sum of the matter is that you assume towards Him who is above you all those obligations which you would desire should be assumed towards yourself by one beneath you-presupposing that relations in both cases are equal. What seems to you good and what displeases you as evil in the conduct of the latter, do and refrain from doing, towards the former.
The Soul: Be more explicit.
The Understanding: Think of the benefits bestowed by G-d that you share with others, and of those benefits with which you are specially favored. Then imagine that you have bestowed similar favors on your slave whom you acquired by purchase; and the kind of behavior on his part towards you that would be pleasing to you, undertake to show to your Creator, and what seems to you evil, on his part, you too must regard as evil on your part to your Creator. 
The Soul: I have understood in general what you have just said. But kindly explain all this to me in detail.
The Understanding: The duties of good conduct of any servant towards his master, who bestowed upon him even a tiny portion of the bounties your Creator has bestowed upon you, consist in honoring the master in word and deed, in faithfulness to him, exerting himself in his master's affairs, openly and inwardly, and showing reverence and fear when standing in his presence. As a pious man said, "Do not rebel against your master when he observes you." 
Among these duties are also included that he should be humble and submissive to his master, in his visible behavior and innermost secret thoughts; that he should conduct himself with humility before him, in his attire and habits. 
That he should honor and exalt him, in his speech and thought, that he should praise and laud him by day and by night; that he should recall his good deeds privately and publicly; recount his praises according to what befits him; run to do his service joyously and goodheartedly out of love that he will find favor in his master's eyes; strive to draw nearer in his behavior to his master's will; ever beseech his master to be pleased with him and forgive him; to love him; to be afraid that he may be falling short in doing what he had been commanded; 
That he should heed the master's command, keep far from that against which the master had warned him, think of the many iniquities which he has committed in the past, appreciate the benefits he has received on account of their great number and importance and diminish the value of what he has done in comparison with what he should have done; that he should regard his efforts as petty, compared with what is befitting him. 
He should admit his own insignificance compared to the greatness of his master. He should bow to him frequently, in deep humility and lowliness. He should put his trust in his master for all his needs and be satisfied with whatever position his master assigns him to. If the master provides for him fully, he should thank and praise him. If the master leaves him hungry, he should accept and bear his condition patiently. He should never suspect the master of unfairness in his judgment of him, nor charge him with perverseness in his decree. He should be contented with what the master favors him with, and justify the master when he has punished him. 
Other things which are proper on his part: that in every movement of his limbs and in all his traits, he should exhibit evidence of his servitude and of his master's ownership. 
He should ponder only on remembrance of his master. 
Look nowhere else than to the master's ways. 
Listen only to his master's words, eat only the food that his master provides for him, think only of his master's greatness, render no service except to please his master. 
Rejoice only in serving his master. 
Seek only his master's will. 
Hasten only on his master's errands, abstain only from whatever might be against the master's will. 
Stay nowhere except in his master's house, remain ever faithful to him alone. 
Only read his books, wear only the garment of reverence for his master. 
Sleep only on the couch of love for him, keeping ever in his mind the master's likeness. 
Awaking with the sweetness in thinking of him. 
Finding no pleasure except in being with him, fleeing from naught except disobedience to him, never mourning except when his master is angry, feeling no fear except fear of his master, hoping for naught but his master's kindness, never angry except at that which his master obliges him to be so. He will only be pleased with one who does his master's will; take nothing but with his master's permission; only give to one to whom his master orders him to give. 
And so with all his movements. He will not move a foot, nor raise an eyelid except to fulfill his master's will.
The habits that are bad in a servant are the opposite of those that are good in his master's sight. When these good habits are reversed, they are easily recognized. 
I have assembled for you a sufficient number of examples to indicate to you the rest of the duties and their opposites. And as the conduct of servants, regarded by their masters as good is as we have described it, and you know how insignificant is the kindness of masters to their servants, how much more in reduplicated measure to what we have mentioned do you owe in service to the blessed G-d in return to Him for the multitude of bounties He has bestowed upon you. 

Chapter 6

The Soul: I have understood what you have stated and your explanation is sufficient. Now explain to me the various aspects of favors for which I am under an obligation of increased service to the blessed G-d. 
The Understanding: The obligation of increased service incumbent on human beings varies according to the benefits - general and specific - bestowed on them. These benefits fall into four divisions. 
The first is the universal goodness of G-d which embraces all mankind, in having brought human creatures into existence when previously they were naught; in keeping them in life and bestowing on them bounties which we have cited in the second treatise of this work. They are accordingly under a universal obligation of service to the blessed Creator. This consists of obedience to all the rational laws observed by Adam, Enoch, Noah and his sons, Job and his companions, up to the days of our teacher Moses, peace be upon him. If one adheres to all these laws for the sake of G-d's service, the Almighty will bestow on him favors beyond those enjoyed by other men, and give him a higher degree in this existence and a great reward in the World to Come, as was the case with Abraham, to whom G-d said, "Do not fear, Abraham; I am your shield; your reward is exceedingly great" (Bereishis 15:1). But one who rebels against G-d, despite His beneficence, will fall from the degree of rational beings and their excellencies, sink to the low condition of irrational creatures and share the fate of the beasts of the earth, as it is said: "And the enemies of the L-ord shall be as the fat lambs (they shall be consumed; into smoke shall they be consumed)" (Tehilim 37:20). And in the next world they will be sentenced to an evil of which there is none greater, as it is said: "As to your spirit - fire shall devour you" (Yeshaya 33:11). 
The second division consists of G-d's special goodness to one people among the peoples, one nation among the nations, as for example, the favors He showed the children of Israel, in taking them out of Egypt and bringing them to the land of Canaan. Thus He put them under an obligation of service, additional to the universal service which we have mentioned. This consists in obedience to the authoritative commandments (Divine precepts received by Moses, the reason of which is not clear), after He had exhorted them and aroused them concerning the rational moral duties (which reason can deduce such as honor your mother and father, don't steal, etc). 
Whoever assumed the service for the glory of G-d was favored by the Almighty with special bounties, for which he was under an obligation of additional service beside the service due from his nation and the rest of his tribe, as Moses said: "Whoever is on the L-ord's side? Let him come unto me. And all the descendants of Levi gathered themselves together unto him" (Shemot 32:26). G-d showed them additional favor and then chose from among them Aaron and his sons to minister to His glory. He charged the Levites with special precepts in addition to those he gave to the rest of the nation, and promised them a great reward in the life hereafter. But whoever of them rebels against the exalted Creator, will fall from both these degrees of excellence and be punished in both worlds; as the wise man says: "But it shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong his days" (Koheles. 8:13). 
The third division is the special goodness of G-d to a certain family among the families of the nations, such as the appointment of the priesthood and the Levites, as also the succession of sovereignty conferred upon the house of David. In return for this, He charged them with additional duties, of which those assigned to the priests and Levites are known and clearly set forth in the book of G-d's law, the Pentateuch. The specific law applying to the House of David is thus set forth: "O house of David, thus says the L-ord, execute judgment in the morning; and deliver him that is spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor" (Jeremiah 21:12). One who completely fulfills these duties, because he loves to please G-d, will be singled out by the Almighty for happiness here and a great reward hereafter. He will be a distinguished nobleman or a teacher of righteousness, as the Scripture says concerning Pinchas, "Then stood up Pinchas and executed judgment and the plague was stayed. And that was counted unto him for righteousness unto all generations for evermore" (Ps. 106:30-31). Further, "But the priests, the Levites, the sons of Zadok that kept the charge of My sanctuary...[They shall come near to Me to minister unto Me]" (Ezek. 44:15). But whoever among them rebels against G-d falls from those highest degrees in this world, and will suffer severe pain in the world to come, as you know from what befell Korach and his company. 
The fourth division is G-d's goodness to an individual, by which he has been singled out from the rest of his family and people and other rational beings, as for instance, one chosen to be either a distinguished prophet, a leader appointed to govern a nation or a Sage whose spirit G-d has awakened and endowed with wisdom, understanding, counsel and similar qualities. For every one of these bounties, he is under the obligation of additional service of G-d. He who performs this service in full measure unto him will these gifts - general and special - be continued in this world, and G-d will increase his power over them and understanding of them, as it is said, "The L-ord has sworn unto David in truth-he will not depart from it, of the fruit of your body, I will set upon your throne. If your children will keep My covenant and My testimony that I shall teach them, their children shall also sit upon your throne for evermore" (Ps. 132:11-12). The reward in the world hereafter is indicated in the following verse: "unless I had believed to see the goodness of the L-ord in the land of the living" (Ps. 27:13).
But whoever [among these who] rebels against G-d, despite the beneficence which G-d has specially bestowed upon him, will fall from all these degrees, and the Creator will hold him more strictly to account in this world, as it is said, "... this is it that the L-ord spoke, saying, I will be sanctified in them that come near Me, and before all the people I will be glorified. And Aaron held his peace" (Lev. 10:3); furthermore, "You only have I known of all the families of the earth; therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities" (Amos 3:2). His punishment in the next world will be more severe, as it is said: "For Tophet (Gehinom) is ordained of old; yea, for the king it is prepared; He has made it deep and large. He makes great with fire and wood. The breath of G-d kindles it, like a torrent of brimstone" (Isaiah 30:33). 
According to the above four divisions, human beings are under obligations to serve G-d. Whenever G-d increases His beneficence to an individual, that individual is under an obligation to render additional service for it. This is illustrated by the following examples. It is a duty to tithe produce, as it is written, "You shall tithe all the yield of your seed that comes from the field year by year" (Deut. 14:22). One to whom G-d has given one hundred kur of produce is obliged to give ten kur; one to whom G-d has only given ten kur has to give one kur. If the former were to separate nine and a half kur and the latter were to separate one kur, the former would be punished, while the latter would receive a reward. 
So, too, if a man has no son, the obligation of circumcising and teaching his son Torah does not apply to him. If a person is lame, the duty of going to Jerusalem for the three festivals is not obligatory for him. When a person is sick, the precepts which he is unable to fulfill are not binding upon him. Analogously, if a person has been singled out by the Creator for special beneficence, he is under an obligation to increased service for it.
Hence, the saints in ancient times, when some good fortune happened to them, were troubled in two respects: First, that they should not fall short in the complete fulfillment of the service and gratitude they owed for this good fortune and that it should not turn into evil for them, as our ancestor Jacob said, "I have diminished from all the mercies, and truth which You have shown unto Your servant" (Gen. 32:11); secondly, that it should not be the Creator's reward for their service, and thus their reward in the world to come would be diminished, as the ancients explained the text, "And repays them that hate Him to their face to destroy them (in the afterlife)" (Deut. 7:10). This will suffice on this theme.
The Soul: I have understood all that you have mentioned. But I do not feel myself able to repay the Creator with services in return for His bounties, not even for those all men enjoy, much less for those with which He has specially favored me. And when it is my wish and desire to fulfill the service which it is my duty to render for them, before I have even completed forming the resolution, the hope of a future reward enters my thoughts. 
And so it is with my gratitude to G-d; when I thank Him, I thank Him for His great goodness to me in words but my thought and intent is the wish that the reward may be continued and increased. I am not like the one who renounced all expectation of an increase of the reward or its continuance. And if I behave in this way in my service and gratitude to G-d, with so little of clear intent to fulfill my obligations for His universal goodness, how will I ever be able to fulfill the rest of the service I owe to Him for bounties with which He has specially favored me? I therefore need that you should teach me the minimum of service that it is my duty to render for these favors, so that I may be worthy of their continuance. 
The Understanding: Your complaint of your scanty devotion in the service of G-d and ingratitude to Him and that the words of your mouth are [hypocritically] those of one who expresses thankfulness, while your purpose is that of a requester, and the wish in your heart is for an increase in the bounty and its continuance - all this is due to three dispositions:
The first is your excessive self-love, and desire to draw for yourself enjoyable things. You do not move a step to the service of the Almighty or for any other purpose without the motive to enjoy pleasures. I have already recommended as the beginning of my course of treatment that you should strive with all your might to keep this evil disposition far from you, and then I may hold out the best of hopes for you. 
The second is that you do not realize the Creator's kindness to you and imagine that you will not obtain His bounty except through your supplication for it, whereas G-d has been good to you in what you know and in what you do not know, and when you supplicate Him, you do not consider Who has done all this for you from the beginning. If you would put away from yourself this idea, your service would be wholly devotional, your thanksgiving to Him would express your inward feelings, and your hopes to Him [of benefits] would then be worthier and more justified. 
The third reason is that you neither know yourself nor how to conduct yourself. You deem yourself deserving of the greatest benefits and you never cease beseeching G-d for them. And when you obtain any of them, your mind yearns for something higher. You do not, however, realize that the exalted Creator deserves the greatest service on your part. When you render any service, you regard it as a favor granted by you to Him, though you realize that for all your needs you are dependent on Him and that He has no need of you. 
If you were to uncover (remove) this blinding folly, study the matter with open eyes and realize that the Creator who created you thinks of you and knows what is good for you and what is not good, better than you do, you would be contented with whatever benefits He bestows upon you, and would render great thanks to Him for them with a perfect heart. Then you would not rest your hope on what disturbs you, and keeps you from recognizing the bounties that you have gotten and from discharging the obligations that you owe to G-d for them. 
And it is impossible that you should not attain what you are fit for, when it will become due to you by reason of your service, and not merely because you hope for it and fix your mind on it. 

Chapter 7

In regard to your question as to what is the minimum service of G-d, below which, a person would not be discharging his duty, and which is requisite for the continuance of the Divine bounty, there are ten matters, as follows: 
(1) One should not use the Divine bounty (G-d's favor) as a means to rebel against G-d. 
(2) One should verbally declare G-d's bounty always and also abundantly thank and praise Him in his heart for it, in harmony with his utterances. 
(3) The bounty should not seem to him insignificant and small. 
(4) He should not ascribe it to anyone beside G-d; and, if it comes through an intermediary, he should not thank the intermediary and fail to thank the Creator for it. 
(5) He should not pride himself of it, nor think that he obtained it by his own strength and wisdom or by what is fitting for it. 
(6) It should not enter his mind that he can secure its continuance by his striving, and will lose it if he neglects the effort. 
(7) He should not despise one who lacks the bounty and regard himself as better before G-d than that person, since it may be that G-d is trying him in order to expose the evil hidden in his nature, so that his good fortune is actually leading him astray, while everyone who lacks this good fortune is better before G-d than he is. 
(8) His heart should be wholly with G-d in devotion and humility, and if he is not more active in his service than he had formerly been, and does not increase his gratitude and thankfulness, he should at least continue to maintain his standard. In his service he should endeavor to direct his heart to G-d, and prosperity should not cause him to diminish his former [pious] practices, nor disturb him in the effort to increase his devotion to G-d. 
(9) His attention should always be directed to one beneath him in material well-being, not to the one who is above him in this respect. So, too, his gaze should always be fixed on one more zealous in the service of G-d than he is, so that he will strive to rise to the latter's degree; and not on one who is less zealous, so that he may not become proud of his piety and negligent in his duties. 
(10) The protracted period during which the Creator overlooks his sins and restrains His anger should not entice him into thinking that he is safe from the Divine wrath, and so may rebel against the Almighty. 
For individuals, concerning whom reports have reached us from ancient times, as well as some also among our contemporaries, who were favored by G-d with various bounties and departed from the service of G-d and rebelled against Him, stumbled only because of the erroneous views which I have mentioned to you. This is also clearly set forth in the books of the prophets in every generation. All these faults are detrimental to the service of G-d which we endeavor to expound in this third treatise.
Yet, whoever cannot increase his service of G-d, but is able to undertake what I have set forth for the sake of G-d, will be worthy of a continuance of the good [portion] which has been specially allotted to him. And if this is withdrawn from him, it will be for one of two reasons: either to erase some previous sin or bestow on him in the life hereafter with a reward greater, more precious than, and much exceeding that of which he has been deprived here. 

Chapter 8

The Soul: You have occupied yourself with my treatment and helped my recovery. You have clarified for me, acted generously, and with your luminous mind supervised my treatment and dispelled the darkness of folly that enveloped me. But of the factors that are detrimental to the service of G-d, one still clings to me. If you will relieve me of the pain it causes me and remove the worry it occasions me, I will be delivered from my worst suffering, and will be near a cure of all my afflictions. 
The Understanding: What is it that troubles you, as you say?
The Soul: I have found in [the sacred] books in reference to the topic of necessity and fate, divine authority and will, that all things created mineral, vegetable, animal and rational being - are in the power of G-d, as it is said: "Whatsoever the L-ord pleases, that He does, in heaven and on earth" (Ps. 135:6). Further, "The L-ord kills, and makes alive: He brings down to the grave and brings up again; the L-ord makes poor and makes rich; He brings low and lifts up" (I Sam. 2:6-7). "Who is he that says and it comes to pass, when the L-ord commands it not? Out of the mouth of the most High, proceeds not good and evil?" (Lament. 3:37). "I form the light and create the darkness: I make peace and create evil" (Isaiah 45:7). "Except the L-ord build the house, they labor in vain that build it; except the L-ord keep the city, the watchman wakes but in vain" (Ps. 127:1). "Vain it is for you to rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrows; for so He gives His beloved sleep" (Ps. 127:2). 
There are many passages to the same effect, all of which indicate that the Creator formed man and other living creatures to fill the world. When they move, they are moved by His permission, His power and His ability. When they rest, it is because He ordains that they shall rest, as it is said, "When He gives quietness, who then can make trouble?" (Job 34:29). "You hide Your face; they are troubled. You take away their breath; they die and return to their dust" (Ps. 104:29). And all the sayings of the ancients in every book indisputably agree in this. 
We find, however, in the book of the Torah a contrary view, namely, that a human being's visible acts are in his own power. He can choose then as he pleases. They are effected by his choice and free will and he is accordingly liable to reward or punishment for service and transgression respectively, as it is said, "See, I have set before you this day life and good, and death and evil" (Deut. 30:15). ". . . therefore choose life" (Deut. 30:19). "Through your hands this has come" (Malachi 1:9). "For according to a man's act, He requites him" (Job 34:11). "A man's folly perverts his way" (Prov. 19:3). Everything in our religious literature, whether it be instruction, precept or moral exhortation, demonstrates this view. And whatever is there set forth concerning reward for service, and punishment for transgression, indicates that a human being's acts are left to himself and that the Divine glory does not interfere in his prosperity or in his ill-fortune, in his righteous deeds or in his perversities. 
This is hard for me to grasp, and to reconcile the contradiction of these two views is exceedingly difficult. If there is a remedy for this difficulty which troubles me sorely, may G-d relieve me through your aid. 
The Understanding: The difficulty you state of reconciling these two contending conceptions, found in the books, is no greater than that of solving the contradiction found in observing life's actual experiences. For we see that a human being's activities are sometimes in accordance with his thoughts and desires and sometimes they are against his wish and intent.
These differences show you that the exalted Creator has control over a human being and that the latter is bound by the Almighty who permits him to do only what He wishes and prevents him from doing what He does not wish. This is also apparent in the function of speech, hearing and sight. And, on the other hand, I see that reward and punishment come to a human being; that he is rewarded and punished according to his deeds and movements either in serving G-d or rebelling against Him. 
Controversies have long raged among the learned as to the modes of reconciling the issue between necessity and righteousness (divine decree vs free will). 
Some say that all human activities proceed according to man's will, capacity and strength; that G-d has left the conduct of these affairs in a man's own hands, and given him control over them. And since the Divine glory does not interfere in these, therefore a human being is liable to reward and punishment for them. 
Others ascribe all human actions, like everything else, to the Creator, blessed be He, and say that every movement in the universe from that of a rational being to that of an inorganic body, is in the control of the Creator, takes place by His decree and compulsion, and which cannot be varied by as much as a hair's-breadth, neither more nor less.
When, against this view, the justice of reward and punishment was questioned, they replied, "We have no knowledge on the subject of reward and punishment; we do not know its form nor the way it is enforced. G-d, however, is righteous and will not do any iniquity. He is faithful in awarding recompense and retribution as He appointed them, and will not depart from His rules. Our minds are too feeble to grasp His infinite wisdom. His righteousness is too apparent, His loving kindness too evident, that we should cast suspicion on His decisions, and there is no G-d beside Him. 
Some find it possible to accept both principles - necessity and righteousness. They say that one who goes deeply into these subjects will not escape sin and will stumble, in whichever way he apprehends them. They therefore assert that the proper course to follow is to act on the principle of one who believes that actions are left to a human being's free will, who will therefore be rewarded or punished for them, and that we should strive for all that will avail us with the Creator in both worlds. At the same time, we ought to trust in G-d with the trust of one, fully convinced that all things and movements, together with their advantageous and injurious results happen by the decree of the Eternal, under His authority and according to His sentence, and that G-d has a victorious claim upon us while we have no claim upon Him.
Of all the views that we have mentioned this is the nearest approach to the way of salvation. For honestly and in truth, we must confess our ignorance on this topic which refers to the wisdom of the Creator, because our knowledge is too weak, and our comprehension too limited. This ignorance is one of the various forms of divine beneficence; it is for our good that knowledge is hidden from us. If there had been any advantage to us in understanding this mystery, the Creator would have revealed it to us. 
A close analogy we can observe in the case of a person with weak eyes, who cannot enjoy the light of the sun without putting on a thin veil to protect his eyes. The more the eyes are impaired, the thicker the veil which he needs to aid his sight. When the impairment lessens, a thinner veil is suitable for him. 
Furthermore, we note in regard to a large number of physical occupations, that if we did not behold them with our own eyes, and only knew of them by report, we would right away declare the reporter a liar. Take for instance, the astrolabe (a measuring instrument formerly used by astronomers). If we had never seen this instrument with our eyes but someone had told us of its form and appearance and what can be apprehended by its use concerning the movements of the spheres, the positions of the stars, the precise determination of each of the seasons, the distances between stars and many other facts that would otherwise be unknown to us, we would have no clear conception of it, nor could we form a picture of it in our minds.
The same is the case with a thing we are more familiar with, which belongs to tools which many men use - the fulcrum scale.
For were it not that we apprehended it with our sense of sight, we could not possibly deem it conceivable that one could truly weigh with a balance scale one of whose parts is longer than the other. And what is still more surprising is that on this balance and by means of a single stone, many objects, varying in weight, can be weighed, some of these weighing more, others weighing less than the single stone.
A thing that people use still more is the upper millstone which the water causes to revolve regularly by a slight contrivance. When we cast a small stone into a swift current of flowing water, it does not stay on the surface for a single moment, but sinks to the bottom, while the millstone is many times heavier than the stone and the force of the water by which the mill is set in motion is much less than that of the current. If any one had told us this and we had not seen it with our own eyes, we would have quickly denied and rejected his statement.
All this is because we know so little of the secrets of nature and because our faculties are too limited to recognize the fundamentals of created things and their results, their natural constitution and special forces. Since a person is so ignorant, as we have shown, in regard to a familiar thing which he constantly handles, it is not surprising that he does not comprehend the divine decree and the righteousness of the exalted Creator's judgments, these being hidden and infinitely exalted beyond all that we have stated.
On a similar topic, David, peace be upon him, said, "L-ord, my heart is not haughty, nor did I lift up my eyes . . ." (Ps. 131:1). And he adds in the next verse, in regard to submission to G-d, "Surely I have stilled and quieted my soul, like a weaned child with his mother; my soul is with me like a weaned child" (Ps. 131:2). 

Chapter 9

The Soul: You have comforted me in having made me give up the hope of ever fathoming the mystery of this subject because of its subtlety and depth. But reveal to me the mystery of my existence in this world, its aim and purpose. 
And give me, as well as you can and briefly, some approximate conception of necessity and righteousness, so that the same should not happen to me as happened to a king who, as I learned, did not appreciate the various aspects of his good fortune. The story is that in one of the Indian islands, there was a state, the citizens of which decided to appoint over them every year a stranger as a ruler; and when the year had elapsed, they would banish him and he would have to return to the status he had had before he had been appointed over them. Among those elected, one was a fool who knew nothing of their secret plans in regard to him. He accumulated much money, built palaces which he fortified, and sent nothing out of their country. On the contrary, whatever he had outside the state - his money, his wife and children, he brought into it. And when the year was ended, the citizens sent him out, stripped of all his possessions, and deprived of all that he had built or acquired before he entered office up to the time he relinquished it. And so when he left, he had nothing of what had belonged to him in the city and outside it. He grieved and regretted the trouble he had taken and the efforts he had expended on the edifices he had erected and the treasures he had accumulated and which now would go to another person.
Afterwards, the citizens decided to appoint as their ruler a stranger who was wise and understanding. After he had been appointed, he selected a person to whom he showed kindness and inquired of him the customs of the people and their laws which they had observed with reference to the one who had preceded him in office. The favorite revealed to the new ruler their secret plan and what they intended to do to him. When he learned this, his activities took a different turn to those of his predecessor. He strove and labored to take everything valuable in the country to the land where he had placed all his other treasures. He did not trust his subjects' exaltation of him nor the honor they showed him. During the whole time he stayed in their country, his mood was in between grief and joy. He was grieved that he would soon have to leave the people, and that the treasures he could bring out were in his estimation, so few. If he could have remained longer, he would have been able to bring out more. But he was glad that he would soon leave and be able to settle in the place where he had put his treasures and would be in a position to use and enjoy them in various ways, with a quiet mind, confident spirit and uninterruptedly.
And after his year was up, he was not troubled at leaving, but prepared for the event speedily, calmly and joyously, with approval of his work and diligence. He was going to great good fortune, honor and enduring joy. So he had happiness in both positions and attained his wishes in both places.
I fear, however, that what happened to the fool who wearied himself in both matters and lost out in both places, may happen to me. Since G-d has favored me in sending you to be my advisor, please instruct me and show me my position and tell me all you know in regard to the mystery of my being and the ways in which it should be improved. 
The Understanding: In the parable you related, you have already given a picture of your state in this world and shown that your situation therein is like that of the kings you mentioned. You clearly realize that you are a stranger here and will soon depart from it. You should therefore act as the wise and understanding ruler did, so that the outcome in your case may be like his. Should you deviate from this course, my words will be of no use to you, my fine language will bring you no advantage.
The Soul: If I had no desire in the matter, I would not have troubled to investigate what is hidden from me in regard to my condition.
The Understanding: The mystery of your being is that the Creator created you out of naught, in common with all spiritual beings that He created; and His purpose is to exalt you and elevate you to the high degree of His treasured ones-the chosen and elect who are nearest to the light of His glory-for your good and as a kindness towards you. But you will only be worthy of this favor when three conditions have been fulfilled: 
The first is the removal of the curtain of folly from yourself so that He may enlighten you with the gift of His knowledge. 
The second is that you be tried and tested as to whether you will choose to serve Him or rebel against Him. 
The third is that He disciplines you in this world by your bearing the yoke of His service, in order to raise you to the degree of the higher beings who serve Him, of whom it is said, "Bless the L-ord, ye His angels, ye mighty in strength, that fulfill His word" (Ps. 103:20). All this could not have been possible if you remained in your former state. 
Therefore the exalted Creator, by His wisdom, created for you this world with all that is therein - minerals, plants and living creatures, everything suitably arranged and properly administered - and all for your benefit. Out of the finest elements, He chose for you a palace similar to the world in its origin, foundations, products and form. In this palace he set five gates opening to the external world, and appointed five trustworthy keepers of the gates. Those gates are the organs of the senses - eyes, ears, nose, tongue, hands. The gatekeepers are the five senses which employ these organs, namely, the sense of sight, the sense of hearing, the sense of smell, the sense of taste and the sense of touch, by means of which you are enabled to attain to the knowledge of all that can be useful to you in this world. He also prepared for you in this palace four degrees for the four rulers. These are the brain, the heart, the liver, and the testicles.
Furthermore, He placed four stores for four officers, namely, the faculty of ingestion, the faculty of retention, the faculty of digestion, the faculty of excretion. Their stores and offices are the two galls-black and green, the white lymphatic fluid and the blood. 
Within and without this palace, He distributed servants to attend to it and take care of it. Those within are the intestines, veins, sinews, nerves and arteries; those outside are the hands, feet, tongue, teeth, nails and other similar parts.
He furthermore made for you connecting intermediaries between the spiritual and physical, namely, the blood, the natural heat and the life spirit. By His wisdom and power He joined you to this palace in a proper and well-ordered union, so that you might fulfill the three requisites which I mentioned to you. 
He provided you with two counselors. He appointed for them two scribes. He gave you servants and attendants for your needs in this world.
Of the two counselors the first is the Understanding which points out to you what the will of G-d is. The second counselor is your lust which entices and seduces you to do that which will arouse the anger of the L-ord, your G-d. 
Of the two scribes, one writes down your good deeds, whether done in private or in public, secretly or in the sight of all, through any of those already mentioned whom he placed at your disposition, the gate-keepers, officers, administrators, servants, counselors, attendants and sextons. The second scribe writes down the bad deeds in the same way as we have stated in regard to the good deeds. 
The servitors and sextons are the soul's moods and qualities - cheerfulness, anxiety, gladness, joy and grief, memory and forgetfulness, wisdom and folly, courage and timidity, generosity and miserliness, righteousness and wickedness, bashfulness and arrogance, hope and apprehension, love and hate, pleasure and pain, pride and modesty, domination and submissiveness, and many similar dispositions which you use with your inner being. 
The blessed Creator appointed these watchmen, leaders and administrators, servants, counselors, servitors and sextons, to listen to you and be ready to do your bidding, up to a definite period, except in certain matters which He explained to them when they were brought into association with you. Those are the matters wherein necessity and the divine decree prevail. 
In other words, He gave you liberty to make use of all these aids for the improvement of your physical well-being and to do everything over which the Almighty gave you control and power, but only in certain ways and under certain conditions. These are comprised in the duties indicated by our natural Reason, or that are to be accepted on divine authority (torah), or that are permitted.
And He said to you: "Whatever I have put into your hands in this world and placed under your control, must not entice you, since none of them can contribute anything to your essential being nor take anything from it; nor will you obtain from any of them either pleasure or pain, for they are only things that incidentally affect your body, externally or inwardly. None of them is necessary for you. Their relation to you is that of the embryonic sack to the new-born baby or the egg-shell to the hatched chick. 
[G-d continues] "If you will understand and comprehend My intention towards you and the benefit which I have bestowed upon you, and you choose My service, and keep far from rebelling against Me in the management of everything over which I have given you control, I will raise you to the highest of the degrees attained by My elect and favored ones. I will draw you closer to My mercy and love, and enfold you with the radiance of My glory. But if you choose to rebel against Me, I will punish you with a severe punishment and afflict you with prolonged affliction." 
[G-d continues] "If you are ignorant of the modes in which you should use any of the things which pertain to your service of Me which I have appointed unto you as your duty and obligation, because you are too much occupied with your body and its concerns, with which I test you, I have appointed for you a counselor, wise and faithful. When you ask his advice, he will instruct you. If you ignore him he will arouse you. This counselor is the Understanding. Take counsel with him in all your affairs, for he will recommend you how to employ all your servitors who stand before you, in the right way of serving Me. The reprehensible qualities will be transformed into praiseworthy ones, even as does the wise physician, making use of injurious and even poisonous drugs for the benefit of the body." 
[G-d continues] "If you will continue to be of this mind, and strengthen your Understanding, and listen to his advice, the scribe who writes down good deeds will count all your permitted (neutral) movements among your good deeds to which they will be added, and all your servitors will help you in My service." 
[G-d continues] "But if you dismiss his advice and incline to the view of the second counselor who is in all respects his opponent, and use all the means placed at your disposal as he advises you, then your praiseworthy qualities will become reprehensible, even as the incompetent physician in his ignorance kills patients by his inexpert use of useful medicines. And the scribe, appointed to write down evil deeds will write, down all your permitted (neutral) movements and enter them in the record of your evil deeds, to which they will be added." 
[G-d continues] "You will find that your aids, attendants and servitors and everyone with whom you come in contact, are agreeable and carry out your desire and thus you will have increased joy and gladness." 
All this is in accordance with the justice of your Creator. Because, in your innermost thoughts and secret aims and purposes, you chose either to rebel against Him rather than serve Him, or serve Him rather than rebel against Him. 
For what is open and revealed in you and what is concealed in you, are equally known to Him. He will requite you for all that His omniscience observes in you, though it remain hidden from human beings. For do you not see that a human judge decides according to what has been established before him as fact, whether on the evidence of witnesses or by his own senses. If what was in the mind could be established for him, he would also take that into account in his decision. Since the blessed Creator knows everything equally well, it follows that He judges according to His knowledge, as it is said: "The secret things belong to the L-ord, our G-d" (Deut. 29:28). 
And when the Creator wishes to arouse you and admonish you, He charges one of the servitors to leave your service; and one or two of your limbs or all of them sicken and become painful for a definite time. If you awake and return to Him, He charges that servitor to return to your service. He heals your body, and it resumes its former function, as it is said: "Fools, because of their transgression, and because of their iniquities, are afflicted. Their soul abhors all manner of food until they reach the gates of death; Then they cry unto the L-ord in their troubles... He sends His word and heals them" (Ps. 107:17-20).
And when the days of your trial in this world are ended, the exalted Creator commands all those we have mentioned - gates, gate-keepers, servants and servitors - to depart from you and the bonds and connections between you and your body are severed, and you return to your first state. Your body has no movement and no feeling. It also returns to its first state, as the sage said: "Dust will return to the earth as it was: and the spirit will return to G-d who gave it" (Eccles. 12:7) : And then you will be shown the account-books, the record of your deeds and thoughts and what you had chosen and troubled yourself with in your earthly existence; and in accordance with this, will be your requital.
On all this, the Almighty, through His messengers and prophets and His faithful law, has exhorted and warned you, as the sage said: "Incline your ear, and hear the words of the wise; put to heart my knowledge; . . . for it is pleasant if you keep them within you . . . Have I not written for you excellent things in counsels and knowledge, that I might make you know the certainty of the words of truth, that you might answer words of truth to them that send unto you" (Prov. 22:17-21). 

Chapter 10

The Soul: I have comprehended your statement and paid attention to all that you have mentioned. And now I beseech your Honor to expound to me the occasions on which I should make use of my good and bad dispositions - each in such a way that there I shall win praise and commendation for their proper employment. 
The Understanding: You possess many dispositions of which I shall briefly mention those that occur to me. 
Among these there are two: joy and grief. They are opposites to one another. The proper occasion when joy is in place when you can trust that the pleasure will be everlasting without any mixture of grief, and uninterrupted by mishap. Then you may permit yourself the emotion of joy. The proper occasion for grief arises when something occurs to you that will cause you everlasting and unceasing pain, which you cannot remove nor separate from. Then you may permit yourself the emotion of grief and make use of it. 
Among your traits there are other two - fear and hope. Fear is proper when you are in a situation which will lead to a painful situation that will not have a good end and which you have no strength or power to avert. 
The occasion for hope arises when you busy yourself with the preliminaries that will bring you good and secure for you bliss with no hindrance to keep you from it, nothing that will separate you from it. And that is when you fulfill the duties which G-d commanded you and the result of which is good. 
There are two other emotions: courage and timidity. The right occasion for showing courage is when you meet the enemies of the L-ord, to wage war against them. [Courage is also in place,] to endure all distress and all trials in fulfilling the will of the exalted Creator and of His saints, as it is said: "Yea, for Your sake are we killed, all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter" (Ps. 44:23). Further, "Let the righteous smite me; it shall be a kindness; and let him reprove me" (Ps. 141:5). 
The occasion for timidity arises when you meet those who love G-d, so that you fight neither them, nor those devoted to His service; and that you refrain from standing up against one who rebukes you for your good, as it is said: "Because your heart was tender and you humbled yourself before the L-ord" (II Kings 22:19). 
Among your dispositions there are other two: shame and boldness. Shame is proper regarding rebelling against your Benefactor to His face while you are in His hands, using the good He bestows on you, and while He rebukes you by means of good or evil happenings; or by means of His prophets, as it is said, "O, son of man, show the house to the house of Israel, that they may be ashamed of their iniquities" (Ezek. 43:10); and further, "O my G-d, I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face to You" (Ezra 9:6). 
Boldness is in place when one meets wicked people and transgressors and those who oppose the truth; and to exhort men to do kindness; and to warn people to avoid what is reprehensible. Boldness is proper to shame sinners and rebuke the small and the great, as it is said: "I have set my face like a flint" (Isaiah 50:7). 
So, too, there are two traits - anger and satisfaction. Anger is in place when you see a departure from the way of truth and the rule of righteousness, when falsehood prevails over truth and those who follow it. 
Satisfaction is proper when all things fall in their right direction, when everything is in its right place, always keeping, in regard to them, in the ways of truth. 
So, too, there are two qualities - mercifulness and ruthlessness. The quality of mercy is to be shown to the needy, to the poor and the sick; to those who are leaving the world; to one who does not realize what is good for him; to one who does not know how to guide himself; to the prisoner who is in the power of his enemy; to one who has lost a great benefit (such as a rich man losing his wealth); to one who regrets his iniquities; to one who weeps for his past sins, out of fear of Divine punishment. 
Ruthlessness is in place in paying back the wicked and exacting vengeance on the corrupt, as Scripture says, "neither shall you pity him, have mercy upon him, nor shield him" (Deut. 13:9). 
So with the two traits, pride and humility. Pride and haughtiness are in place when you meet those who deny G-d and turn away from Him. Do not humble yourself before such people nor show them deference, so as not to seem to justify them or even incline to their corrupt views; but release the trait of arrogance and pride, to indicate your opposition to their views and how little you agree with them, as you learn from the relation of Mordechai to Haman.
Humility is in place when you meet a man who is pious and pure, G-d-fearing, learned in the Torah and occupied in the service of G-d. So, too, if any one has shown you kindness and favor, you are under an obligation to make a return for it. And how much more so, if His benefactions are so great and weighty that you cannot make Him a return for them. Likewise, you should accept on yourself the justice administered to you by G-d [in acceptance of His judgment], as it is said, "if their uncircumcised heart be humble and they accept their punishment then will I remember My covenant..." (Lev. 26:41-42). 
So with the two qualities, love and hate. Love is in place towards one who is in agreement with you in the service of G-d, and through whom you will secure abiding joy at the end of your earthly existence.
Hatred is proper against one who transgresses the will of G-d, stood up against men of truth and misled you to what angers your Creator, as it is said: "They that forsake the law praise the wicked; but such as keep the law contend with them" (Prov. 28:4). 
So with the two traits, generosity and miserliness. The part of generosity is to assign to everything its proper place, and give to every good-charactered person of your money and of your wisdom, in a measure suitable to the recipient, as it is said: "Withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of your hand to do it" (Prov. 3:27); further, "Let your fountains be dispersed abroad" (Prov. 5:16). 
Miserliness is in place towards the cruel and foolish and those who do not recognize themselves, nor the value of the beneficence bestowed on them, as it is said, "He that reproves a scorner gets to himself shame: and he that rebukes a wicked man, it is a blemish to himself" (Prov. 9:7). Our wise men say, "He who does a favor to an ingrate is like a man who casts a stone to Markolis" (A form of idol worship in ancient times). 
And so with the two qualities - laziness and diligence. Laziness is proper in the gratification of physical desires, the pleasures of which pass away while nothing remains to him who indulges in them but shame in this world and punishment in the world to come. 
Diligence is in place, in the spiritual pleasures and in doing deeds, with the intent to attain the favor of the blessed G-d, as David, peace be unto him, said: "I made haste, and delayed not to keep Your commandments" (Ps. 119:60). 
What I have expounded in this treatise should suffice for one who chooses the just way, seeks the truth for himself and desires wisdom for its own sake. 
May G-d in His mercy lead us out to the paths of His service. AMEN.

Fourth Treatise on Trust

Introduction







Fifth Treatise on Devotion

Introduction







Sixth Treatise on Submission

Introduction







Seventh Treatise on Repentance

Introduction







Eighth Treatise on Examining the Soul

Introduction







Ninth Treatise on Abstinence

Introduction







Tenth Treatise on Devotion to God

Introduction







Addenda

Ten Sections (Poem)



Admonition



Prayer

