Siddur, Sefard
סידור נוסח ספרד
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Siddur,_Sefard
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-http://www.sefaria.org

Siddur, Sefard



Seder 1



Tefillah 1

... The Order of Awaking in the Morning
... Modeh Ani
... As soon as one awakes, he should rise like a lion to serve his Creator and say "I give thanks before you..." and so on until "Your faithfulness." [and since it does not contain the Divine Name,] it can be said without the washing of the hands.
... I give thanks before You, living and eternal King for You have returned my soul within me; great is Your faithfulness!


... Blessed is His Holy name and kingdom forever and ever.
... The Torah which Moses commanded us is the heritage of the congregation of Jacob.
... When donning the tzitzit he should say:
... Blessed are You, the LORD our God, King of the universe, Who has sanctified us with his commandments and has commanded us concerning the commandment of tzitzit.
... 

Tefillah 2






... Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, You sanctified us with his commandments and commanded us to wrap ourselves in tzitzit.

Seder 2



Seder 3



Seder 4



Seder 5



Seder 6



Seder 7



Seder 8



Seder 9



Seder 10



Tefillah 1




...Blessed are You, Lord our God, King of the universe, who has sanctified us with His commandments and Commanded us regarding the washing of hands.

Seder 11



Seder 12



Seder 13



Seder 14



Seder 15



Seder 16



Seder 17



Seder 18



Tefillah 1



Tefillah 2








I give you thanks, God and God of my fathers. For all the kindness that You did with me and that You will do with me and with all the members of my household and with all your creations members of my covenant. And blessed are Your holy angles who perform your will. Master of peace, King to whom peace belongs, bless me with peace. And order for me and for all the members of my household and for all your nation the house of Israel to a life of good and peace: High King upon all the high hosts. Our creator the creator of the universe. 

Seder 19



Tefillah 1



Tefillah 2





There is no measure to you, there is no one else but you, it's impossibl​​e without you, and who can be compared to you? There is no measure to you, God our Lord, in this world, and none beside you, our King, for life in the world to come. It's impossibl​​e without you, our redeemer,​ for the days of the Mashiach,​ and none compare to you, our savior, at the resurrect​ion of the dead. 