Mishneh Torah, Rebels
משנה תורה, הלכות ממרים
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Mishneh Torah, Rebels



Chapter 1



Chapter 2









Since the Beit Din has the capacity to declare laws and prohibit what is permissible, and its prohibitions last for generations, and similarly they have the capacity to permit that which is prohibited in the Torah for a specific situation. What does this mean that the Torah warns us (Deuteronomy 13:1) “Do not add to it and do not subtract from it”? That one should not add on to what is in the Torah and should not subtract from it, and make that thing set forever as something that is from the Torah, whether the Written Torah or the Oral Torah. How so? It is written in the Torah (Exodus 23:19) “Do not cook a kid in its mother’s milk.” From the interpretation they learn that this verse prohibits the cooking and eating of meat in milk, both the meat of a domesticated animal and the meat of a wild animal, but the meat of fowl is permissible in milk according to the Torah. If the Beit Din came and permitted wild animals in milk, this would be subtracting [from the Torah]. And if it prohibited the meat of fowl and said that it is included in [the wording of] “a kid,” and it is therefore prohibited according to the Torah, this would be adding on [to the Torah]. But if it [the Beit Din] said: “Meat of fowl is permitted from the Torah and we have prohibited it,” and we inform the people that this is a ruling that does not originate from that which is obligatory [in the Torah], they [the people] will say just as fowl is permissible [with milk] since it is not specified [in the Torah], so to [meat of a] wild animal is permissible [with milk] since it is not specified [in the Torah]. And then another will come and say that [meat of a] domesticated animal is permissible [with milk, according to the Torah], except for goat [meat]. And another will come and say that even meat of a goat is permissible with milk of a cow or a sheep, for the verse only says “its mother” who is of the same species [i.e. don’t cook a kid in its mother’s milk]. And another will come and say that even milk of a goat that is not its mother [i.e. the kid’s mother] is permissible [according to the Torah], for it only said “its mother.” Therefore, all meat in milk was prohibited, even meat of fowl. This is not adding to [the Torah] but is creating a fence around the Torah. And similarly anything like this.

Chapter 3




However, the rebellious elder that is spoken of in the Torah is a wise man from the sages of Israel that has received the tradition, adjudicates and teaches Torah, just like the other sages adjudicate and teach. When he disputes any law of the laws with the large beit din, and does not rescind his words in favor of the decision of the beit din, rather he continues to argue against them and continues to teach and to act against their decision, the Torah has decreed upon him death.  If he confesses, he has a place in the World to Come.  Even though he is a judge and they are judges and he has received the tradition just as they have, the Torah has given them the measure of honor.  If the beit din wanted to forego their honor and let him live, they may not, so that disputes will not be plentiful among the people Israel.

If there were an outstanding sage, on of the court that disagreed and repeated his own position and taught it to others, but did not teach them to do as he says, he is exempt; As it says "the man that does it on purpose" It does not say 'the man that says it on purpose' rather it emphasizes that he must instruct it to be done or do it himself.

Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6

A mamzer is obligated to honor his father even though he is exempt from [the prohibitions regarding] striking him or cursing him.  Even if his father were a wicked sinner, he would honor and revere him.  If he sees his father transgress a Torah law, he does not say to him "Father, you transgressed this Torah law!"  Rather, he says to him, "Father, is it written in the Torah that such-and-such...?" as if to ask him and not to reproach him.

Chapter 7











 It is a scriptural decree that a wayward and rebellious son be executed by stoning. But the daughter is not convicted in this legal ruling since her mannerism is not to persist in eating and drinking like a man does. As (Deuteronomy 21:18) says "son" and not daughter and not 'tumtum' [indiscernable gender] and androgyne.