Mishneh Torah, The Sanhedrin and the Penalties within Their Jurisdiction
משנה תורה, הלכות סנהדרין והעונשין המסורין להם
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Mishneh Torah, The Sanhedrin and the Penalties within Their Jurisdiction



Chapter 1






A court that has two of the following: one who is capable of listening and one who is capable of expounding is a (valid) court. If there are three, it is a court of average esteem. If there are four who can expound, it is a wise court.

Chapter 2


It is a mitzvah to have priests and Levites included in the Great Sanhedrin, as it is said: "You shall come before the priests and Levites." (Deut 17:9). And if none can be found, it is permissible to have a court of exclusively Israelite judges. 

Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11





The laws which pertain to a mesit, a person who entices others to serve false divinities, differ from those pertaining to others liable for capital punishment. We hide witnesses to observe his act. He does not need a warning as must be given to others who are executed. If he departed from the court after being acquitted, and someone said: "I know a rationale that will lead to his conviction," he is returned and retried. If he was sentenced to death and someone said: "I know a rationale that will lead to his release," he is not retried. The court does not advance arguments in defense of a mesit. An elderly person, a eunuch, and a person who does not have sons are placed on the court which judges him, so that they will not have mercy on him. For cruelty to those who sway the people after emptiness brings mercy to the world, as implied by Deuteronomy 13:19: "so that God will turn away from His fierce anger and grant you mercy."

Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20


Anyone who has done something for which the penalty is murder by the hands of a beit din while in [a state of] ones [coerced action], beit din shall not put them to death, even if they were required to die rather than transgress [the law in question]. Even if one were to desecrate God's name while in [a state of] ones, one is not put to death, as it says: "But you shall do nothing to the girl" (Deuteronomy 22:26) - this is a warning to beit din that they shall not punish the one in [a state of] ones.

Chapter 21



Chapter 22



From where do we know that a student who sees his teacher erring in a particular matter of judgment, should not say, "I will wait for him until the conclusion of the judgment, at which time I will point out his error. I will then construct the argument correctly, so that the judgment will be quoted in my name"? The Torah therefore says, "Distance yourself from falsehood."
It is a Mitzvah to tell the parties at the beginning 'do you want Din (strict justice), or Pesharah (arbitration)?' If they want Pesharah, we seek out a compromise for them. A court that always does Pesharah is praiseworthy. Of them the verse says, “A just peace was made in your gates.” What kind of peace is also justice? We must conclude that this is Pesharah. As it is stated regarding King David, “And David made justice and righteousness to the nation.” What is the justice that has with it righteousness? We must conclude that it is arbitration.  This is before the verdict, even if you heard their words and know which way the verdict leans. Once the case finished, and he said “Ploni, you are innocent, and Almoni, you are liable,” you may not do Pesharah, rather, let the Din pierce the mountain.

Chapter 23



Chapter 24






Similarly, at all times, a court has the prerogative to declare money belonging to others as ownerless. It may destroy those funds or give them to whomever they see fit to close any breaches in the faith and to strengthen its observance or to penalize a stubborn and difficult person. The Book of Ezra 10:8 states: "Whoever fails to come in three days according to the advice of the officers and the elders will have all of his property confiscated." From this we learn that when a court declares property ownerless, their declaration is effective.