Ein HaTekhelet
עין התכלת
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Ein_HaTekhelet
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-YU Torah miTzion Beit Midrash
-http://www.torontotorah.com

Ein HaTekhelet

Introduction



Some  of  them,  out  of  zealousness,  say  they do not wish to consider this matter... They saw my previous works and lacked the ability to  battle  me  on  the  fields  of  Talmud,  and  to fool people they say they do not wish to enter the matter. Is this the approach of Torah? To the  contrary,  whoever  knows  and  has  the ability  to  clarify  is  obligated  to  consider  this topic.  If  he  does  not  find  a  blemish,  he  is obligated  to  help  one  who  is  engaged  in  a mitzvah.


































This group includes the Gaon, the head of the Beit Din of Brisk, Lithuania [Rabbi Yosef Dov ‎Soloveitchik, the Beit HaLevi], may he live long, who gave forth his reasons in rejecting the ‎commandment of techelet to one of his followers, to write to me in his name: His honour [Rabbi ‎Leiner] did not explain what he found after it had been forgotten, whether the fish, or the way to ‎extract the dye. Only after he clarifies, that something had been lost and he has found it, then we ‎will be obligated to listen to him and wear it. However, if the fish was in existence, and extracting ‎its dye was known since the time that techelet ceased amongst the Jewish people, but ‎nonetheless our forefathers did not wear it, then this is as if we have a tradition from our fathers ‎that this fish and its dye is not the chilazon and the techelet, even if the fish has the signs that the ‎Sages gave. Even if the proofs are as numerous as the sand, they cannot negate the tradition. Only ‎after it becomes clear that the fish or the dyeing process was forgotten at any point in time, then ‎the halakhic evidence will serve as proof.‎

‎... With all due respect, he demonstrated that he  did  not  look  at  my  two  articles, where I wrote  ‎explicitly  in  the  name of  the Radvaz that although the  chilazon was available, we forgot which ‎species of  fish it was. We also forgot how to extract the dye, because nations stopped using dye ‎from the chilazon because they found other beautiful blue colors that lasted and were cheaper to ‎produce. We also explained another reason: The Jews became impoverished and went from exile ‎to exile, and drifted far from the coast where the chilazon was found. On‏ ‏account of their poverty, ‎and the difficulty of the subjugation, they lacked the ability to send to the shores of the sea to ‎acquire the chilazon. Also, decrees existed that only allowed the ruling class to wear techelet, as ‎Ramban mentioned. Once it was forgotten from Israel for one generation, the species of snail   was ‎forgotten and the dye-making process was forgotten. We explained that in truth, until now the ‎dye extraction to dye techelet was hidden from us, and this is what we have now found, raise G-d. ‎First, through the characteristics that the Sages provided we now know that this is the chilazon, ‎and second, we now know how to extract the dye. ‎… We have recorded his words to show favour to him, because from his words it is clear that one ‎who looks with a compassionate eye at our words and sees that the Jews did forget this matter, ‎and that  we  have  found  this  fish  that  is  the chilazon, and that we have found the way to ‎extract the dye, is obligated to wear the techelet of the mitzvah on his tallit.‎

First Article



Second Article



Third Article

