Mishneh Torah, Forbidden Foods
משנה תורה, הלכות מאכלות אסורות
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Mishneh Torah, Forbidden Foods



Chapter 1

It is a positive commandment to know the simanim (signs) that distinguish between domesticated and wild animals, birds and fish, and grasshoppers that are permitted to be eaten, and those that are forbidden for consumption, as it says, (Leviticus 20:25) "And you shall distinguish between a kosher animal and a non-kosher animal, between a non-kosher fowl and a kosher fowl." And it says, (Leviticus 11:47) "To distinguish between the kosher and the non-kosher, between a beast which may be eaten and one which may not be eaten." 

Chapter 2



Chapter 3












The milk of a non-kosher animal will not coagulate and form into cheese like the milk of a kosher animal. If milk of a non-kosher animal were mixed with that of a kosher animal, when it coagulates into cheese, the non-kosher milk with its whey will flow out of the cheese.
It therefore is logical that any milk owned by a non-Jew is prohibited, lest they have mixed in the milk of a non-kosher animal. Cheese produced by a non-Jew is permitted, since milk of a non-kosher animal cannot become cheese. However, in the days of the sages, they decreed that cheese produced by a non-Jew be prohibited, lest they coagulate it using the non-kosher stomach lining of animals they slaughter. And if you will say - the stomach-lining is negligible in relation in the amount of milk; should it not be considered nullified? Since it is the very thing which creates the cheese, and if the thing which creates the cheese is prohibited, the whole thing is prohibited, as will be explained.

[If] a person eats the cheese of non-Jews or milk that was milked by a non-Jew and no Jew watched him, they give him lashes for rebellious conduct. [Regarding] the butter of non-Jews, some of the Geonim permit it, for [the Sages] did not make a decree against butter, and impure milk [from a non-kosher animal] will not coagulate [into the butter]. But some of the Geonim prohibit it, because of the drops of milk that remain in it. For the whey in the butter is not mixed into the butter in such a way as to be nullified based on its minimal quantity. And we suspect all milk from them [non-Jews], lest it be mixed with the milk of an impure [non-kosher] animal.
It appears to me that if one purchased butter from non-Jews and cooked it until the drops of milk left, it is permitted. If you would say [that drops of non-kosher milk] were mixed with [the butter] and they were all cooked together, [the non-kosher milk drops] would be nullified based on their minimal quantity. But [if] the butter was cooked by non-Jews, it is forbidden because of the leeching of non-Jewish [vessels into food], as will be explained.

Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8











Ten stores: nine sell kosher meat and one sell non-kosher meat, and one takes meat from one of them, but does not know which one the meat was taken from, this [meat] is forbidden, as every established place is like a half of a half [i.e. each established location is treated as its own majority]. But meat that is found thrown in the marketplace, you can follow the majority, as anything separated [is considered to be] separated from the majority. If the majority of sellers are non-Jews, it is forbidden; and if the majority of sellers are Jews, it is permitted.

Chapter 9







One who cooks a fetus in milk is liable, as is one who eats it. However, one who cooks a placenta, skin, sinews, bones, or the inside of horns and talons in milk is exempt. Likewise one who eats it is exempt.

Chapter 10










What is this [law of orlah] referring to? A case where one plants in the Land of Israel, as it is written (Leviticus 19:23), "When you shall enter the land," etc. But the prohibition of orlah outside Israel is a "Halacha of Moses from Sinai," for true orlah outside Israel is forbidden, and in a case of doubt, it is permitted. And in the laws of Maaser Sheni we shall explain what is forbidden and what is permitted on account of orlah.

Chapter 11







A Ger Toshav -- He who has accepted the Seven Mitzvot of the sons of Noah, as we have explained -- it is prohibited to drink his wine, but it is permitted to derive benefit from it. And one may leave wine with him briefly, but not for a long time. And so too any Gentile who does not worship the stars and the constellations, such as the Ishmaelites, their wine may not be drunk, but one may derive benefit from it. And such instructed all the Geonim. But those who worship the stars and the constellations, one may not derive benefit from their wine.

















In the time that the Land of Israel was ruled by the Jewish people, one would purchase wine from other Jews without any doubts. Outside of the land, one would not purchase from anyone unless they had a reputation for upholding the laws of <i>kashrut</i>. Nowadays, in all places wine is not taken from anyone without such a reputation. And so it is with regards to meat, cheese and fish without obvious signs.
One who is a guest in the house of a host, in all places and in all times, and is given wine, meat, cheese or fish - one does not need to investigate further [about the host], even if he is unknown to him, and all he knows is that he is a Jew. If, however, [the host] is reputable for not upholding the laws of <i>kashrut</i> and not applying all its details, it is forbidden to be a guest in his house. And if one nonetheless did come as a guest, one does not eat the meat or drink the wine or trust his word about it, unless another reputable person testifies about it.


Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17









And there are other things that the Sages prohibited, even though they are not Biblically prohibited, the Sages decreed upon these in order to distance from the Gentiles such that Israel would not assimilate in them, and intermarry. And the prohibitions are: The prohibited to drink with them, even when we are not worried about libations; and they prohibited eating their bread or dishes that they cooked, even when we are not worried about their "revulsions" [i.e. the absorbed taste of non-kosher food in the dishes]. 
How so? A [Jew] shouldn't drink at the party of a Gentile; even though the wine is pre-cooked and therefore not prohibited. He should not even drink from their vessels. If the majority of the party attendants are Jews then it is permissible. And one should not drink their alcohol that is made of dates or figs etc. And it is not prohibited unless there is a possibility of purchase. However, if he brings the alcohol to his home and he drinks it then it is permissible because the primary enactment was eating with them.
Apple wine or pomegranate wine etc. are permissible to drink no matter what. For that which is uncommon is not part of the ruling.
Even though they [the Sages] prohibited Gentile bread, there are cases where we are lenient and we take bread from a Gentile baker where there is no Jewish baker, and in the field, for it is a time of pressing need. But bread made by ordinary folk, there is nobody who permits it; for the primary purpose of the decree is from intermarriage, and if he eats the bread of ordinary folk, he will end up eating with them.