Mishneh Torah, Forbidden Foods
משנה תורה, הלכות מאכלות אסורות
Yad Hachasakah, based on L. Mandelstamm,1851 German translation. Translated by DeepL
http://sefaria.org

Mishneh Torah, Forbidden Foods



Chapter 1

It is a mitzvah to discern the distinguishing marks of animals that are allowed and forbidden to eat — whether cattle, game, birds, fish and locusts — as is written: "Ye shall therefore separate between the clean beast and the unclean, and between the unclean fowl and the clean" (Lev. 20:26); "to make a difference between the unclean and the clean, and between the living thing that may be eaten and the living thing that may not be eaten" (Lev. 11:47).
The identification marks of cattle and game are indicated in the Torah, and there are two of them: "cloven hooves and ruminants" (Lev. 11:3; Deut. 14:6). All ruminants are missing their upper incisors. All ruminants have split hooves, except the camel. And all animals that have cloven hoofs are ruminants, except the hog.
If one meets an unknown animal in the desert and finds that its hooves are mutilated, one examines its mouth. If it has no upper incisors, it is a kosher animal — provided he can recognize camels. If the mouth is severed, the hoofs are examined: if the hoofs are split, the animal is kosher, provided that a pig can be ruled out; if the hoofs and mouth are mutilated, the outer hip-hole muscle is examined. If the muscle fibers are crossed there, the animal is kosher. This only applies if a wild ass can be eliminated.
If a kosher animal bears a young that resembles a non-kosher animal — although it is neither ruminant nor cloven-hoofed, but resembles a donkey or a horse, the animal is fit for consumption. When does that apply? When it delivers in our presence. If, on the other hand, you leave the gestating cow in the herd and you find a pig clinging behind the cow, even if it suckles from it — there is a doubt here and the animal is forbidden for consumption. Perhaps it was born to a non-kosher animal and is now running after the kosher one.
If a non-kosher animal bears a young that resembles a kosher one — although it is cloven-hoofed and ruminant and looks exactly like an ox or a sheep — it is forbidden for consumption, because everything that originates from the non-kosher animal is non-kosher, and everything that originates from the kosher animal is kosher. If a non-kosher fish is found in the belly of a kosher fish, it is forbidden. If a kosher fish is found in the belly of a non-kosher fish, it is allowed, because it has swallowed the fish and has not spawned it.
If a kosher animal gives birth or if an animal with two backs and two spines is found in it, it is forbidden for consumption. In the Torah this is called <i>shesua</i> (split): "Nevertheless these ye shall not eat of them that chew the cud and have the hoof cloven — the <i>shesua</i>"  (Deut. 14:7). This is an animal that was born as two animals [a kind of Siamese twin].
Also, a bird-like animal found in a [slaughtered] cattle: although it looks like a kosher bird, it is forbidden for consumption. Only if you find an animal with hooves in a cattle is it allowed.
In the whole world, only the ten species listed in the Torah are allowed of cattle and game. The three types of cattle: cattle, sheep and goats. The seven types of game: gazelle, deer, antelope, ibex, addax, bison and giraffe. Included are also subspecies such as aurochs and buffalo, both belonging to the cattle. All these ten species and their subspecies are cloven hoofed animals and ruminants. Therefore it is not necessary to examine these animals for their identification characteristics if you know and recognize them.
Although all these animals are eligible for consumption, we must make a distinction between kosher livestock and kosher game. With game, fat is allowed and blood must be covered after slaughter. In the case of livestock, the consumption of fat is punished by the penalty of <i>karet</i> (extermination) and its blood need not be covered.
According to the oral tradition, these are the distinguishing features of game: ruminants and cloven hoofed animals whose horns branch out like a deer's are undoubtedly kosher. If the horns do not branch, but are curved like those of cattle, or vertebrally notched like those of goats, or spirally twisted like those of gazelle, then this is a kosher animal. These are the distinguishing features of horns: curved, notched or spirally twisted.
When does that apply? When you can't identify the game. On the other hand, the seven animals listed in the Torah are kosher if you recognize them, even if they have no horns — you can eat their fat and must cover their blood.
The aurochs belongs to the cattle. The <i>keresh</i>-unicorn has only one horn, but belongs to the game. If you are in doubt whether an animal belongs to the cattle or the game, its fat is forbidden — but whip lashes are not given for it — and its blood must be covered.
There is a hybrid, a cross between kosher cattle and game, called "Koi". Its fat is forbidden — whip lashes are not given for it — and its blood must be covered. Non-kosher animals cannot be fertilized by kosher animals.
The Torah does not mention the distinguishing features of kosher birds, but only lists the non-kosher species. All unlisted species are allowed. The twenty-four non-kosher species are these: 1) Eagle; 2) Bearded Vulture; 3) Black Vulture; 4) Kite, which is the <i>ra'ah</i> in Deuteronomy (Deut. 14:13); 5) Hawk, that is the <i>da'ah</i> in Deuteronomy (ibid.); 6) species of hawk, because for the hawk is written "after its kinds" (Lev. 11:14), so it includes two species; 7) Raven; 8) Starling, because for the raven is written "after its kinds" (Lev. 11:15), it includes the starling; 9) Ostrich; 10) Swallow; 11) Gull; 12) Falcon; 13) Shrike, it is a kind of falcon, because it says "after its kinds" (Lev. 14:16); 14) Little Owl; 15) Osprey; 16) Long-Eared Owl; 17) Barn Owl; 18) Swan; 19) Egyptian Vulture; 20) Stork; 21) Heron; 22) species of heron, because for the heron is written: "according to his kind" (Lev. 11:19); 23) Hoopoe; 24) Bat.
If one is a expert and knows about birds and their names, he can eat all birds except these [twenty-four] without examining them. Kosher birds are eaten according to the tradition that prevails in different places. A hunter is credible if he says: "My teacher allowed me this bird" — provided that this hunter is a professional of reputation who knows these birds and their species.
If one is not an expert and is not familiar with birds and their names, he should look for identification marks that our rabbis have established: If a bird treads on its prey, it is certainly non-kosher. Otherwise, the bird may be eaten if it has one of the following three characteristics: It has an extra, fourth toe on its foot; or a crop; or the membrane of its stomach can be peeled off with the hand.
All forbidden birds that tread on their prey with their foot have one of the above mentioned characteristics except the black vulture and the bearded vulture. But these two birds do not live in inhabited areas, but only in deserts and faraway countries, distant from civilization.
There is a question whether the bird is kosher if the membrane of the stomach can be peeled off with a knife but not with the hand, even though it does not tread on its prey with its foot. If the membrane is firm and sticks closely to the stomach, and upon exposure to the sun becomes loose and can be peeled off with the hand — the bird is permitted.
According to a tradition of the Geonim, birds may not be permitted on the basis of a single characteristic, unless that characteristic is the ability to peel the membrane from their stomach. If the membrane cannot be peeled off, the bird must not be eaten, even if it has a crop and an extra toe.
Any bird is a non-kosher bird if it splits its toes two on each side when a thread is stretched, or if it seizes and eats its prey midair. Any bird that lives with and resembles a non-kosher species is itself non-kosher.
Eight species of locusts are permitted by the Torah: 1) grasshopper; 2) a species of grasshopper — <i>razbanit</i>; 3) bush cricket; 4) a species of bush cricket — <i>artzuveya</i>; 5) locust; 6) a species of locust — the bird of the vineyards; 7) bald locust; 8) a species of bald locust — Jerusalem yoḥana. 
Those who are experts and know their names may eat them. The hunter is as credible as with birds. If one is not an expert, he examines the identification marks. There are three distinctive signs: If it has four legs; four wings covering most of its circumference; two legs that spring — it is kosher. Even if its head is .wide and it has a tail — if its name is "grasshopper" (<i>chagav</i>) it is kosher.
A grasshopper that has no wings covering most of its circumference, but will grow them after a time, is permitted.
Fish have two distinguishing marks: fins and scales. Fins are what he swims with. The scales are attached to the entire surface of the body. All fish that have scales have fins. If it does not have scales at the moment, but they will grow in the future, or if it had scales while in the water, and when it emerged it dropped off the scales, then it is kosher. If the scales do not cover the whole body, it is permitted. Even if a fish has only one fin and one scale, it is permitted.

Chapter 2

From the scripture (Deut. 14:6): "and every beast that parts the hoof, forming thereby two entirely cloven hoofs, and ruminant [among the beasts, that may you eat.]"  — I derive that everything that is not cloven-hoofed and ruminant must be forbidden. A prohibition derived from a commandment becomes a commandment. Regarding the camel, hare, and hyrax it says (Lev. 11:4; Deut. 14:7): "These you shall not eat among ruminants" — you see that they are forbidden even though they have one sign, certainly other non-kosher cattle or game that has none of the signs. The injunction against eating them is in addition to that derived commandment.