Marpeh la'Nefesh
מרפא לנפש
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Marpeh_la'Nefesh
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Duties of the Heart, trans. Rabbi Yosef Sebag
-http://dafyomireview.com/article.php?docid=384

Marpeh la'Nefesh

Introduction to Commentary



Introduction of the Author

<b>true Unity</b> -- i.e. He alone is truly One and there is no other unity like His. For all the things which we call "one" are only one in a borrowed and relative sense as will be explained in the Gate of Unity.
<b>whose existence is Eternal</b> -- (1) His existence always was and always will be, therefore (2) He preceded everything, and therefore (3) He must also be the true Unity. For each of these three conditions imply the other two as will be explained in the Gate of Unity. See there and you will understand.
<b>who created all that is found as a sign of His Unity</b> -- for all the creations are testimony and proof that He who created them is the true Unity, since behold, the entire creation is like one man and one house, where each part needs the other. If there were more than one creator, then there would need to be some non-uniformity and conflict in the creations, and it would not be interdependent as will be explained in Gate 1 ch.7.



that G-d endowed man in this structure and form, after he has grown up with mature faculties of perception and comprehension -- 
with wisdom and understanding.
Through wisdom, his spirit will vivify and the light of his intellect will illuminate him, but the fool walks in darkness. The Manoach Halevavos explained this differently. Let the chooser choose [which explanation fits better].









<b>learn out of love</b> -- out of love of G-d only. But other intents that a man intends in his service, be it material reward or even for [reward] in the next world - it will not be accepted, for he is serving for his own benefit not for G-d, as will be explained in this book.



G-d graced man with knowledge and understanding to know and understand His torah and to do His will, provided that his intellect is free from serious damage, namely, that it has not become erroneous or that it has not become ruined due to some brain damage.
this was explained in the Kuzari (maamer sheni ot 25,48,50). The summary of his words is as follows: a man cannot attain the favor of G-d or come close to Him except through His commandments. For He [alone] knows the measure, amount, time, and place of each commandment. Therefore, if we perform them as G-d commanded Moses, the divine presence will rest on our handiwork as was the case in the building of the Tabernacle despite that we do not understand their reasons and effects and that they are beyond our human logic... so too by the torah, we must listen and carefully follow that prescribed quantity and quality, how and with what we can do His will, namely, His law and religion. For otherwise, as with all the nations of the world which also strive, each man trying to come close to G-d in his own way, but he does not succeed. For no prophet, seer, or [man with] divine spirit (ruach hakodesh) has appeared to them as is the case with the Jewish people when they would follow the torah and commandments properly as is known. Therefore, a man should not become "smart" against the word of G-d, as written (Prov. 21:30) "there is no wisdom nor understanding nor counsel [that can succeed] against the L-ord". See also Gate 8 ch.3 part 4 where the author wrote similar words there.
i.e. the oral law, which was received from generation to generation until Moses, as our Sages said (Pirkei Avot 1:1) "Moses received the torah at Sinai and transmitted it to Joshua..." Because every commandment G-d gave to Moses was accompanied with an oral explanation and clarification. This is the oral law. And thus Moses transmitted it to Joshua, and Joshua to the elders, etc. For without an explanation we would not know how to do even one precept fully, i.e. to do it completely, such as Tzitzit, Tefilin, and likewise for all of the others. Then each person would explain the precepts in the torah according to his knowledge and understanding, and every Jew would have a different torah and a different religion. Therefore, our torah depends on the transmitted oral law which Moses received at Sinai and which was transmitted until it reached the place G-d chose [for His temple]. For there [in Jerusalem] are the true receivers of the oral tradition, the great Sanhedrin and the Kohanim (priests). Therefore, the torah says (Deut. 17:10-12) "you shall do according to the torah which they [the Sanhedrin] teach you. Be careful to do everything they instruct you to do...and the man which does not hearken unto the priest that stands to minister there before the L-ord your G-d, or unto the judge [of the Sanhedrin] - that man shall die"... And they also received from Moses all the great secrets which are known to true Kabalists, and the amazing allusions, for it is all hinted in the torah. The torah is expounded in 4 ways (Pardes) as explained in the Zohar, Ramban, and the Alshich. The author was brief here for he relied on the words of Rabbi Saadia Gaon.





<b>candle of G-d</b> -- ... here is an excerpt from the Moray Nevuchim (Part 3 ch. 51): "behold I have explained to you that the understanding which G-d bestows on us - it is the connection between us and G-d. You have been granted free will in this. If you want to strengthen this connection, you may do so. And if you want to weaken it little by little until it is severed completely, you may likewise do so. This connection will only be strengthened if you employ it for love of G-d, and that your intent is to Him, as we wrote, and its weakening occurs when you set your thoughts to other than Him. [And even if you were the wisest man in divine knowledge, when you turn your thoughts to necessary eating or some other necessary occupation - you have already severed that clinging between you and G-d. You are not with Him then, and likewise, He is not with you. Because the relationship between you and Him is severed at that time..." End quote. see there more powerful words.]














One cannot do a religious deed until he first pictures in his mind and thinks in his heart that it is proper to do that religious deed, and [considers] how he will do it. Afterwards, he performs it with his limbs.











it seems the author's view is like that of Rabbi Saadia Gaon, that the Tradition is primary. And if one is of strong intellect, so that he can also delve into rational inquiry in order that his faith will be more firmly implanted in his heart through both tradition and rational proofs and together they will be perfect in his heart and mind - then he can tread this path [of rational inquiry], as will be explained in Gates 1 and 2. Here is an excerpt from the introduction of Sefer Emunot by R.Saadia Gaon: even though the Sages prevented us from this inquiry in saying "whoever inquires into four things, better had he not been born" (Chagiga 11b). Their intent was only if we abandon the books of the prophets and instead each person relies on his own intellect in trying to understand the first beginnings of time and space [first existence]. For whoever inquires in this way, perhaps he will find [truth], perhaps he will err. And until he finds [the truth], he will be without religion. And even if he finds [truth] it is possible that he will stray from it due to some doubt that will surface in his mind and he may lose his faith. Everyone agrees that one who goes in this manner is a sinner. But we, the congregation of Israel, investigate and rationally inquire what we received from the prophets, who were confirmed true prophets through signs and miracles, so that what we received from them in knowledge may become tangibly clear to us. Secondly, [we study this in order to know how to] refute those who come against us in Torah matters in the way of "know what to answer a heretic" (Pirkei Avot 2:14). See there at length.)

... here is an excerpt from the Ibn Ezra "...he concluded in the end, that the complete knowledge is for a man to set in his heart until he has clarified through logical proofs that G-d is one, therefore Moses said 'Therefore, know this day and consider within your heart, that the L-ord is G-d in Heaven above and on the earth beneath. There is no other' (Deut. 4:39), and David said: 'And you, Solomon my son, know the G-d of your father and serve Him with a perfect heart and with a willing soul' (Chron. I 28:9), and 'knowing' means in the heart not on the mouth". end quote.

It appears there were two problems here. The question itself was remote. It was unlikely such a thing would ever happen, and the questioner asked this only to show off his wisdom and cleverness to the Rabbi. Secondly, the questioner was not on the level to be dealing with questions of marriage and divorce documents. For one must first acquire what he needs of good traits, Torah, and emunot... But one who turns the plate over, such as those who study Choshen Mishpat or Yoreh Deah while in the practical day to day commandments they do not know between their right and left.. Likewise, for the youths who study Talmud before knowing the Torah (five books of Moses) and wind up knowing neither, as the Maharal spoke of at length in his book Kenei Chachma, for one must teach a youth according to his capacity as the mishna says (Pirkei Avot 5) "Five year old for Scripture, ten year old for Mishna..."
i.e. For twenty five years, I studied how to reach this trait, to purify my actions to G-d alone, without any other motive. This was my primary study and toil.




<b>between blood and blood, between plea and plea, between affliction and affliction</b> --  i.e. this verse mentions three things, which are things whose explanation we cannot know except through the Torah Sages who received their explanation from Sinai, as mentioned earlier. Therefore, the verse specified these three. But if the entire Torah were included in this statement, why did the Torah mention only these three? Let it say either a blanket statement [such as "a commandment"] or let it also include a precept of Reason.
just like G-d commanded us to inquire on the matter of the Unity, despite that we received it by tradition and that it is explained in the Torah.








<b>the depth of their wisdom</b> -- that their primary wisdom and toiling was only in delving into and purifying their deeds - that all their deeds be l'shem shamayim [devoted to G-d].










<b>It is well known</b> -- this matter also applies to human beings. If a man tells his fellow one thing and does the opposite, or sometimes like this and sometimes like that - the fellow will not trust his integrity and word since he contradicts himself. All the more so, that G-d, for who everything is revealed, will not accept fraudulent service, namely, if one does the commandments with intent for personal gain or for any other [improper] motive. 










(an alternative interpretation is that the last sentence refers to G-d not to the book, hence) Man does iniquity but G-d does to him righteousness,  
man deviates from G-d, but G-d does to him good and uprightness, man perverts his ways, and G-d rectifies him, man falls short in his deeds, while G-d is perfect in His deeds. When a man puts these ideas to heart always, he will not run away from G-d. 






















(quoting the Alshich) Each and every believer has daily times when he is stirred from the sleep of his foolishness and wants to separate himself from now on from the vanities and lusts of the world, and to load on himself the yoke of Torah and mitzvot, day and night. But immediately, the yetzer (evil inclination) greets him telling him, "it's good. you see well, but why so fast? You will collapse. When will you take care of your home and your numerous business activities? First, work hard for a few days to finish your occupations then you can return to this... But this is just a ploy to wait until he has cooled down and eventually his motivation disappears altogether. Thus he acts all of his days. Therefore, Solomon wrote: "lazy one, until when will you lie down?" (Prov. 6:9). He did not write "[until when will you] sleep" [but rather "lie down"] for he already awoke from his sleep.. do not listen to him, rather hold fast to the service of G-d immediately. Do not slacken and be strong as a lion to do the will of your Father in heaven, and you will succeed in your business also.. see there. 






















we are obligated to proclaim His exaltedness and greatness, and this entails humbling ourselves before Him. 






<b>all things begin</b> -- with this intent [of love] - all the service of G-d begins.

First Treatise on Unity

Introduction









<b>our G-d</b> -- this eternal Being, who reigns supreme over all worlds, even so, He is specifically "our G-d", for He chose us among all nations during the giving of the Torah to be His treasured nation, and He drew us near to His service, and we undertook His sovereignty over us.
<b>G-d is one</b> -- that only G-d is truly one, but nothing else is truly one under any circumstances, and even if we say on something that it is "one", it is not really one, except in passing (relatively), rather it is more than one as will be explained. 




because this is the primary goal of all the levels of the Tzadikim (righteous) and the Chasidim (pious) - to not empty one's heart from remembering G-d always, as the Rama says in the first halacha in the Shulchan Aruch, which are the words of the Morey Nevuchim (Maimonides' Guide for the Perplexed) part 3 chapter 52, see there, and see also later on, and the Sefer Chasidim siman 35.





Chapter 1

 the meaning of the word "definition" is: "a correct and complete teaching on the thing that one wishes to explain what it is". Therefore one must call it with a name which is specific to it, so that the reader does not err that one's intent was for something else... for example, if we define a human being as a "speaking being" - this is a comprehensive teaching without breaches, but if you define him as an "alive being" - this is not a complete definition, and there is a breach in your words since animals are also called "alive". So too for all things similar to this. Understand this. Now, likewise for the matter of the unity of the Creator, when the tongue and the heart are equal, and a person understands by the ways of logical proofs, that which a person says of the Creator that He is "One", how He is One, then the person's unifying (G-d) in his heart is a complete teaching on G-d, but if the person cannot bring logical proofs, and he says on G-d that He is "one", this is not a complete teaching on G-d, and there is a breach in his words, because there are many things in the world which are also called "one", even though they are not truly one, since really they are more than one, as will be explained. With this introduction you will understand this chapter and the next.

Chapter 2

Now he will explain from where came these different outlooks regarding the unity of G-d mentioned in chapter 1, he answers: since this word became common language and became used in their other affairs and needs. 




he knows without doubt through logical proofs that there is a Being who created the world and that there is no other G-d, but he does not know the difference between the Creator and His creations.

It is known that the prophets see, hear, and apprehend with their supernatural spiritual eyes as if they saw and heard them with their physical senses - awesome things which the philosophers and Sages would squander most of their lives to try to grasp correctly, and it is possible that they never manage to grasp them correctly, as the Kuzari book spoke on this.

Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6
























There was already much discussion from the early Sages, the philosophers, and receivers of the true tradition on the subject of "physical and form", as you can see in the Moray, the Kuzari book, the Raavad's introduction to the book of Yetzira, and the Ramban's commentary on the verse: "And the earth was without form, and void" (Gen. 1:2), see them. The summary of what comes out of all of them is as follows: When G-d wished to create the world, He first created a primordial physical without form, similar to clay in the hands of a potter, or raw metal which the metal smith uses to make various objects of different forms, but of the same material. So too regarding the four elements, before each one received the form visible to us, it was first composed of the primordial substance, which is called by the Greeks, "hiyuli", and in the kabalistic books, "nefesh yesodot" (the spirit of the elements), since the form requires the underlying physical, without which it cannot hold its form, and the substance is the essence of the thing while the form is the incident (mikre), because sometimes it is embodied in this form and sometimes in another. The physical and the form of the four elements always existed simultaneously, because their existence preceded that of all the creations, and from them all creations were composed...now you will understand well the author's coming words. 




... which is inherent in fire but non-inherent in other things.

... even in the four elements which are a union of only two things, namely the primordial matter and the Form. 
And even the supernal realms (angels, mystical worlds) are also composite from the four spiritual elements. They are composed from the four letters of the tetragrammaton (YHVH, G-d's primary Name as He manifests Himself to His creations), which is the source of the four spiritual and the four physical elements, and there is nothing whether in the upper realms or in our world which is not composed from the four letters of the tetragrammaton, and the Ein Sof ("light" of G-d) which dons them, as written in Shaarei Kedusha part 3 gate 1, and the Alshich on parsha Bereishis, see there. 



that there was nothing forcing Him to create the world, neither was it for His benefit, but rather, He created everything to bestow good to another, like the nature of the good to bestow good, since, behold, we saw that of everything He created, it is only that which is needed for man and not more, and according to G-d's infinite power and ability, this entire world is as nothing, rather He bestows good on everything according to what it is capable of receiving. 




In the Moray (Rambam's Guide for the Perplexed) Chapter 13: "I say that any work done with intent must have a purpose for which it was done... and likewise it is clear that the thing which was made with intent is mechudash (created) after there was not... And Aristotle already clarified that the plants were created for the creatures, and likewise for other things, each one for the other, and all the more so for the limbs of the creatures. Know that this existence of plan and purpose in natural matters brought the philosophers to believe in a beginning beyond nature...Know that the greatest proof to the chidush of the world, for one who admits the truth, is from the natural world around us, since all of them have a purpose and that each one is for the other - this is a proof on intent from an Intender, and intent which is carried out..." End of the Rambam's words. I wrote this because even though the Rambam greatly engaged in debating and refuting all the different viewpoints, whether for kadmon (eternal existence of the world) whether for creation, as you can see in that entire book, this is what he found most proper in his eyes from all the proofs, and he brought it as his final words, and in truth, it is a foundation and root. Therefore, the author (of this book) also built all of his building on it, since they are things which can be grasped intellectually - but to delve deeper in these matters is extremely dangerous, as the Rambam wrote in the Moray part 2 chapter 16: "When it became clear to me [that arguments can be made against each of the proofs that Aristotle brought to show that the world was eternal (and not created), and therefore] the question of whether the world is kadmon (eternally extant) or created remains unresolved [through philosophical proofs], I chose to resolve the question based on the prophecy of the prophets, since prophecy is able to clarify matters that are beyond the power of the intellect to resolve and even those who believe that the world is eternal do not deny the existence of prophecy....", see there. And in part 2 chapter 17, he brought a very powerful analogy against the heretics who believe in kadmus (eternal existence of the world), and he said that all of their proofs and logic are only from the nature which exists in the world after the Creator has already created them in perfect form from all angles as they are now, and how can we possibly bring a proof from this as to how it was before it was created and brought to existence from nothing: "the analogy of this is to a child who was born in a deserted island, and then his mother died, and this orphan never saw a female. When he grew up and matured intellectually, he asked his father how a man was formed. His father answered him 'each person among us, came to be and was formed in the belly of a female, who is of our kind, like us, of such and such form, and the man was in her belly, small, and his body was closed. And he grew there slowly, slowly for fixed months until the time he was forced to go out from her belly through an opening which opened for him. Afterwards he grew until he became big in his limbs, senses, and intellect, as you see now. The orphan started to deny all of this, and built proofs against all these true things, saying that "they are impossible and are lies, because how is it conceivable that a live man can breathe through his nostrils inside a container which is closed on all sides, and it appears impossible that one cannot live for any time without breathing, or if one cannot excrete the waste of his food, he will die a painful death, and how could his mouth be shut and his navel open, and his eyes closed and his limbs constricted together for such a long time, and when he comes out of there, all of his limbs and his eyes should be intact". This is a clear proof that the formation of man could not have occurred in this way, even though it is truly so." He ends off: "contemplate this analogy and test it, and you will find the two matters to be identical, and that we are of these who pursue Moshe Rabeinu, peace be unto him, and Avraham avinu, we believe the world came to be in such and such a way, and it was such and such, and it was created such and such, and afterwards Aristotle came to refute our words, and he brought proofs from the laws of this nature, which are complete and with us, here in the present, but which are not comparable to what existed at the time of creation, for this was after absolute non-existence... He then finishes: "and you must be careful in this matter as it is a great protective wall, which I have built around the Torah.. to protect from the stones of all who hurl at it", until here is the Rambam, see also what is written in the introduction of the book "Haemunot". Note it well!

Chapter 7





























Each Creator would have created different creatures which are not at all similar to the creatures of the other, and each Creators' works would have demonstrated a different form of wisdom, so that all can recognize that it is from a different Creator. But now that we see that they are all similar to each other - it must be that one Wisdom made all of them. 
Every creation in the world depends on something else for its existence and welfare, plants and anything which comes from the ground needs water, and animals need both, and man needs all of them. 





If you see discrepancies in handwriting style, then you can say that perhaps two people wrote it due to the changing and the non-uniformity of the handwriting. But all the time that you don't see any irregularity or nonuniformity - what pushes you to say that perhaps two people wrote it? - on the contrary, this that there is no irregularity testifies that one person wrote the entire letter. 






Here is a quote from the Rambam (Yesodei Torah 1:7): "This G-d is one. He is not two or more, but one... If there were many gods, they would have body and form, because like entities are separated from each other only through the circumstances associated with body and form. Were the Creator to have body and form, He would have limitation and finiteness, because it is impossible for a body not to be limited. And any entity which itself is limited and defined [possesses] only limited and defined power. Since our G-d, blessed be He, possesses unlimited power, as evidenced by the continuous motion of the sphere, we see that His power is not the power of a body. Since He is not a body, the circumstances associated with bodies that produce divisioning and separation are not relevant to Him. Therefore, it is impossible for Him to be anything other than one. The knowledge of this concept fulfills a positive commandment, as [implied by Deuteronomy 6:4]: [Hear, Israel,] The L-ord is our G-d, The L-ord is one." End quote. 


If we see some unity and we call it "one", it must be that there is something else which exists whose unity is absolute, and from which stems this characteristic to also call the thing we see as a "unity", as we say on an object which is now hot, that there must be something intrinsically hot (fire/energy) from which it received its warmth, and that we also call "hot", as he will explain later. 


No "number" means the concept of numbers does not apply to this unity, since it is absolute unity which has nothing after it. But if we describe Him as "one", we would be standing by Him since "Ein Od Milvado" (there is nothing besides Him), because if there were other things like this, we would be able to count them, hence the true Unity has no number. The idea of plurality is the opposite of this.

Chapter 8



Chapter 9








hotness can only leave the fire if the fire is completely destroyed because it is in its essence whereas for hot water, even if the hotness leaves the water, the water remains in existence because the hotness was in the water only as an incidental property.

Chapter 10


Some attributes are in Him as etzem (essence), even if He did not create the world, while others we call Him due to His deeds. 










It is better to negate ascribing to the Creator attributes which are lackings on Him. For example, it is more correct to say that the Creator is not plural, not non-existent, not created, which are opposites, and which are more true than saying and affirming on Him that He is the "true Unity", "permanently existing", "eternal", because we are not capable of understanding what is true Unity. 





















This is the "shem hameforash", the "shem haetzem" (name of essence), "this is My Name forever" (Ex. 3:15). This name was not known, rather G-d revealed it to the prophets. All the other names are taken from the honoring (titles) of humans and all of them have an explanation and definition, such as "Adon-ay" which is like "Adoney Yosef" (the masters of Yosef), and the judges are called "Elohim", etc. unlike the "Shem Hameforash" as the Kuzari extensively wrote about (Maamar 4 ot 1-3). 











 see end of chapter 6, the example of finding a letter with orderly style and uniform handwriting which demonstrates that there exists a man who knows how to write who wrote this letter, even though we never saw him. Hence, the handwriting is proof on him as if we saw him with our senses. So too for other similar things. 


the Kuzari wrote (Maamar 1 Ot 25): "it is the duty of the entire congregation of Israel to believe all that is written in the Torah, since it has been clarified to them that great assembly (at Mount Sinai) with their own eyes, and afterwards the ensuing tradition which is considered as if one saw it with his own eyes. 
We are not capable of understanding even one of His praises. For example, when we praise Him with the praise "righteous judge", "merciful", "gracious", - who is capable of knowing or making known how He is a righteous judge? Sometimes He decrees on this man poverty, destitution, and sufferings, and everything was just, while other times such a person lacks no good. Likewise for merciful and gracious or the like. Therefore any praise we say of Him due to the signs of His wisdom and deeds is not even a drop in the ocean compared to what is befitting Him. 












through the intellect we think and understand things, yet we don't understand what it is. 
Likewise the Kuzari wrote several times - that distant proofs and logical explanations cause a man to stray and bring him to apikorsut (heresy), and he extensively wrote on this throughout his just book. And his opinion throughout the book is that a man should be simple with G-d (Deut. 18:13) without investigations and proofs, see there. 







He is now giving a reason why the intellect did not perceive the matter from beginning to end. He says: it is impossible for the intellect to perceive that which is perceived by the physical senses, namely, the noise and the touch. If he did not see the rock, hear the noise, or feel the strike, the intellect would not have known whether or not there was any stone which produced a noise or struck. Likewise for other similar things. From there he will make a kal v'chomer (major to minor logical inference) - if the intellect cannot perceive that which is normally perceived with physical senses, all the more so that it is impossible for the physical senses to perceive what is normally perceived by the intellect (since the intellect is on a higher plane.) 

 As we find recorded in books, that most of the early philosophers became insane. And we see even in our generation - those groups which go after their opinions and investigations, either they became crazy or they go out to evil ways... Perhaps this explains: "Ben Zoma looked and was damaged, and Acher went out to evil ways" (Chagiga 14b regarding the 4 great Sages who entered Paradise upstairs using holy names).  
One must be careful and guard to not represent G-d with any likeness or form, G-d forbid.  
We must remember this in our investigations in this gate when examining the matter of the existence of the Creator. We must also guard to not represent Him or ascribe to Him any kind of physical form. Likewise, the Moray (Rambam's Guide for the Perplexed Part 1 ch.35) wrote: "just like it is necessary for the masses to realize and the young ones to be taught that G-d is one, and that one must not serve other than Him. So too, it is necessary to educate them in this in the way of tradition that G-d does not have a body and that there is absolutely no comparison in any way whatsoever between Him and His creations." He then ends off with "even though they don't understand the reasons for the matter and don't know the logical proofs which establish the matter in the mind, just like you are not obligated to teach him by proofs that G-d exists. Rather, let them accept everything in the way of tradition, and afterwards when they grow, the matter will be explained to them stage by stage according to their intellectual ability", see there for more details. 













"hidden" in that other people do not know his intent, that he associates something else with G-d, namely that he serves G-d with fraudulent intent, but "visibly" he appears as if he is serving G-d alone.

When a man turns to the physical pleasures, he will not stop nor rest day and night, and all of his aspirations will be to fulfill his desires. And all of his acts are not l'shem shamayim (for G-d), because he will always look first - whether he will receive benefit from it. If yes, then he will do it. But if not, he will drop it all. 




Certainly they don't need to plumb in-depth to bring proofs on the Unity of G-d, since none of this is hidden to them due to their powerful intellect and understanding. Also, every man, especially those who study the Torah, need that there should be before them a "book of remembrance" of mussar and yira, especially this book, so that one can rebuke and reprimand himself always from within the book, lest and perhaps one goes out from the bounds of the service of G-d, without realizing. Therefore it is necessary to consider and examine one's acts always. Because the yetzer (evil inclination) is close by, and does not leave a person who does any good thing until he has enticed him to abandon it, like the author wrote in the fifth gate...as the maggid (angel) prescribed to the Beis Yosef (to study daily from the Chovos Halevavos to subjugate the yetzer)...and in my book "HaZechiros", I elaborated a bit also from other early books on the greatness of the obligation on every Jew to always toil in books of yira and mussar, and especially Torah scholars, since the greater a man, the greater is his yetzer.

Second Treatise on Examination

Introduction


















Since if the kind hearted man did not take the infant into his home, it would have died there. But for the prisoner, it is possible that he would have found a way to save himself from his enemy through some strategy. If so, the former should have been more grateful and praised the benefactor more than the prisoner. But he did not do so. The reason being that he is used to the benefits from childhood and thinks that this is normal and that he deserves it. Thus it is so with most human beings, who behave like this infant.


One should always think that everything G-d does is for the good, and all the bad things are actually good for him. Either they are for the benefits of trial, namely, that G-d tests the righteous to increase their reward. These are the yesurim shel ahava (chastisements of love) or they are in the way of punishment, and his sins are forgiven through them, as written in Gate 8 accounting #27, see there. 



Like the Moray Nevuchim writes in part 3 ch.12 on the grumbling of a certain philosopher that the bad things in the world are more numerous than the good, etc. The Rambam answered there at length. The summary of his words is that most of the bad things which befall a man are due to his own bad choices, such as due to a bad way of living in eating, drinking, [excessive] marital relations, or that he pursues things which are not necessary for him. Through this, he falls into mishaps and troubles, and he then complains about G-d's traits. But if he had subsisted with the necessary only, he would have been spared from all these troubles, because the minimum necessary is easily obtained and is assured for every human being. see there and Gate 8 accounting #22 for similar to this. 







Even though the sages do not stir a person to the good, behold, there are books of wisdom and understanding available, and whoever wants to learn and stir himself, let him come and learn. For without toiling in books of mussar (ethics), a man does not fulfill his duty.





Chapter 1




If you find something which you do not know its benefit and its reason, then when you reflect and examine well all things, you will find that all were done with awesome wisdom, and there is nothing which does not have a purpose and a benefit.







<b>shall point to His unity</b> -- it is a clear proof and plain evidence that G-d is alone in His world... All the creations, generally and specifically - all of them guard their post (for example, the planets are forced to revolve around the sun according to His physical law). This points that they are all forced by one Master, and all are under His domain and power...

Chapter 2







this is a general proof that a man must not be like a wild horse without understanding, rather he must consider and examine all of his actions always.

Chapter 3






















G-d made the universe so that all who behold it will recognize and know that a wise, mighty, and capable One, of which there is none like Him, created it just like a building teaches on the wisdom and ability of the builder. So too, we can deduce from the world and everything in it on the Creator even though we cannot grasp His essence as explained in Gate 1. 







Without death, the human race could not endure for several reasons. Without death, why should a man work endlessly under the sun? When would he take his reward? Since in truth, the good of this world, is not really good and likewise for the bad. The wicked person would not fear death and would always remain in his wickedness. [With death,] the righteous man will receive his reward there according to his deeds... and there are other good reasons for death which we cannot comprehend. 

<b>study its fine and spiritual elements...obtain proofs</b> -- i.e. he will not look solely at the physical side of things, so one should not think man was created for physical things such as eating and other needs. Because then it would not be necessary for each creature to have some fine and spiritual elements. Rather the spiritual in each thing is a clear proof on the blessed Creator, as is evident to one who reflects on this. When a person habituates himself in everything he looks at and in every creature he sees, he will be able to see the work of G-d for it is awesome, and through this he will be able to fulfill the verse: "I have set G-d before me always" (Tehilim 16:8). When he habituates in this, the awe and fear of G-d will enter his heart and "he will then cling to the service of G-d". 







This world and all of its possessions was created only so that a human being will prepare in it his provisions for the Olam Haba (afterlife). Because there is his true home and residence. While here, he is like a visitor who stopped by temporarily. "This world is like a hallway to the Olam Haba..." (Avos 4:16), "today to do them and tomorrow to receive their reward" (Eruvin 22a). Therefore, one should take from this world only what will be good for him in the afterlife, and not more. But the fool, who does not understand what G-d asks of him, and why he came to this world and in this body, and thinks that here is his home and residence, and that he will be here forever. Therefore, he works only for worldly matters and completely forgets his final end.







Gan Eden is a person's true home. In this world, he is like a visitor who camped for a temporary stay. Only that he needs room and board, and must therefore prepare his livelihood. But he must not abandon his plot of land in Olam Haba (the afterlife) by ignoring cultivating it lest it become a barren wasteland.

Chapter 4









Through man all of what G-d created is completed and perfected for everything was created for the benefit of man and to serve him, and man is in this world, like the owner of the house.











Rabeinu Tam writes in the sefer hayashar shaar 13 that it is proper to recite that speech in Job [ch.38]






<b>of a general and particular character</b> -- that all human beings need that trade such as plowing and sowing, or the like, while some trades are only for some people such as gold and silver smiths, which are needed only by the wealthy.
<b>who has given understanding to the mind</b> -- who has given wisdom to man and set understanding in his mind to think thoughts and do all the works and deeds which man does?

G-d set His torah among us so that we may properly know what to do and how to conduct ourselves in this world. Through the torah, we may know how to do G-d's will. Without it, a man is like a fool, walking in darkness. Not only that, but through the torah one also attains the pleasures of this world as explained in parsha Bechukotai: "if you will walk in My statutes, I will give..." (Vayikra 26:3) and many similar verses. 



Even though it appears that the world acts independently according to natural laws, in truth nature is under rule of the torah, i.e. those who fulfill the torah. They can rule over nature as they wish as a master can rule over his slave (subject to certain limitations by G-d). This is not something supernatural because G-d, who created the universe and the laws of nature - He Himself gave us the torah, and He decreed on all of His creations that they be under the rule of those who fulfill the torah.. And as the verses in the torah teach.

Chapter 5










<b>philosophy</b> -- i.e. general wisdom, because all the wisdoms and all the rational investigations are given the general term "philosophy". And the author says that the general principle of wisdom is only man's knowing himself.

















<b>G-d has joined a spiritual and intangible essence</b> -- A complete independent spiritual creature, with 248 limbs and 365 sinews just like the body (see Shaarei Kedusha 1:1), and it is intangible and invisible to the physical eye, like the higher beings, namely, the spiritual melachim (angels).























<b>G-d inspires the parents' hearts with kindness</b> -- G-d implanted in human nature that the infant finds favor in his parents' eyes. Without this, no kids would ever be raised [properly].










If a human being had only constant good in this world, he would forget and not recall the matters of his final end, and he would trust (hope) in this world and follow the musings of his heart and his lusts for all of his days. Therefore, it was among the divine plan to send him sometimes bad illnesses, even during his youth in order that he recognize and know that there is no complete good in this world. And even if he is in a very good situation, the bad illnesses can come and ruin his joy, so that he won't trust in this world. 


<b>The heart is the sanctuary of the natural heat</b> -- in the heart all the blood of the body is drawn through. The nefesh chiyuni (lower soul) is bound to the heart, like a flame to a candle as I quoted earlier the words of the Kuzari, see there. 












<b>like a King's court</b> -- the body is like the king's court and the king which dwells there is the Sechel (mind). All the limbs and organs are like servants of the court. There are officers appointed to provide food for them so that they can minister to the king, i.e. the intellect. Hence, it is no wonder that a human being is called a "miniature world", for his inner workings is like the entire world.
















And likewise our sages said (Pirkei Avot ch.5): "a shamed face person is destined for Gan Eden (paradise)", and (Nedarim 20a) "whoever has shamefacedness will not sin swiftly" 
... the reason is so that man would not be forced in his actions. For a man would never sin if he reflects that the great King, the holy One, blessed be He, stands over him and observes his deeds, as written in the Shulchan Aruch Orach Chaim Siman 1, see there. Hence, if it were naturally so that a man were ashamed before his Creator, just like he is before human beings, he would be forced, and would not be deserving of any divine reward. And in truth, "everything is in G-d's hands except the fear of G-d" (Berachos 33b), so that there would be room for reward and punishment for his free will.






<b>unbound to time and space</b> -- God is not bound to time, all of the past and the future are before Him simultaneously as something in the present. For time is His creation. He was, is, and always will be. And even though we are not capable of understanding this, the verse already says: "For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are My ways higher than your ways, and My thoughts than your thoughts" (Yeshaya 55:9), as the Rambam wrote on the mishna in Rosh Hashana "all are examined in one sweeping look", see there amazing words, and the book Shomer Emunim [Kadmon] spoke of this at length.














All the traits in man are designed in the utmost perfect and beneficial way, provided that man uses his understanding in them. But if he does not use his understanding, then he cannot rectify any trait or any deed properly.


......


























This power that a man possesses, whereby he "moves" - it is a spiritual power, and certainly the spiritual is tied to something else spiritual, namely, the will of G-d. Through changes, G-d directs a man any way He wishes, like an animal's leash in the hand of the herdsman. Thus, we are in G-d's hands. In all of our movements, big or small, visible or invisible - everything is in His hand and His power. 

<b>And when this will have become clear to you</b> -- hence, it is proper that in all your movements, you will remember and check yourself, and think to yourself what you will do with this movement so that it will not be against the will of G-d, since you are tied to Him and He has the ability to change it. If you do thus, that all your deeds will be l'shem shamayim (for G-d), and you feel abashed always before Him, since behold, He is always with you in all your deeds then you will.











<b>A single grain that has been saved from mishaps produces a thousand grains and more</b> -- this is a wonder and a great benefit. Were it not for this, that the land would produce such great amounts, how would human beings attain their sustenance? And their toil would be for nothing.



<b>strongest proof</b> -- ...that all these miracles were done before millions of people, and no nation can refute this to us due to its being so openly well known... The "Kuzari" book expounded on this at length, and it is the central theme of the book from beginning to end. see there.




i.e. G-d puts in the heart of the king to govern his kingdom with righteousness and justice, and to punish the wicked, and to benefit the good so that his rule will endure and so that he does the will of G-d.

Chapter 6


i.e. there are some things which depend and are related to the examination, and it is proper to mention them.
<b>the factors noted in the first treatise</b> -- since one who does not believe in the One Master of the universe, that He alone created all these things, certainly such a person cannot discern the benevolences of the Creator, and to thank Him for them, etc., since for such a person, there is nothing fitting to serve, "the fool says in his heart, 'There is no G-d'" (Tehilim 53:2). But if he would examine with an open eye, on the greatness of the Creator, and His wisdom and providence - he would believe in the Master of the world, and that inevitably, He alone created all this, as explained there. Hence, this depends on that.
Because for what purpose, should a person examine and know the greatness and goodness of G-d without assuming His service, as our sages said (Berachot 17a): "the purpose of wisdom is repentance and good deeds"
To not cease to think all the time, every second, and everything that he beholds of G-d's creations, whether it is big or small, and especially on his own self, how G-d guides him in all matters. If a person puts his mind to all these things mentioned earlier, certainly, he will see new marks of the Creator every day and every hour. See also Gate 8 ch.3 #23







put to heart how you humble yourself before a rich person who has more than you, and all the more so if he is beneficent towards you, the favor will be great in your eyes, and you will revere him and esteem him since he does not need you, and you need him, and his status is higher than yours. Likewise, you run to do the command of this rich person according to how much he is important in your eyes. 

<b>the more energetically will you strive</b> -- i.e. strive and labor to do His service with all of your might.

Third Treatise on Service of God

Introduction

i.e. once all this has become clear to a person, namely, that there is a G-d above and below and He alone created everything, and it has also become clear how much abounding beneficence He has bestowed on us, as written in the previous two gates - the consequence of this is that a human being is under duty to assume on himself the yoke of the service of G-d.


 [According to reason] everything goes after the intent. If he benefits him without outside interest, even though sometimes he falls short and is prevented from this due to some incident or mischance, nevertheless - we are under duty to thank him for his good intention and faithful heart. 









<b>for the sake of a heavenly reward</b> -- i.e. even if his intent is for heavenly reward [which is the highest of the ulterior motives], nevertheless, he is like a merchant who purchases merchandise with little money with intent that he will profit afterwards with this merchandise a lot of money. So too, for one who gives charity to receive heavenly reward. With the small donation he gives to the poor person, he intends to acquire a great and enduring pleasure, namely, the afterlife. 






<b>and the similar appearances on the skin</b> -- i.e. it is similar to the filth and foulness inside the body if he does not wash himself for a long time, such as skin diseases, or the like, unlike the animals even if they don't bathe. 

<b>due to a brain injury</b> -- hence, he lost his ability to reason, then he is "stupider and more senseless", like the way of the crazy people. For then he is worse than an animal, because despite that an animal does not have an intellect, nevertheless, it does not act crazily. Sometimes he inflicts on himself serious injury or even kills himself, unlike the animals who recognize what will be to their advantage and show ingenuity in obtaining their food such as the spider's web or the honeycomb of the bee, or the like, something which many wise men cannot do like them.





Chapter 1





Hence it is proper and a duty to teach him the path he should walk, and the deeds he should do - to stir him and stand him on the true faith from his early years so that he does not walk without religion and without good deeds for a long time. For otherwise it is possible that he will become ingrained in this like a wild horse. 

It is in human nature, for every person with intelligence, that just like he knows and can discern between good and evil, so too he knows that it is proper to humble himself before his Benefactor.
There is something additional which arouses him, namely, what he hears and learns from other people, i.e. what we heard from Moshe Rabeinu, peace be unto him, the master of all prophets - how we should serve G-d.

Chapter 2

<b>natures conflicting</b> (literally: overpowering each other) -- the nature of the body is to be drawn after the physical, while the nature of the soul is to be drawn after the spiritual. Each tries to overcome the other and wants to conquer the other, that it will be drawn after it, because each one needs the help of the other.
<b>[natures] mutually antagonistic</b> (literally: essences which are enhanced in conflicting ways) -- this yearns for physical delights and is enhanced by them, while this yearns for spiritual yearnings and is enhanced by them. Hence, they are enhanced in conflicting ways.
<b>The Creator has implanted in his soul</b> -- the Rambam writes in the Shemonei Perakim that: "even though the nefesh (human soul) is essentially one (i.e. not physically divisible. This is why it is invisible), nevertheless it has 5 "powers", namely, sustenance which allows [the organism] to grow (i.e. an underlying spiritual power which drives and animates the biological cells), feeling, imagination, awareness, and intellect. The intellect is the primary essence while the other powers are implanted by the Creator in order to guide the body, for without this, the body could not endure..." the Rambam ends off there: "and if a man uses all his powers except for the intellect, then it is all for nothing. And this is what scripture says: (Mishlei 19:2) "Also, that the soul be without knowledge is not good; and he that hastens with his feet sins".
without the lust for physical pleasures man would not procreate and the human race would become extinct. 

This is the intellect and understanding, through them he will yearn for lofty spiritual things, not for the body and its pleasures, and he will desire to part from the body and this world, because it yearns for its root [in the higher worlds] as the nature of all things is to yearn for its root. 

Hence, the lusts overpowered the intellect, for the intellect is likened to a poor youth [in scripture as in "better a poor and wise child than an old and foolish king who no longer knows to receive admonition" (Koheles 4:13)"], while the lusts, which are the yetzer hara (evil inclination) is a foolish elder, since he came before the yetzer tov [good inclination which starts to come after 13 years of age]. 


<b>the intellect is a spiritual entity</b> -- As written, "And He breathed into man the soul of life" (Bereishis 2:7), this is the soul which originates from the higher spiritual worlds. And it includes within it all the levels of the spiritual worlds. It has 248 spiritual limbs and 365 spiritual sinews. Therefore, the body was also created in this form, as a tailor who makes a garment like the measure of the man. The body which is physical matter from the ground, is mixed and synthesized from the four elements and their spiritual components. This is called the "foundation soul" (nefesh yesodit). On this, the intellect, or "neshama" abides. The intellect does not benefit from physical pleasures, therefore it has no support or ally in this world, and all of the worldly pleasures are against it. This nefesh (foundation soul) is called the "nefesh bahamit" (animal soul), and it is an intermediary between the physical body and the soul (intellect), as is well explained in the book "Shaarei Kedusha" (essential reading) and in the book of Moshe Alshich.



<b>For the commandment is a lamp and the torah is light</b> -- like a candle which dispels darkness and then one can see what to do, so too the torah enlightens a man, and then he will be able to use his understanding, and not be blinded [by the lusts].

Chapter 3








<b>fear, hope, necessity or compulsion</b> -- that he submits due to fear of punishment. "hope" that he hopes for and waits for good reward. Hence, he submits out of necessity and compulsion.


<b>the second</b> -- that it is a duty and the understanding dictates that it is right and proper to submit to this benefactor even without any fear and compulsion.





i.e. not that he will certainly always serve out of hypocrisy, only that we find it is so for most people who serve G-d only due to the stimulus of the torah - that their intent is for honor and praise of other people, since the torah is built on the foundation of reward [and punishment], as written many times "if you will listen to My commandments...I will send the rain in its time" (Devarim 11:13-14), and "if you will walk in My statutes..." (Vayikra 26:3), and many curses and punishments if they will not listen. All these things apply to the body. And all the time a person's heart is not perfect with G-d, to serve Him for His sake and His greatness, and the person serves only due to the study of torah, then he will also serve sometimes for honor and praise of other people, since his primary intent is for his own benefit. He will think to himself "what's the difference between receiving benefits from G-d and benefits from human beings?", because he is primarily seeking his own glory. But if he serves G-d from inducement of the understanding, namely, what a created being is obligated to his Creator, if so, certainly he is not serving out of expectation of any reward from his Master. As to why the torah is built on the foundation of reward and punishment, this will be explained soon. 

i.e. if a person did not learn the torah and the rewards and punishments mentioned there, he would not, on his own, be stirred to serve and fulfill the commandments written in the torah. Rather, only after he hopes for reward and fears from the punishment. And after he has been stimulated by the torah, and reached the level that he is not serving in order to get reward as mentioned in #1. This is the difference between the first and this second case. In this second case, he is on a higher level than the first. But if he served G-d through inducement of the understanding, he does not need to be stirred by reward and punishment. Rather, he volunteers on his own and willingly endeavors with all his might in the service of G-d with great enthusiasm. 
<b>after knowledge and comprehension</b> -- "knowledge" of G-d and His greatness and exaltedness; 
and "comprehension" that it is fitting to serve G-d, and that man is lacking everything while G-d rules over everything, and the other things which arouse a person to serve G-d, as the author mentioned in Gate 10 ch.3, see there. This knowledge and comprehension is a prerequisite, for without it, the soul will never come to this level, to serve G-d out of love and generous willingness.  

Nevertheless, even with this knowledge and comprehension, the soul will not freely volunteer all it has, unless it is convinced that what it receives in exchange is greater than what it gives,  
namely, that it recognizes that through this, it will attain that the Creator will be pleased with it and love it, like a father is pleased with his [righteous] son, as the author wrote in the end of the introduction, namely, that the greatest possible good attainable is that G-d is pleased with him, and likewise for the converse [the greatest evil is that he kindled G-d's wrath due to his sins]. see there. And this is the main thing of all, to strive that G-d be pleased with him, not that one's intent is to receive any reward, but only to do G-d's will. To understand this fully, it is proper to cite the words of Rabeinu Tam in Sefer Yashar shaar 5: "after we have reached the ultimate purpose.. there is no greater attainment than the Creator's love for a person. For in this love, all good reward is included..." 
 


This is the purpose of all his toil, which he ploughed, and soughed, etc. so that it produces good, blessed fruits. So too, the main thing, and ultimate purpose of all the torah study and service is - the service of G-d for His sake alone, not for any reward or punishment, even in the afterlife. This kind of service is the main purpose of everything.



<b>with great strength</b> -- Because the main thing of all the service is - that a man be complete and right with G-d always, in his inner being and outer being, when he lies down and when he gets up, and that all the actions he does, even matters of his body and all his needs - that they all be devoted to G-d, as David said: "I have placed G-d before me always" (Tehilim 16:8). And this is something beyond the power of a man to attain unless G-d helps him. It comes only after one does all that is in his power to do, and afterwards to increase this in zeal and exertion - then G-d will help him to attain what is beyond his ability, etc. See later in Gate 8 accounting #23 all these words well explained. 
i.e. when he is not learning torah or praying, then the power of lust strengthens over him when he is engaged in matters of the body. 


The inducing by the torah is also necessary. Even though the inducing by the understanding is more acceptable to G-d, but without Torah a man will never get to this.


When a man is calm and contemplates the swift changing of matters in this world, that each day brings greater troubles than the previous one, and the never ending grievings - through this he desires to tend towards the next world and he abhors this world altogether. 






Even though we find that through the stimulus of the torah, some people do alot while others do few commandments of G-d despite that they were all equally commanded. The reason is because this one's understanding is strong and he does the commandments of G-d with zeal and with simcha (joy) without diminishing, while this one's understanding is weak and he does not understand how to do the commandments of G-d. Therefore, he does them sluggishly and sometimes not at all. All this is due to the understanding, but the torah itself does not change, rather it commands everyone equally to do the service of G-d and each one does according to his understanding and recognition. But if there were only the urge of the understanding, without the torah, most people would remain ignorant, without any service of G-d.

 






 the torah included together the received commandments, i.e. the statutes such as the red heifer, shatnez, pork meat, and the like, which reason does not obligate them at all. Likewise the torah clarified general principles and roots of the rational precepts such as the existence of the Creator, His Unity and eternity, love and reverence [of Him], even though these things can be deduced by reason, nevertheless the torah did not refrain from mentioning them because a person whose understanding is not complete due to overpowering of the lusts as was the case at the time of the giving of the torah. Otherwise, they would not seek them because they require some introductions. Therefore, the torah included them in general principles.

Chapter 4


<b>its divisions</b> -- Even though the torah appears to have 613 commandments, and likewise many commandments of the understanding, but the thinking person will categorize them all into only 2 categories - good and evil, namely, the positive commandments and the negative commandments, as he will explain.
<b>various levels</b> -- there are 10 levels of those who study the torah, as will be explained. That this person learns and toils like this, and another person like that.
 
<b>their faith and acceptance of it</b> -- since this person believes in the torah like this and that person like that, their acceptance, i.e. fulfillment of the torah varies, namely, this person fulfills the torah more than that one as will be explained.






<b>consistency in speech and thought</b> -- when he recites the Shema Yisrael, and declares that G-d is One, that the heart (mind) should be with him, i.e. that he understands what he is saying - that G-d's Unity is not like other unities which are also called "one" as explained in Gate 1.
<b>reading and studying, fasting, giving tzedaka, rest from labor, etc.</b> -- all these things need intent of the heart, that in them, his heart needs to be l'shem shamayim (devoted to G-d).



he longs constantly to do sins, even though he doesn't actually do them.









i.e. who is considered intelligent and righteous in all his deeds? He who makes it a habit and second nature in this - that he does nothing in this world, whether in religious or secular deeds, until he first ponders in his mind what he is about to do. If it appears something good will come out of it, he does it. If not, he will abandon it. This general principle includes the entire service of G-d....
<b>I thought on my ways</b> -- Through my thinking and putting to heart, all of my ways, what will be their end, through this - "I turned my feet unto Your testimonies".
So that a man will know on which level he is holding, and will strive to ascend from level to the next level, as he concludes in the end.


<b>who have learnt the torah, etc.</b> -- from their youth, and even when they get older, they do not change from this path. They are satisfied like this, and they don't know nor understand what they are saying such as those who read shnayim mikra, without understanding anything. Likewise, their prayers are like this.
People who sought to study their reading, so that their tongue does not mispronounce, that they recite Hebrew with proper vowelization and taamim (cantilation notes), but they don't understand the contents like those who read the torah merely by way of grammar. They do not understand anything.
they sought the reason why this word is voweled like this and that one like that. For example yira versus yerae (same word different vowels) - that the meaning of this is not like the meaning of that.












They also learned the grammar of Hebrew, since without clear understanding of hebrew grammar, a person cannot lift his hand anywhere in the torah as is known and evident. Only that a person should not waste all of his time in these matters, and refrain from learning other things which his soul needs. Many authors have already warned at length against this practice.




Up until [and including] now, he is speaking about people who try to explain the Torah using only grammar. They explain the matter, but according to their understanding and desire. They are not interested in the explanations of our Sages of blessed memory, as received by the Tradition. These are the Sadducees and Karaites.



i.e. since they don't learn any books on yira and mussar (ethical books), certainly all of their learning is only to show off their brilliance and breadth of knowledge to the masses, "to acquire a name"... and even though they toiled in the torah to the best that a human being is capable, nevertheless, they are still on the outside, since they are not learning l'shem shamayim (for G-d alone), rather only to "win a name, etc." for themselves. However, they are near to the exalted level if they will just open their eyes on their ways, and from lo lishma (undevoted), they can come to lishma (devoted). Let one put this to heart so as not to inherit a double Gehinom as our sages said in Yoma 72b.








Now, he will explain that there are different classes of faith in the torah, and due to this, their corresponding undertaking of the service of G-d will likewise be different.
Due to foolishness and worldly lusts, they found excuses to shed the yoke of torah, and they think that the torah is similar to the laws and customs which come from gentile kings - without reason, and only the fools will believe them and fulfill them. Likewise, they say that there is no reward and punishment in the torah (in the afterlife).
<b>who cannot deny the signs</b> -- since the great signs and wonders performed by the prophets are so familiar and well known, and certainly the signs were from G-d, but the matter of prophecy itself they deny, believing it is inconceivable that G-d will speak with a human being. For speech is physical while G-d is exalted and above all physicality, as this view is mentioned in the Kuzari book. Hence, they claim that the torah is not from G-d. G-d's intent was only that people should conduct themselves justly in this world, that their matter should not be unrestrained. Therefore, G-d stirred the prophet to guide them in the right way, according to how he wants. G-d made signs and miracles so that they will listen to the prophet's words and commands. They also do not believe in reward and punishment like the first class.


It is inconceivable that G-d would make signs and miracles for one who will say falsehood in His Name, i.e. that the person will utter in G-d's name, that G-d commanded him on everything in the torah. And according to their view, the prophet (Moses) made up on his own the entire torah. How could G-d change the natural order for him if he were a liar?  


If you say, G-d changed the natural order for the prophet so that he will be able to direct the people to the way of G-d.  This is also inconceivable since why wouldn't G-d Himself command as to how to do His will?  
For certainly the vision of prophecy to the prophet, to command him on words of the torah is no more wondrous and no more difficult before G-d than performing miracles. If G-d wants to change the natural order for the prophet why would He not command him also. Is one more difficult than the other? Is G-d's power lacking? Rather, certainly G-d spoke the words of torah to the prophet. See also Kuzari maamar 1 siman 89




And likewise, one who has demonstrated miracles, that you can see tangibly that he is a messenger of G-d, how much more so that you are under duty to abide by his commands.





Due to their great lust for worldly enjoyment they undertake the religious service as a snare to trap this world. They are not able to attain their lusts due to their weakness and poorness. Therefore, they pretend to be pious and ascetics and wear garments of torah scholars so that others will believe in them, give them gifts, and deposit their money by them [for safekeeping]. They are hypocrites to people and to G-d. In the Gate of Abstinence ch.4 the author concludes regarding them that they are the worse class of all human beings.

These people are worshipping only l'shem shamayim (solely to G-d). But their intent is for worldly reward because they do not understand the bliss of the afterlife.
They are still outside [the goal] since they hope for reward in their service. If not for hope of reward, they would not be doing the service of G-d. And in truth, it is proper to serve Him for His own sake, etc.
They are not concerned about the reward, but they are serving G-d out of fear of punishment of this world or the next. From our words, one can see the difference between each of the degrees, which are going up in ascending order, from the lowly to the lofty, so that a man will know how to ascend from level to level, as the author ends off. See the [book] Shl"Habris and you will understand all these levels.
He wrote later in Gate 5 that every good thing has corresponding bad things which ruin it. These are the musings of the evil inclination which desires to topple him from this world and the next. See there. Therefore one should study all the things detrimental to avoid them and only then he will be able to do good. See there at length.

If you did not learn torah nor do mitzvot and good deeds, you would have nothing to be proud about. Through good deeds one comes to arrogance. Furthermore, a person is embarrassed to do sins, but one who is arrogant becomes increasing more and more without realizing it. Furthermore, when one commits a sin, he will rouse himself to repent for it. But if he does not do sins and is proud of this, he does not arouse himself to repent [for his pride], therefore pride is the worst sin.
<b>have become aroused out of their neglect</b> -- If they neglected to do some good thing or [neglected] not to do some [bad thing], immediately they aroused themselves and stood up against their evil inclination, so that the Yetzer (evil inclination) has no opening to strengthen himself over them.

Chapter 5

until now, he explained the urge of the torah. Now he will explain what is the urge of the understanding. 

<b>G-d reminds a human being</b> -- When G-d reminds a man and stirs him so he does not fall into the trap of forgetfulness and sinks into the abyss of lusts. G-d warns him through his intellect and neshama (soul) which is called the "yetzer tov" (good inclination). 

<b>comes to one who has taken the Torah...</b> -- i.e. after he conducts all his affairs in line with the torah, and does not veer neither right nor left as G-d commanded Moses. Then he can ascend higher and higher to the intellectual urge. Because, without torah, he is a fool who walks in darkness. He is entrenched in bodily lusts and erroneous outlooks, as the author wrote in chapter 2. 

When does a man experience the intellectual urge? He answered, when he comes to realize the just and true outlooks which a straight intellect obligates, namely, that it is proper to esteem truth and detest falsehood, etc. 



<b>when G-d will remind him</b> -- i.e. G-d will place in his heart good thoughts, and stirs him to choose for himself the proper path which will be good for him in both worlds. 
<b>that person will arouse his mind and soul</b> -- then he will start to consider and think by himself on how many benefits G-d has bestowed on him. 
<b>and his recognition of them will become stronger</b> -- he will see to it to recognize them meticulously, and not forget even one of them - that they be like Totafot (tefilin) between his eyes, the great favors which G-d did with him every day, at all times. 






Even if he had the ability to repay the benefit, he will understand and realize that the Creator does not need him or his benefits.
<b>to humble himself...</b> -- to say to oneself, "what am I and what significance am I that You have brought me until here? You have bestowed on me these tremendous favors and I am not capable of repaying You in the least, as the pious king (David) said (Divrei Hayamim 17:16): "Who am I, O L-ord G-d, and what is my house, that you have brought me this far?" Examine the whole matter there and you will be inspired.



The soul (nefesh) is the life spirit, through it the body lives and is maintained. The Creator has implanted in it lusts for all bodily things. It is called the "nefesh bahamit" (animal soul), for an animal also lusts for things which furthers its body. But the superiority of a human being lies in his intellect, which is like the king over the body, to guide everything in the just way and to yearn for spiritual things. See the Shemonei Perakim of the Rambam ch.1 and what I quoted from the book Shaarei Kedusha later on.

How can you say that your intention is to repay a portion, etc. while you do not long and yearn for this with a tremendous desire. Your words contradict your heart.

Know and understand that all the time that you are lax and negligent to long for this, namely, that you do not know and contemplate always "when will the time come that I can do something to fulfill the will of G-d?", and that through this will be your salvation in this world and life in the next world -  
then you are still on the outside. But if not, know that this is a true longing. 




For the physician will not give the treatment to the patient as long as the patient is continuing to eat the bad foods which the illnesses stem from. He then says that the bad foods to the soul are the bad traits which divide into two categories. 
 If you wish to understand why he refers to bad traits as bad food, and why the healing of bad traits is not part of the healing regimen itself, see the words of a holy man, the man of G-d, our teacher, Rabbi Chaim Vital in his book "Shaarei Kedusha". There he explains this matter at length as he received it from his teacher, the Arizal, through the divine presence which rested on him... The summary of what he says is that good and bad traits in a human being stem from the nefesh bahamit (lower soul). The body is comprised of the four elements of the world and their spiritual counterparts, which are material and form. Therefore, all the traits fall into two main divisions which in turn subdivide into two subdivisions: "arrogance", from the element of fire (Rabbi YS: see Gate 1 ch.6 for an explanation of the four elements system of classification. Modern science combined everything with E=mc2 because it ignores the spiritual side of reality). [Excessive] speech, whether good or bad springs from the element of air. Lust for physical pleasures springs from the element of water, sadness and laziness from the element of earth. From their opposites spring the good traits in a human being. The 613 commandments correspond to the 613 spiritual limbs of the soul which are enclothed inside the nefesh bahamit which in turn is enclothed in the 613 physical limbs of the body. Therefore, the body is not able to work and fulfill the 613 commandments if the soul is ill with the sickness of these bad traits, just like if the body were ill. Therefore, the traits were not included in the 613 commandments. It comes out that bad traits are more severe than fulfillment of the commandments themselves, since then the body and soul are not capable of fulfilling any commandment properly. Therefore, the bad traits are like bad food to a sick body - all the medications in the world (i.e. the commandments) will be of no avail as long as he continues with the bad food. See there at length the words of the wise man and you will understand it well. 







 your perception, namely, your thoughts will be primarily on the next world, for there is your true home, and there you will rest and be tranquil. 



 i.e. the root of the matter and general principle how it is fitting to serve G-d - take a proof from your own self. If you own a slave and the slave receives benefits from you (room and board, etc.), you want that this slave will honor you and serve you with all types of service, as he will explain. So too, it is proper to take on yourself all kinds of slavehood and service towards Him, since He is your superior, the Master of all, and you receive countless benefits from Him.


<b>Do not rebel against your master when he sees you.</b> --therefore David said "I have set G-d before me always" (Tehilim 16:8), in order not to transgress before Him... A slave should not dress up before his master in honorable clothing like free men, unless it is for his master's honor. He should also not act important in his traits, for example, to not become angry before his master even on someone who it is proper to get angry on. Likewise, he should not machria his words (affirm his opinion as if you are equal to him), as the Sages wrote regarding honoring one's father Kidushin 31b.

Chapter 6





<b>an evil of which there is none greater</b> -- for just like we understand that the good of the next world is unimaginable and incomparable. So too, we can imagine that its evil also is incomparable. For, if even in this world there are many troubles and evils, and sufferings - all the more so for one who has incurred the wrath of the great King, the King of kings, the holy One BB"H. How many great evils will befall him of which there are none worse. 
<b>authoritative commandments</b> -- (literally "heard" commandments) these are the statutes which were made known by "hearing" (prophecy). This is what the verse says (Devarim 16:12) "And you shall remember that you were a slave in Egypt: and you shall observe and do these statutes". This verse was said regarding the holiday of Shavuot to teach that only the "statutes" ( Chukim-commandments without rational explanation) were new in the giving of the Torah. 
<b>whoever assumed the service for the glory of G-d</b> --  i.e. both torahs, the authoritative precepts and those which the intellect obligates - if he assumed them for G-d's glory alone, not for his own needs, and therefore, he fulfills them with all his heart and soul, as the Levites did, to endanger their lives in order to exact revenge on the sinners [of the golden calf]. 







<b>it is a duty to tithe</b> -- it is written in the Shl"a and the book "Kenei Chachma", that this is not only for produce, but rather for all good a person receives, he is under duty to tithe it. And from all profit that G-d bestows on a man, he is obligated to give one tenth to the poor. Since, behold, the forefathers took on themselves to do this as written: "he (Abraham) gave him one tenth of everything" (Bereishis 14:20) and "of all that you give me I will give a full tenth to you" (ibid 28:22), and "put Me to the test, says the L-ord of hosts, if I will not open the windows of heaven for you and pour down for you a blessing until there is no more need" (Malachi 3:10). Since this mitzvah is lax in our times, it is proper to remind and make known its importance. Here is an excerpt from the book "Yesh Nochalim" (ch.2 ot 30) and the Sefer Chareidim siman 144: "woe to those who refrain from giving their maaser, for in the end nothing will remain in their hands except the one tenth. This is something tangibly visible for in the places where people were careful to take maaser properly, they became wealthy and their wealth stayed by them until they bequeathed it to their children. While in those places where people were not careful in this, they lost their wealth through some calamity and bequeath nothing to their children... see there and the book Kenei Chachma at length.




It would be proper for my intent in my service and rendering of thanks to make my heart renounce future benefits. Namely, that even though G-d will not give me anything, nevertheless, I am under obligation to render thanks for the past. Because all the while that my intent is to increase benefits, I am like one who serves in order to receive reward, thereby doing it only for my own honor. 

you love yourself, i.e. your body, namely, you pursue pleasures, to seek enjoyments in everything. Whether you are working for the next world or for this world, your intent is to have immediate pleasure from this. 
... and (Pirkei Avot) "lust ,etc drive a person out of the world" 
You [mistakenly] think that if you supplicate for something then you will obtain it but if not, then you won't. You do not consider that G-d has already bestowed many benefits on you which you do not even think about or know about. If one would reflect on this frequently, he would not associate his thoughts in his service or in his prayers on receiving reward. 
you do not put to heart from whence you came and who you are. You are a petty creature, worm and maggot in your life and in your death. You constantly need the kindness of the Creator while He does not need you or your service.
<b>remove this blinding folly</b> -- that you come to know and understand this, that you do not deserve any good while the Creator deserves the greatest service on your part due to His great favors to you.
<b>thinks of you and knows what is good for you...</b> -- and also you consider that the Creator thinks on you. It appears to me that this point is against the second disposition.
<b>you would be contented with whatever benefits He bestows upon you</b> -- whether good or bad, little or much - you would greatly thank Him for them and not put your mind to your benefit and gain in all that you do. This point is against the first disposition.
 if you would remove and divest yourself of these three dispositions certainly you will attain all good things fitting for you due to your service and you would not need to fix your mind and hope on this.

Chapter 7

<b>In regard to your question</b> -- of how can I conduct myself in the service of G-d in the minimum way, and even though one is not able to do more, nevertheless this small amount should be with kavana (proper intent). The Understanding answered that there are ten matters which one must conduct himself in. This is the minimum of all levels of service [of G-d] and every human being is capable of fulfilling it.

to always verbally recall the favors which G-d has bestowed on him. 
 the bounty of G-d should not be insignificant and small in his eyes. Rather, it should be big, important, and cherished. 
to not ascribe the good to other people who benefit him and thank only the person because the person is just an intermediary between him and G-d, which G-d has made into an agent. It is proper to thank the human being for his good heartedness and because G-d has brought good through him [since G-d brings good through the meritorious]. But the main thing is to thank G-d because He is the primary Benefactor, and the good comes from Him alone as will be explained in the Gate of Trust. 
To not pride oneself in them and think "my power and the might of my hand have achieved all these things for me" (Devarim 8:17), or that he says that he is worthy of this due to his good deeds. In truth, all the bounties are a kindness of G-d for a man is not worthy of this as will be explained. 
He should not think that this good will continue only if he exerts himself with all his strength to amass it and guard it but if he neglects it, he will lose it. 
that he should not despise the poor man and think that he is better before G-d than the poor man since he has received many bounties. This is not a proof because perhaps your heart was evil before G-d and other people did not know about it. Therefore, G-d gave you much good and this good will entice you to do bad things in public view. But if G-d had not done this, there would have eventually been a chilul Ha-shem (desecration of G-d's Name). 



For "G-d does not come with complaints [unreasonable demands] on His creations" (Avodah Zara 3) but nevertheless a man can take on himself these ten matters mentioned.
<b>will be worthy of a continuance of the good</b> -- as if to say "I guarantee on this that no damages shall strike his material possessions and he will succeed in all of his ways."
<b>And if this is withdrawn from him</b> -- i.e. even if sometimes one who fulfills all these ten things, and nevertheless G-d withdraws the bounties from him and his situation reverses, and he is struck with poverty or some other troubles, he should not feel bad because "all that G-d does is for the good". Either through this, G-d will erase his sins in this world, so that they are not prepared for him in the next world, because there the justice is extremely harsh.  
Or it is to increase his reward, as the Sages said regarding "chastisements of love" (Berachot 5a), for certainly one hour of the bliss of the afterlife is better than all the life and pleasures of this world. Hence, either way it is good for him.

Chapter 8










You wonder at the contradictions in scripture on this matter, but you do not wonder that you can see this tangibly by mere observation that these two things contradict each other.
Sometimes, a man is able to accomplish all that his heart wishes and no one can hold him back. 
While for some matters and some times, he cannot perform things the way he wishes, and many times things happen against his wishes. From this you can see and observe that man is under the chains of G-d, and G-d has total control over him like the pottery in the hands of the potter. If G-d wants, He will grant him the ability of free will and sometimes, G-d holds back and blocks his free will if He does not want this thing.

Chapter 9




This is a powerful parable on a human being, who is here now and tomorrow in the grave. Not only does he accumulate money and builds here as if he will live forever, but even what he has there, namely, the torah and mitzvot which he should have received reward for in the next world, he does them in order to receive reward in this world, namely, for honor and [worldly] benefits. Therefore, he received his reward for them in this world like he wished. And when he is lowered in the grave, he will be destitute here and with nothing in his hand for there. Then too the regret he will feel will be of no avail. But the wise king, when he realized the truth, did the opposite, etc. So too, a wise man, everything he does in this world, even for things of his body and benefit, which people deem valuable - he leaves them there, namely, he does everything l'shem shamayim (with wholehearted devotion to G-d). Hence, he will find his reward in the next world, and there he will delight in them. Therefore, he is always joyful, whether in this world or in the next. 




the soul is from the spiritual worlds. It's state was like that of angels, before it came into this world. Only that they are forced in their deeds, and they stand always at the same level. They have neither reward nor punishment. 
<b>His purpose is to exalt you</b> -- i.e. G-d wanted to exalt the soul and elevate it to a greater level than even the angels. Hence, the author continued "nearest to the light of His glory". For the souls of tzadikim are mamash the [holy] chariot (see Ezekiel 1), and close to the Shechina (divine presence) as the Sages said (Bereishis Raba 47:6) "the forefathers are the chariot". And every human being can reach their level with his deeds. All this is accepted by all the kabalists - that the level of tzadikim is higher than the level of angels. Likewise, it is the view of the author, and the view of Rav Saadia Gaon... See also the end of Shaarei Kedusha and in the Shl"A. 

To not be foolish, as in: "Be you not as the horse, or as the mule, which have no understanding" (Ps. 32:9)


G-d sends sufferings and other trials on a man to demonstrate whether he will scorn them or receive them with love and serve G-d with whatever G-d sends his way. Like the forefathers, whose days were full of displacements and sufferings. And likewise, for the pure and straight of every generation, they are in a state of suffering due to this reason - in order to elevate them to a higher level than the angels which are called "mighty in strength, etc." For if man had only good in this world, with what would he be worthy of all this greatness?
<b>All this could not have been possible if you remained in your former state</b> -- when you were there, in the world of souls, [it was not possible] to do these three things to you.






<b>two counselors</b> -- the understanding and the lust. I term these the good inclination and the evil inclination. They are for your need, namely, so that you may have free will to follow whichever one you wish. 
Every thing that a man does creates something above (in the mystical worlds), whether good or bad, and it is very much as if he wrote it. It is known that a man creates with each deed either a kategor (prosecutor) or kanegor (defender). They [the prosecutors] stand and do not nullify until the man repents. Likewise, the sages said (Pirkei Avot 3:16): "the shop stands open and the shopkeeper gives credit and the account book lies open and the hand writes...". And in the talmud (Taanit 11a) on the verse (Devarim 32:4) "righteous and just is He", the sages said (Taanit 11a): "When a man departs to his eternal home all his deeds are enumerated before him and he is told, 'Such and such a thing have you done, in such and such a place on that particular day'. And he replies, 'Yes'. Then they say to him. 'Sign' - And he signs, as it is written, "He seals up the hand of every man" (Job 37:7). And what is even more, he acknowledges the justice of the verdict and he says. 'You have judged me correctly'." 













<b>not entice you</b> -- know that all the pleasures you can possibly enjoy in this world - they are only to the body. 
Your soul has no pleasure or benefit whatsoever from them nor any pain in their absence. 





<b>If you will continue to be of this mind</b> -- that all your deeds are l'shem shamayim (devoted to G-d).  
The scribe will count all your movements which are not a mitzvah such as eating, drinking, business dealings, and likewise all other bodily needs - they will be counted as good deeds and you will receive reward for them just like mitzvot since you did them l'shem shamayim (for serving G-d)

<b>but if you dismiss his advice</b> --  you discard the advise of the Understanding and listen only to the advise of the lusts, which is the Satan, which is the yetzer hara (evil inclination), who is diametrically opposed to the Understanding.

Chapter 10

i.e. which occasions may I employ even bad traits, and even so I shall win praise for them in the next world. 

 If you do a mitzvah, which you trust that through it you may attain an enduring pleasure, namely, the reward of Olam Haba. Release this trait, i.e. to do the mitzvah with great joy as we wrote earlier in chapter 3. For otherwise [the wise man wrote:], "and of joy, what use is it?" (Eccl. 2:2). And the opposite, the proper place to use grief, i.e. sadness, is if an occasion happens that you are forced to commit a sin, that through this you will get enduring pain in Gehinom, it is permitted to use the trait of sadness. Likewise, for the death of righteous people or your relatives, it is permitted to mourn in sadness. But otherwise, sadness is a very bad trait as written in Shaarei Kedusha. 
 i.e. now you are engaged in some matter, and this matter is a path which leads to another matter which will have a bad ending that you cannot avert. Then, release the trait of fear. Hence, if this is not the case, do not fear and trust in G-d that He will do what is good for you. 
For example, to do your business dealings faithfully, i.e. according to the torah even though this may [seemingly] cause you losses, and trust in G-d that the end of this matter will be good in this world and in the next. 
to be strong as a lion, to not transgress the will of G-d, even if this entails enduring many trials, distresses, and humiliations. Likewise, to fulfill the commandments of G-d and the commandments of His saints (the Rabbinical decrees), even though there are many obstructions against you - do not be swayed and endure their difficulties. 




That you feel ashamed and humiliated when G-d removes the good which He bestowed on you until now. "to His face, in His hands" - i.e. even though your Benefactor is eternal and so are His benefits, therefore He has the ability to continue to bestow good to you, and even so, He retracts them from you and no longer wishes to bestow this good to you, then it is proper for you to feel ashamed before Him and to ask yourself why did G-d do this? It must be due to my sins. Then feel remorse and repent completely.  
And likewise be ashamed when He rebukes you either through good means, i.e. preachers who use good and nice words,  
or through bad means, namely, sufferings G-d sends on you which are usually measure for measure.

... 

even though he wrote in Gate #5 that it is a ploy of the evil inclination to go and shame other people and that this is to induce arrogance, see there at length (ch.5). We must answer that here he is referring to thoroughly wicked people whose wickedness is well known. And likewise, if he is fitting for rebuking them and that his words are heeded. But there it refers to when he does this arrogantly, and also he does not know clearly their wickedness. It appears to me to make this distinction due to the different expressions used here and there. 
when people sway from the way of truth and when the falsehood strengthens over the truth. Likewise it is permitted to be angry at people of falsehood [who adopt the ways of falsehood]. 

When all things are done in the good and just way, and each and every person's direction and place will come in peace - this should be your desire and wish.









 so too one who teaches torah to a student who is not worthy, not only are you not doing a mitzvah, but you will also be punished for this. Because he will take the torah teachings and do all kinds of bad things with it, and like those apikorsim (heretics), and as the talmud says (Pesachim 49b) "those who learned torah and left it [hate the torah sages] more than all of them".
<b>seeks the truth for himself</b> -- as in (Pirkei Avot 1:14) "if I am not for myself who is for me?" Why should a man oppress himself, for all that a man does, whether good or bad, is ultimately for himself.

Fourth Treatise on Trust

Introduction














 He endeavors and does everything he can to not need others and to not enclothe himself in the favors of others. For this would place him under an obligation to toil to express gratitude to them and to also make a return, as it is proper and obligatory to pay back a benefactor with good, as mentioned earlier in the beginning of the third gate. Rather, he desires that G-d alone be his benefactor, and that he thanks only Him. 


This is because the chief cause of mental agitation and confusion which prevents a man from learning torah and devoting himself to religious service is - constant worry on his livelihood, how will he earn money and through what means. But one who trusts in G-d will diminish his worry in this and increase his worry for religious service. And he will have tranquility of heart like the Alchemist, and even more.





Chapter 1



Chapter 2





Otherwise, he will abandon hope from the favors of G-d, since he is in doubt whether he is worthy of them, and his trust in G-d will diminish. And through this, he will distance from G-d and His torah. Rather, let him reflect that G-d is benevolent to the good and the bad, as written: "His mercy is on all of His creations" (Tehilim 145:9). And through this, he will come closer to G-d and repent and he will become worthy of the good.

Chapter 3

























When a man realizes that G-d knows the truth, whether what comes out of his lips is the same as what is in his heart, how could he then claim and say that he "truly trusts in G-d", when his heart is not with him. And then G-d will also remove His providence from him as mentioned in the beginning of the introduction to this gate ("..whoever trusts in something other than G-d, the Al-mighty will remove His providence from such a person..."), and then it will be a chillul H-ashem. And it is proper for us to put our eyes and hearts on the things which come out of our lips every day in our prayers, that we claim and say many times that we trust in Him and hope to Him, such as in Pesukei D'Zimra: "Nafshenu Chiksa L'H-ashem", "ki bshem kadsho batachnu", "yehi chasdecha..", and in Ahava Raba: "ki bshem kadshecha hagadol vehanora batachnu", and in the Shmonei Esrei "ve ten sachar tov lchol habotchim b'shimcha b'emes, vsim chelkenu imahem", "ki becha batachnu", and many others. It is proper for every man to put his eye and heart all of his days on the words of this gate, then "lo yevosh v'lo yikalem", not in this world and not in the next. 




Rather, let one reflect constantly that G-d is the Cause of all causes, and everyone and everything are merely His agents, as will be explained later on. 
Even though G-d has compassion on all His creations, including the wicked, as he explained earlier, even so, for this, one should not think that G-d will forever tolerate him, and trust that G-d will continue bestowing good to him always despite his wickedness. And even though things are going well now, there is no escape from His judgments, and eventually, when He wishes, He will choose a time and place to collect His debt (of justice). Rather it is proper for a man to endeavor to fulfill all of G-d's commandments. 






































If everything were prepared and ready before a man, he would not have any free choice. And he would remain forever at the same level and he would not deserve any reward or punishment. 















As the sages said (Kidushin 39b): "He whose merits outweighs his sins is punished (Rashi: in this world to clean him from his sins, so that he receives complete reward in Olam Haba) and is as though he had burnt the whole Torah, not leaving even a single letter; while he whose sins outweighs his merits is rewarded (Rashi: to pay him the reward for his merits in this world so as to banish him in Olam Haba) and is as though he had fulfilled the whole Torah, not omitting even a single letter!" 
These are "Yisurim shel Ahava" (chastening of love) which are not due to sins, as the talmud says (Berachos 5a): "if he examined his deeds and did not find any sins let him be sure that these are Yisurim shel Ahava, as written (Mishlei 3:12): 'For whom G-d loves He chastens'", i.e. to increase his reward in Olam Haba more than his merits. 
 That he receives everything with a good countenance, and he does not rebel in sufferings so that others will learn from him and see him and notice him and desire to serve G-d even though they don't have all their lusts, and even though they are in poverty, hardship or in painful sicknesses as we find with Iyov (Job) and many other sages, who were in suffering yet did not stop from torah and service, and as is known of Hillel who was extremely poor, and others who needed to labor for their livelihoods and nevertheless studied the torah.
Due to the wickedness of the generation, sometimes G-d sends suffering to a Tzadik to atone for the sins of the generation (to avert disasters or the like), and without a doubt, his reward will not be withheld and the wicked will be paid what they deserve, as Rashi explained on the verse he cited. 






Through this it will be demonstrated who was of good, pure heart to G-d and faithful in His service. And even though the wicked were ruling over him and humiliating him, he bears everything and knows that their success is temporary and eventually G-d will collect His debt. And he doesn't learn from their ways and will receive reward for this. But if G-d were to punish the wicked immediately, and reward the righteous right away, there would be no room for free will (which was the purpose of creation), and everyone would hasten to do good and receive reward quickly and everyone would fear swift punishment.

Chapter 4



Namely, if he regards them as means between himself and G-d, and that they are merely agents from G-d as will be explained. 







i.e. the recipient does not give praise and thanks to G-d who provided his livelihood through the donor, and appointed the donor as a caretaker of him. Rather, he submits only to the donor, and flatters him as if the donor provided him of his own...and likewise he wrote later on "if only they realized that no human being has the power to give or prevent anything except to he who the Creator decreed - they would not hope to anyone other than Him, etc". And he wrote this again several times. This seems to be a contradiction (since the donor had free will whether or not to give to him). The answer to this is that the completion of something is not in man's hands, rather, only the free will and resolve to do it, and G-d is the one who brings all things to completion. 




















One can explain this to also be referring to one who realizes that it is the decree of G-d that these be provided through him, but he thinks that if there were not a decree that he provide for the poor, the abundant money would remain by him. But he errs in his outlook, because a rich man is like a funnel, if it pours down below, then we pour more up above. But if it is clogged below, we stop pouring above. 
i.e. He acquires money in good and honest ways, and he is not in a rush to become rich. And if he does have wealth, he will distribute it to all those who it is fitting to distribute to. He is easygoing (vatran) with his money. If he gives he is not arrogant on account of this. He doesn't desire to be praised for it, and he gives praises and thanks to G-d who appointed him as a caretaker of many people. 




If it was decreed for this person that his money will not come from that person, then that rich person does not have the ability to give to him. Even though man has free will, the completion is not in man's hands, as written earlier. Likewise, the rich man cannot prevent this, if the Creator decreed the money will be his. G-d will arrange that the rich man will lose the money, or some other means that will cause the money to reach the hands of that person....













i.e. he should reflect in his heart that it is for his benefit that he has no relatives or friends that he can enjoy with, and it is good for him so that he makes his companionship with G-d and places his trust in Him alone since he has no one else to trust due to his being a stranger. 
 Furthermore, all of us are strangers because the soul, which is of divine origin, is in this world like a stranger in a strange land. And in truth, the essence of man is his soul... and further in a short while he will leave this world, and certainly then he will lay there alone without relative or savior. 


To be saved from them by fulfilling his duties towards them.





As the sages said (Yoma 23a see rashi Rosh Hashana 17a): "he who forgoes his honor when it is slighted will merit that all his transgressions be forgiven". 






He gave a reason for this difference, namely, "it was not revealed to us which means is best...", and we don't know what to do, whether engaging in this trade or that business will be best for us or maybe in something else. And as the sages said (Berachos 33b) "everything is in the hands of Heaven (G-d), except for fear of Heaven". 


Furthermore, how can we charge our mind to choose this business or this trade? Many times we find one person becomes rich through this business or trade and it is good for him, while another person does not profit at all from it and it is bad for him. If so, there is no way for us to know, rather only that which G-d puts in our hearts [to choose] is for our good. We find many verses which teach this such as (Mishlei 19:21) "There are many plans in a man's heart but the counsel of the L-ord - that shall stand", and "A man's heart plans his way: but the L-ord directs his steps" (Mishlei 16:9), and (ibid 20:24) "A man's steps are directed by the L-ord; how then can anyone understand his own way", and many more verses. But the actions in the service of G-d, that which is good, namely, fulfilling the commandments - this is good forever and never changes. Likewise the negative commandments are always bad.

... 






<b>his reward for it will be lost</b> -- since he had pleasure and praise for his deed, he already received his reward for this. 

The above account of Yehoshua Kohen Gadol was entirely a spiritual vision, as it is written there: "And he showed me Yehoshua the high priest standing before the angel of the L-ord..." Certainly those standing there are spiritual beings, and when he will "walk among them", certainly it means without a physical body. 

The prophets would explain it to them by heart, just like most of the torah and the explanation of the commandments were transmitted orally by heart, due to many sound reasons. 
<b>can be derived by the wise</b> -- since obviously the main reward and punishment is in the next world, since, behold, in this world life is short and its good does not last, and there is not one person in the world who is completely in enjoyment, without any sadness, worry, or fear to hinder his joy. If so, one who does the will of G-d in this world will certainly be rewarded according to His infinite ability and goodness, which cannot be imagined in this world, and certainly this is in the next world which is eternal and all good. See the Sefer Hayashar for a detailed explanation of this. 






That which scripture ascribes physical form to G-d, such as "the hand of G-d" (Shemos 9:3), "the eyes of G-d" (Devarim 11:12), is also for this reason - so that everyone will understand together, the wise man and the fool, that there is a Creator and Master, as explained at length in Gate #1 chapter 10. 





The Sh'la wrote (page 52b): "Consider an analogy of one who [severely] broke his leg or blinded an eye, and a great doctor came and through his great expertise, healed him for free, or even for pay. Wouldn't he love him greatly all of his days, and nothing the doctor asked of him would be difficult for him? Behold, G-d gave a person hands, feet - all of his limbs, and sustains him and watches over him, and gave him a soul so that he can come to immortality..." see there for more. And the author already wrote in Gate#2 ch.5 on some of the favors that G-d did to us from our first existence in this world until today. He who places them always before his eyes - then, his heart will become fiery (impassioned) towards G-d, yisborach. 
The kindness is that He pays man some punishment in this world with easy suffering (instead of paying him in the next world with far worse suffering), and also slowly, slowly one at a time, not in furious wrath, as written: "Only you did I love above all the families of the earth; therefore, I will punish you for all your iniquities" (Amos 3:2) as our sages expounded in Avoda Zara 4a. Otherwise [if one thinks G-d's kindness means He will overlook his sins], behold they said: "if a man says 'G-d will overlook my sins, his life will be overlooked", unless it is through [the system of] teshuva (repentance) and this is also a kindness. 



During the giving of the torah at Sinai, the Jewish people were in this world. Hence it is proper to inform them of the reward and punishments of this world, since a man does not fear that which is not tangible to him and that he does not understand. 









<b>to be desolate from the world and its inhabitants</b> -- to not have any contentment in joining in the company of people, rather to distance from their conversations and social gatherings. 
 (see gate #8) 


The reason is that every mitzvah is not worthy of reward, as he wrote earlier in the sixth category, because as our sages said on: "Who has given Me anything beforehand, that I should repay him?" (Iyov 41:3) that first G-d bestowed all good to a person and afterwards man performs commandments to make a return. But one who offers his life and soul, and all that is his for G-d, out of love, then all the good of this world is worth nothing to him compared to his love of G-d. If so, how could he not be worthy of the good reward of the righteous and the just? This is clear.

Chapter 5

i.e. both are engaged in the means, whether in a handicraft or in a business, and even so, there is a big difference between them. 

He will curse them since he sees they are of no substance (ein bo mamash). 










He will have provisions for the afterlife.

Chapter 6




<b>whose light of intellect has obscured, whose candle of understanding has extinguished due to being overpowered by the darkness of material desires</b> -- i.e. since the darkness of his material desires has overpowered him, therefore "the light of intellect has obscured, and the candle of understanding has extinguished", to the extent that he does not understand even self-evident things which no man is capable of denying. 










Even though it is a mistake to demand a pledge from G-d for many reasons, nevertheless, if he were assured that the money would stay by him and that he could do what he wants with it, his mistake would not be a falsehood. For example, let's say he took a pledge from someone who he did not realize that the man is an honorable and wealthy person. Even though he was mistaken in demanding a pledge, nevertheless, since he did not know the man, it is not falsehood, since nevertheless, he is assured by the pledge from many possible mishaps. But this that he took a pledge from G-d, not only was he mistaken in his outlook, but also his mistake will not yield any benefit, because he is still not assured that the money will be by him at a needy time, perhaps the money will be struck by a loss and nothing will remain or maybe he will die at midlife as [we see] happens every day.  
And even if we say that the wealth will stay by him, nevertheless it is uncertain whether he will serve G-d due to having wealth, because perhaps the money will bring him more mental pressure and anxiety than he had before he had it, since "more possessions, more worries". 

<b>reward that we cannot even imagine</b> -- that He bestows so much good reward for one mitzvah. 
For example, if the lender takes a security pledge on condition that he will lend the borrower 1000 gold coins. Then, if the lender has the 1000 gold coins available, he can take the security pledge. If he does not [have the 1000 gold coins available], then he cannot take it. And a man knows that he does not have the ability to pay G-d in services and righteousness corresponding to all the benefits he gets from G-d. And especially, if he pays back a little bit, it is through G-d's help, as our sages expounded (Midrash Vayikra Rabba 27:2) on the verse: "Who has given Me anything beforehand, that I should repay him?" (Iyov 41:3) - Who put up a mezuzah before I gave him a house? [Who built a Sukkah before I gave him a place upon which to build it? Who performed the mitzvah of tzitzis before I gave him clothing?], likewise, even one's wisdom and praises is from Him, bb'h

Chapter 7

 i.e. the Unity - to believe in the Creator of the world, as explained there [in Gate #1], and likewise on the [Gate of] examination, to examine His creations, and to assume the service of the Creator, as is fitting to Him. Whoever is far from the things mentioned in those gates and fell into the things detrimental to them as was explained earlier - he undoubtedly does not trust in G-d. 

<b>Ignorance with regard to the Creator</b> -- he does not realize that G-d is a great and awesome King and that His reign is over everything.
<b>and His good traits</b> -- how He guides His creations with kindness and mercy, and always gives them all their needs.
<b>that they are bound by His chains</b> -- all the creations are truly bound by Him, that everything is from Him, all things that a human being does is completely from Him, and there is nobody who can change anything, except for yiras shamayim (moral choice) which G-d gave the free will in man's hands. 




the thing near to him from which his livelihood comes has less power to provide his livelihood than the thing remote from him, which is the cause of this [near] thing, and this remote thing to another more remote thing, etc. All these agents from the man on are called causes and means, and G-d is the Means of all the means and the Cause of all the causes, and the man who receives from all the means is called "the affected". Understand this. 
The proof of this is what he will mention shortly, that a baby at first trusts in his mother's breast, and afterwards on his mother, and afterwards on his father, and so on for the 10 levels he mentions. From this it is clear that the greater one's knowledge of G-d and of His providence on him, the more trust in G-d he will have. 





His joy in love of G-d is greater than the pleasure of the living in reaching their desires and even greater than the pleasures of the dead in the next world, as our sages said (Avot 4:17): "one hour of teshuva and good deeds in this world is better than all of the life of the next world".

Fifth Treatise on Devotion

Introduction







Chapter 1

that a man should not have any intent when serving G-d, other than to do the will of G-d, that G-d said, and one is doing His will. This itself is the reward and punishment, as written: "For his anger endures but for a moment; life results from His favor" (Tehilim 30:6). This was explained earlier in a few places. If a man has any other intent besides this, he is serving himself not G-d alone. He is like a bad servant who hopes for favors from his master.

Chapter 2

 i.e. Through what, and which things must first be established in oneself [before he can come to proper devotion]. He answered that they are 10 matters that must first be clearly established in one's heart. Afterwards, the outgrowth from them that he will do all of his actions only lshem shamayim (for G-d), and he will not turn his heart to anything other than G-d, nor will he hope to anything else, etc. 
Because the inclination of a man's heart is evil and entices him in every matter, small or big. Therefore, it is necessary for one to watch his affairs and consult his intellect, so that the yetzer does not lure him with trickery, because the yetzer also lures people with logical claims, only that they are false, as the author will explain.

Chapter 3



Chapter 4

Through these three things will come loss and spoiling of his deeds, that undoubtedly, they will not be l'shem shamayim (for G-d). He will now explain them, one by one. 





 since he is unsure if he is obligated in such and such a mitzva or not, and even if he does the service, it will be only by rote practice, and for ulterior motives, not lshem shamayim (for G-d), like our sages said: (Pirkei Avot 2:5) "A brutish man cannot fear sin; an ignorant man cannot be pious"

Chapter 5

These are examples and illustrations to learn to apply to other enticements of the yetzer because there is no end to his enticements, therefore who can possibly mention all of them? 

<b>He is interwoven in the forces of your soul</b> -- the yetzer is mixed in all of the forces in a human being's soul. Likewise, he is mixed and merged in the spirit of a man, and in his physical senses, namely - sight, hearing, smell, and touch. He is mixed in and associates with all of them, to steer them according to his will. Examine closely the book Shaarei Kedusha to see what is the evil inclination. See there in detail. Fortunate is the eye which saw all its words. You will understand from there. 
<b>has control of the secrets of your soul...</b> -- That which you think in your heart and in your thoughts, which is something concealed and hidden from all creatures - he rules over all of them, and can steer them according to his evil way.
<b>He is your advisor in all of your movements whether visible or invisible that you wish to do</b> -- you think that your physical movements and invisible movements (thoughts, decisions, etc.) are according to your will. But you don't put to heart that in all of your movements, he counsels you according to his will. If you don't stand up against him to reflect on whether or not your ways are just - immediately you will fall into his net and be ensnared like a bird in a trap.

<b>to kill and uproot you from the land of the living</b> -- from Olam Haba (the afterlife), since, behold, we see that he entices people from small things and builds up to big things, until he tells you "go and serve idols". How many have gone off to evil ways, r"l, and it is all due to the enticements of the yetzer hara. Therefore scripture tells us to guard "very much" from him, as written (in the Shema - Devarim 11:16): "guard yourself lest your heart be enticed, and you stray and will serve other gods, and worship them" i.e. when you stray from the way of the torah, even for small things, eventually you "will serve other gods, etc." (ibid), and in the end "then the L-ord's wrath be kindled against you", etc. (ibid) until finally, "you'll be swiftly destroyed from the good land" (ibid), like our Sages told us in books, and likewise we saw with our own eyes. Here is a quote from the "Magid" (angel) to the Beis Yosef (Rabbi Yosef Karo, sefer magid Parsha Vaera): Yom Revii (Wednesday) at the time of mincha, while I was studying mishnayot: (The heavenly messenger said:) Chazak v'Ematz (be strong and courageous) in my torah, and unify your heart to not separate your thoughts from my torah, my yira, cleave to my nitzchi, my nekiyus, my sod, my oz, etc, my tiferet, my torah, my teshua, my teshuva (see the book Tomer Devorah for an explanation of the Divine attributes), because that which you seek from the Holy One bb'H, that He guide you in the ways of His teshuva, these are the ways I am teaching you, i.e. these are the ways of His teshuva. Strengthen yourself so that you do not part your thought for even a second from my torah and my yira. Annul from your heart all the hirhurim (urges, thoughts) which come to you from the yetzer hara, the serpent, the Samal (Satan). They put these in your heart to make you lost, to confuse/disorient you, to destroy you. And you, stand up against them, annul them from your heart, let not their words enter your ears. Thereby, you will cause them to be lost and confused/disoriented, and you will destroy them. Their desire is in you but you will rule over them. That which you see that sometimes I speak to you but the words do not "arise", behold you know what the Sages said: "shema yigrom hachet" ("sin may cause" [the forfeiture of future good]). Furthermore, even if it does not cause, nevertheless, the hirhurim (thoughts) which enter your heart cause that my words do not arise and they also cause my words to stagger and I do not reveal to you all the words. Therefore, be watchful and guard yourself from these hirhurim, and especially at the time of prayer, annul all these thoughts and unify your heart to my prayer and my service. It is necessary for you to not mesiach daat (become distracted) at all, because the moment you become distracted, your yetzer hara will make you lost, confuse/disorient you, topple you, destroy you, and cast you in the bor tachtis (depths of the pit, i.e. Gehinom). Therefore, you must be constantly alert to his strategies. Do not be forgetful of him for even one second. Be always watchful of him, because zehirus (watchfulness) brings to cleanliness. And thereby, you will make him lost and will destroy him, confuse/disorient him, submit him under you. You must exert yourself exceedingly to not neglect your watchfulness of him for even one second. And especially during the time of Shema and prayer, to burn all hirhurim and machshevot betelot (useless thoughts) with the straw of kerias shema. And thus, you will become elevated and exalted. See and reflect that all the thoughts that a man ponders on his affairs, they do not increase, decrease, or annul in the least from what was decreed for him. Therefore, annul the hirhurim from our heart.(later on Parsha Bo) Friday night 4th of Shevat: "G-d is with you, etc. only cleave in me and in my yira and in my mishnayot. Do not part your thoughts for even one second because, I, I am the mishna (i.e. the Shechina) which is speaking through your mouth. I am the mother which is chastising her child (i.e. the Shechina). Strengthen and cleave to me, because I and all of my legions are all around you. And you are among us like a king with his army. If the eye had permission to see, you would see out as far as your eye could behold in every direction everything full of troops (angels) which were created from the breath of your mouth, when you toil in mishna. They are encamped all around you, and they surround my troops. And you are in their midst like a king in his army. And all of them proclaim and say 'give honor to the holy form of the King, because he is our teacher, etc.' Therefore, be careful for yourself in all your way to be constantly clinging to me, and do not part your thoughts for even an instant from Me, and I will elevate you exceedingly in lofty levels. 


<b>to draw you away from what is for your benefit</b> -- i.e. by putting bad thoughts in your heart constantly, so that through this you will be distracted from looking and thinking about what is for your benefit, namely, your torah and your faith. 

The proverb is referring to a promiscuous woman, and the lust for her, and the guidance towards her is one branch of the strategies of enticement of the yetzer hara. The [hidden] meaning of a "promiscuous woman" is to apikorsus (heresy) and idolatry as the Talmud says (Avodah Zara 17a). The verse gives a double expression of death corresponding to death in this world and in the next. 



 Rav Moshe Alshich wrote in parsha ki tetze similar to these words, see there. He concluded saying: "for two great and important reasons war with human beings is small compared to the war of the yetzer. The first: War with humans is not in a man's hands, but rather it belongs to G-d since "Ha-shem Ish Milchama" (G-d is the master of war) (Shmos 15:3) and without Him "no man shall lift up his hand" (Bereishis 41:44). But the war of the yetzer belongs to man, not to G-d, since "Everything is in the hands of G-d, except for fear of G-d" (Berachot 33b). Free choice is unrestrained, to whatever way one desires, he may pursue. The second: One who wages war with his yetzer is like a young lad who approaches a city he does not recognize. Inside it is a seasoned warrior, trained in warfare from his youth, knowledgeable in all the roads and alleys of the city, since he dwelled there all of his life. And there are over 600 troops there who are all like slaves of that seasoned warrior and follow his orders, powerful warriors which do his will. The city is barricaded shut, with the seasoned warrior and his troops inside it. And behold, this young lad comes and bold heartedly decides to wage war with the seasoned warrior and topple him and conquer the entire city, capture all of its inhabitants, and enslave them all to himself, and change their hearts to accept him as their master. And in truth - if a man does thus with his yetzer hara, this is the ultimate degree of mightiness, because this is like the lad who wages war with the seasoned warrior as above. And this is what our sages said (Pirkei Avot 4:2): "Who is mighty? He who conquers his yetzer, as it is written (Proverbs 16:32) "One who is slow to anger is better than the mighty, and one whose temper is controlled than one who captures a city", [a city] as above. 


As the sages said (Avot 3:2) "one sin induces another sin", and (Shabbat 105b) "whoever breaks an object in anger is as if he worshipped idols...since today he tells you to do this and tomorrow that until he tells you to go worship idols. 






See [Torat Moshe] by Rabbi Moshe Alshich on parsha Ki Tetze who explains the account of Ki Tetze to be referring to the war of a man with his yetzer, and how he can overcome it. See there amazing words. 





that the universe never ceased existing, that it is eternal, and likewise will never cease to exist. Therefore, nobody created the world and one is not under duty to serve anything. 

Really you can deduce intellectually that the universe has a Creator, as explained in the first gate, since even a small pebble cannot possibly create itself, all the more so for this entire vast universe. 








The torah itself tells us that whenever we have any doubt in a torah matter, we should go to ask the Kohanim in the temple, because they are the pillars of the tradition. The explanation of the torah never left them from Moshe until then, since they are free to toil in the torah due to being supported from the priestly gifts. 



<b>he will make superfluous things that are secondary to food appear so embellished</b> -- i.e. the yetzer embellishes to a man to run after the superfluous and the enjoyments which are the causes of all iniquities and all sins, as this is written at the end of the first gate and in the gate of abstinence, "that it is the El Zar (strange god) in the body of a man. see there. 












When your mind is seduced to believe his advice, then your intellect will depart from you, i.e. the intellect/conscience was given to a man to guide him to the just path, and the yetzer will divert it from you to help him do all the things G-d considers abominations with support of reason. Therefore our sages said (Pesachim 49b): "[Greater is the hatred wherewith the amme haaretz (ignorant Jews) hate the torah scholar than the hatred wherewith the gentiles hate Jews...It was taught:] He who has studied and then abandoned (the Torah, hates the torah scholar) more than all of them." 
<b>and topple you from the levels of reward in the next world</b> -- i.e. even if you are a torah scholar and toil in mitzvot - you will not have any reward in the next world when you heed to the yetzer that all your actions be not l'shem shamayim (for G-d), as will be explained. You will be like Doeg and Achitofel or the like, and the apikorsim in every generation who have no portion in the next world despite that they were big Chachamim, 
... through the torah they became wise men to do evil. 















The Ramban wrote (on Devarim 6:18) that all the good conducts, even though they are not [explicitly] mentioned in the torah, the torah nevertheless exhorts us on them, as written there: "And you shall do that which is right and good" - that everything which is good in the eyes of G-d and man, you are under duty to do it all, see there. Likewise he wrote on the verse (Vayikra 19:2): "You shall be holy", that this is a commandment on a man to be holy and pure in all of his conducts and traits. That he should be entirely holy. He then went to explain the good conducts, see there. He ended off: "even though these enactments are Rabbinical, the main intent of the verse is to exhort us in this, to be clean, pure, and separated from the masses of men who dirty themselves with superfluous and ugly things". 





 i.e. there is no good thing which does not have a corresponding damaging thing which can ruin and spoil that good thing. And the more good something is, the more quickly it can become spoiled. Similar to silk clothing which can be ruined with a bit of oil or a stain...unlike coarse cloth..) 


From here is a proof that one need not refrain making known and publicizing the various types of incitements of the yetzer on a man. And we need not worry lest people may learn from these things to deceive others. 







this is the complete flatterer, who worships human beings. He is like the idol worshipper, as written earlier in chapter 4. 


<b>All flesh is like grass</b> -- Like a flower of the vegetation of the field which wilts and dries up swiftly, so too are human beings.
<b>all its kindness is like the flower of the field</b> -- the kindness that a human being does is like a flower which blossoms and swiftly withers and falls from the fruit and does not endure. So too the deeds of human beings do not endure. And if so, how can a man be haughty? 













He will cause your mind to always worry and think on this world, and from where will come your livelihood and desires, so that you forget your end. Not only that, but even at the time you want to pray or learn torah, he will put in your heart every which way he can [to distract you] as will be explained. 

Why was he able to put in your mind all these things? Because you recite your prayers without kavana (intent/direction) of your heart. But if you would pray with all of your kavana, to understand every word that comes out of your mouth - none of this would happen to you. 


Even though he will think, during the time of prayer, on doing mitzvot and good deeds or to answer (Talmudic) difficulties, which are good things, nevertheless, the loss, namely that he ruined his prayer with outside thoughts is a greater sin in his hand and outweighs all of what he gained, and our sages said (Shabbat 10a): "Torah and Tefilah each have their own time"...as in the Shulchan Aruch: "prayer is in place of the temple korbanos, therefore one must be careful that it is like a korban with kavana, to not mix it with other thoughts just like improper thoughts can invalidate a korban", see there 
In the Orchos Chaim of the R"Osh siman 47 "have intent in your prayer, for prayer is the service of the heart. If your son spoke to you not from his heart, would it not anger you? What will you do, putrid drop, before the King of the Universe, the Holy One BB"H. Are you not like a slave charged with an important job, for his own benefit, who then corrupts it? How then can you stand before the King of kings, HKBH... if you cannot do this for the entire prayer, at least do not lack this for the first blessing of the Amida and for the Shema because one who did not have intent in these did not fulfill his obligation."

In the Shl"A (Mesechet Tamid p.ner mitzva): "Let one reflect in his mind, if he were to speak before a flesh and blood king and between his words, he would speak other nonrelated things, certainly, he is liable for his head to the king. And behold, for the King of kings, HKBH, thoughts are just like words, "for the L-ord searches all hearts, and understands all the plans of the thoughts" (Divrei Hayamim 28:9). Therefore, what is the difference if one interrupts with other thoughts or other words during the prayer?" 


 i.e. to abandon flattery completely. The intent is to not do any good things before people. Hence, he abandons the service of G-d because of the praises of people, so that they do not praise him for it. He is fleeing from a small fire, namely, the trait of flattery, and into a big fire, namely, he will abandon all good deeds one by one. 




If you were alone by yourself, would you have also done this?  
If yes, then you can do more deeds like this one, even in front of people and it will not damage you. If no, that your heart is not yet whole so much, it is better to refrain from it, and not to do a fraudulent thing with bad motives. 


Your worship is for yourself, so that you obtain this world and the next. And if not, you would not serve G-d with a complete heart.
"in that you exert yourself in things that will bring you selfish pleasure and joy" - you only do those things that bring you joy. 




 see the gate of trust chapter 4. There you will find peace of mind (an explanation) so that these two things are not contradictory. 








As the sages said (Sanhedrin 19a): "first fix yourself, then correct others". 

















<b>the elementals of faith and the foundations of the torah</b> -- it's enough for you to study the main fundamental things such as Chumash, or the like, and halachic summaries.

Chapter 6



Like one who does many undertakings and difficult jobs until he profits some silver and gold. Likewise, one who works hard in the field or the vineyard, and in the end has nothing to eat and be satiated due to various mishaps that G-d sends. Then all of his exertion and toil was for nothing, and his efforts for falsehood. So too, for one who does his religious acts not lshem shamayim (for G-d). His exertion will be for nothing and naught, and he won't receive reward since his intent was for something else. Likewise, they said in the talmud (Yoma 72b): "Rava said to his disciples: 'I beseech you, do not inherit a double Gehinom'".) (i.e. work hard in this world and earn Gehinom in the next)

Sixth Treatise on Submission

Introduction







Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3






i.e. that a man submits himself on his own (by contemplating death). The author mentioned these ten causes through which a man becomes submitted, so that a man can choose the proper one, and not procrastinate submitting himself until terrible troubles and disasters befall him like the first cause (which is inevitable). Rather, let him submit himself by contemplating the eighth, ninth, and tenth. And likewise, he wrote this in the 3rd gate chapter 4 and in the gate of repentance chapter 6. See there and you will understand.

Chapter 4



Chapter 5

As our sages said: (Avot 3:1) "Reflect upon three things and you will not come to sin. Know from where you came..." 




Not that he is like a prisoner as an analogy or metaphor, but rather he is actually a prisoner. Since, behold, we can see that he is incapable of averting all the accidents, sicknesses, etc. which suddenly befall a man. If so, he is not in control of himself and not able to choose for himself just like a prisoner. 

<b>his pleas and excuses will be cut short</b> -- there in the next world, he will have no pleas and no excuses. Likewise, regret [and repentance] will not help at that time.
<b>he will be full of regret</b> -- then he will regret the disgraceful deeds he did while alive when he will be punished for them. Then too, he will see the reward for the righteous and the punishment to the wicked and it will pain him, and his regret will not help since (Avodah Zara 3a) "One who toiled on friday (this world) will eat on Shabbat (next world); but one who did not toil on friday, what will he eat from on Shabbat?" 

<b>When one contemplates the greatness of the Creator and His infinite might</b> -- How can one picture in his mind and put to heart the greatness of the Creator? When one fixes his mind on this great theme, namely, the great and wondrous awe on the sages and pious ones of the early generations and [even] the later ones. How great was their deeds! They were capable of resurrecting the dead and of killing whoever they wanted (by mere words), as reported in the Talmud and the zohar in numerous places. Likewise it is known of the wonders that the Arizal did, and likewise his disciples, and many others. When one then compares the greatness of these sages with that of the prophets such as Eliyahu and Elisha and other famous ones, and we see that the prophets were seized with fear and trembling when they were visited by angels (see Megila 3a), and as mentioned in the zohar when Moshe ascended to the spiritual worlds. 
 If so, "what is man that You consider him?" (tehilim 8:4) How could he raise his head and be proud before an omnipotent and awesome King loftier than everything, and even while He is observing him always in his outer and inner life.

Chapter 6



Chapter 7















i.e. he rebukes himself just like it was proper for the Creator to rebuke him, doing so before the Creator's punishment strikes him. Through this, he confesses and mourns his bad deeds and repents from them before the Creator's punishment strikes him. This is like the first group mentioned in Gate#6 (Gate of Repentance) chapter 6. see there.

Chapter 8

which depends on which? Is it due to a man possessing the other moral qualities that he can come to the trait of submission, or no, that submission is primary, and through it, he can come to the other moral qualities. 
all the while that one has not shed completely all the traits of masterhood, arrogance, and grandeur, then how can he possibly serve G-d, since he is also a master and is therefore not fit to serve another. 



All the worlds and levels from above to below are all garments to the Ein Sof (infinite essence of G-d). They are His praise and grandeur... Hence it is not proper for a human being to don the garment of his blessed Master. 
A man must first discharge the primary and obligatory duty, namely, to fulfill all the commandments of G-d and afterwards he can add on to this, as he wrote earlier (Gate 5 ch.5), "these extra acts are not accepted until one first fulfills the obligatory duties".

Seventh Treatise on Repentance

Introduction









<b>it was out of Divine grace to man</b> -- this means grace, favor, and mercy - that the Creator granted man the ability to repent, because according to reason, "the soul which sins shall die" (Yechezkel 18:20) as is the custom for [human] kings of the land (who execute those who rebel). Only that G-d desires in kindness... "for I do not desire the death of the wicked, says the L-rd G-d, but that he repents and lives"... and (Yechezkel 33:11) "Say to them: As I live, says the L-rd G-d, I do not wish for the death of the wicked, but for the wicked to repent of his way so that he may live. Repent, repent of your evil ways, for why should you die?"





Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3

I deemed proper to quote from the Orchot Tzadikim who brought the "seven things" of this book and expanded on them a bit. From his words the author's words will be properly understood. Here is the excerpt from Shar Teshuva there: After a man deliberates on repenting, he will not be able to do a complete repentance unless he puts to heart seven things. The first: That one knows and recognizes all of his actions... know my son that most people are not careful about devarim betalim (useless chatter), nor from looking at woman and speaking to them without needing to. They are also not careful to pray with kavana (intent), and to speak [mundane things] in a synagogue, and from frivolity (sechok and kalut rosh), nor from giving tzedaka to those fitting to receive... and talmud torah, and likewise from jealousy, hatred, slander, arrogance, anger, and all the [bad] traits mentioned in this book... Even if he knows the transgressions he committed, he will not regret them if he is not certain of the evilness of what he did. If he thinks "so what if I benefited from this world without a beracha, or if I wasted time for torah study, it is not so bad?" He who thinks thus will not regret nor repent wholeheartedly. Rather one must think: "there is nothing worse in the world than one who doesn't care about the orders of the lofty King"... The penitent must know and believe from the depths of his heart that there are harsh and bitter retributions and punishments in the next world for the sins he committed. If he does not know this, he will not care to repent. But after the inevitability of the punishment is clear to him, then he will repent and regret it and beseech forgiveness for it from G-d.

Chapter 4

i.e. if he is not perfect in these four components and conditions of repentance, he is still outside, and there is a breach in his repentance, as mentioned earlier. 
that he regrets for having transgressed the command of G-d.

Chapter 5




Because the eyes and the heart are the gates of sin - "The eye sees, and the heart desires, and then the body commits the deed" (Bamidbar Rabba). And the wise man wrote (Sefer Chasidim siman 9): "nothing stops desire like closing of the eyes"

Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10










<b>repent one day before your death</b> -- hence repent today, since perhaps you will die tomorrow.



i.e. that you carefully examine to do everything according to your physical and mental strength - to not overburden yourself thereby losing everything, as he wrote at the end of gate 10 - "Proceed slowly and thoughtfully in acquiring the good traits, according to how your matters allow you to bear. Beware of taking on too much, or too quickly, without moving gradually, lest you become lost, because too much oil in a candle is a cause to extinguish its light" 











What, after most of my days have been wasted in sins, how could I lift up my face to repent to G-d, lest and perhaps He will not accept me? Don't say this since all the prophets, and also Moshe Rabeinu, have already proclaimed, that G-d will accept us in [our] repentance, and there is nothing that stands in the way of repentance. 




do not bring a proof from wicked people who persist in their foolishness and wickedness and never even think of repenting, and perhaps they are even doing well and full of prosperity... take heed and guard yourself from bringing a proof from such blind and wicked people since this is a snare of the yetzer to entice you and others like you.

Eighth Treatise on Examining the Soul

Introduction







Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3







Here is a quote from the book Orchos Tzadikim (shar zechira): "Imagine if he were crazy or insane and would rip his clothes, how much would his affairs be ruined and he would be considered a complete nobody in people's eyes. And if a doctor came and cured him from his craziness and insanity, how fitting would it be to praise him for this, and all the more so for the Creator." 



The book Orchos Tzadikim (Shaar Zechira) ends off: "Without a doubt, if there was in his city even the lowest of the lowest person who knew how to explain the part of the letter he did not understand, he would hurry to go to him and would not be embarassed. 
This refers to the secrets of the torah, that the profound matters of the torah you cast off behind you. In the Zohar this is expounded at length (Chelek 3 152a): "cursed is he who says that the torah is only the plain meaning, because any wise man can also author chronicles and stories like these, and it's not for nothing that it is called "the torah of G-d is perfect, it returns the soul...", and it's not for nothing that the Angels wanted to receive the torah, rather certainly that there is an inner side to it and great secrets on every letter and crown of letter, see there.





To reflect in his mind whether he is fulfilling all the conditions that a slave is obligated to do to his master, if he also does at least this to his Creator, who is our Master, Creator, and King as he wrote in Gate 3 end of chapter 5.
























These are the words and matters of prayer one speaks with to the King of Kings. When one puts to heart these three introductions before his prayer - after all this, maybe, he will have proper kavana (intent) in his prayer).
In the sefer Chasidim (Siman 46): "To habituate oneself in kavana, to do this small habit before prayer, or any blessing, to pause a bit before and not allow any thought or hirhur (feeling) to take hold in his mind, because if one gives a place to laziness, even for one second, or for any thought whatsoever - he is already ensnared in the trap of the yetzer, and he will continue and overpower him...", see there.



The matter of prayer is in order that a man humble/submit himself before the Creator...this is the primary mitzva of prayer...therefore a person can pray in any language and for all matters, as long as his intent is to submit himself before the Creator and to ask his needs.




i.e. that if he does not do it, there will be on him anger and punishment from the Creator. If at the beginning, middle, and completion of the act, there will be these three things... - then he will do it with passion and zeal until he completes the mitzvah wholly.



To always remember that G-d watches him and knows what is visible in a man's life and what is in his heart, in his concealed and in his innermost being.

as the Rambam ends off his book the "Guide for the Perplexed" (Chelek 3 ch.54) and the Shulchan Aruch starts off with it in the Rama, on the verse: (Tehilim 16:8) "I have placed G-d before me always", this is a great general principle.


he will no longer be sad due to lack of money or other needs. And likewise, he will no longer fear coming to sin, since G-d will be with him.
he will see with his Ruach Hakodesh (holy spirit) things happening far away that a man is not capable of seeing with his physical eyes, and will see them with his mind's eye since he has purified his physicality to the extent that he fulfills the verse (Tehilim 16:8) "I have placed G-d before me always".















































The analogy is that a man must have intent to cling to the Creator, and that if he momentarily forgets Him, it is as if he is outside of G-d's place.


When a person feels himself desiring and longing to sit with people and enjoying their company, and he thinks it is a good thing for him and an enjoyment, let him reflect in his mind on how many benefits there are in solitude and separation from people and how many bad things come about from being in the company of fools. And the author will now list them, one by one.




 All these groups he mentioned, they are those four who do not greet the Shechina in the next world (talmud). They are the groups of flatterers, liars, jesters, and speakers of lashon hara (slander). And all of them are dependent on speech, and are called "evil". And it is written: "You G-d do not desire wickedness, evil will not dwell with You" (Tehilim 5:5). And here is an excerpt from the book Reishis Chachma (Shaar Hakedusha perek 12): "One who fixes his place in the street corner for useless conversation and idle talk, is called a jester (letz). Since he was capable of learning torah at that time but refrains from doing so, he is called a letz, since he is like a man who the king told: "count gold coins for one hour, ad all that you count will be yours", and he sits idly. This man jests from the gold coins and they are lowly to him. Is there frivolity greater than this? So too one who is idle from learning torah after he understood the great reward for one who toils in the torah - he is a real jester... and especially,even those who learn torah must be careful from idle speech, since if words of frivolity enter the heart, correspondingly, words of torah spill out of his heart, etc", he ends off "whoever wants to distance from sins should distance himself from the company of the wicked", see there for more.


In chapter 5 of the gate of submission and in introduction to Gate #3 he explains that man is "lacking and weaker than the animals in three things..." see there.











































to be like the first category of ascetics mentioned in chapter 3 of the Gate of Separation, which left civilization and dwelled in the wilderness.









When troubles come on him, chas v'shalom, he should accept them with a good heart and with joy, as our Sages said (Berachos 60b): "a man is obligated to bless on the bad with joy, just like he blesses on the good with joy. Because even though the bad already struck him and he has no escape from it, it is not the same if he receives it with love and says to himself "everything G-d does is for the good, and the bad is for my good, either it is to bring forgiveness for my sins or it is yisurim shel ahava (suffering of love, see Gate of Trust ch.3)". If he truly thinks this - he is forgiven for his sins as will be explained. On the other hand, if the bad is a burden and a hassle to him, and he is like one forced to bear it, because he has no escape from it, then since it is against his will, he may also come to complain on G-d's traits, as written "A man's folly (i.e. his sins) crushes his way, and his heart is angry with the L-rd" (Mishlei 19:3), and even though he bears it, he gets angry and complains. With this you will understand well the author's words. And like our sages said Berachos 5a: "Rava said: If a man sees suffering coming on him, let him examine his ways...", as above (i.e. G-d is trying to atone for him on the sin he committed). And Rava said in the name of Rav Huna: "whoever G-d desires in, He will crush him with sufferings, as written 'G-d desired to crush him..' (Isaiah 53:10)... but on condition he receives them with love.

bearing all types of hard work to fulfill the service of G-d.
to bear whatever comes to him so as not to rebel against Him, as written in Shema: "And you shall love the L-ord...", which the sages expounded: "even if He takes your life".





















Since there is no person in the world, even amongst your friends and relatives who are capable of benefiting you in any way or of harming you, rather everything depends on the will of G-d. If so, are you not in this world like a total stranger?


That you do the service of G-d, for G-d alone, without any interests or thoughts for anything else, just like He is alone in managing you.
Just like honey is sweet to your palate, so too, put to mind to make wisdom sweet to your soul, and through this, your end will be good, and your hope will never be cut off.

Chapter 4



Chapter 5

There is no hour or second that a man is not involved in one of the thirty accountings. Whether he is alone, or with people, or learning, or praying, or engaged in worldly matters, or in talking. Every act one does or thought one thinks, one can put to heart one, two, or more of the accountings that he remembers at that time and place. Examine and you will see. 
sometimes a man refrains from doing a good deed because the thing seems small in his eyes, such as a mitzva with a word, or looking at something for the sake of G-d. He thinks it is not worth anything in the eyes of G-d, and one says to himself, 'if so, why should I do it?' On this he wrote: 'Do not consider small in your eyes any good'. And here is an excerpt from the Chasid on the chapter "Yesh Nochalim":
"know that the commandments and warnings which appear very small and insignificant, and people are indifferent to them - they stand over the heights of the universe, it is impossible to imagine their measure or examine their effect by (limited) human intellect. It cannot be grasped except by true, holy, supernal sages who the light of G-d shines on them. And every mitzva, even the smallest of the smallest, has a power and root in the divine chariot (kabala terms), from which the matter emanates down to the physical world. When one fulfills the mitzva, the corresponding supernal power is aroused in his root above, and there they are illuminated without limit, and he adds power and might to the Pamalya shel Maala. And if he does a sin, whether in speech or in deed, thereby strengthening the power of the "Samech-Mem" and his helpers (the forces of impurity), he arouses the power of tuma and klipa of that matter which is aligned to him in the chariot of tuma. Therefore, G-d has commanded us specifically on these commandments and warnings and not on others. And likewise for all the Rabbinical commandments, which are also in this way, etc.... And let one imagine as if he is actually toiling in the corresponding matter on high, because even though he is a small creature, G-d has granted him power to arouse supernal powers on high. This is what is meant by the verse "the portion of G-d is His people, Yaakov the rope of His inheritance" (Devarim 32:9), which means that G-d has granted of His honor to them, and He blew into their nostrils the soul of living spirit. And the part is attached to the whole, like a rope whose one end is tied to a high place and the second end is down below - one who grabs the end below and pulls it with all of his strength - moves the end above. And this is what they said in the mishna (Avos 2:1) "be careful of a light commandment just like for a severe one". End of excerpt.

Chapter 6



on the words "and he will rejoice in the service of the Creator") this is the main thing in the service of the Creator as written: "because you did not serve the L-ord your G-d with joy..." (Devarim 28:47), and likewise for many verses the author brought down in countless places. And I already wrote that the Arizal merited Ruach Hakodesh, and the rest of his levels because he was joyous in doing his mitzvos and service. Thus it is written in the (Assara Maameros number 3 and 4) Shl"A.

Ninth Treatise on Abstinence

Introduction







Chapter 1















i.e. since there are many human beings whose [bad] practice has become ingrained as second nature - to excessively indulge in pleasures, whether in food and drink, or in bad and disgraceful character traits, until this led to many bad things, ruining health, or even premature death, and they deem themselves incapable of refraining from them. Therefore, G-d put in the hearts of some human beings to become complete ascetics, this person from such a trait, that person from that trait, and which are completely separated from it, so that everyone can learn from them virtue, and to see with their own eyes that they are capable of forcing their nature in whatever matter to the middle way, just like there are many different trades and sciences in the world, and there are countries which excel in skills or resources over all others, so that they will benefit from each other.

Chapter 2






<b>rule over and prevail over</b> -- i.e. there are lusts that one cannot do without, such as desire for food and marital relations, for preservation of the human race. On this he wrote: "rule over". Some lusts are not needed at all, on this he wrote "and prevail over", to nullify them completely. 




 Just like one drowning in the sea cannot come out, so too them, since (Avot 2:7) "more possessions, more worries"

Chapter 3




 they are so absorbed with the fear of G-d, that they have no fear whatsoever of flesh and blood. Because of this they put themselves in danger to go off to deserts (i.e. wilderness), a place where there are dangerous animals, because the fear of not being able to serve G-d in their homes is, for them, greater than the fear of the created beings. 







They understand what G-d wants from man, and why He created him, namely, to test him in this world to benefit him in the next world.

Chapter 4



Chapter 5






even though it was originally against your nature, if you habituate yourself many times to force your nature, you will reach the level where you will no longer need to force your nature. 
















The author did not mention regarding guarding the Brit Kodesh, and this is a stumbling block before many. It is proper to bring here a bit of the severity of the punishment for a man who wastes seed, r"l... see there for more

Tenth Treatise on Devotion to God

Introduction







Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Hence, it is our duty to offer to Him even the good He bestowed to us in the past (money), and to accept on ourselves even the harshest sufferings (of our body) for Him. If so, certainly, we should not love Him out of hope for future additional benefits or to be spared from suffering.

Chapter 3



Chapter 4



even though a son is dear to his father, as before with Avraham, here it is not the same, since to slaughter him with his own hands like Avraham, that is equivalent to sacrificing oneself, but for Iyov, the Satan killed his children without his knowledge, and he merely accepted the decree - this is not like giving up one's own body, therefore he needed to be tested further to demonstrate his genuine love.

Chapter 5



Chapter 6




it is obvious from many sources that the prohibition of uttering G-d's name in vain does not differentiate whether it is in hebrew or any other language in the world. Likewise it is obvious that it doesn't matter whether it is the Tetragramaton or any other (Kinuyim) substitute name.

Chapter 7




even though man has free will, nevertheless, every matter, secular or religious, is in His hand and under His authority regarding whether the matter will be successfully carried out or not. Therefore, they placed their trust in G-d in all of their matters.










in conversations of the everlasting G-d they are full of all wisdom and knowledge, because that is their primary occupation and residence, but in worldly matters, it is the opposite, they know nothing, as if the world is desolate without inhabitants, they don't even know the picture in a coin.














 put your mind like an iron pillar against the wellspring, i.e. evil habit, which is like a flowing wellspring, and that this be with all of your strength.



i.e. even if you are in solitude in a special chamber, it won't help in the least if your mind is tied to the affairs of this world, etc. Rather you need along with this also "spiritual solitude", i.e. that you reflect on matters of the next world, G-d's torah, closeness to G-d, or the like of spiritual things...  
until you habituate yourself that your body is free of its affairs, and even the opposite - that you free your body from itself, i.e. your heart contemplates on G-d all day long - [as long as you didn't reach this,] you have still not arrived.


...therefore he did not mention anything of love of G-d since one who has attained all the levels, undoubtedly has also love of G-d, but if he lacks even one of them, it is not possible for the love to exist, as was explained in Gate 3 chapter 3.