Saadia Gaon on Genesis
ר' סעדיה גאון על בראשית
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Saadia Gaon on Genesis

Introduction

The contemplation, because it is necessary in it... And many of the commandments are not explicitly stated in it (in the Bible), but the one who gives the commandments and warnings has based them in the first category (intellectual commandments) on what was planted in our intellect. And in the second category, on what has reached us through tradition. And I, among those who are obligated, have chosen not to delve into the explanations of the Torah until I have acquired from these three sources (the intellectual, the written, and the received) what is impossible to attain without them. But I have deemed it appropriate not to delay the beginning of interpretation until I have grasped each of these categories in their entirety. For if I had waited for the perfection in these three levels, I have not seen or heard of any sage who has achieved it. Especially since I have heard what Job's friends said to him: "Acquaint yourself with God and be at peace, thereby good will come to you," as I have interpreted these verses in their place. Furthermore, I have known with certainty (the only one who knows) that the one who understands the purpose of this matter is the wise one alone, may he be exalted and sanctified, as the prophet said: "God understands its way, and He knows its place." As for all the other sages, their knowledge is only partial and limited, according to their ability. And one of them said, in an exaggerated manner: "I have only received a drop from the sea of wisdom." And another one said: "Like a whiff from a fruit," and yet another: "Like a spark from the light." And I knew that these statements are in an exaggerated and exaggerated manner, with humility before the Creator and surrender to Him, and each of them has a figurative interpretation... And as the Scripture said: "There is no wisdom, no understanding, and no counsel against the Lord." And I apologize before His greatness and exaltation that I am not bold enough to accept upon myself such a daring matter with confident assurance in my speech abilities and my attainment of perfection. How can I compare myself to this while I am well aware of my limited intellect and my lack of knowledge? And I have also heard from the eminent sages who said that I am but dust...

Foreword



Foreword to Genesis







Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Verse 1

And the serpent was cunning, and it said at first: 'They were both naked,' because it wanted to say after they ate from the Tree of Knowledge, 'They realized that they were naked.' The Scripture reveals that they were not ashamed of their nakedness and did not recognize that it was disgraceful until they ate from that fruit, and their understanding expanded. It is common for a person to engage in actions considered disgraceful by the wise without feeling their disgrace. But after receiving education and broadening his knowledge, the ugliness of his actions becomes clear to him, and he refrains from them 
There are several possible answers to this: A. The description of serpents being called 'seraphim,' which is also applied to angels, does not necessitate that they have the same names. Rather, all those described with a certain characteristic may be called by different names, as we have explained... 'Beit Arukh' (long house), 'Ish Arukh' (tall man), and as we have said, 'Darham Emitti' (true pearl) and 'Kikar Lehem Emitti' (true loaf of bread), 'Mamar Shalem' (complete statement), 'Yom Shalem' (complete day), and the like. This is a matter that reason excludes. If we say, for example, 'holy and pure Nazirite' and 'holy priest,' it is the same with regard to 'Eil Gadol' (Great God), 'Gibbor' (mighty), 'Nora' (awesome), and similar names. Besides, this matter would require us to attribute jealousy, moments of anger, desire, and a will to deceive to angels when they are sent as messengers to the prophets (which is impossible), as I am about to explain regarding the Satan in the book of Job when I challenge the opinion of those who consider the Satan there to be an angel. Moreover, if we are required to interpret the punishment of the serpent allegorically, then according to this principle, the punishments of Adam and Eve would also be allegorical, and even the tree and the garden would be mere allegories. Thus, the matter would not cease to trouble us until we are compelled to interpret all the events of Genesis figuratively, saying that they are only allegories. This is similar to those who claimed that the Tree of Knowledge is not a literal tree but rather a symbol for forbidden desires or some other concept. And know, may God grant you success, that the reason these individuals divided into these differing opinions is because they did not want to believe that the well-known serpent would speak, let alone receive reward and punishment. For this reward and punishment only applies to those who are commanded and warned. And if that is the case, it would logically follow that even animals should be commanded, warned, and receive reward and punishment, for according to rational reasoning, there is no difference between a serpent, a camel, and a frog in this matter. And if they have commandments, warnings, and reward and punishment, then it is necessary that one of two possibilities exists: either they have intellect or they do not have intellect [and if they do not have intellect, it is impossible for them to have commandments and warnings]. And if they have intellect, then humans have no advantage over them. And this distinction is what led them to be confused in these matters. And this is what we have discerned... And in it, it states: Indeed, it is impossible for the familiar snake to be commanded regarding "do" and "do not," neither from the perspective of reason nor from any other perspective, as I have explained based on what is obligated by reason and as explicitly stated in the scripture that the commandments and recompense are not only for humans, as it is said: "To make known to the sons of men..." and "And to man He said, 'Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom...'" and "The terrors of death confronted him" and "The sons of men take refuge in the shadow of Your wings." He unified them in knowledge, commandments, reward, and punishment. But this statement implies something that exempts us from all other arguments to be made: God, may He be exalted, created many snakes, just as He created many humans from all other species of animals. And when He wanted to test Adam, He changed the nature of one of the snakes and gave it the form of a human. He imposed upon him commandments of what to do and what not to do, as well as rewards and punishments. The allowance in this case was that if he would rebel, he would be restored to his original state, as it is written to Adam: "For you are dust, and to dust you shall return." Accordingly, I said in the translation of "היה ערום" (Genesis 2:25), "צאר חכימא – he was wise." And the serpent did not become wise, but rather in order for Adam to be tested by him. The action was indeed in accordance with the instruction of creation, as it is written: "Lest the land from which you were taken say, 'It is a wasteland.'" Zion was a desert, as you were a curse and you shall be a blessing. And just as we have "היה" (was) in the sense of continuation, as it is written: "And it remained there until this day." And as it is written: "It is not good for man to be alone," as I have previously explained in the statement. And the word "arum" (naked) has a profound meaning of wisdom, particularly in the Book of Proverbs: "The wisdom of the prudent is to discern his way; the prudence of the discerning is to understand his path. The prudent sees evil and hides himself." And similar to these examples. This is the answer to the first question.  
Question 2. How did the serpent change? And the answer: Just as God changes the circumstances in bodies when He performs miracles through them, so that people will believe in Him, such as turning water into blood. Some scholars claim that He removed the water from existence and created blood, and afterwards the blood disappeared and He created water. But if that were the case according to their opinion, the verse would not say, "And all the water that was in the river turned to blood." Rather, we say that He removed from the water all its characteristics, its clear color, pleasant smell, and sweet taste, and left only its moisture. Then He renewed in it the characteristics of blood: a red color, putrid smell, and bitter taste, to the point of complete transformation. And this is the correct opinion, as I am about to prove regarding Aaron's staff that turned into a serpent. They say that God removed the wood and created a living creature, and later He removed the living creature from the world and created the wood. But the expression, "the staff that turned into a serpent," contradicts this opinion, because it implies that the essence of the staff did not disappear. We say that He removed from the staff the characteristics of wood and left its essence intact, and He imposed upon it the characteristics of a living creature in place of the characteristics of an inanimate object, and thus the transformation took place in actuality. Similarly, we say about the serpent here: the Creator removed from it the characteristics of the serpent and transformed them into human characteristics. Therefore, it says here, "He was cunning," just as it says elsewhere, "And they turned into blood," and "And it turned into a serpent." And if someone asks, "Why was it called a serpent after the transformation?" we say that it was called by the name it had from the beginning, just as it says when the staff of Aaron swallowed the staffs of the magicians, "And the staff of Aaron swallowed their staffs," even though the serpent was originally called by its initial name.   
And question number 3: Why did He transform it (the serpent)? As we have already said: To test Adam. And if someone says, "Indeed, the transformation was wise for him; Adam stood firm in his test," but since God knew that Adam would not withstand his test and would only be tempted and punished, he and the tempter, what wisdom is there in this? We answer and say: It is like the wisdom in creating the unbeliever and giving him the ability to be an unbeliever - for without giving him the ability, he would not be an unbeliever. And the answer that we, the unique community, give regarding the unbeliever is: The wise one acts according to what his wisdom necessitates, and he guides us towards the greater good. Therefore, he brings us to trials so that we may receive reward if we withstand them. And if among us, someone chooses disbelief, it does not tarnish the wisdom of the Creator. And this answer itself, we respond with regarding the trial of Adam. And one who considers himself a thoughtful person said that God gave the serpent the gift of speech in order to arouse the attention of Adam towards the Tree of Life, so that he would eat from it, for its consumption was not forbidden to them. Therefore, it begins and says: "Although God said, etc.," and in this there is an abandonment of the language of the scripture. And besides this, it does not exempt us from the argument posed against us: Why did God give the serpent the ability to seduce Eve? 
The fourth question: Where did the serpent find Eve, since it is stated that no other creatures entered the Garden? The answer is based on the assumption I have already presented, that Adam and Eve were not obligated to always be in the Garden, but were permitted to be there for their elevated state. In the phrase "and to guard it," it was stipulated with them that they should not both leave it at the same time, but one of them should always remain there, either Adam or Eve. According to this, it is possible that Eve left Adam in the Garden and went out, and then the serpent encountered her and spoke to them, as described.  
The fifth question: Based on what did Eve say, "Do not touch it," when God did not say this to Adam? The answer is that after God told Adam not to eat from the tree of knowledge, Adam himself added a safeguard and refrained from touching it. This was done so that if any mishap were to occur in relation to touching the tree, it would affect only what Adam had added and not the actual prohibition. This can be likened to a skilled doctor who wants to keep the patient away from eating meat, and also warns them about poultry, so that if they disregard the instruction, they would stumble with poultry and not with actual meat. Based on this principle, our ancient sages instructed us: "Build a fence around the Torah." I will give you a similar analogy: Pure water placed in a vessel can render the food that falls on it impure, but it does not render a person impure. However, we establish a safeguard and decree that it also renders a person impure, so that they do not come to purify the food that has fallen on these waters. Similarly, we do not allow the sale of an item that is as valuable as a rock for less than the value of the rock (to avoid accepting interest payments), so that we do not fall into the trap of usury. In all these cases and similar situations, we rely on what the Torah has prohibited, based on the principles of safeguarding and creating fences. As it is written, "He shall not have too many wives, so that his heart does not turn away," and "He shall not accumulate silver and gold excessively, so that his heart does not become haughty," and so on.  
The sixth question: From where did the serpent know that this fruit nurtures understanding and adds knowledge, as it claimed to know God, etc.? The answer is as follows: After God said to Adam, "But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, you shall not eat," he explained to Eve that the tree adds knowledge. This information was then passed between them, and eventually reached the ears of the serpent. Now, if one argues that Eve did not know this before, it can be said that it is similar to a person who knows the benefits of theft and adultery but does not pursue them, until someone else comes and entices them.   
The seventh question: What is the meaning of "and your eyes shall be opened" and "and their eyes were opened," as stated afterwards? Were Adam and Eve blind before? We answer: It is impossible that Adam was blind, for it is explicitly stated in the scripture that he named all the animals and remembered their names. How could he recognize their names if he couldn't distinguish their bodies? Furthermore, he saw Eve when she was brought before him and said, "This is now bone of my bones," indicating that he recognized her. Moreover, it is evident that when God warned him about the tree of knowledge, He showed him the physical existence of the tree. All the conclusions that arise from all this regarding Adam also apply to Eve. As for the "opening of the eyes" mentioned here, we say that it means Adam became aware of things he did not previously know. Indeed, our language refers to this as "opening." There is no deviation from the plain meaning of the scripture, nor does it involve a method that we oppose. We find this usage in biblical stories where their language is clear and precise, and there is no room for figurative interpretation. For example, it is said about Hagar: "And God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water," and she was not blind. Regarding the disciple of Elisha, it is said: "And the Lord opened the eyes of the young man," etc., and it is said: "For a bribe blinds the eyes of the wise," referring to the fact that a bribe obscures intellectual vision because they do not pay attention to the points of proof, and so on. There is also an "opening" that follows after the blinding, such as what is said about the army of the King of Aram: "And the Lord opened their eyes," etc. According to what we mentioned before, Adam and Eve knew something after eating the fruit that they did not know before, and this is what is called "opening of the eyes."   
And the eighth question: Did Adam and Eve not know good and evil, as God said to them, "You will be like God, knowing good and evil"? If that were true, the deniers of the story would argue at length and say, "Could it be that God withheld the knowledge of good and evil from His servants?" They further claimed, "We see that the serpent protected and benefited them by showing them something from which they gained advantage." They also said, "Punishing someone who seeks to move from distress to prosperity and from darkness to light is strange and objectionable." Moreover, they argued, "Punishing someone who shows something beneficial is even more peculiar." In all these arguments, they are the enemies of God, corrupting and stubborn. I, however, am the first to explain and reveal this matter. I say that the knowledge of good and evil, which according to the Torah was lacking in Adam, is not a complete lack of knowledge of good and evil altogether, but rather the knowledge of a part of them. For in our language, we find that we use the phrase "good and evil" to describe an action among other actions. Similarly, Moses said to the Israelites about their children who had not reached twenty years of age, "Your children who do not know good and evil today." It is known that every nineteen-year-old knows all the good and evil known to adults. They only lack experience due to the fact that anyone below the age of twenty does not go out to battle. Therefore, the knowledge associated with the intricacies of war is called "good and evil." Likewise, Barzillai said to David, "I am eighty years old today. Can I discern between good and evil?" He actually distinguished between all good and evil that others distinguished, and he only lacked certain known pleasures due to his weakness. And Laban and Bethuel said to Abraham's servant, "We cannot speak to you bad or good." This statement does not include all good and evil but rather refers to matters related to Rebekah's journey with him. Similarly, when God blessed Laban, He said, "Beware that you speak not to Jacob either good or bad," but it is not said in a general sense; rather, it refers to a specific aspect, that he should not steal his sons or his possessions and should deal with him honestly. Likewise, when the woman said to David, "As an angel of God, so is my lord the king to discern good and evil," she intended to refer to the good and evil in the complaints of the litigants. There are other types of good and evil as well, but they are not relevant to our discussion here, but rather to the interpretation of the Scripture. The matter of "evil" that God gave to humankind to contend with, as mentioned in the Book of Ecclesiastes, refers to partial good and evil, such as those we mentioned here, which were lacking in Adam and Eve. One of them was the shame of nudity, as it is written, "And their eyes were opened, and they knew." It does not refer to general good and evil.   
Question 9: If Adam and Eve had not eaten from that fruit, would their Creator have informed them of what was lacking in their knowledge of "good and evil"? The answer: It is necessary to assume that He would have taught them these things in order for their knowledge to be complete, especially since Adam is described as being full of wisdom and perfect beauty. They would have remained blessed in that state because they would have learned directly from the mouth of God. And when it is said to a wise person, "You will be a disciple of a prophet if you refrain from this matter," it means that he is obligated to abstain from that thing. To the extent possible, he should be a disciple of God without making mistakes, without rushing, without suffering from forgetfulness, as Moses experienced because he learned directly from Divine Power. But when he did not want to wait and hurried to attain what was to be acquired through natural means and the process of evolution in relation to God, and he annulled himself from God's teachings and deprived himself of his reward, it is just and appropriate for God to punish him, as well as his tempter. This can be illustrated by the example of a king who told his minister, "Do not eat today until you eat with me at my table," similar to what David said to Mephibosheth. Then a person who knew the king's commandments came and enticed the minister to eat before the appointed time, and the minister ate when he no longer needed the king's meal. According to justice, both of them should be punished. The minister cannot apologize in any way, as the tempter aroused his desire for that food with its beauty, goodness, taste, and benefit, for the king had promised him something better, more valuable, and honorable than that. But these deniers, who lack understanding, cling to superficial imaginations and do not contemplate matters until their end.

Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Verse 1



Verse 2



Verse 3



Verse 4



Verse 5



Verse 6



Verse 7



Verse 8



Verse 9



Verse 10



Verse 11



Verse 12



Verse 13



Verse 14



Verse 15



Verse 16



Verse 17

And it is stated with an expression of wondering: "Shall I conceal from Avraham?" And there are seven reasons for this. The first is because his children would multiply and inherit the plain and the cities, I mean to say Sodom and its satellites... And He stipulated about them that they would inherit it and dwell in it. Hence He said (Genesis 18:18), "Avraham is indeed to become a great nation." And [on account] of the destruction that He threatened about it [and he requested mercy upon it] in his prayer. And that is why He said, "and through him shall be blessed all the nations of the world." And because he was a prophet; and the merit of a prophet is great concerning the [counsels of the Holy One, blessed be He]. And because of that, He said, "For I have known him," the explanation of which is, for the times that I will know him (so is the <i>yod</i> vocalized, with a <i>hiriq</i>). And the fourth is because he fears the Lord, and the merit of those who fear the Lord is great. For 'the counsel of the Lord is to those who fear Him.' And because of this, He said, "in order that he commands." And the fifth is because he is just, and the merit of the just is great in the counsel of the Lord. It is as it is written (Proverbs 3:32), "and His counsel is with the just." And the sixth is in order to enlarge his reward because of his effort to save people and to have them repent... [He set up for them] great estimation, and it is as I am about to elucidate in, "I will now descend" (Genesis 18:21), and as we explained concerning the people of the Flood and the people of the Tower.


Verse 18



Verse 19



Verse 20



Verse 21



Verse 22



Verse 23



Verse 24



Verse 25



Verse 26



Verse 27



Verse 28



Verse 29



Verse 30



Verse 31



Verse 32

Why did he stop with ten and not continue arguing for fewer?  On this matter we find four explanations: A. So that there would be among them a minyan for prayer and numerous other commandments, as it is known that a congregation is ten. B. There were five separate bastions (walled cities), and he intended there would be two (righteous people) in each. C. Experience taught him that there had been eight righteous (Noah, his three sons, and their wives) in the generation of the flood, and they had not pleaded to save that generation on their behalf. D. He reasoned that there were ten (righteous)  in Sodom already - Lot and his wife, his four daughters, and their husbands…