Mishnah Niddah
משנה נדה
Mishnah Yomit by Dr. Joshua Kulp
http://learn.conservativeyeshiva.org/mishnah/

Mishnah Niddah



Chapter 1

Shammai says: for all women it suffices [to reckon] their [period of uncleanness from their time [of discovering the flow]. Hillel ruled: [their period of uncleanness is to be reckoned retroactively] from the [previous] examination to the [last] examination, even if this was many days. The sages say: [the law is] not like the words of these or the words of those, but [the women are deemed to have been unclean] during [the preceding] twenty-four hours when this lessens the period from the [previous] examination to the [last] examination, and during the period from the [previous] examination to the [last] examination when this lessens the period of twenty-four hours. For any woman who has a regular period it suffices [to reckon her period of uncleanness from] the time she discovers the flow. And if a woman uses rags when she has marital intercourse, this is like an examination which lessens either the period of the [past] twenty-four hours or the period from the [previous] examination to the [last] examination.
How [does the rule that] it suffices [to reckon her period of uncleanness from] the time she discovers the flow work? If she was sitting on a bed and was occupied with ritually clean objects and then she leaves [the bed] and then sees [blood flow] she is unclean but the objects are clean. Even though they have said that she conveys uncleanness for a period of twenty-four hours [retroactively] she counts [the seven days of her menstruation] only from the time she observed the flow.
Rabbi Eliezer says: there are four types of women for whom it suffices [to reckon] their [period of uncleanness from] the time [of their discovering the flow]. A virgin, A pregnant woman, A nursing woman; And an old woman. Rabbi Joshua says: I have only heard [the ruling applied to] a virgin, but the halakhah is in agreement with Rabbi Eliezer.
Who is regarded as "virgin"? Any woman who has never yet observed a blood flow, even if she is married. "A woman in pregnancy"? One whose fetus is notice. "A nursing woman"? Until she has weaned her child. If she gave her child to a nursing woman, if she weaned him, or if he died: Rabbi Meir says: she conveys uncleanness retroactively for twenty-four hours; But the sages say: it suffices for her [to reckon her period of uncleanness from] the time of her [observation of the flow].
Who is regarded as "an old woman"? Any woman over whom three "onot" have passed near the time of her old age. Rabbi Eliezer says: for any woman over whom have passed three onot it suffices [to reckon her period of uncleanness from] the time of her [observing a flow]. Rabbi Yose says: for a woman in pregnancy and a nursing woman over whom three onot have passed it suffices [to reckon their period of uncleanness from] the time of their [observation of the flow].
And of what did they speak when they said that "it suffices [for them to reckon] their period of uncleanness from the time [of their discovering of the flow]"? [This refers to] the first observation, but after a second observation she defiles retroactively for a period of twenty-four hours. If she saw the first flow on account of an accident even it suffices for her even a subsequent observation [to reckon her uncleanness from] the time of her [observing of the flow].
Although though they said [that for a woman who has a regular period] it suffices to reckon her period of uncleanness from the time she observes a flow, she should nevertheless examine herself [regularly], except for a menstruant or one who is sitting over pure blood. She should also use testing-rags when she has marital intercourse except when she is sitting over pure blood or when she is a virgin whose blood is clean. And twice [daily] she should examine herself: in the morning and at the [evening] twilight, and also when she is about to have sexual relations. Priestly women are subject to an additional restriction [for they should examine themselves] when they are going to eat terumah. Rabbi Judah said: [these must examine themselves] also after they have concluded eating terumah.

Chapter 2

Every hand that makes frequent examination: In the case of women is praiseworthy, But in the case of men it ought to be cut off. In the case of a deaf, an person not of sound senses, a blind or an insane woman, if other women of sound senses are available they attend to her, and they may eat terumah. It is the custom of the daughters of Israel to have intercourse using two testing-rags, one for the man and the other for herself. Virtuous women prepare also a third rag to prepare the "house" [before intercourse].
If [blood] is found on his rag they are both unclean and they are liable to bring a sacrifice. If any blood is found on her rag immediately after their intercourse, they are both unclean and must bring a sacrifice. If [blood] is found on her rag after a time, they are unclean due to doubt but they are exempt from a sacrifice.
What is meant by "after a time"? As long as it takes to get down from the bed and wash her "face." [If blood was found some time] after she causes uncleanness retrospectively for a period of twenty-four hours but she does not cause the man who had intercourse with her to be unclean. Rabbi Akiva says: she also causes the man who had intercourse with her to be unclean. And the sages agree with Rabbi Akiva that one who saw a bloodstain defiles the man who had intercourse with her.
All women are in the presumption of being pure for their husband. For those who return from a journey, their wives are in the presumption of being pure. Bet Shammai says: a woman needs two testing-rags for every time she has intercourse, or she must have relations in the light of a lamp. Bet Hillel says: two testing-rags suffice her for the whole night.
The sages spoke of a woman through a metaphor: A chamber, a vestibule and an upper chamber. The blood of the chamber is unclean, If blood is found in the vestibule, and there arises a doubt about its character, it is deemed unclean, because it is presumed to have come from the source.
Five kinds of blood in a woman are unclean: red, black, like bright crocus, like earthy water, or like diluted wine. Bet Shammai says: also like fenugreek water or the juice of roasted meat. But Bet Hillel declares these clean. One that is yellow: Akavia ben Mahalalel declares unclean And the sages declare clean. Rabbi Meir said: even if it does not convey uncleanness as a bloodstain it conveys uncleanness as a liquid. Rabbi Yose says: it does neither the one nor the other.
What is considered red? Like the red of a wound. Black: Like ink-sediment. Darker than this is impure. Lighter than this is pure. Like bright crocus: like the clearest shade in it. Like earthy water: from the Bet Kerem valley, when water floats over it. Like diluted wine: two parts water, one part wine, from wine of the Sharon.

Chapter 3

A woman who aborted a shapeless object: If there was blood with it, she is unclean, If not, she is clean. Rabbi Judah says: in either case she is unclean.
If a woman miscarried an object that was like a rind, like a hair, like earth, like red flies, let her put it in water: If it dissolves she is unclean, But if it does not she is clean. If she miscarried an object in the shape of fishes, locusts, or any forbidden things or creeping things: If there was blood with them she is unclean, If not, she is clean. If she miscarried an object in the shape of a beast, a wild animal or a bird, whether clean or unclean: If it was a male she sits in uncleanness as she would for a male; And if it was a female she sits in uncleanness as she would for a female. But if the sex is unknown she sits in uncleanness for both male and female, the words of Rabbi Meir. The sages say: anything that has not the shape of a human being cannot be regarded as a human child.
If a woman aborted a sac full of water, full of blood, or full of pieces of flesh, she need not be concerned that it was a birth. But if its limbs were fashioned she must sit for both male and female.
If she aborted a sandal or a placenta she sits in uncleanness for both male and female. If a placenta is in a house, the house is unclean, not because a placenta is a fetus but because generally there can be no placenta without a fetus. Rabbi Shimon says: the child might have been mashed before it came out.
If a woman aborted a tumtum or an androginos, she must sit for a male and a female. [If she gave birth] to a tumtum and a male, or to an androginos and a male, she must sit for a male and a female. [If she gave birth] to a tumtum and a female or an androginos and a female, she must sit only for a female. If the embryo came out in pieces or in a reversed position it is deemed born as soon as its greater part come out. If it came out in the normal way [it is not deemed born] until the greater part of its head came out. And what is meant by the "greater part of its head"? Once the forehead comes out.
If a woman miscarried and it is unknown what it was, she sits for both a male child and a female child. If it is unknown whether it was a child or not, she sits for both a male and a female and as a menstruant.
If a woman miscarried on the fortieth day, she need not be concerned that it was a valid childbirth. On the forty-first day, she sits as for both a male and a female and as for a menstruant. Rabbi Ishmael says: [if she miscarried on] the forty-first day she sits as for a male and as for a menstruant, But if on the eighty-first day she sits as for a male and a female and a menstruant, because a male is fully fashioned on the forty-first day and a female on the eighty-first day. But the sages say: the fashioning of the male and the fashioning of the female both take forty-one days.

Chapter 4

The daughters of the Samaritans are regarded as menstruants from their cradle. And Samaritans impart uncleanness to a couch underneath as to a cover above, since they have intercourse with menstruants, because [their wives] sit [unclean for seven days] on account of any blood. However, on account of their [uncleanness] no obligation is incurred for entrance into the Temple nor is terumah burned on their account, since their uncleanness is only of a doubtful nature.
The daughters of the Sadducees, so long as they are accustomed to walking in the paths of their fathers, are to be regarded as Samaritan women. If they left those paths to walk in the paths of Israel, they are to be regarded as Israelite women. Rabbi Yose says: they are always regarded as Israelite women unless they leave the paths of Israel to walk in the paths of their fathers.
The blood of a Gentile and the clean blood of a metzoraat (a woman with scale disease): Bet Shammai declares clean. And Bet Hillel holds that it is like her spittle or her urine. The blood of a woman after childbirth who did not immerse [in a mikveh]: Bet Shammai says it is like her spittle or her urine, But Bet Hillel says: it conveys uncleanness both when wet and when dry. They agree that if she gave birth while in zivah, it conveys uncleanness both when wet and when dry.
A woman who is having difficult labor is regarded as a menstruant. If she had difficult labor for three days of the eleven days and she ceased having pains for twenty-four hours and then gave birth, she is regarded as having given birth in zivah, the words of Rabbi Eliezer. Rabbi Joshua says: a night and a day, as the night and the day of Shabbat. That she ceased from having pain, but not from bleeding.
How long can protracted labor [be considered] as lasting? Rabbi Meir says: even forty or fifty days. Rabbi Judah say: the [ninth] month suffices for her. Rabbi Yose and Rabbi Shimon says: protracted labor is not for more than two weeks [before birth].
If a woman was in hard labor during the eighty days prescribed for the birth of a female, all kinds of blood that she may observe are clean, until the fetus is born. But Rabbi Eliezer holds them to be unclean. They said to Rabbi Eliezer: if in a case where the law was stringent in regard to blood discharged in the absence of pain, it was nevertheless lenient in regard to blood discharged during hard labor, in a case where it was lenient in regard to blood discharged in the absence of pain is there not even more reason to be lenient in regard to blood discharged during hard labor? He replied: it is enough for the case inferred to be treated in the same manner as the one from which it is inferred. For in what way were you lenient upon her? From the uncleanness of a zivah, but she does have the uncleanness of a niddah.
Throughout all the eleven days a woman is in a presumption of cleanness. If she did not examine herself if this was unwittingly, under duress or intentionally, she is clean. If the time of her regular period arrived and she did not examine herself she is unclean. Rabbi Meir says: if a woman was in a hiding place when the time of her regular period arrived and she didn't examine herself she is clean, because fear suspends the flow of blood. But during the days prescribed for a zav or a zavah or for one who waits day against day, these are presumed to be unclean.

Chapter 5

For a fetus born from its mother's side, she does not sit the prescribed days of uncleanness nor the days of cleanness, nor does one incur on its account the obligation to bring a sacrifice. Rabbi Shimon says: it is regarded as a regular birth. All women are subject to uncleanness [as soon as the blood appears] in the outer chamber, as it says, "her discharge being blood in her body" (Leviticus 15:19). But a zav and one who emitted semen convey no uncleanness unless the discharge came out of the body.
If he was eating terumah when he felt that his limbs shook, he should take hold of his member and swallow the terumah. And it conveys uncleanness however small the quantity, even if it is only of the size of a mustard seed or less.
A girl one day old defiles due to menstruation. A girl ten days old defiles due to zivah. A boy one day old defiles due to zivah, and defiles due to scale disease and due to corpse uncleanness; He subjects [his deceased brother's widow] to yibbum [levirate marriage]; He exempts [his mother] from yibbum, He enables her to eat terumah And he disqualifies her from eating terumah; He inherits and transmits inheritance; He who kills him is guilty of murder, And he counts to his father, to his mother and to all his relatives as a fully grown man.
A girl of the age of three years and one day may be betrothed by intercourse and if a yavam had intercourse with her, he acquires her thereby. One can be liable for adultery with her; And she defiles the one who had intercourse with her so that he in turn conveys uncleanness to a couch underneath as to a cover above. If she was married to a priest, she may eat terumah. If any of the disqualified men have relations with her he disqualifies her from the priesthood. If any of the forbidden relatives found in the Torah had relations with her he is to be executed on her account, but she is exempt [from the penalty]. If she was younger than this age, intercourse with her is like putting a finger in the eye.
If a boy the age of nine years and one day had relations with his yevamah, he acquires her thereby; But he cannot divorce her until he is of majority age. He contracts uncleanness through intercourse with a menstruant so that he in turn conveys uncleanness to a couch underneath as to a cover above. He disqualifies a woman from the priesthood. But he doesn't give her the right to eat terumah. He renders a beast invalid for the altar, and it is stoned on his account. If he had intercourse with any of the forbidden relations mentioned in the Torah, she is to be executed on his account, but he is exempt from punishment.
A girl of the age of eleven years and one day, her vows must be examined. A girl of the age of twelve years and one day, her vows are valid; And they examine them throughout the whole twelfth year. A boy the age of twelve years and one day, his vows must be examined. A boy the age of thirteen years and one day, is vow are valid. And they examine them throughout the whole thirteenth year. Prior to this age, even though they said, "We know to whom we have made our vow" or "to whom we have made our dedication," their vow is not a valid vow and their dedication is not a valid dedication. Subsequent to this age, even though they said, "We do not know to whom we have made our vow" or "to whom we have made our vow," their vow is a valid vow and their dedication is a valid dedication.
The sages spoke of [the physical development of] a woman in a parable: an unripe fig, a fig in its early ripening stage and a ripe fig. "An unripe fig": while she is yet a child; "A fig in its early ripening stage": when she is in her youth (naarut). In both ages her father is entitled to anything she finds and to her handiwork and to the right of invalidating her vows. "A ripe fig" as soon as she becomes of majority age (bogeret), her father has no longer any right over her.
What are the signs [of a bogeret]?Rabbi Yose the Galilean says: the appearance of the wrinkle beneath the breast. Rabbi Akiva says: from when the breasts hang down. Ben Azzai says: the darkening of the ring around the nipple. Rabbi Yose says: [the development of the breast to a stage] when one's hand is put on the nipple it sinks and only slowly rises again.
If a woman at the age of twenty did not bring forth two hairs, she must bring evidence that she is twenty years of age and she is an aylonit, she doesn't perform halitzah or yibbum. If a man at the age of twenty years did not produce two hairs, he must bring evidence that he is twenty years old and he becomes confirmed as a saris and he doesn't perform halitzah or yibbum, the words of Bet Hillel. Bet Shammai says: with both of them at the age of eighteen. Rabbi Eliezer says: In the case of the male, according to the words of Bet Hillel, while in that of the female, in accordance with the words of Bet Shammai, since a woman matures earlier than a man.

Chapter 6

If the lower sign appears before the upper sign, she can perform halitzah or yibbum. If the upper sign appears before the lower sign, even though this is impossible: Rabbi Meir says: she doesn't perform halitzah or yibbum. And the sages say: she can perform halitzah or yibbum. For they have said: it is possible for the lower sign to appear before the upper sign, but it is impossible for the upper sign to appear before the lower sign.
Similarly, any [hole in] an earthen vessel that lets in a liquid will let it out, but there may be one that will let liquid out and will not let it in. Any limb that grows a nail also has a bone in it, but there may be one that has a bone in it but does not grow a nail.
Whatever is susceptible to midras uncleanness is also susceptible to corpse-uncleanness. But there are things that are susceptible to corpse uncleanness but not to midras-uncleanness.
Anyone who is fit to try capital cases is also fit to try monetary cases. But there are those who are fit to try monetary suits and and unfit to try capital cases. Anyone who is eligible to act as judge is eligible to serve as a witness. But there may be one who is eligible to act as witness and not as judge.
Whatsoever is subject to tithes is susceptible to food-uncleanness. But there are foods that are to food-uncleanness and not subject to tithes.
Whatever is subject to peah is also subject to tithes. But there is [produce] which is subject to tithes and is not subject to peah.
Whatever [beast] is subject to the laws of the first of the fleece is also subject to that of the priestly gifts. But there may be [a beast] that is subject to the law of the priestly gifts and not to that of the first of the fleece.
Whatever is subject to the law of removal is also subject to the sabbatical year. But there is [a kind or produce] that is subject to the sabbatical year and is not subject to the law of removal.
Whatever has scales has fins, But there are fish that have fins and no scales. Whatever has horns has [split] hooves; But there are animals that have [split] hooves and no horns.
Whatever requires a blessing after it requires one before it; But there are things that require a blessing before them and not after them.
If a girl has grown two pubic hairs she may perform either halitzah or contract levirate marriage, and she is obligated in all the commandments in the Torah. So too if a boy has grown two pubic hairs, he is obligated in all of the commandments in the Torah. He is fit to become a wayward and rebellious son from the time he has grown two hairs until the time when his beard forms a circle. This refers to the lower, and not to the upper one, but the sages spoke using a euphemism. A girl who has grown two hairs may no longer refuse the marriage. Rabbi Judah says: [she may refuse] until the black [hairs] predominate.
The two hairs spoken of in regard to the red heifer and in regard to leprosy as well as those spoken of anywhere else must be long enough for their tips to be bent to their roots, the words of Rabbi Ishmael. Rabbi Elazar says: long enough to be grasped by a finger-nail. Rabbi Akiva says: long enough to be taken off with scissors.
A woman who found a blood-stain is in a spoiled condition and must take into consideration the possibility that it was due to zivah, the words of Rabbi Meir. But the sages say: in the case of blood-stains there is no [need to consider the possibility of their being] due to zivah.
If a woman observed [a discharge of blood] on the eleventh day at twilight, at the beginning of a menstruation period and at the end of a menstruation period, at the beginning of a zivah period and at the end of a zivah period; On the fortieth day after the birth of a male or on the eightieth day after the birth of a female, At twilight in all these cases, behold these women have made a mistake [in their reckoning]. Rabbi Joshua said: before you fix the situation for the women who lack intelligence, come and fix the situation for the wise ones.

Chapter 7

The blood of a menstruant and the flesh of a corpse convey uncleanness when wet and when dry. But the discharge [of a zav], and the phlegm [of a zav] and the spittle [of a zav], a dead sheretz, a nevelah and semen convey uncleanness when wet but not when dry. If they can be soaked and then revert to their original condition they convey uncleanness when wet and when dry. And how long must they be soaked? In lukewarm water for a period of twenty four hours. Rabbi Yose says: If the flesh of a corpse is dry, and it cannot be soaked and brought back to its original condition, it is clean.
If a dead sheretz was found in an alley it causes uncleanness retrospectively to such time as one can say, "I examined this alley and there was no sheretz in it," or to such time as it was last swept. So also a bloodstain found on a garment causes uncleanness retrospectively to such time as one can say, "I examined this shirt and there was no stain on it" or to such time as it was last washed. And it conveys uncleanness whether it is wet or dry. Rabbi Shimon says: if it is dry it causes uncleanness retrospectively, but if it is wet it causes uncleanness only to a time when it could still have been wet.
All bloodstains that come from Rekem are clean. Rabbi Judah declares them unclean, because the people who live there are proselytes though misguided. Those that come from non-Jews are clean. Those that come from Israelites or from Samaritans: Rabbi Meir declares them unclean, But the sages declare them clean because they are not suspected in regard to their stains.
All bloodstains, wherever they are found are clean except those that are found in rooms or in a house for unclean women. A house for unclean Samaritan women conveys uncleanness by overshadowing because they bury miscarriages there. Rabbi Judah says: they did not bury them but threw them away and the wild beasts dragged them off.
They are believed when they say, "we buried miscarriages there," or "we did not bury them." They are believed when they say concerning a beast whether it had given birth to a firstling or had not given birth to one. They are believed when giving information on the marking of graves. But they are not believed either in regard to overhanging branches, or protruding stones or a bet ha-peras. This is the general rule: in any matter in which they are under suspicion they are not believed.

Chapter 8

If a woman observed a bloodstain on her body: If it was opposite her genital area she is unclean; But if it was not near the genital are she remains clean. If it was on her heel or on the tip of her large toe, she is unclean. On her thigh or on her feet: If on the inner side, she is unclean; If on their outer side, she remains clean. And if on the front and back sides she remains clean. If she observed it on her garment: Below the belt, she is unclean, But if above the belt, she remains clean. If she observed it on the sleeve of her shirt: If it can reach as low as her genital area, she is unclean, But if it cannot, she remains clean. If she takes it off and covers herself with it in the night, she is unclean wherever the stain is found, since it can turn about. And the same law applies to a pallium.
[A woman] may attribute [a bloodstain] to any [external] cause to which she can possibly attribute it. If [for instance] she had slaughtered a beast, a wild animal or a bird, Or if she was handling bloodstains or if she sat beside those who handled them. Or if she killed a louse, she may attribute the bloodstain to it. How large a stain may be attributed to a louse? Rabbi Hanina ben Antigonus says: one up to the size of a split bean; And even if she did not kill it. She may also attribute it to her son or to her husband. If she herself had a wound that could open again and bleed she may attribute it to it.
It happened that a woman came in front of Rabbi Akiva and said. She said to him: I have seen a bloodstain. He said to her: Perhaps you had a wound? She said to him: Yes, but it has healed. He said to her: Perhaps it could have opened again and let out some blood." She said to him: Yes. And Rabbi Akiva declared her clean. He saw his disciples looked at each other in astonishment. He said to them: Why do you find this difficult, for the sages did not say this rule in order to be stringent but rather to be lenient, for it is said, "And if a woman have issue, and her issue in her flesh be blood" blood but not a bloodstain.
A testing rag that was placed under a pillow and some blood was found: If it is round it is clean If it is elongated it is unclean, the words of Rabbi Elazar bar Zadok.

Chapter 9

A woman who was attending to her needs and observed an issue of blood: Rabbi Meir says: if she was standing she is unclean but if she was sitting she remains clean. Rabbi Yose says: in either case she is clean.
A man and a woman did their needs in the same bowl and blood was found on the water: Rabbi Yose says it is clean, Rabbi Shimon says that it was unclean, since it is not usual for a man to discharge blood, but nevertheless the presumption is that blood is from the woman.
If she lent her shirt to a non-Jewish woman or to a menstruant she may attribute a stain to either. If three women had worn the same shirt or had sat on the same wooden bench and subsequently blood was found on it, all are regarded as unclean. If they had sat on a stone bench or on the projection within the colonnade of a bath House: Rabbi Nehemiah says that they are clean, for Rabbi Nehemiah says: anything that is not susceptible to uncleanness is not susceptible to stains.
Three women who were sleeping in one bed and blood was found under one of them, they are all unclean. If one of them examined herself and was found to be unclean, she alone is unclean while the two others are clean, [for] they may attribute the blood to one another. And if they were [all] not likely to observe blood, they must be regarded as though they were likely to observe one.
If three women slept in one bed, and blood was found under the middle one, they are all unclean. If it was found under the inner one, the two inner ones are unclean while the outer one is clean. If it was found under the outer one, the two outer ones are unclean while the inner one is clean. Rabbi Judah said: when is this so? When they passed by way of the foot of the bed, but if they passed across it, they are all unclean. If one of them examined herself and was found clean, she remains clean while the two others are unclean. If two examined themselves and were found to be clean they remain clean while the third is unclean. If the three examined themselves and were found to be clean, they are all unclean. To what may this be compared? To an unclean heap that was mixed up with two clean heaps: If they examined one of them and found it to be clean, it is clean while the two others are unclean; If they examined two of the heaps and found them to be clean, they are clean while the third one is unclean; And if they examined the three and they were all found to be clean, they are all unclean, the words of Rabbi Meir, For Rabbi Meir used to say: any object that is presumed to be unclean remains unclean until it is known to you where the uncleanness is. But the sages say: one continues the examination of the heap until one reaches bedrock or virgin soil.
Seven substances should be applied to a stain: tasteless spittle, the liquid of crushed beans, urine, lye, soapwort, cimolian earth, and potash. If one immersed it and then handled clean things on it, and then applied to it the seven substances and the stain did not fade away it must be a dye, and the clean things remain clean and there is no need to immerse it again. If the stain faded away or grew fainter, it must be a bloodstain and the clean things are unclean and it is necessary to perform immersion again.
What is meant by tasteless spittle? From one who had eaten nothing [that day]. The liquid of crushed beans? The chewing of split beans, ready to be swallowed. Urine? That has fermented. One must scour the stain three times with each of the substances. If he applied them out of the prescribed order, or if he applied the seven substances simultaneously, he has done nothing.
For any woman who has a regular period it suffices [to reckon her period of uncleanness from] the time she discovers the flow. And these are the signs of a regular period: [if the woman] yawns, sneezes, feels pain at the top of her stomach or the bottom of her bowels, discharges mucus, or is seized by a kind of shivering, or any other similar symptoms. Any woman who established for herself [one of the symptoms] three times behold this is a regular period.
If a woman usually observed her menstrual discharge at the onset of the symptoms of her regular periods, all clean things that she handled while the symptoms were in progress are unclean. But if she regularly observed them at the end of the symptoms, all clean things that she handled while the symptoms lasted remain clean. Rabbi Yose says: even days and hours may determine regular periods: if she regularly observed blood flow at sunrise she is forbidden intercourse at sunrise only. Rabbi Judah says: all that day is hers.
If a woman regularly observed [menstrual blood] on the fifteenth of the month, and then she changed and observed it on the twentieth both become prohibited. If she changed twice and observed it on the twentieth both [are still] prohibited. If she changed it three times to observe it on the twentieth then the fifteenth becomes permitted and the twentieth is set [as her regular day], for a woman does not establish a regular cycle until she sets it three times, and she doesn't lose her regular cycle until she is free from it three times.
Women in regard to their virginity are like vines: One vine may have red wine, while another has black wine. One vine may yield much wine while another yields little. Rabbi Judah stated: every vine yields wine, and one that yields no wine is but a dorketi.

Chapter 10

If a young girl, whose age of menstruation has not arrived, married: Bet Shammai says: she is allowed four nights; And Bet Hillel says: until the wound is healed. If the age of her menstruation has arrived and she married: Bet Shammai says: she is allowed the first night; And Bet Hillel says: four nights, until after Shabbat. If she had observed blood while she was still in her father's house: Bet Shammai ruled: she is only allowed the obligatory marital intercourse, And Bet Hillel says: all that night.
If a menstruant examined herself on the seventh day in the morning and found herself to be clean, and at twilight she did not ascertain her separation [from impurity], and after some days she examined herself and found that she was unclean, she is in a presumptive state of cleanness. If she examined herself on the seventh day in the morning and found that she was unclean, and at twilight she did not ascertain her separation [impurity], and after a time she examined herself and found that she was clean, she is in a presumptive state of uncleanness. [But] she conveys uncleanness for twenty-four hours retrospectively or during the time between the last and the previous examination. But if she had a regular period, it suffices [to reckon her period of uncleanness from] the time she discovers the flow. Rabbi Judah says: Any woman who did not ascertain her separation [from impurity] is regarded as being in a presumptive state of uncleanness. But the sages say: even if she examined herself on the second day of her menstruation and found that she was clean, and at twilight she did not ascertain her separation, and after a time she examined herself and found that she was unclean, she is regarded as being in a presumptive state of cleanness.
If a zav or a zavah examined themselves on the first day and found themselves clean and on the seventh day and found themselves clean, but did not examine themselves during the other intervening, days: Rabbi Eliezer says: they are in a presumptive condition of cleanness. Rabbi Joshua says: they are entitled [to count as clean] only the first day and the seventh day. Rabbi Akiva says: they are entitled to reckon as clean the seventh day alone.
If a zav, a zavah, a niddah, a woman after childbirth or a metzora have died [their corpses] they convey uncleanness by being carried until the flesh has decayed. If a non-Jew has died he does not convey uncleanness. Bet Shammai says: all women die as niddot. But Bet Hillel says: a woman is not regarded as a niddah unless she died while she was in menstruation.
If a woman died and a quarter of a log of blood comes out of her, it conveys uncleanness as a bloodstain and it also conveys uncleanness in a tent. Rabbi Judah says: it does not convey uncleanness as a stain, since it was detached after she had died. Rabbi Judah agrees that when a woman was sitting on the birthing stool and died and a quarter of a log of blood issued from her, it conveys uncleanness as a bloodstain. Rabbi Yose says: therefore it does not convey uncleanness in a tent.
In earlier times they used to say: a woman who is dwelling in clean blood may pour out water for [washing] the pesah sacrifice. They changed their minds and said: in respect of consecrated food she is like one who came in contact with a person that was subject to corpse uncleanness, this is according to the words of Bet Hillel. Bet Shammai says: even as one who is subject to corpse uncleanness.
But they agree that she may eat second tithe. And she may set aside her hallah, bring it near to the dough and call it by its name. And if any of her spit or her pure blood fell on a loaf of terumah it remains clean. Bet Shammai says: she requires immersion at the end [of her days of purification], Bet Hillel says: she does not require immersion at the end.
If a woman observed a discharge on the eleventh day and immersed in the evening and then had marital intercourse: Bet Shammai say: they defile a couch and a seat and they are liable to a sacrifice But Bet Hillel says: they are exempt from the sacrifice. If she immersed on the next day and then had marital intercourse and after that observed a discharge: Bet Shammai say: they convey uncleanness5 to couch and seat6 and are exempt from the sacrifice, But Bet Hillel says: such a person is a glutton. They agree that if a woman observed a discharge during the eleven days and immersed in the evening and then had intercourse that both (she and defile couch and seat and are liable to a sacrifice. If she immersed on the next day and then had intercourse, such an act is improper conduct, but the uncleanness of their contact and their liability to a sacrifice on account of their intercourse are in suspense.