Bat Ayin
בת עין
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Bat_Ayin
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org
-Likutim em português 
-https://www.sefaria.org/Bat_Ayin%2C_Likkutim.1?lang=bi

Bat Ayin

Bereshit



Noach



Lech Lecha



Vayera



Chayei Sara



Toldot



Vayetzei























And to understand this, we will preface [these words]: Behold, it is well known that Leah is called the covered world, while Rachel is called the revealed world (Zohar Chadash II, 29b). Meaning, the aspect of the world of thought is covered and is called Leah, the aspect of <i>lo</i> [not], since what is in a thought is not noticed externally. And that is the root of the negative commandments. For one who fulfills a negative commandment is not noticed, since he fulfills the commandment while being passive [literally, sitting and not doing]. Hence the external forces have no hold in that place. For there is no indulgence or significant pride that would be relevant to it, since it is something hidden only in the thought and in the heart. But the aspect of Rachel is different, it is the aspect of the revealed world, the aspect of the world of speech, which is the root of the positive commandments. [In their case], one acts with actual movement, which is visible to all at the time of the fulfillment of the commandment. Hence there can be more of a hold for the external forces on account of the indulgence that comes to him at the time of the commandment's fulfillment, the aspect of pride and that which is similar to it. For example, to receive a prize in this world or in the world to come.

Vayishlach



Vayeshev



Chanukah

And the beginning of the miracle was with Avraham, as the Maggid, may his memory be for a blessing in the life of the world to come, regarding the verse "we will go up there" [ad koh כ"ה] meaning, up to the aspect of כ"ה kah of Hanu"kah. And this is what our sages said (Bereshit Rabbah 12:9) "don't read 'at their creation' [בהבראם  behibaram] rather read 'with Avraham' [באברהם beAvraham] - meaning, the first letters of "the generations of heaven and earth" תולדות השמים והארץ are the acronym of תהו chaos, and this is fixed through 'behibaram' that is through 'beAvraham'. BeAvraham באב"רהם has the same gematria as נ"ר lamp, and this is a hint on why they said that the aspect of chaos was fixed through Avraham, with the lamp of Chanukah as explained. This is because he observed the mitzvah of brit milah, which is something that sustains the world, as it is said "Thus said Ad-nai: As surely as I have established My covenant [brit] with day and night - the laws of heaven and earth" (and see Nedarim 32a)
And the beginning of the miracle was with Avraham, as the Maggid, may his memory be for a blessing in the life of the world to come, regarding the verse "we will go up there" [ad koh כ"ה] meaning, up to the aspect of כ"ה kah of Hanu"kah. And this is what our sages said (Bereshit Rabbah 12:9) "don't read 'at their creation' [בהבראם  behibaram] rather read 'with Avraham' [באברהם beAvraham] - meaning, the first letters of "the generations of heaven and earth" תולדות השמים והארץ are the acronym of תהו chaos, and this is fixed through 'behibaram' that is through 'beAvraham'. BeAvraham באב"רהם has the same gematria as נ"ר lamp, and this is a hint on why they said that the aspect of chaos was fixed through Avraham, with the lamp of Chanukah as explained. This is because he observed the mitzvah of brit milah, which is something that sustains the world, as it is said "Thus said Ad-nai: As surely as I have established My covenant [brit] with day and night - the laws of heaven and earth" (and see Nedarim 32a)
And this is what the Text says "and Ad-nai appeared to him at Elonei Mamre, and he was sitting at the opening of the tent as the day was hot" (Gen. 18:1) - meaning that after the circumcision the fixing of the opening of the tent (פתח האוהל petach haohel) and this is a hint to the aspect of 'Hanukah light' since its mitzvah is at the door (פתח petach) of the house (Shabbat 21b) and also his house was wide open (פתוח patuach) to receive guests (see Zohar III 104a). And he was also converting people (see Bereshit Rabbah 39:14). And all this is the fixing of chaos, meaning, the essence of fixing chaos is to raise the physical attributes, which are the aspect of external husks (kelipot), which are the aspect of chaos, and raise them to their source and their root, to holiness (kedushah) [meaning that all a person's actions in worldly things should be for the sake of heaven, and Hashem should always be in a person's foremost thoughts, and one should always intend to serve the Blessed One, and through this a person can raise all their deeds and attributes to their root, to the aspect of holiness]. And this is the aspect of receiving guests, that one makes all the aspects that were in chaos enter into the aspect of fixing, into the aspect of holiness, as it is written (see Meor Eynayim, Lech Lecha, "and the souls"). And this too is also the aspect of converting converts, that one makes them enter to the aspect of holiness, and this is also called "receiving guests" and in essence this is fixing chaos, as one raises them to holiness. And Avraham Avinu PBUH did all this, and his house was wide open, meaning, to illuminate all the aspects of chaos so that he could raise them.
And therefore this is why our sages OBM said (Shabbat 21b) that "the mitzvah of the Hanukkah lamp is on the outside door of one's house, and in times of danger [they are set] on one's table of course", meaning, the essence of the mitzvah is that the setting it on the outside door is to illuminate all the external aspects. That is to say, a person who is able to deal with all the physical aspects in the market with good intentions so as to raise them to holiness, as we explained above, this is obviously good, and this is the essence of the mitzvah of Hanukkah lamp being outside, in the aspect of outside, as explained. But on times of danger, meaning, when one fears to make oneself enter into the external aspects, into the physical things, in order to raise them - in moments when one is not able to conquer one's evil impulse. Then obviously one sets it on one's table, meaning, one is very careful regarding all things connected to one's table, eating and drinking, that they should be in the aspect of obvious (vadai) - this is the aspect of satisfaction, that is, contentment, enough (dai) to serve the Blessed Creator [with the energy of that food] and not to satisfy one's base appetites  so as to shine on ones table God's light [and so too with all one's attributes, first cooling one's physical appetites, and also the desire for honor and arrogance, and after that maybe the Holy Blessed One will have mercy and the person will merit setting the Hanukah lamp outside, as explained].
And it was to this that our sages OBM said (Shabbat 21b) that the mitzvah [of the Hanukkah lamp] is from the moment when the sun sets, that the beginning of the mitzvah is to set the sun, that is, the light of God will illuminate and set into that person's hart, as explained. And the last moment is "until the feet stop [walking] in the marketplace" that is to say that until one merits that the feet rest, which is the aspect feet, which is the aspect of physicality, that they should stop [walking] in the marketplace, that is, that even when one is walkign around in the marketplace, one does not experience odd cravings, which are called feet, that go against one's serving God, which is called head. And what is "feet" (in the Gemara) - the feet of the tarmudai, that is tarmu"dai, an expression of sleep and hibernation [tardemah], which are the deeds done without intention to serve God, those are called tarmudai, this is the aspect of hibernation [tardemah], the aspect of sleep.
















































And the essence of the trait of humility is that one contemplates that all the accomplishments that he has are not from the angle of his deeds and his wisdom, but rather that the Creator, blessed be He, effects this accomplishment from the angle of His kindness. And then he merits the aspect of inspiration from the Divine Presence, the aspect of prophecy. And that is [the meaning of] that which is written (Genesis 41:16), “Not I, God will address the peace of Pharaoh.” And Onkelos translates [it as], “It is not from my wisdom; rather the address to the peace of Pharoah will come from before God.” [Its] explanation is that Yosef had the aspect of humility, so he merited the aspect of inspiration from the Divine Presence, the aspect of prophecy. 

Miketz



Vayigash

And Judah approached him, etc." (Genesis 44:18). Behold, the inspiration of the Shekhinah is only in a lowly place, as our Sages say (see Sotah 5a, Zohar Ruth 98a, Berakhot 99a): "The Holy One, blessed be He, did not rest His Shekhinah on Mount Sinai except because it is lowly, etc." This means that the Shekhinah only rests in a place of humility and meekness, as the Scripture says (Isaiah 57:15), "I dwell with the lowly and the humble spirit," etc. It is also written (Deuteronomy 7:7), "Not because you were more numerous than all the nations did the Lord desire you and choose you, for you are the fewest of all the nations," and our Sages say (Chullin 49b): "Make yourselves small before Him.
"And the main creation of the world was in the beginning, for the sake of Israel, who are called 'reshit' (first/fruits) (Vayikra Rabbah 36:4). This is explained in the manner of the saying of our Sages (Pesikta de-Rav Kahana 12:21): 'Every day should be in your eyes as new,' meaning that every person, even if he serves the Lord constantly, nevertheless needs to reflect every day on his distance from God, and all his service is as nothing compared to what is required of him. In his eyes, it should be as if he has not yet begun to taste any pleasantness from the Lord, and he should be like a newborn today, starting to serve the Lord. He should gaze and seek to behold the pleasantness of the Lord, and he should pray to the Lord for help to begin and complete his service for Him. He should cry out for the good fortune to see the pleasantness of the Lord, and he should humble his heart greatly for the days and years that have passed over him from the day of his birth without benefiting at all from the pleasantness of the Lord. Moreover, this has greatly impaired him, and a barrier has been created that separates him from his Creator. As a result, he has distanced himself greatly from God. But from now on, let him read and pray to the Lord from a distance through a hint, like the example of a servant who is far from his master and cannot speak to him face to face, requesting his needs and the necessities of his life. Instead, he communicates with him from a distance through a hint, thereby alluding to his master and asking him to grant him his life needs. Similarly, when a person reflects on himself and finds that he is far from God, he should pray to the Lord only through this hint, which is called 'zimmurah.' As the Scripture says (Isaiah 24:16): 'From the ends of the earth we heard zimmurot,' meaning from a distance, we are heard only through hints, specifically using the language of zimmurot. This is called 'reshit,' for every day, in his eyes, is as if it is the beginning of his service to the Lord through the zimmurot. This is what Jacob said to his sons (Genesis 43:11): 'Take of the best fruits of the land,' meaning the aspect of zimmurot, as explained above.
And this is the essence of the aspect of 'reshit,' the aspect of wisdom (which is called the 'revealed beginning' - Pardes Shaar 23, Roshit, 3), to contemplate within oneself the aspect of nothingness, as the Scripture says (Job 28:12): 'But wisdom, from where shall it be found?'

Vayechi



Shemot



Vaera



Bo



Beshalach



Yitro



Mishpatim



Parashat Shekalim



Terumah



Tetzaveh



Parashat Zakhor



Purim

That night, the king's sleep was disturbed, and he commanded to bring the book of records, the chronicles, etc. (Esther 6:1 - אסתר ו א). And it is stated in the Gemara (Megillah 15 - מגילה טו) that 'the king's sleep' (שנת המלך) refers to the King of the World.
It is possible to explain this matter in a moral way regarding the path of serving the Creator, blessed be He, as follows: The primary focus of the Creator's providence is on the humble in spirit, as the verse states (Tehilim 34:19 - תהלים לד יט), 'The Lord is near to the brokenhearted.' (קרוב ה' לנשברי לב) The essence of complete humility (ענוה בשלמות) is when one is entirely unaware of their own humility (ענוה) and lowliness (ושפלות). However, if one is conscious of their lowliness, this is not complete humility.
The attribute of humility is symbolized by the letter 'Yud,' (יו"ד) which is the smallest of the letters (see Tikunei Zohar, Tikun 9, p. 125 - ע' ת"ז ת' ע' קכה), and also by the letter 'Kaf,' (כ') because the righteous bend and lower their heads. Additionally, the attribute of humility is referred to by the number one hundred (מאה), as in the idea of 'Modim,' (מודי"ם) which has the numerical value of one hundred (מאה), and one must bow, as is explained in the holy books (Siddur of the Ariza"l - סידור האר"י ז"ל).
Additionally, the full spelling of the letter 'Kaf' (כ"ף) has a numerical value of one hundred (מאה), in connection with the verse, 'And now, Yisrael, what does the Lord your G-d ask of you' ( ועתה ישראל מה ה' אלהיך שואל מעמך) (Devarim 10:12 - דברים י יב). Do not read 'what' (מה) but 'one hundred' (מאה) (Menachot 43; see Tosafot, s.v. 'Shoel' מנחות מג: ע' תוד"ה שואל). This is the meaning of 'A man who brings an offering from you' ( אדם כי יקריב מכ"ם) (Vayikra 1:2 - ויקרא א ב), which has the numerical value of one hundred (מאה). This is an offering to the Lord, as the verse states (Tehilim 51:19 - תהלים נא יט), 'The sacrifices of G-d are a broken spirit.' (זבחי אלהים רוח נשברה) Then one is referred to as a 'man' (אדם) when he is in the state of 'and what are we' (מ"ה) (Shemot 16:7 - שמות טז ז), which has the same numerical value as 'man' (אד"ם).
The principle is that the essence of divine service lies in true lowliness (שפלות) and humility (וענוה). Then, the Creator, blessed be He, rests His presence upon the person, as the verse states (Yeshaya 57:15 - ישעיה נז טו), 'I dwell with the contrite and lowly of spirit.' (אשכון את דכא) However, even if one attains complete humility, one must still strengthen themselves greatly to pray before the Creator, blessed be He. They should not think, 'Who am I to approach the holy?' On the contrary, they should strengthen themselves more and more due to the faith that You hear the prayer of every mouth. Yet, this strengthening must be accompanied by great awe (בגודל אימה), and reverence (ויראה), and fear (ופחד).
This is the meaning of 'And He called to Moshe' (ויקרא אל משה) (Vayikra 1:1 - ויקרא א א), which implies that Moshe was in a state of awe (יראה) and submission (והכנעה). This is alluded to in the word 'Vayikra' (ויקרא): the letters 'Reish,' 'Yud,' 'Vav' = 'רי"ו' = from the word 'Vayikra' (ויקרא) have a numerical value equal to 'Yirah' (awe - ירא"ה) (Likutei Torah, Parashat Vayeira, discourse 'Vayaschem Avraham' - לק"ת פ' וירא ד"ה וישכם אברהם). The letter 'Kaf' (ק') hints at submission (הכנעה), as mentioned above, and the small 'Aleph' (וא') also signifies submission (הכנעה). This was the effect of G-d's speech to him, that the communication was uniquely directed to him (see Torat Kohanim and Rash"i on the verse - ע' ת"כ ורש"י עה"פ). This resolves the question of why it states both 'He called' (ויקרא) and 'He spoke.' (וידבר)
True humility is an aspect of longing (חשק), as the Gemara states (Chulin 89 - חולין פט): 'I have a longing for you because you are few, as you diminish yourselves before Me.' (חושקני בכם כי אתם המעט שאתם ממעיטין עצמיכם לפני) To understand the concept of longing, we can explain it as follows: The Divine Name Havayah (הוי"ה), blessed be He (ב"ה), with the vocalization of Tzevaot (צבאות), corresponds to the initials of Cholem , Shva, Kamatz, (ח"לם ש"בא ק"מץ) which form the acronym חש"ק (Tikunei Zohar, Introduction 10 - ת"ז הקדמה י). This is the meaning of 'I have a longing for you,' (חשקתי בכם) implying that I bestow the sanctity of My Name upon you when you humble yourselves before Me.
Additionally, the term חש"ק (longing) hints at three occurrences of the Name Havayah with the vocalization of these three points (Or Ne'erav, Part 6, Chapter 5 - אור נערב ח"ו פ"ה). This relates to the concept of 'Megillah,' (מגילה) where the letter 'Yud' (יו"ד) in the word 'Megillah' (מגילה) symbolizes humility (ענוה), and the remaining letters, מגל"ה, have a numerical value equal to three times the Name Havayah, blessed be He (הוי"ה ב"ה).
The principle is that a person must purify the materiality completely, and according to the level of purification, so is the degree of humility. According to the humility, so is the revelation of the divinity upon them. This is also alluded to in the word 'Megillah,' (מגילה) where the letter 'Yud' (יו"ד) symbolizes humility. The meaning is that the more one humbles themselves, the more the divine is revealed upon them.
This is the meaning of 'This is the Torah, a person' (זאת התורה אדם) (Bamidbar 19:14 - במדבר יט יד) , implying that the Torah is only sustained when one is in the state of 'Ma"H' (מ"ה), which has the numerical value of 'Adam' (אד"ם). As the Gemara states (Taanit 7 - תענית ז), the Torah is compared to water (שהתורה נמשלה למים), as water flows to the lowest place, so too the Torah descends only to those of humble spirit. When one learns Torah with complete humility, the Creator, blessed be He, rests His presence upon them, the sanctity of the Name Havayah (הוי"ה), blessed be He (ב"ה), with the vocalization of 'Chet - ח' 'Shin - ש' 'Quf - ק' (ח'ש'ק), and delights in them and longs for them. This is hinted at in the word 'Torah,' (תור"ה) whose numerical value corresponds to the combination of 'Cholem' (חל"ם) , Shva (שב"א) , Kamatz (קמ"ץ).
Now let us return to our topic. The main focus of the Creator, blessed be He, is on those with a humble spirit (לנמוכי רוח), and He watches over them with an open eye. However, when one, G-d forbid, is in the state of rudeness/arrogance (גסות הרוח), the Creator does not watch over them with an open eye, and they fall, G-d forbid, into the state of sleep. This is the meaning of 'That night, the king's sleep was disturbed,' (בלילה ההוא נדד"ה) which has the numerical value of ג"ס' (63)' (rudeness  - גסות הרוח), because being in the state of rudeness (גסות הרוח) causes the King's sleep, the King of the World, to be akin to sleep. From this comes the aspect of strength (גבורה) mentioned above. 'And he commanded to bring the book of records, the chronicles,' (ויאמר להביא ספר הזכרונות דברי הימי"ם) which has the numerical value of one hundred (מאה), meaning to reach the level of humility and lowliness (ענוה בשלמות). Then, 'They will be called before the king,' (ויהיו נקראים לפני המלך) to receive the attribute of kindness for the community (מדת חסד על כללות), because certainly He will watch over them with an open eye, as the verse states (Tehilim 34:19 - תהלים לד יט), 'The Lord is near to the brokenhearted,' (קרוב ה' לנשברי לב) and He will bestow good influences and blessings on the community (ומשפיע השפעות טובות וברכות לכלליות). Amen, may it be His will (אמן כן יהי רצון).

Ki Tisa



Parashat Parah



Vayakhel



Vayakhel Pekudei



Parashat HaChodesh



Vayikra



Tzav



Shabbat HaGadol



Pesach I



Shabbat Chol HaMoed Pesach



Shmini



Tazria



Metzora




But we must now understand what is the meaning of [what he said], "on account of the miracle," according to this. Behold, the essence of the miracle is [that] <i>the Lord slew every first-born in the land of Egypt, etc.</i> (Exodus 13:15). [In fact], thought is called the first-born, since it precedes all speech and action, and the essence of spiritual work is to rectify thought. For even though a person will sometimes pray with great enthusiasm or [similarly] occupy himself with other commandments, his thoughts are not with him, but are rather extraneous [to what he is doing]; and, in this way, he separates between thought and speech. That is why every person must make efforts and exert himself in this spiritual work, to bind together and connect thought and speech, and have them cling to God. This is like the statement of Scripture: <i>And you who are clinging to the Lord [your God are all alive today]</i> (Deuteronomy 4:4).

Pesach II



Achrei Mot



Kedoshim



Emor












Or it can be said with this approach, according to the approach said by the holy Rabbi of Berditchev, may his memory be a blessing for life in the world to come, about the superfluous expression of the words, “the sons of Aharon” (Kedushat Levi on the Parsha, s.v. or it is understood): For behold the Creator, blessed be He, commanded there to be additional holiness upon the priests, beyond [that of] the Children of Israel. And on account of this, they could, God forbid, come to the aspect of haughtiness. Hence, God, may He be blessed, preceded [this] and told them that this aspect of holiness is only on account of your being the sons of Aharon, and not from the angle of your own greatness. And this is [the meaning of], “to the priests, the sons of Aharon” – meaning [to] say to them that this aspect that they have is only from the angle of their being the sons of Aharon. 
In this fashion, we can also say that this is the intention of the verse [here] with the superfluous expression: That they not, God forbid, come to the aspect of haughtiness. So the Holy One, blessed be He, told them to remember what happened to Nadav and Avihu because they did not have the aspect of submission as is fitting. For it is found (Eruvin 63a) that the cause [of their death] was on account of their pronouncing a law in front of their teacher, and their not having the aspect of submission as is fitting.
And this is [the meaning of], “Say to the priests” – that they should remember what happened to Nadav and Avihu, the son of Aharon, and not come to the aspect of haughtiness. 

Behar



Behar Bechukotai



Bechukotai



Bamidbar



Shavuot



Nasso



Beha'alotcha



Sh'lach



Korach



Chukat



Balak



Pinchas



Matot Masei



Masei



Devarim



Vaetchanan



Eikev


<b>And it appears to me</b> according to that which I heard in the name of the great Maggid, may his memory be blessed for life in the world to come (it is brought in the Ohr HaMeir, at the beginning of the teaching on Rosh Hashanah):  As he said,  "Before the sun darkens (<i>techshach</i>)" (Ecclesiastes 12:2)" - that [corresponds to] the fifteenth of Av. As the letters of  <i>techshach</i> are [the same as] <i>tash koach</i> (strength weakens). And on the fifteenth of Av, the strength of the sun weakens, as it is found in the Talmud (Taanit 31a). "And the moon and the stars" correspond to Rosh HaShanah and Hoshana Rabba. And also the holy Rabbi of Berditchev, may his memory be blessed for life in the world to come, said (Kedushat Levi, Likkutim, p. 477) that the fifteenth of Av is the beginning of the coming year regarding repentance. This is according to the approach of that which the Sages, may their memory be blessed, said (Sotah 2a), "Forty days before the formation of the embryo, they announce, etc." For the world was created on the twenty-fifth of Elul; and there are forty days from the fifteenth of Av to the twenty-fifth of Elul. To here are his words regarding our topic.

Re'eh



Shoftim



Ki Teitzei



Ki Tavo



Nitzavim



Erev Rosh HaShanah



Vayeilech



Shabbat Shuvah I



Rosh HaShanah



Shabbat Shuvah II



Ha'Azinu



Yom Kippur



V'Zot HaBerachah



Sukkot



Likkutim

It is stated in the Gemara (Shabbos 118): "Make your Shabbos like a weekday and do not rely on others." (עשה שבתך חול ואל תצטרך לבריות) And one can be particular about this in several ways. It can be said similarly: The essence of servitude is to cover and conceal the level of holiness that one possesses through any mitzvah they perform, or through Torah and prayer, so that it remains hidden from the eyes of all living beings. For when one does not conceal and cover their holiness, it is possible that during the performance of a mitzvah, the thought of arrogance (גסות הרוח) may arise, G-d forbid, so that people may praise him. Or, it could be that during the performance of the mitzvah, a foreign thought (מחשבה זרה) may arise, G-d forbid, for personal enjoyment, in order that others may have compassion on him by seeing his good deeds. In this case, he is in the category of being "dependent on others," (נצרך לבריות), meaning that he is dependent on others to either praise him or have compassion on him.
... And behold, the aspect of holiness is referred to as "Shabbos." This is the meaning of "Make your Shabbat like a weekday,"  (עשה שבתך חול) that is, your aspect of holiness should be made like a weekday, meaning you should cover and conceal it to the extent that it appears to others as mundane. Then, "do not rely on others," ( ואל תצטרך לבריות) as mentioned above. May it be His will that we merit this, Amen (יהי רצון שנזכה לזה אמן). 
...It is stated in the Midrash that when Shlomo HaMelech, peace be upon him, completed the construction of the Holy Temple, two birds stood on the roof. One said to the other, "Do you not see this great building? If I wish, I can ruin it with a single movement." The king heard this and summoned the bird, asking him how such a thing could be possible. The bird replied, "What does it matter to you? Am I not allowed to boast before my wife?" And that was the end of it.
...The matter (הענין) is as follows: this bird represented the evil inclination and S-atan, who said, "I can ruin the entire structure so that the Divine Presence will not dwell in this holy house, rendering all your labor in vain, G-d forbid." The king asked him, "How can this be? I have already banished you through repentance and good deeds, with great effort, and yet you still boast over me?" To this, the evil inclination replied, "Regarding gross physical transgressions, G-d forbid, it is indeed impossible to entice you. However, with something minor, like saying to your wife, 'I completed this house so well,' some subtle pride might creep in. This pride would prevent the Divine Presence from dwelling here, as it is written (Isaiah 57:15 - ישעיה נז טו): 'I dwell with the contrite and humble. (אשכון ואת דכא וגו')'" 
...On Shabbos near the month of Adar, he said during the morning meal that when he recited the "Crown" sanctification (קדושת כתר) during the verse "Indeed, I have redeemed you, the end as the beginning," (הן גאלתי אתכם אחרית כראשית) his eyes were illuminated from Heaven with the following interpretation. This was based on what he had heard from the pious and righteous sage, the renowned holy light, a man of G-d, sanctity was proclaimed over him, the Av Beit Din of the holy community of Berdichov, of blessed memory and saintly merit. He explained the Gemara (Rosh Hashanah 11 - ר"ה יא): "In Nissan they were redeemed, and in Nissan they are destined to be redeemed." (בניסן נגאלו ובניסן עתידין לגאול) This does not mean exclusively in Nissan; rather, redemption could occur in the month of Adar. However, the redemption will occur in the quality of Nissan. Based on this introduction, the verse "Indeed, I have redeemed you, the end as the beginning" (הן גאלתי אתכם אחרית כראשית) ) can be understood as follows: The month of Adar is the "end" of the months of the year, and the month of Nissan is the "beginning" of the months of the year. This is the meaning of the verse: "Indeed, I have redeemed you, the end as the beginning," (הן גאלתי אתכם אחרית כראשית)  meaning that I can redeem you in the month of Adar, which is the "end" of the months, in the quality of Nissan, which is the "beginning" of the months. Amen, so may it be His will (אמן כן יהי רצון).
...A remedy (סגולה) and advice (ועצה) for a person to connect their thoughts with their speech during the prayers of Shabbos is to ensure they read the weekly Torah portion (הפרשה), "Shnayim Mikra Ve'echad Targum" (שנים מקרא ואחד תרגום) (twice the text and once the Targum/translation), specifically on Friday, the sixth day of the week, Erev Shabbos Qodesh. The reason for this is that the Written Torah symbolizes the aspect of thought, while the Oral Torah, which serves as the interpretation of the Torah, symbolizes the aspect of speech (Tikunei Zohar, Tikun 21, 50 - ע' ת"ז ת' כא נ ). Therefore, by reading the portion along with its translation/Targum, which is its interpretation, on Friday, one creates an effect such that on Shabbos, during prayer, their thoughts and speech will be unified and connected as one.
On the yahrzeit (24th of Tevet - כ"ד טבת) of those who perished in the earthquake in the holy city of Safed (in the year 5597/1837 - בשנת תקצ"ז), he delivered a discourse and concluded with an interpretation of the Gemara in Perek Chelek (Sanhedrin 98 - סנהדרין צח): "The students of Rabbi Yose ben Kisma asked him, 'When will the son of David come?' He replied, 'When this gate falls, is rebuilt, falls again, is rebuilt, and falls again, and they will not have time to rebuild it before the son of David comes. (שאלו תלמידיו את רבי יוסי בן קיסמא אימתי בן דוד בא, אמר להם כשיפול השער הזה ויבנה ויחזור ויפול ויבנה ויחזור ויפול ולא יספיקו לבנותו עד שבן דוד בא ע"כ)'" He explained that the word "gate" (sha'ar - שע"ר) shares the same letters as the word "earthquake" (ra'ash - רע"ש) and is also numerically equivalent to Tzfat (570) (Safed - צפ"ת). Over the years, there have been two major earthquakes in the land, during which many lives were tragically lost. He stated that this is the final fall, and before there is time to rebuild, the son of David will come. Amen, may it be His will (אמן כן יהי רצון).
... Blessed is He who gives strength to the weary and increases power to the powerless.
Bendito é Aquele que dá força aos cansados e aumenta o poder dos desamparados.

Responsa

