Sefer Mitzvot Katan
ספר מצוות קטן
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Sefer Mitzvot Katan

Introduction

Since, due to our iniquities, the Torah is being forgotten and I was afraid that many would not know the understanding of the commandments that are incumbent upon us, I have written these commandments that are incumbent upon us in our time in seven columns that correspond to the seven days of the week: So I am requesting that every man read a column each day so that it be good for him. For there are many commandments that a person is not obligated to observe until they come to him. But when he reads them and considers them in his heart, the Holy One, blessed be He, counts it for him as if he did [them]: And this reward is great beyond measure. And the proof is from that which it is written, <i>And the Children of Israel went and did</i> (Exodus 12:28), concerning Passover. But this was said on the first of Nissan, when they were commanded and accepted upon themselves to do [it], and the doing was not until the 14th of Nissan. It comes out that the acceptance was counted for them like the doing. And also, as it is found in Sifrei (Sifrei Bamidbar 151), "<i>And you shall remember them [...] and do them</i> (Numbers 15:39), from here [we learn] that remembering is like doing." Also, sometimes the commandment will come to him, and he will not know how to do [it]. Hence everyone should pay attention to this; for if not now, when [alluding to Avot 1:14]? And anyone who does not know the understanding [of the commandments] should also study the Sefer HaMitzvot which was developed by Rabbenu Moshe of Coucy. And if he [still] does not know, he should ask someone greater than himself. As the words of the Torah are compared to water, such that one should not be embarrassed to ask one another, as it is stated, <i>Ho, all who are thirsty, come for water</i> (Isaiah 55:1). And the greater one should also not prevent himself from teaching the lesser one. Hence I have summoned a blessing to do like this thing, so that we become one grouping and, through this, the servant will be acceptable to his Master. And each one who increases [this] will be praiseworthy, to study the explanation of two or three commandments daily. And [with] everything, according to the toil is the reward [alluding to Avot 5:23]. One should also organize [study] of the parashah that they are reading in the synagogue weekly, as the sages commanded, twice reading and once in translation. And one who does not understand the translation [of Onkelos] should read the commentaries; and if he does not [understand that], he said ask someone greater than him. And if he is not able to complete it in one or two days, he should divide it into seven sections, so that it not be too difficult for him. And even though a person is [already] accustomed to studying without the stringent prohibition of this blessing, it is nevertheless a proper thing to attach oneself to the blessing to draw the hearts of others; and also because his reward will be doubled and quadrupled if he will do it for the sake of the yoke of his Master that is incumbent upon him much more than if he would study double without this yoke when he is available. I have also set down a blessing to bless daily, for someone who attaches himself into this covenant in this commandment of the One for whom I am a messenger: And every sexton in every town should command to copy these commandments and to give the wage [to the transcriber] from the community chest, so that it will be a guardianship in their hands afterwards, such that anyone who wants to copy or study it, borrow it and return it on the same day. And it shall be righteousness for you, for they will then be secure. And if the messenger should need to stay in the town in order to copy the commandments, they should give him a wage from the chest of six small "pasitornis" per day, and meals and lodging from the home-owners as is the law for other wayfarers.  And I have not done this to become famous, as there is no fame in this, as it is a simple act. For it is a time of need, lest the commandments be forgotten from the mouths of Israel: For the sages said (Avot 2:5), "An uneducated person is not a pious one." As sometimes a person thinks he is doing a commandment, but he is [actually] doing a sin, like in the story of Rabbi Akiva. So everyone must strengthen themselves about this, since the Holy One, blessed be He, will not raise another prophet to make us repent if we do not repent on our own, as Scripture stated, <i>Until when will you waver, O rebellious daughter, etc.</i> (Jeremiah 31:22): Such did our teacher, our rabbi, Rabbi Yitzchak the Pious, son of Yosef from Corbeilles write and send out in Ashkenaz.

Remazim







Siman 1



Siman 2



Siman 3



Siman 4



Siman 5



Siman 6



Siman 7



Siman 8



Siman 9



Siman 10



Siman 11



Siman 12



Siman 13



Siman 14



Siman 15



Siman 16



Siman 17



Siman 18



Siman 19



Siman 20



Siman 21



Siman 22



Siman 23



Siman 24



Siman 25



Siman 26



Siman 27



Siman 28



Siman 29



Siman 30



Siman 31



Siman 32



Siman 33



Siman 34



Siman 35



Siman 36



Siman 37



Siman 38



Siman 39



Siman 40



Siman 41



Siman 42



Siman 43



Siman 44



Siman 45



Siman 46



Siman 47



Siman 48



Siman 49



Siman 50



Siman 51



Siman 52



Siman 53



Siman 54



Siman 55



Siman 56



Siman 57



Siman 58



Siman 59



Siman 60



Siman 61



Siman 62



Siman 63



Siman 64



Siman 65



Siman 66



Siman 67



Siman 68



Siman 69



Siman 70



Siman 71



Siman 72



Siman 73



Siman 74



Siman 75



Siman 76



Siman 77



Siman 78



Siman 79



Siman 80



Siman 81



Siman 82



Siman 83



Siman 84



Siman 85



Siman 86



Siman 87



Siman 88



Siman 89



Siman 90



Siman 91



Siman 92



Siman 93



Siman 94



Siman 95



Siman 96



Siman 97



Siman 98



Siman 99



Siman 100



Siman 101



Siman 102



Siman 103



Siman 104



Siman 105



Siman 106



Siman 107



Siman 108



Siman 109



Siman 110



Siman 111



Siman 112



Siman 113



Siman 114



Siman 115



Siman 116



Siman 117



Siman 118



Siman 119



Siman 120



Siman 121



Siman 122



Siman 123



Siman 124



Siman 125



Siman 126



Siman 127



Siman 128



Siman 129



Siman 130



Siman 131



Siman 132



Siman 133



Siman 134



Siman 135



Siman 136



Siman 137



Siman 138



Siman 139



Siman 140



Siman 141



Siman 142



Siman 143



Siman 144



Siman 145



Siman 146



Siman 147



Siman 148



Siman 149



Siman 150



Siman 151



Siman 152



Siman 153



Siman 154



Siman 155



Siman 156



Siman 157



Siman 158



Siman 159



Siman 160



Siman 161



Siman 162



Siman 163



Siman 164



Siman 165



Siman 166



Siman 167



Siman 168



Siman 169



Siman 170



Siman 171



Siman 172



Siman 173



Siman 174



Siman 175



Siman 176



Siman 177



Siman 178



Siman 179



Siman 180



Siman 181



Siman 182



Siman 183



Siman 184



Siman 185



Siman 186



Siman 187



Siman 188



Siman 189



Siman 190



Siman 191



Siman 192



Siman 193



Siman 194

Maimonides, Laws of Yom Tov, Chapter 1; Laws of Shabbat, Chapters 1-2; Laws of Rosh Hashanah, Chapter 1; Semag, Negative Commandments, Section 59, from 71a to 73b; Tur, Orach Chayim, Section 495.
Not to work on holidays, as it is written (Numbers 28:26) "And on the day of the firstfruits," and not to work on Rosh Hashanah, as it is written (Leviticus 23:24) "In the seventh month, on the first day of the month," and not to work on Yom Kippur, as it is written (Leviticus 23:28) "And you shall do no manner of work in that same day; for it is a day of atonement." And not to work on the first day of Passover, as it is written (Numbers 28:18) "In the first day is a holy convocation; you shall do no manner of servile work." And likewise, for all six days of Passover. It is permissible to do work only for food preparation needs, specifically things that cannot be done before the holiday begins, such as grinding pepper when one does not know which pot to cook in on the holiday, or spices that lose their flavor, even if one knows. But for things that could be done before the holiday begins, it is forbidden to do them on the holiday. Likewise, it is forbidden to tell a non-Jew to do something on the holiday that would change the setup from the way it was before the holiday, even without setting the table, as explained in Tosafot concerning the Poter that it is a slight change. Since their way is with a box or an aruva. Likewise, one does not play with the peppers in their pods. And it is forbidden to do any work, even work for food preparation needs, for non-Jewish idolaters or for the needs of dogs. Likewise, one does not invite a non-Jew to the holiday because he might overdo it for him. And things that are impossible to do before the holiday begins are permitted, like Rabbi Yehuda, and we do not instruct like him. And a knife that became damaged on the holiday, the law is that it is permitted to sharpen it in order to slaughter with it, and we do not instruct like him. And Rabbi Yehuda permits whitening the iron shovel on the holiday because it looks like it is being heated to bake quickly, and anything that is set aside is permitted like Rabbi Shimon. Except for raw nutshells, pits, and things set aside due to a prohibition, and one smokes in vessels but not in brokenvessels, as it is considered new and appears to be born and born appears to be forbidden. And an egg that was born on the holiday is forbidden to eat and to move, but they force a utensil on it so that it does not remain, and it is uncertain if it is forbidden. If it got mixed with a thousand, all of them are forbidden. And if it was born on Shabbat and a holiday, it is forbidden on the other. And the two days of Rosh Hashanah are forbidden on each other. And the two days of the Diaspora are born on one of them permitted on the other. And one who dies on the second day of the holiday, the Jews do not deal with him. On the eve of the holiday, he checked in a hen's nest and did not find an egg. And the next day he got up very early in the morning and found an egg. If there is a hen, until sixty houses, it is permitted. If there is a doubt about it being from the ground, it is forbidden, and a chick that was born on the holiday is forbidden because of being set aside even when its eyes opened. And a calf that was born on the holiday is permitted to slaughter it wherever we know for certain that it completed its months. For if it is in doubt, even on a weekday, it is forbidden due to the doubt of it being a stillborn for up to seven days, and we do not postpone. To cook on the holiday for a weekday need in one pot alone is permitted, but if it boiled, it is forbidden. And an animal that is dangerous should not be slaughtered unless one can eat a roasted olive-size piece of it from before the day. A woman who fills an oven with bread even though she only needs it for one loaf, because the bread bakes well when the oven is full. And they fill a woman's hand with salt on the holiday. And washing and anointing are permitted on the holiday like eating and drinking. And a person warms water to wash his face, hands, and feet. But not his entire body because of the decree of bathing, but with warm water that was heated before the holiday, the Gaon ruled that it is permitted to bathe with them. And one does not place a lamp on a tree on the eve of the holiday because he might take it on the holiday. But on the eve of Shabbat, it is permitted. And one does not trap something that needs to be said "The one that came into the trap and was trapped," where there are set traps from before the holiday and he finds an animal trapped, it is forbidden unless he knows for certain that it was trapped from before the holiday. And a non-Jew who brought a gift to a Jew, if it is attached to the ground, it is forbidden to accept it in order to do him a favor, and Rashi explained that this is the second night of the holiday. And some divide about it until the night of the weekday, and our Rabbis would allow them to do it as their custom was. And a thing that comes from outside the techum for Jews is permissible for another Jew even on the day itself. And wood that was cut from a palm tree for firewood on the holiday, one adds prepared wood and lights them. And one does not chop wood from the beams standing for construction on the holiday, even to remove them without chopping, because they are set aside due to lacking a handle. And even Rabbi Shimon agrees. And one puts soil in a box on the holiday for his needs, and he makes it ready, and even on Shabbat. And ashes that were removed from the oven on the holiday, if it is hot enough to roast an egg, it is ready. And if not, it is forbidden, and even according to Rabbi Shimon as Tosafot explained regarding an egg. And if he slaughtered and did not find ashes but that it is not ready, he covers it with them. One who slaughters an animal on the holiday, and there is mostly wool on it so that he cannot slaughter it, he leaves it in place, but with a bird, he does not pluck it, as it is its nature, and he is considered one who removes on the holiday and is liable to bring a sin-offering. One does not cook on the holiday for weekday use in one pot alone, and if he erred, it is forbidden. And one does not salt vegetables individually on the holiday, for fear that he will grind them, and Rashi explained that this is the second night of the holiday. And we debate him about this until the evening of the weekday. And our Rabbis were lenient to let them do one kind and then another like its custom. And a thing that comes from outside the techum for Jews is permissible for another Jew even on the day itself. And wood that was cut from a palm tree for firewood on the holiday, one adds prepared wood and lights them. And one does not chop wood from the beams standing for construction on the holiday, even to remove them without chopping, because they are set aside due to lacking a handle. And even Rabbi Shimon agrees. And one puts soil in a box on the holiday for his needs, and he makes it ready, and even on Shabbat. And ashes that were removed from the oven on the holiday, if it is hot enough to roast an egg, it is ready. And if not, it is forbidden, and even according to Rabbi Shimon as Tosafot explained regarding an egg. And if he slaughtered and did not find ashes but that it is not ready, he covers it with them. One who slaughters an animal on the holiday, and there is mostly wool on it so that he cannot slaughter it, he leaves it in place, but with a bird, he does not pluck it, as it is its nature, and he is considered one who removes on the holiday and is liable to bring a sin-offering. One does not cook on the holiday for weekday use in one pot alone, and if he erred, it is forbidden. And one does not salt vegetables individually on the holiday, for fear that he will grind them, and Rashi explained that this is the second night of the holiday. And we debate him about this until the evening of the weekday. And our Rabbis were lenient to let them do one kind and then another like its custom. In the first chapter of Shabbat, we learn that anything that is not a boundary is considered as if it were giving water, which incurs liability. We do not make cheese on the holiday because it does not improve its taste. We do not grind spices in a large mortar, but in a small mortar, which is considered a change for the better. In the land of Israel, even in a small mortar, it is forbidden because their produce is good. If one crushed on the eve of the holiday, it does not improve its taste, we do not take out fire either from wood, stones, or metals that were not set aside for the holiday, but with existing fire. We do not cover the lamp to extinguish it, nor do we remove the oil from it, nor do we remove burning wicks from the oil. We do not cut the head of the wick with a utensil, but we cut it with our hands. Kinasa is permitted, meaning the bundle of wood that was ignited. Some wood catches fire, while others do not, we do not extinguish the fire to save money on the holiday, but we leave it and it will go out on its own. We do not extinguish the lamp on the holiday, we do not make coals, we do not cut the wicks, we do not shake it, nor do we cut it into two with a utensil, but we trim it with our hands. We place it in oil, we place it between two candles, we light it in the middle, and the wick is divided into the mouths of two candles, and so too with every candle of wax. But to cut it with a utensil is forbidden. We do not sharpen the knife in its sharpener, but we sharpen it on a piece of wood or on a stone. We do not teach many people this so that they do not come to sharpen it in its sharpener. This is specifically when it can cut with difficulty or when it is damaged, but if it cannot cut at all, we do not sharpen it even on a piece of wood, lest it come to sharpen it in its sharpener. This is why they said not to show a knife to an ignorant person on the holiday, lest it be damaged, and he says to slaughter with it when it is damaged, and he goes and sharpens it in its sharpener. A wise man who saw a knife for himself, he borrows it. We do not cut wood on the holiday, not with a saw, nor with a sickle, nor with a hatchet, but by breaking it off with his short side, but not with its wide side, because it is like a saw and similar things that he does on weekdays are forbidden. We remove the shutters of shops on the holiday and return them on the holiday so that they can take out spices that they need from the shop and not prevent them from the joy of the holiday. These things are said when they have a hinge in the middle, but if they have a hinge on the side, it is forbidden, because there is a decree lest it get stuck. And if they do not have a hinge at all, even in the walls of the house, it is permitted to return them. We do not milk an animal on the holiday, but we feed it. How do we feed it? We hold the calf so that it does not fall to the ground and we blow into its nostrils and we put the teat into its mouth. We do not slaughter an animal on the holiday, but we feed it, how do we hold the calf so that it does not fall to the ground and we blow into its nostrils and we put the teat into its mouth. And we do not slaughter the animal until after the holiday, we see the live animal that remains, how much it is worth, and we do not weigh it with scales, even to save it from mice, it is forbidden to place it on the scales, and a skilled butcher is forbidden to weigh it in his hand, and it is forbidden to weigh it in water, and we do not cast lots for portions, and a person should not say to his friend, "Give me a dinar's worth of meat," but "Give me a portion and a half portion." Likewise, a person should say to a storekeeper, "Fill this container for me," even if he is standing and learning, as long as he does not mention the amount. And a person should not measure barley and place it in front of his animal, but he should estimate it and give it to him so that he does not make a habit of measuring it. But a skilled person can measure spices and place them in his pot so that his food does not spoil. Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says, as long as he does not mention the amount of the purchase. Rabbi Chananel explains in the words of the first Tanna: How much is the minimum amount? And likewise in Tosafot and in the Halachic Midrash, how much is the minimum amount that he says to him, "I have already taken from you twenty once, and now twenty," which is forty in total, and there is no difference between a Gentile storekeeper and a Jewish storekeeper, except for things that have a concern of being born, set aside, hunted, or attached, and concerning the concern of being attached to fruits on the tree, it is forbidden to take out a key that he will take out with a utensil, but it is permitted to take it out with his hands.The one who brings wine jugs should not bring them in a basket or in a chest, and one who leads straw should not drag the chest behind him, but he should bring them in his hand, and any change that he can make, he should make. And if he cannot make a change, it is permissible. We do not lead animals with a stick, and a blind person does not go out with his stick. One who slaughters an animal in the field should not bring it in a staff, but should bring it limb by limb. Anything that is acceptable to be moved on a weekday may be sent as a gift on a festival day immediately. If it is explained by an egg, such as a sandal that has nails, and anything that is not explained by an egg, such as wheat and barley, we do not send them, and when we send gifts, we do not make them in a row. But three types are permitted, and Ameimar permitted a woman to sift flour and put it into her dough so that she could take out a proper portion for the challah. And Shmuel said it is forbidden. But the Tanna of the school of Shmuel permits it, and Shmuel rules according to the practice. He came to teach us: We do not measure grains and place them in front of our animals, but we estimate them, and give them to him so that he does not become accustomed to being measured. But for a third person, it is permitted. And Ravina argues with the first Tanna's explanation, how much is the minimum amount. And likewise, in Tosafot and in the Aggadic Midrash, how much is the minimum amount that one says to him, "I have already taken from you twenty once, and now twenty," which is forty in total. And there is no distinction between a Gentile and a Jew, except for things that have a concern of being born, set aside, hunted, or attached. And concerning the concern of being attached to fruits on the tree, it is forbidden to take out a key that he will take out with a utensil, but it is permitted to take it out with his hands.