Shorshei HaYam on Mishneh Torah, Red Heifer
שורשי הים על משנה תורה, הלכות פרה אדומה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Shorshei HaYam on Mishneh Torah, Red Heifer



Chapter 1



Halakhah 1

The root of the law of the Red Heifer is that it must be the offspring of a cow that is at least three years old. The mitzvah of the Red Heifer must be fulfilled with a cow that is at least three years old, or four years old if it is mature. See the explanation of the Tanna Rabbi Yosei in the Mishnah, and within his words, there it is written in the entry (ד"ה) and in the explanation (במ"ש) where he wrote and the holy ones of blessed memory (ז"ל), and in another version, there is a dispute between Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira and the Sages, where Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira says two years old, and the Sages say three years old, and Rabbi Meir even says four years old, and the fifth opinion is the straightforward reading of the Mishnah that is evident, that they all agree with Rabbi Yosei that it is two years old. And the Tosafot in the first chapter of Tractate Rosh Hashanah raises a question regarding the statement of Rabbi Meir, that wherever it says "calf" (עגל) in the Torah, it generally means one year old, "bull" (בן בקר) means two years old, and "bull" (פר) means three years old. They write this because the term "bull" (בן בקר) mentioned is the same as "calf" (עגל בן בקר), as is evident in the Tosefta that teaches: "A bull, one might think, even if it is mature, the Torah teaches 'a bull', meaning how? It must be three years old according to the words of the Sages." And you may say that we have learned in the first chapter of Tractate Parah: Rabbi Meir says two years old, and the Sages say three years old, and Rabbi Meir even says four years old, and the implication is that according to Rabbi Meir, even two years old is valid. However, Rabbi Meir adds, and here it implies that a "calf" (עגל בן בקר) is two years old, but less than three years old is not valid. And the Rav, may his memory be blessed, wrote and proposed an explanation for why the Tosafot needed to make an effort to reconcile the statement of Rabbi Meir that "bull" (בן בקר) means two years old with their difficulty, as even if we say that "bull" (בן בקר) means "calf" (עגל בן בקר), according to the words of the Mishnah, which says that Rabbi Meir even allows four and five years old, what is the source for saying that it specifically means two years old? And if we say that "bull" (פר) generally means two years old, then how can we reconcile the statement of Rabbi Meir that it even includes four and five years old? According to him, it must be that "bull" specifically means two years old, and if it is a "bull" (פר) without specification, it includes three years old, but less than three is not valid. And it seems from his words that the Tosafot understood until "calf" (עגל בן בקר) it means two years old, and "bull" (פר בן בקר) means three years old, specifically, neither less nor more. And therefore, the Rav, may his memory be blessed, criticized the Tosafot for not stating this explicitly in their words, as why did they need to analyze that Rabbi Meir admits even two years old for the purpose of reconciling it with the view of the later authorities who argue with him? They could have straightforwardly reconciled it from the words of Rabbi Meir, who says even four and five years old, and he specifically meant two years old for "bull" (פר בן בקר). And as the Rav, may his memory be blessed, understood, undoubtedly the straightforward understanding of Rabbi Meir's words is that he meant specifically two years old, neither less nor more. And this is how the Rav, may his memory be blessed, surely understood the matter, that according to the straightforward understanding of Rabbi Meir's words, he meant to say that "bull" (פר בן בקר) starts from three years old and onwards. If that were the case, I would say that he meant to say that "bull" (פר בן בקר) specifically means three years old, neither less nor more, and that's how the Rav, may his memory be blessed, understood it. But certainly, it is clear and evident to anyone who examines the straightforward understanding of Rabbi Meir's words that the intention of his words, as explained by the Tosafot, is that "bull" (פר בן בקר) means three years old and onwards. Indeed, it is difficult to understand the conclusion of his words, as the intention of the Tosafot is to say that we cannot say that "bull" (פר בן בקר) means specifically two years old, because if so, that Mishnah contradicts it. Rather, it means "calf" (עגל בן בקר), and therefore it was attributed to the case of the Red Heifer (פרה) in which it specifically means three years old, neither less nor more. So what benefit did the Tosafot gain by saying that it means "calf" (עגל בן בקר)? It only creates a difficulty for them from the straightforward understanding of Rabbi Meir's words, as it implies that "calf" (עגל בן בקר) specifically means two years old, and "bull" (פר בן בקר) means three years old. However, if "bull" specifically means three years old, it does not necessarily mean only three and not more. Rather, it means that from three years old and onwards is when its time begins, but it is not limited to three and not more. So, certainly, the difficulty returns to the Tosafot from that Mishnah, and therefore their words are not clear and require further explanation. 
However, what seems to be his intention is that he started by scrutinizing the words of the Tosafot in the beginning of his statement, asking why they needed to force the interpretation from that Mishnah about the "bull" (בקר) and so on, even though it could be understood that "bull" means specifically two years old, which could create a difficulty for them from the Mishnah of the Red Heifer (פרה). Even though they could argue that when it says "bull" (פר ן' בקר), it specifically means two years old, and how does he then say "until five or six" (עד חמש ועד שש) and so on? Why would he also argue against Rabbi Meir's opinion? Furthermore, why did Tosafot also focus on the implication that Rabbi Meir goes and agrees with Rabbi Yosei? And he says that "bull" (פר ן' בקר) specifically means three years old, neither less nor more. Therefore, the intention of his words is that if we say that "bull" (פר בן בקר) means "calf" (עגל בן בקר), then certainly, as we understood from it, "bull" specifically means three years old and not less. But if it means more than three, then "bull" would include even less than three, and this is not possible. However, if we say that "bull" (פר בן בקר) means "calf" (עגל בן בקר), then we can understand that it means specifically three years old and not less, but more than three would not be called "bull" (פר בן בקר). However, if it includes even less than three, then we have two different names referring to the same thing, and this cannot be. But if we say that "bull" (פר בן בקר) means exactly three years old, then we can understand that more than three is not similar to a regular calf (עגל סתם בן שנה) which specifically means "one year old" and not more, as the revered rabbi mentioned earlier. Therefore, all the complaints against the revered rabbi are removed, and it is clear.