Pat Lechem
פת לחם
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Pat_Lechem
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Duties of the Heart, trans. Rabbi Yosef Sebag
-http://dafyomireview.com/article.php?docid=384

Pat Lechem

Introduction to Commentary



Introduction of the Author




<b>one generation shall praise your works to another</b> -- from this verse alone, we can only deduce that the wise must make known to the ignorant. But how do we know that even if all of us were wise men, we must still thank G-d? For this he brought the second verse, "all Your works shall give thanks to You (yoducha)". The word "yoducha" (give thanks to You) is a combination of two words, "yodu" and "lecha". For the matter of thanks, is for the beneficiary to tell his benefactor that he recognizes his good, as written "give thanks to the L-ord for He is good" (Ps.107:1). Afterwards, he explained the matter of thanks, in saying "they shall speak of the glory of Your kingdom", namely that the honor of Your sovereignty is different from that of flesh and blood, because a flesh and blood king has pleasure and benefit from his people, unlike G-d who needs nothing as mentioned earlier. Hence, we do not yet know if He wants that we examine His beneficence and thank Him for them. Therefore, he brought this verse "to make known to the sons of man", i.e. G-d's intent in creation was to make known to the sons of man, etc. And like the verse (Prov. 16:4) "the L-ord made everything for His praise" . 







such as mathematics for business, measurements, engineering. Astronomy is useful for navigating the sea. Music is also used to bring joy to human beings and dispel sadness. Unlike, the first division, namely, the wisdom of created things and the wisdom of theology which has no use for material matters. Their purpose is only for knowledge. And even though the wisdom of created things is needed for healing purposes, this is only a part of it. 














the intellect (which is rooted in the spiritual) is not something which can be harmed like physical things, which grow and decay. Hence, "free" means "removed and separated" (from desire) as the Onkelos renders the verse in Gen. 31:9. 











<b>that we devote our acts to His Name</b> -- that our deeds be devoted solely to G-d - to not mix them with some ulterior motive such as to aggrandize oneself through this or some other motive.
<b>in order to come closer to Him</b> -- i.e. not with intent to receive some benefit from Him due to this. 


On coveting he did not bring a verse because it is a precept of Reason (i.e. it can be derived from reason) and therefore does not need a proof [from Scripture]. Unlike revenge and bearing a grudge which are not precepts of Reason. On the contrary, the Understanding resists them, and dictates that it is proper to be crooked with the crooked, and to return his evil to his head (Ps. 7:16). Therefore, he brought verses to show they are decrees of the King.
<b>muse, desire, resolve</b> -- he outlined the preparation steps which lead to an act [of sin]. At first it is just thinking about the matter. And even though our Sages counted "thought" as one of the things which are not in a man's control, since thoughts pop up on their own in a man's mind. Nevertheless, there are two answers to this. Firstly, this was stated regarding the beginning of the thought's entering one's mind. Then it is only like a tiny spark that a man can easily extinguish. Hence, immediately, when he senses it, he can dismiss it and remove it from his mind and turn his mind to other things. However, if he does not dismiss it right away, then that spark will be fanned by a man's ruach (spirit) and will prolong for some time. This prolongation is called "hirhur" (musing) in the words of the Sages. The second answer is that a man has the ability to not leave any room for these thoughts to arise, namely, by not allowing his mind to go idle in the first place - through the study of torah or engaging in work, as the Rambam wrote (Isurei Bia 22:21): "thoughts of lusts do not strengthen except in a heart devoid of wisdom". Behold, after the thought is fanned and prolongs in his spirit, this will correspondingly arouse the force of lust. And after he has lusted for it, he will hesitate a bit and deliberate whether or not to do it. Afterwards, he resolves to do it, and the matter will be held and pending in his mind until the time of the actual committing of the act of sin. 













<b>mekametz</b> -- (literally: gatherer) the book is called by this name because its author gathered together all the heretical views found in their nonsense and disgusting words, and then refuted them, demonstrating their foolishness, and exposing their foul stench, until everyone realized they are but wild dogs. And the Sages already said (Ketuvot 77a) "what is a mekametz? [Answer:] One who gathers up dog excrement." 














<b>humble ourselves before Him</b> -- that we constantly display signs of humility as explained in the Gate of Submission.

<b>that we trust in Him</b> -- for our livelihood and [other] needs.
<b>that we give over our life to Him</b> -- if at some time, a man is struck with a fear of death due to some cause - he should not be too alarmed on this thereby weakening in his service of G-d. Rather, let him holdfast to the pillar of strength of his service and remove dread and fright from his heart by giving himself over to G-d, and saying to himself: "G-d will do whatever is good in His eyes".
<b>that we abstain from what He hates</b> -- his intent is not on things which are specifically commanded as sins, but rather on things which we know that He hates, as the Rambam wrote regarding those things which are called "hated [by G-d]" (Pirkei Avot 1:17). And in the words of the wise man (Prov. 6:16) "six people G-d hates".
<b>that we devote our actions to His Name</b> -- that our activities are devoted only to Him, that there no other motives mixed in.
<b>reflect on the benefits He bestows</b> -- to recognize them and their great value. So that we are not among the blind who "do not consider the work of G-d" (Isaiah 5:12) and who have no understanding in this, as he will explain in the Gate of Examination. 

<b>thoughts and sentiments (literally: put away in the heart)</b> -- he specified two terms "thoughts and sentiments" since some of these things need to be greatly maintained in man's thoughts and contemplated in detail to the best of his ability and they need to be thought about constantly such as love, fear, humility, and trust. Therefore, he used the word "thought". Other things don't need to maintain constant thought such as faith in His torah. For, once his outlook has been firmly established, it is enough that it is "put away in the heart". Likewise, for "abstaining from what He hates", only when the opportunity for these things occur does one need to think about abstaining from them. But after this, why should he think about them? On the contrary, it is better to forget about them. Therefore he wrote "put away", that they are put away in his heart by force. Understand this.

<b>(1) will of the heart, (2) longing of the soul, (3) desire of the heart</b> -- first he mentioned plainly: "will of the heart", which means to resolve by one's will to do it. Afterwards, he specified two divisions. Corresponding to things which are "[physical] actions" such as building a Sukkah, [donning] Tzitzit, making a fence on one's roof, etc. he wrote "longing of the soul to do them". Corresponding to things which are not really [physical] actions such as prayer or study of torah, he wrote "perform them" since this term is more proper. After either of these two, namely, after (1) resolve of one's will to do it, he should arouse in himself a strong yearning and great desire to attain and fulfill it, as Rabbi Akiva said (Berachot 61b) "when will it come to my hand that I may fulfill it?"









i.e. since they did not find it in the torah then it is not something obligatory. Either because G-d knows man's capabilities and this is impossible due to the great difficulty or perhaps due to some other reason. Hence, even though Reason obligates this, nevertheless, once the Torah was given we need only to follow what is written there.







<b>intention and sentiment</b> -- intention refers to a man's intention at the beginning of the performance of a mitzva, namely, that he does it with intent that he has been commanded [by G-d] to do the mitzva. And what he thinks about during its performance with regard to the mitzva and its details, and that he has joy in doing it, the author called here "sentiment" (matzpuno).


<b>we have no claim whatsoever for neglecting them</b> -- i.e. we have no answer or excuse if we are negligent from this and abandon it.
<b>to serve Him inwardly</b> -- the "service" which the author intends here is submission and shame, as he mentioned earlier. These are also called service as our Sages said (Sotah 5b) "humility is greater than all the sacrifices... as written 'the sacrifices of G-d are a broken spirit; a broken and a contrite heart, O G-d, You will not despise' (Ps. 51:11).







<b>some thing which impedes him...no impediment or other matter</b> -- In the work of the field the impediment is due to some lacking in doing the work such as a flood, or bad weather, or a windy day where he cannot sow seeds, etc. But for the work in the house of the king, certainly all the necessary means for his work are prepared and before him, for there is nothing lacking in the palace of the king. Hence, the impediment inside the house refers to some human being which impedes him. Therefore, regarding the field, he wrote "some thing which impedes him" while for the house work he wrote "no impediment" (literally: not impeded by an impending agent) which refers to some human being which impedes him and does not let him do and toil in the work of his king. He wrote two expressions (1. no impediment or 2. other matter), referring to either a man which impedes him despite that he is free to work or alternatively that he is not free in the work of his king due to being busy with other matters he must tend to.


we don't understand His greatness, His sovereignty over us, and His beneficences to His creations.























<b>the light of the heart, and the shining of the soul</b> -- light refers to something which is luminescent by itself, while "shine" (noga) refers to something which reflects light that it received from something else, like the moon which reflects light it received from the sun. Therefore it is written (Isaiah 60:19) "The sun will no more be your light by day, nor will the brightness of the moon shine on you"... So too here, the author's intent is that wisdom enlightens the heart, and from the heart, radiance will flow to the soul. Hence, he wrote the shine (noga) of the soul.




<b>If they conceal it, man cannot discover it</b> -- if they will leave it thus, concealed in potential, a man cannot apprehend it. The intent is on a man himself. i.e. the matters of wisdom are not openly revealed in a man's heart, that he can apprehend them automatically, without contemplation, as is the case with that which is apprehended automatically by the senses. For example, something which is before him, he will apprehend it through his sense of sight automatically without effort. Likewise, for a sound which reaches his ears, it will be apprehended immediately by his sense of hearing. Wisdom, however, is concealed in potential, and will not be apprehended by him unless he strives to draw it out through the power of contemplation. This is what he meant, "If they reveal it..", i.e. excavate it from its hidden place through the faculty of reason, until it floats up and is revealed - then it will no longer be concealed to that man, that they are indeed just and correct words, and victorious in bringing a man to perfection. He said this corresponding to the lazy people, that even if they are intelligent by nature, and they fool themselves saying perhaps the reason (the duties of the heart) are not revealed in their hearts is because they are not things needed for wholeness. Therefore, he wrote, let them test for themselves, through contemplation, and they will find the correctness of these words.

<b>in his potential and inward faculties</b> -- for things which are still completely concealed, and he did not yet have any start in them, he wrote "potential". For things which he already had some knowledge and now they are absent from his mind until he recalls them, spreads them out, and expounds their parts, in order to derive wisdom and understanding from them - he wrote "inward faculties".





i.e. for his laziness and light esteem he will be punished. In addition to this, he sins for neglecting to inquire into these things.



<b>if your mind falls short and your perception is too weak</b> --On matters of emuna (faith) such as the Unity or the Eternity, or the like, he wrote "your mind falls short", i.e. to grasp their logical proofs. On the other things of the inner duties such as placing one's trust in G-d, giving over oneself to Him, and devoting one's acts to Him, and the like, which stem from recognizing the greatness of G-d and of His beneficence, on this he wrote "your perception is too weak".
<b>the roots of the religion and the pivots of the deeds</b> -- I already explained earlier that His Unity, and His Eternity, and the faith in prophecy and the like, are the roots of the religion, and from them it sprouts. For the other things in the inner science such as love, fear, trust, giving over oneself to Him, it is correct to call them "pivots of the deeds". For on them all the deeds pivot around and the purpose of all the deeds is to love Him, fear Him, and give our lives over to Him.











<b>to return them to your heart</b> -- this means the entering of the matter in one's heart. Afterwards, on contemplation of it, he wrote "and to apply your intellect in them".

<b>inquire with your intellect, understanding, and power of discernment</b> -- inquire with your intellect on the general matters. Then use your understanding and power of discernment to discern the roots from the branches, and contemplate the roots to discern with your comprehension which branches stem out from them.





<b>for the students must learn it first</b> -- i.e. in the days of youth before their understanding becomes strong so that they do not remain in those days without faith. Therefore, one must then rely on the Tradition. Also, from a different reason, one must precede the Tradition and that it be the foundation of his faith, whether or not he understands it and his reason agrees with it. Because if one starts from his own understanding and makes it his foundation, namely, that which he agrees with he accepts and that which he disagrees with or cannot grasp, he rejects. G-d forbid for us to go in this way, for this is the path which the philosophers tread, who wound up ruining the world and themselves. And that which he wrote earlier that the inner wisdom precedes by nature, the answer is that there he was referring to [intent of] deeds while here he is referring to faith.


<b>toil in them</b> -- i.e. to make them one's business, namely, to expound their topics and to speak of their roots and branches.

Doubtful because they are strange matters, not found in the words of the Tradition, and therefore need many logical constructs, premises and deductions. Therefore, a man cannot render a definitive answer and say "accept my reasoning". In truth, we find many of the great Rabbis end off their responsa in a doubtful tone in saying 'thus it seems according to my humble opinion'.
<b>general principles of judgment</b> -- i.e. monetary cases. He preceded these to "permitted/forbidden" things because most questions can be derived from them, for they are the cornerstone of the Torah. Therefore, he used the term "general principles" by them, since their rulings are based on many general principles such as "hamotzi mechavero.." or the principles of "migo", and many similar things.






<b>Hence, Torah study must be combined with acts of kindness</b> -- behold, even for practical Torah study one should not spend all of his time because one must also leave over time for actual good deeds. All the more so, one should not spend his time with strange questions which would never have any relevance.


















<b>according to the heart and intent</b> -- according to the joy of heart to do it and the intent to G-d.  
Likewise for sins, according to how much joy he has in doing it, as written "those who rejoice to do evil, and delight in the perversity of evil" (Prov. 2:14), and according to the intent, whether he does the sin due to lust or to anger G-d (rebel), r"l.



<b>thought upon His Name</b> -- according to the Sages, the intent of the words "thought upon His Name", is that he thought to do a commandment for His Name. Then, even if he was prevented from doing it, it is accounted as if he did it, for a pure thought to G-d also makes a [good] impact in one's soul.





















<b>straighten the early</b> -- he who has strong enthusiasm and yearning to serve G-d, and due to this he mixes up the order, preceding things which must be done later. In truth, this is a major detriment in the service of G-d. This book will straighten him, i.e. direct him in the straight path and the proper order of steps.


<b>show the way to the perplexed</b> -- many people are confused in many matters of service, and they are not capable of clarifying and deciding which way to turn, and which road to take. This book will teach them which is the proper path to choose.


<b>to properly divide its parts</b> -- I do not have the strength to divide the matters of the inner wisdom, that the matter be properly presented. For this is the chief aim of [rational] inquiry into something - to clarify what is its nature, and on what pillars does it rest on, and what are its roots, branches, and derivatives, as mentioned earlier.




<b>I would thus be exceeding proper bounds of discretion</b> -- it is a proper trait for a man to recognize his place, and to restrain his desires from doing something beyond his power, for that would be like haughtiness.
<b>retract (lit:return) the thought..draw back</b> -- he doubled the expression for this is human nature. When something is fixed in a man's thoughts for a long time and afterwards he regrets and wishes to retract from this thing, the immediate decision to retract is called "return" (chozer). However, since the thing was fixed in his imagination faculty for so long, the thoughts overpower him. A thought seizes him every time it enters his heart to persuade him to do that thing. A man must then draw it back and remove it from his heart, and dismiss it from his mind by force. This is the meaning of the double expression "return...draw back". Understand this.






i.e. other things besides service [of G-d]. Since, by defeating me in this indolence, automatically the power of lust will lead me to laziness, similar to the principle (Pirkei Avot 4:2) "sin drags more sin".















<b>they invent falsehoods</b> -- i.e. even though at first appearance, its evil and bitter end is visible. Nevertheless, they invent for themselves false pretexts to embellish the thing they lust for and cover up its evil, such as in the eating of the Tree of Knowledge, whose evil was apparent to them, since, behold, they were warned by the word of G-d of a punishment of death. But when the serpent showed them its beauty and desirableness, and then built up excuses and covered up its evil, as written "you will not die, for G-d knows..." (Gen. 3:4). Their hearts enticed them and they were seduced by his words.


<b>make firm its looseness</b> -- it is the way of falsehood to join together things which in truth do not logically follow. It then tricks the person with imaginations and joins the false premises to draw spurious conclusions.




<b>enemy between ribs</b> -- this the lusting soul (nefesh bahamit/animal soul/evil inclination), whose source is in the liver which rests in the abdomen, between his ribs.

<b>a rebuker always ready...powerful governor</b> -- this is the Understanding, that it be standing and ready always to rebuke the soul. Corresponding to the excuses and false claims of the soul, he wrote that his Understanding should be "ready" to deduce and clarify the truth, for all rebuke means "clarification of the matter". Corresponding to the strengthening of the soul with its lusts, he wrote "powerful governor" which stands against it and overpowers it. 
<b>harness his soul with the saddle of service</b> -- "saddle" is the belt which one harnesses the load to the donkey corresponding to the soul's fleeing from the service in doing good, he wrote "harness,etc". This splits to two parts. That which is between man and G-d, he wrote "harness it with the saddle of service", while corresponding to that which is between man and his fellow, he wrote "muzzle it with the bridle of righteousness", i.e. muzzles its mouth with the muzzle of righteousness to turn it to the good.

<b>and if his heart entices him to a different path he should scold it and overpower it</b> -- i.e. if while he has an opportunity to do good, his heart entices him to turn to a different matter in order to distract his mind and detour him from that good activity, he should scold it, and if it strengthens over him, he should likewise strengthen himself against it and overpower it.
i.e. according to what we said earlier, that the nature of the soul is to instill laziness in a man, and to prevent him from a good activity, therefore, I saw myself obligated to direct and force my soul against its will to bear the strain...etc.



<b>aid me...teach me</b> -- I will receive aid from G-d in terms of strength and I place my trust on Him to enlighten my mind. These correspond to the two problems he mentioned earlier "my strength was insufficient" and "my knowledge too inadequate, etc."

















for it is impossible to explain things in theology using our physical senses or to explain it through a familiar analogy, because it is exalted above and beyond all [physical] senses and comparison. It has no connection whatsoever with these things.











<b>under His permission</b> -- regarding the benefits, he wrote "from Him", while on the harm, he wrote "under His permission". For the harm does not come from Him. Therefore, it is only correct to say that it comes with His permission, namely, that He did not prevent it.
























Do not be enticed by the evil inclination which desires to impede you, so that you continue conducting yourself in the same way you have done until now. He tries to befriend you with all sorts of false excuses. Rather judge your soul a true judgment and confess to its error and perverseness.









<b>return them to your thoughts</b> -- since, by human nature, it is impossible to keep them continuously clinging in his thoughts, without any interruption, therefore he concluded and said that nevertheless, return them to your thoughts continuously.

























<b>to justify pursuing worldly pleasures</b> -- such as the fools adducing proofs that it is proper to pursue wealth from the forefathers who were all wealthy. Or they bring proofs that the important ancients would pursue excessive sexual relations, as we find by David who had eighteen wives or Solomon who had a thousand wives. But these fools do not realize that we are blind, and we have no understanding whatsoever of the ancients and what was their true motives in their activities which appear strange to us. We must not adduce any proofs from them to be lenient but rather to be stringent.

First Treatise on Unity

Introduction


even if he does good deeds, his acts will not be correct and built on a foundation, nor will they be whole and enduring...
... and if there is no foundation, the entire building will eventually collapse





Chapter 1



Chapter 2

































he is called a fool because he did not investigate and inquire which roads to take before setting on the journey. He is the opposite of the wise man, who looks into the future, whose eyes are on the head of every matter to contemplate beforehand every matter.

Chapter 3




Through knowing G-d with your intellect, your heart will be perfect and your soul will be willing in His service. This is the meaning of "and serve him with a perfect heart and with a willing soul". 
<b>the L-ord He is G-d</b> -- this is the primary matter of the Unity - to know that even though He exhibits different actions such as mercy and justice, nevertheless, in His essence, He has no plurality, rather the L-ord (His Name of mercy) is G-d (Elokim, His Name of justice).

Chapter 4



Chapter 5





Since the thing is eternal, without beginning, therefore, its power is infinite, since whatever is finite ceases when its finite power ceases. Therefore, it would have already ceased if it were finite (and would never have reached the present). Hence that which is without beginning cannot be finite, and since it is infinite, therefore it will never cease to exist forever, just like it did not cease eternally. And this is the meaning of "since it is impossible for man to grasp...", i.e. it is impossible for man's [finite] intellect and understanding to grasp the limit of its power and to investigate and consider how much longer it will continue to exist and when it will cease, according to the limit of its power - since it must be that its power is completely without limit.

Chapter 6



Chapter 7



If I were to properly explain the following matter, our discussion would become very lengthy. One who wishes to know should get a hold of the book "Ruach Chen" and the book "Milot Higayon"; there he can quench his thirst. 






Even though the creatures are different in size, they are very similar in the amount of the Creator's wisdom visible in them. Just like the elephant and the camel have a mouth, legs, and a belly to receive food, so too for the mosquito and the moth. 





































Since the logical proofs necessitate the existence of one Creator, why and from where do we need to consider that He is more than one, since this logical proof on the existence of the Creator is completed and suffices also without more than one. 












He began with the title: "powerful" because according to our understanding, He existed before everything, since immediately after we grasp that there exists a Creator who created the world from nothing, we will immediately recognize His power, namely, the act of creating something from nothing...After this, when we reflect on the details of creation, and we study them and their parts - we will see signs of His wisdom and we will know that He is wise. Afterwards, we contemplate His providence in governing the world, we will know that He is living and among us always. Understand that all of these descriptions are obligatory and follow one after the other, with the creation of the world as their first source. 
That the rational proofs stood for us to bring us to believe in His existence, as if we had grasped what He is and as if we had seen Him...Perforce, we are forced to suffice with our limited grasp, by accepting the logical proofs instead of actually seeing Him because He is not among the things which can be seen.  



"Plurality" refers to another of similar essence. "Association" refers to associating another in His deeds. "Similarity" refers to His deeds, namely, that none can make other deeds similar to His.


 If the Creator is more than one, it must be that each part (supposed creator) has its own etzem (essence) by itself. If so, we must say that there is a separation between them, namely, some boundary which separates between their etzem since they are split...if so, since there is a boundary between them which separates them, and behold, each one is limited, since each one does not spread out infinitely, since that would leave no existence for the second. Therefore each has an end and a limit, if so, each has the attribute of extent and spreading out since behold its limit is the extent of its spreading out, and anything which has the attribute of extent and spreading out can receive divisioning (i.e. it is not of infinite character), and whatever can receive divisioning is composed of parts, and anything composite must be brought into existence, as we clarified earlier, that the parts precede it. And anything brought into existence has a Creator since a thing cannot make itself.





since association or dissociation only applies to things with some form of similarity, but He is the singular unity which has no similarity in any form whatsoever.































That when the people are rebelling and sinning to G-d, G-d will appoint on them multiple rulers, and automatically the governance will fail and the country will fall apart and be ruined...as in the second temple era where the governance fell in the hands of 3 strong rulers...as mentioned in the book of Josephus until the land became corrupted and destroyed through them....

Chapter 8










<b>it is susceptible to origination and destruction</b> -- if so it changes from one form to another since it goes through many forms in its formation and likewise in its destruction until it ceases completely, as is known. Its formation is not completed suddenly in one instant. Likewise, its destruction does not occur suddenly without stages, one form to another. Hence, it is correct to ascribe to it plurality, since it necessarily has a "beis-kibul" (ability to receive) all of its potential stages. understand this. 
<b>division and combination</b> -- i.e. that the thing can be divided. hence, one can divide it or leave it as is in its assembled state. This is from the aspect of itself. Separation and association is from the aspect of relative to something else. That it can be separated from it by distance or associated with it by being in close proximity. 



<b>the first abstract and the second actual</b> -- the first is unity grasped conceptually in the mind, not associated with any real object. The second is unity on something which actually exists. This only applies to the Creator, as he will explain.
<b>numerical unity, namely the root and beginning of all numbers</b> -- "one" is the root of all counts since every count is comprised of a sum of ones. Hence, "one" is the root and foundation on which one builds a count. It is also the beginning of the count for it is impossible for a counting not to start with one.

In his fine words, he incidentally answered the question of Rashi in Genesis 1:5, who asked: "according to the order of creation, the verse should have said 'first day', but according to the author's words, the intent of the verse was to teach on absolute creation, which was the beginning of everything, even time. 



<b>perceptible to the five senses or by some of them</b> -- some things are perceptible to all the senses. For example, a goat has an appearance perceived by the sense of sight, a sound perceived by hearing, a taste, when eating its meat, by the sense of taste, an odor by the sense of smell, and a texture to the sense of touch. Some things are perceived only by some senses such as an apple which is not perceived by the sense of hearing. A rock is perceived only by sight and touch.
<b>nor susceptible to change or variation</b> -- it is not correct to ascribe to the true unity any change from one form to another, nor is it correct to ascribe variation to say it is the opposite of something else... a rock for example, cannot be termed "speaking" nor can it be termed "mute". So too, for the true Unity, it is incorrect to associate it with anything nor to say it is the opposite of something. 

<b>not described by any corporeal measure/traits</b> -- such as anger, mercy, etc. whatever is said of Him is only metaphorical, as is known.

<b>destruction or end</b> -- he added "end" because there exists some things which don't become destroyed but they end, such as a specific time. It is incorrect to say that time was destroyed, but rather to say it was completed and ended. 






Anything which changes must have had plurality in its first state, because it had two powers, one: what it was, and two, the beginning [potential] for the second existence which it changed into, and it is so that the philosophers agree that anything which changes had the potential for change inside it from the beginning, since if this is not so, from where did it come out afterwards to actuality? because that which is not in potential will never go out to actual. The commentators already expounded this from the verse "the day of death from the day of birth" (Eccles. 7:1). If so, behold, it has two powers, namely the previous entity and the beginning for the second entity, and it is not one. Understand this.
<b>similarity</b> -- A comparison term which is ascribed to the bearer of that comparison, that it is called "similar" to - it is Mikre, because it is attached to the Etzem (essence) of the bearer of that term. 
<b>whatever has an incidental property is plural</b> -- since behold it has essence and incident (2 things).

We are not ascribing to Him unity, just negating the opposite, namely plurality. Likewise, the intent for any "attributes" we ascribe to Him such as "Living", "Wise", "Powerful", it is only to negate the opposite.

Chapter 9












Any quality that we find in a subject as an incidental property, namely, that it is not a quality in its essence but rather only an incidental property attached to it, we will know for certain that this quality must be found in another subject as a true name reflecting its essence. Since the quality is "essence" in that thing its name is called on it in truth, not as a borrowed, passing term. Therefore, it is called its true name. 


















For example, appearance, form and change is specific to physical things of our world and do not apply to spiritual creations in the (higher) spiritual worlds... However the general incidental property of plurality and finiteness applies to all things except G-d.

Chapter 10





Even after the creation no existing thing can be associated with Him in these three attributes...they can be ascribed exclusively to His glorious essence, unlike the "Active" attributes that the creations can associate with them a bit, as will be explained, and as the Sages say (Shabbat 133b): "cling to His ways, just like He is merciful so too be merciful, just like He is gracious, so too be gracious, etc." 

















































"Tavnis" is the form. It is called "tavnis", derived from the (similar Hebrew letters of the) word "binyan" (building), since the form is like a building, built from the assembly of specific parts according to a determined amount. This term is used for living creatures such as "tavnis of all fish" (Deut. 4:18), since they are built and synthesized from different organs/parts. And they are of form. This term is also used in buildings such as "tavnis heychal" (the form of the inner temple), unlike fire or wind where the term "tavnis" is not relevant to them since they don't have a specific form. It is only correct to employ for them the term "demus" (likeness), since they are grasped in likeness by a mirror. But G-d is beyond any form or likeness...and for other types of physical characteristics such as sleep, laughter, joy, sadness, or the like he said "dimyon" (comparison), that would make comparable through these acts to His creations. Understand this. 

Behold not only is it beyond the power of man to conceive in Him a likeness but even G-d testifies on Himself that He has no connection whatsoever to any kind of likeness. 


Which the Torah has taught us that He is called by this Name... it teaches on the "revelation of His glory". 










 i.e. the verse has called G-d "the portion of Yaakov", also for this reason - since G-d chose Yaakov for His portion, namely, to perform His service. 




























that you admit this before Him, and believe in your heart that this is truly so, and not like one who praises flesh and blood who says praises but His heart does not believe in them. 

you will clarify that His existence is hidden and beyond any comparison. 
<b>way of reasoning</b> -- this refers to His deeds which are proofs to us of His existence. 









































In scripture there are verses with expressions of His glorious essence which are said in first person form such as "See now that I, I am He, and there is no god with Me" (Deut. 32:39), while other expressions which the prophets speak in third person. 
















The wise man is he who sees the future consequences. When he stands at the beginning of a matter, he contemplates and thinks about what will happen at the end of it. Unlike the fool, who is like one who walks in darkness who does not see what is ahead of him.

Second Treatise on Examination

Introduction


<b>nearest way...the clearest path</b> --  nearest in that it does not require many logical constructs and preliminary introductions like the other ways [such as philosophical inquiry]. Clearest in that it is a well-trodden path by many people, and a well-trodden path is free from stumbling blocks, mishaps, and errors. In other ways of inquiry, a man is not assured against mishaps and mistakes in treading them, as in truth, there are many, many casualties strewn along the path of philosophical inquiry unlike the path of examination [of G-d's wisdom], which none grow weary or stumble in it. 






<b>(1) too blind to recognize .. (2) comprehend .. (3) think over</b> -- He specified three terms corresponding to the three types of blindness which tends to affect human beings. (1) Benefits which one does not recognize at all and which one is completely ignorant of - on this he wrote "too blind to recognize". (2) Benefits which he realizes a bit, but he does not contemplate them to "comprehend their high excellence" and goodness. (3) Thirdly, and this is worse than the first two, that some benefits seem at first impression to be bad, and they require to deeply "think over" to recognize their benefit and understand the good concealed in them. On those like this it is written, "the wicked do not understand, but the thinkers will understand" (Yirmiya 12:10), and the wise man said "he who thinks on the matter will find good" (Mishlei 16:20) i.e. he who is not satisfied with the first impression that appears to him but instead applies his intellect and understanding on it - "will find good", i.e. after thinking it through he will find the thing to be good, unlike the superficial appearance which deemed it evil. He will now explain that these three types of blindness are due to three reasons and that each reason is a cause for one of the above three types of blindness. I will explain each of them, G-d willing, after his words. 
<b>their absorption in (1) matters of this world and (2) its pleasures</b> -- Two terms corresponding to love of "useful" things and love of "enjoyable" things. For in saying (1) [their absorption in] "matters of this world", the author's intent is on the way of most people, that most of their occupation and most of their time is squandered in fulfilling their lust for "useful" things such as building houses, making garments, and amassing possessions. The author called this "matters" [of this world], since "matters" (inyan) connotes "conduct" [in Hebrew] as Rashi explained on the verse "but to the sinner He has given a matter to gather and to accumulate" (Kohelet 2:26), and "it is an evil matter [that G-d has given to human beings with which to occupy themselves]" (Kohelet 1:13). (2) On the second term "its pleasures", the author's intent is on love of "enjoyable" things such as eating, drinking, marital relations where the [following] term "lusting" applies primarily to this type. 
<b>lusting for what they will not attain of it</b> -- i.e. they constantly lust to attain more worldly lusts that they have not yet attained in the past. One can also render this as referring to the future, i.e. even for something which is beyond their ability to ever attain, and certainly they will never attain it, nevertheless they strive full strength to attain it. Hence, their heart is forever absorbed in a prolonged longing which never ceases. 


<b>of satisfying their lusts and fulfilling their wishes</b> -- here too, the author's intent is for the two kinds [of love] as above, since for love of "enjoyable things", which a person, by nature, is enthusiastic about fulfilling, it is proper to use the term "satisfying their lusts", while for love of "useful" things, it is proper to use the term "fulfilling their wishes".

<b>seek what is higher than it, and strive for what is after it</b> -- Two terms. (1) "higher than it" refers to increasing the same kind [of worldly thing], such as regarding wealth, where our Sages said "he who has 100 coins wants 200 coins" (Kohelet Raba 1:13). (2) The second term, "strive for what is after it" refers to a stage of a different kind which normally follows his current stage. For example, honor seeking normally follows after wealth seeking. Hence, he who has attained the stage of wealth, now strives to attain honor. Therefore, he used the term "strive" which connotes great exertion since it is a different stage [and a new beginning] which he has no momentum in and, as is known, (Rashi Shemot 19:5) "all beginnings are difficult". 

The hunger of lust intensifies so much in them until they will desire everything for themselves, and they will imagine that they deserve everything that is in other peoples' hands and imagine that it is as if other people plundered them and stole from them. 
<b>(1) any advantage possessed by another person as if it was taken away from them...and (2) when others attain some benefits, it is as if evil befell them</b> -- immediately when someone else attains some benefit, their heart will be disturbed and will be bitter on this, as if some evil befell them because good that reaches others is evil to them. The first expression above (1) refers to benefits already in other peoples' possession, and they hope for and long for it, like a man who hopes for and waits to recapture that which was stolen from him. The second expression (2) refers to the initial time when the good reached the other person's hands, they are disturbed and feel bad, since the primary pain of feeling a bad thing is in the beginning of it.
<b>They do not understand the works of G-d who bestows good to them</b> -- they do not understand that these benefits are the works of G-d, and since they come from Him, and His hand distributed them, there is no room for jealousy, and there is no avail to excessive hishtadlut (striving, since it is all G-d's decree what each person will attain as explained in gate 4).
<b>The wicked, in his high arrogance, does not enquire</b> -- due to his arrogance, he does not examine the cause of his benefits to know their Source, because G-d is not in any of his thoughts. Alternatively, due to his arrogance, he thinks he deserves everything. Therefore, he is not content with what he has and seeks what he did not yet attain. 


<b>continuous and recurring Divine favors</b> -- on constant favors such as life and health, he wrote "continuous", while for favors which come and go over time, he wrote "recurring". 
<b>they become so used to and familiar with</b> -- on the constant favors, he wrote "used to", while for those that come and go, he wrote "familiar with" since even though they are not so used to them, nevertheless, these are familiar to them and ingrained in their imagination due to their recurring many times. 

<b>not to be (1) removed or (2) separated from themselves</b> -- There are two ways a man can lose his benefits. Either (1) they can be removed from him and cease to exist such as in the death of his children or the burning down of his possessions. Or, (2) they can be separated from him and transferred to someone else.. In truth, they are different calamities. The first case is difficult in that there is no hope left for reattaining this thing which no longer exists unlike something which still exists but is in someone else's possession where one still sits and hopes perhaps it will someday return to him. On the other hand, the second case also has a harsher evil since (Shir 8:6) "Jealousy [is] cruel as the grave", that a man sees his hard earned work in someone else's hands, as written (Yeshaya 1:6) "your land, strangers devour it in your presence". 




<b>understood the ways of the many benefits</b> -- the author precisely chose the term "the ways", which means, that the infant was ignorant and did not understand from which ways his benefits came from and what chain of causes bring him the benefits. He only experienced the end benefits and its enjoyments. Unlike, when he grew up and understood the ways of his benefits and the chain of causes which bring them to him. Understand this. 












<b>(1) benefit them, and the benefits of (2) trial and (3) suffering</b> -- Three terms. The tribulations that G-d brings on a man fall into three categories. Either G-d's intention is that this bad thing will result in benefit for them in this world, such as the sale and imprisonment of Joseph, which eventually caused him to become king [of Egypt]. Some tribulations He intends for the benefit of trial, namely, that the person tested comes to recognize his level. It is very beneficial for them to strengthen themselves and bring out their potential to actuality, as explained in the Sages regarding the trials of the righteous, especially on the binding of Isaac.. On this he wrote "benefits of trial". Or G-d's intent is for the benefit of suffering, namely, to bring him suffering in this world in order to save him from fury and wrath (of the evil forces created by his sins) in the world of retribution. 




They resent the things which appear bad, even though in truth, concealed inside them, G-d's intent is for the greatest possible good for them. This leads them to not praise G-d even for the good which manifests openly towards them. Alternatively, even when the thing which appeared bad was visibly seen to result in good, nevertheless they still don't praise Him. 
"G-d's work" refers to general things in the world such as extreme heat, or extreme cold, which a person's soul hates, and the fools speculate that their absence would be better than their existence. Alternatively, it refers to G-d's providence with which He guides the world... and in truth, most people are resentful in seeing bad things happening to good people or vice versa, and these fools think that if the world's conduct was in their hands, it would be better and more orderly than it is now..."the various creations which He created for their well-being" - this refers to damaging creatures and poisonous plants, and the like, where, in truth, everything was created perfectly for the well-being of mankind. 











<b>falling short</b> -- this refers to one who performs some undertaking in a lazy manner, without proper attention. Then the resulting work does not succeed perfectly. Therefore, he is called "falling short", that he reduces the matter from its perfection, and something which is lacking, not only is it not useful, but sometimes it is even harmful. 


Now that the author has finished presenting the three reasons, you, intelligent reader, put your attention to what I have made known to you - to clarify how they correspond to the three types of blindness mentioned earlier. (1) For corresponding to the first cause, namely, their great absorption in matters of this world and the endless clamor of its waves of pleasures which do not allow quietude of the imaginations of his heart, behold, for a man caught in this, certainly there is no hope whatsoever that on his own, he will stir himself to recognize the beneficence of the Creator, and praise Him on them. Because, from where will this recognition come? Since his heart is preoccupied with too many things until there is no room left to think of anything else. Combine this, with his imagining always that he is lacking much, and whatever he has is worth nothing to him. Either way, there is way that his heart will come to recognize G-d's beneficence. On this he wrote earlier "the majority of mankind are too blind to recognize these benefits". He wrote "blind" without qualification, in that they do not recognize them at all. (2) Corresponding to the second cause, namely, being greatly habituated in them from childhood, behold, it is known that habit alone cannot by itself annul and desensitize a person from feeling something. If someone strikes him with a stick every day for several years, he will also feel the latest one, only that his fear of the feeling will not be so great, like someone who never experienced it. Hence, habit alone is not enough to block out the recognition completely. Likewise for the good, due to being habituated in them he does not recognize them properly, relative to their high excellence. On this he wrote: "or comprehend their high excellence".(3) Corresponding to the third cause, namely, that a man is bitter and complains on many of the matters that are actually good for him due to their appearing bad on the surface, without contemplation. On this he wrote "they do not think over their matters", as explained earlier. Think and contemplate this for I have been brief.

<b>to realize through their own intellect</b> -- i.e. the sages do not fulfill their duty in informing the people the high degree of the good by simply informing them so that the people will accept it with faith. Rather, it is their duty to teach them through rational inquiry until they understand it on their own.










. 





Chapter 1



His intent in this analogy is so that one will not claim: "since we see the marks of wisdom are diverse in the creations, and what appears in this one does not appear in that one, if so, each one must originate from a different source of wisdom... Therefore, since there are so many sources of wisdom, why should I waste my time endlessly examining each one. For certainly many of them are beyond me, and from where will I know how to approach each one? To this, he answered that it is a mistake. Since in truth, even though the marks of wisdom appear different, they are all from one Source, and only one power is needed to recognize them all. Hence, the author continues: "therefore, contemplate."




<b>you will find that they are as I have told you</b> -- You will find that I was right - that all the marks of wisdom manifested in them stem from one root. 

Corresponding to "contemplate them", he wrote: "established in our minds", i.e. to delve so deeply until one grasps the matter clearly, then his mind will be established and accept the matter without the gnawing of doubt. Corresponding to "think on them" he wrote "abides in our consciousness" - that one thinks on them for such a long time, until he is assured it abides by him, and will not be easily forgotten. 

<b>wise and the fool</b> -- The fool is one who does not realize the qualities of wisdom, and does not want to strain his mind to toil in it. He is satisfied with the first impression. Hence, the author wrote that the wise and the fool would be equal in their recognition. Because the fool also understands things that are common and familiar, and due to repetition he understands certain things without needing to think over and contemplate. Hence, if everything were the same, he would know the hidden from the revealed. 



<b>has free will, not forced, etc.</b> -- His intent in this is that something which is bound to a nature such as inanimate objects, always do the same thing. But something which acts by will and desire, namely, a human being, which possesses free will - he will have different actions, but not at the same time, rather according to his needs of the time. And the Creator is not bound by any "nature", ch'v, nor is he forced, nor needs anything. The latter two terms "not forced" and "needs nothing" the author wrote to contrast with man. Because a man is sometimes "forced" in his actions, to avoid harm, or he needs to bring some benefit. Therefore, though, he acts with free will and desire, one cannot truly call him as doing with "free will", except in a borrowed sense since necessity may prevent him in this. Hence, the term "free will" correctly applies only to G-d, since His will is free of any form of need or necessity, and all the more so of any "nature".

Chapter 2







<b>and the living will take it to his heart</b> -- Even though death is something everybody knows, since behold, it is the normal way of the world. Nevertheless, it requires contemplation and putting to heart on the sign of wisdom which is manifested in it, as our Sages expounded on the verse "behold it was good" - this refers to death (Midrash Bereishis Raba 9:5). 



The cat covers his excrement. The dove does not exchange his mate. The rooster appeases the hen before mating. The ant does not steal the food particle that his fellow ant acquired.

Chapter 3





<b>the marks of wisdom exhibited in its production</b> -- i.e. the beginning of its existence, while it is forming, such as in living things, some species gestate and give birth, others lay eggs, and by plants, this species grows by itself, another through a seed planted. Similarly, there are many many differences in the formation of creatures. 














<b>so that it hints and teaches on the Creator</b> -- "hints" refers to a general vague teaching whose explanation is not clear, such as "He winks with his eyes" (Mishlei 6:13). "teaches", however, refers to a clear teaching which explains the thing. Behold, on the surface examination and first impression on the general existence of the universe - immediately, it teaches on the existence of the Creator who created it because a thing cannot create itself, as explained in gate 1, just like a handiwork reveals the existence of the craftsman who made it. However, it is an encrypted teaching, only hinting, since it does not explain His intent, wisdom, and ability. However, after much contemplation on the details of the creations and their connected purpose - it will teach us clearly and explain to us His intent, wisdom, and ability to do as He wishes, just like the existence of a building teaches on the existence of its builder, which certainly also teaches on the builder's intent, wisdom, and ability. Unlike a general vague deed, as before, (that creation alone does not show all this). And this is what he wrote: "as a work points to the workman, or a house indicates the builder". "The work" corresponds to the "hint" (general vague teaching of creation), while the "house" corresponds to the "clear teaching" on His will, wisdom, and ability. Understand this. 

<b>like body and soul (nefesh) in living creatures</b> -- the soul prolongs and sustains the body. When the soul leaves the body, the body immediately inanimates and decomposes ("life" ceases). Likewise, the body sustains the animal soul in animals, and when the animal soul leaves the animal's body, it (the animal soul) ceases and nullifies. Likewise, for the nefesh tzomachat (plant soul) in plants. For the nefesh medaberet (human soul) we can say the same regarding its existing in this physical world, because immediately after the human soul leaves the body, it returns to its place in the higher worlds [as written (Eccl. 12:7) "Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was: and the spirit shall return unto G-d who gave it." 











The wise man will put his attention to know the fine and spiritual side of the world... He will set them as a ladder in intellectual investigation to ascend higher and higher. And the purpose of all this - so that he attains understanding into the greatness and exaltedness of the blessed Creator and clings to His service. The intensity of his clinging will be according to the intensity of the picture in his heart of the greatness and exaltedness of the Creator, and according to how much he recognizes the marks of G-d's benevolence to His creations... i.e. to first contemplate G-d's collective benevolence towards all of His creations and afterwards to contemplate the special favor G-d has shown specifically to him. 


































<b>a day of rest, idleness and amusement</b> -- Three disgraces each worse than the other. The first person who hates hard work, and after a bit of strain, already wants to rest. He does not realize that a "man was born to toil" (Iyov 5:7),and according to the greatness of the purpose will be the greatness of the necessary strain to attain it, as written "[he saw that the rest (in the afterlife) was good, and the land that it was pleasant;] and bowed his shoulder to bear" (Bereishis 49:15). Worse than this person, is a lazy man who loves idleness, and does not desire any work, as written "A sluggard buries his hand in the dish; he will not even bring it back to his mouth" (Mishlei 19:24). Even worse than both of these, some people hate idleness and are energetic. However, all of their toil is in futilities and foolishness, such as playing with dice or the like. Hence, this person sometimes makes "a day of rest", to rest from the feeling of strain of the previous days. Sometimes, even though he does not feel any strain in his body, he desires idleness, and sometime he made that day a day of amusement, to amuse himself with futile toil.

Chapter 4

















The psalm describes how the creations guard the [physical] laws of G-d and never deviate from their purpose. 










<b>forms, traits, uses, benefits, and purpose</b> -- Each creature reflects a particular part of wisdom. The terms "forms" refers to external appearance. "Traits" refers to the special traits of creatures, such as bravery of heart to the lion, brazenness to the leopard, anger to the bear, and the wise king attributed zeal to the ant, and similarly for others. The term "uses": that man uses each one for a particular use. Such as the ox for plowing, the horse for riding, the donkey for carrying, the camel and elephant for travel in deserts/jungles. "Benefits" that man benefits something from each one, such as cattle and sheep for their meat or milk. Wild animals for their skins. These are uses for enjoyment. But some creatures provide man with "purposeful" uses such as the crab and the eggs of the "kastor" which are needed for medicinal purposes, and many many more examples, as known by those who study [natural] medicine. Likewise, many others are needed for different benefits. 
<b>the speech in which the Creator rebuked Job in order to arouse him to his duty</b> -- to arouse his heart to reflect on the greatness of the Creator and His wisdom. Then automatically, he will realize his lowliness relative to Him, and will close his mouth.

Chapter 5


<b>nearest and clearest</b> -- nearest in proximity because why should a man go out to find other creatures and approach them to observe and contemplate them? Is not man in close proximity to himself? Furthermore, knowledge of himself is clearer to man than knowledge of other creatures. 
<b>the closest cause to the existence of the larger world</b> -- As our sages said on the verse "this is all of man" (Koheles 12:13) - that the entire world was created for this. The author called man the "closest cause", since G-d created many worlds, which emerge and chain out one from the other. And this [physical] world, which is perceptible to us, is the end of the chain. Hence, it arouses through a long series of causes. However, since man is the ultimate purpose - he is the closest cause of all of them, since "the end of action is first in thought". And immediately when G-d thought to create man, He also thought about the creation of our world, and subsequently, the causes through which our [physical] world can come to existence. Understand this. 




<b>man's advantages</b> -- instincts the Creator set for his benefit, such as arousing compassion for him in the heart of his parents, lack of intellect and perception in his early years, benefits of crying in his babyhood, and other matters as will be explained. 
<b>his temperaments</b> -- such as pride, humility, anger, contentment, or the like.
<b>faculties of his nefesh</b> -- such as memory, thought, and also others enumerated such as sustenance, growth, reproduction, and the like, as will be explained. 

<b>his lusts</b> -- such as eating, drinking, relations. 




<b>in order to arouse the negligent person</b> -- He who is by nature lazy and negligent, we must arouse his heart and make him understand "what it is his duty". 












<b>the visible constituents of man's being, namely his body and his soul</b> -- a human being is a composite of many things, only that these two things, the body and the soul, are the roots which include generally the entire structure... He called them "visible" because the particular parts are hidden, such as in the body, the intestines, small veins, biles, etc. or, in the soul, the hidden powers inside it. However, the general structure of body and soul are visible, i.e. generally perceptible. The body is perceptible to the eyesight, and the soul is perceptible in the intellect, in that the body can feel and move when the soul is inside it, and the opposite when the soul leaves it. 




















<b>wise, merciful, and gracious One</b> -- G-d is merciful towards him that he not be injured in going through a narrow track, and in His wisdom, He made the birth canal widen and expand then to make for him a secure exit path.  










<b>warding off everything harmful, even against its will</b> -- For behold, the infant is foolish, and tends to pursue even harmful activities, such as to hold a razor with his hand, or grasp a burning stick, or instigate a dangerous dog, or the like. When the parents remove him from these things, he screams and cries, and anguishes his parents with his screams. 

<b>little recognition of the burden</b> -- when the receiver of benefit knows and recognizes the good that another is bestowing on him, and he also recognizes the exertion that the person is exerting himself for him and he appreciates it - through this the benefactor feels some contentment and consolation from his toil. But this is not the case by the child. 







<b>he is not a thinker and is unable to distinguish good from evil</b> -- He has no knowledge, neither from intellect, nor from recognition. For the power of recognition is something independent of the intellect, and even other creatures (i.e. animals) have the power of recognition despite that they have no intellect. 
<b>manage for themselves</b> -- The adults are able to manage their needs, and do not depend on the management of another unlike him whose management is not according to his will. 
<b>move freely</b> -- unlike him that due to his weakness all his movements are sluggish. 
<b>and keep clean</b> -- while he, due to his weak ability to hold in, is forced to roll in his own excrement and urine, and dirty himself with filth. 
<b>he would have died of worry and sorrow</b> -- worry on each detail of his lackings, and general sorrow on his lowly situation. 








<b>the usefulness of the limbs... the ways of his rectification from them</b> -- some of the limbs are crucial for preserving his body while some were created so that his body will be in a better way, as the scholars wrote regarding the doubling of the limbs of senses (2 eyes, 2 ears, etc.). For the first kind, he wrote "the usefulness", while for the second kind, he used the term "rectification". Understand this. 











<b>carried into the stomach</b> -- we cannot say it is simply gravity, since the food would then easily get delayed or stuck in the esophagus, and certainly, when a person is lying down or on his side, whereby the stomach and the esophagus would in be of equal height. Hence, it is clear that there is a faculty (muscles) specially made for this, to draw the food and pull it to the stomach. 



















<b>shame with which man alone has been endowed</b> -- unlike the other characteristics which are also found in the animals such as memory, forgetting, anger, as mentioned in the books of the scholars. 




<b>Many precepts of the Torah are fulfilled only out of shame</b> -- i.e. come and see how powerful this trait is, since behold it stops a man from evil more than the commandments of the torah. 
And if you ask, "even though this trait is implanted in human beings, nevertheless there are still evil doers. Hence, that which stops them [from evil] is not shame." To this he answered, that whoever you see doing one of these things, know that it is due to their divesting themselves from the garment of shame out of their evil choice as written. 


<b>it is our duty to feel shame...as a result of reflection</b> -- i.e. general reflection, which is the subject matter of this gate, namely, a man's examination of the marks of wisdom manifested in the creations. Through them he will grasp the greatness of the Creator.
<b>realization of the service we owe to Him</b> --through this one will reflect on how much he is falling short in G-d's service [and be ashamed].
<b>Be ashamed and humiliated of your ways</b> -- two expressions corresponding to falling short in avoiding evil and in doing good.








This is the purpose of man - to receive the reward of his deeds, and this is impossible without a reckoning. 




A man needs to be complete in three areas, deot (outlook/thought), midot (character traits), and in peulot (deeds). Corresponding to "deot", he wrote "truth and falsehood", for example, the belief in the Unity of G-d is truth, while ascribing plurality to Him is a falsehood, and similarly for all other contemplations in chakira (inquiry). Likewise for "excess and deficiency" - just like G-d is exalted beyond all praise, while the opposite for flesh and blood which is much deficient in praises. Corresponding to peulot ("deeds"), he wrote "good and evil", namely that doing kindness and justness is good, while corruption and oppression is evil. Corresponding to the "midot" (character traits) he wrote "the laudable and despicable". For instance humility is a praiseworthy trait while arrogance is disgraceful.  
<b>the necessary, the possible and the impossible</b> -- this refers to the two extremes and the middle way. "Necessary" is what the understanding obligates that it should be this way. While "impossible" is the opposite. The "possible", which is the middle way between the necessary and the impossible. 






such as anger and tranquility, generosity and stinginess - all are for man's benefit, for each one has a time and place. 


















<b>Among the completing benefits...</b> -- this is one of the things which demonstrates that G-d's will is that man's good should be to the utmost extent, i.e. that he should be lacking nothing that could possibly be beneficial to him.




<b>clear proof of the Creator's mercy towards us</b> -- since behold, our eyes can see that everything was designed in the most perfect and most beneficial possible way for man.  










<b>solely by His will and wish</b> -- this is to exclude the view of those who believe in the "necessity" of creation, y"sh. See Morey Nevuchim II ch.13-15, that they ascribe the creation to G-d as a kind of "necessity", like a shadow to a pillar, without will. 



































































That which human beings tend to yearn for and endeavor to amass gold and silver - this is a nature implanted in them by G-d in order promote their welfare. The proof is that they themselves are of little use, since they have no food or thirst value, therefore it must be that it is an implanted nature that man loves them without a reason....
<b>the plan of the Creator's supreme wisdom</b> -- since most of the testing of man which demonstrates his free will, whether he chooses good or evil - is through them. For money pulls from one side and pushes from another. Understand this

Chapter 6

<b>arrogant attitude towards the Creator's favors</b> -- The author spoke on the three detrimental factors at the beginning of this gate. There, however, he focused on the great toil, etc. which distracts a person, while now, he is adding the detriment due to arrogance. 
<b>constantly recall...never cease to think</b> -- to keep in mind what he has grasped and to inquire on what he does not yet know of them. 

<b>purify your heart</b> -- that one's heart is simple, without ulterior motives or pretentiousness, while "refine your soul" refers to refining the soul through deeds, either by doing good, or refraining from evil. 




<b>eye and heart</b> -- a caretaker must first see what is lacking in his subject, and afterwards put to heart how to fill his lacking. 
and in truth, one must also praise G-d also on the beneficence He bestows on others, as our sages said in the blessing of "haTov vehaMetiv" [Who is good, and bestows good]. 







 i.e. even though He has countless creatures like you, nevertheless, He put His eye on you with hashgacha pratis [special providence].

Third Treatise on Service of God

Introduction






<b>he has a (1) benevolent disposition towards us and (2) his intention is to be of benefit</b> -- these are two different modes, for it is possible to find someone who loves his friend and has a benevolent disposition towards him, but nevertheless never has intent to try to actually benefit him, whether due to laziness or due to inability. Likewise, it is possible to find someone who has intent to be of actual benefit to his fellow, but not because he has a benevolent disposition towards him, but rather due to some outside interest, either to appear noble, or to annoy his enemy who desires evil for that fellow... Hence, the author wrote two expression: "benevolent disposition" and "intent to benefit". Or perhaps the intent is for positive benefit and saving from harm. 






When the powerful man sees the pain of the weak, then his heart is moved by the latter's pain. And even when he no longer sees him, nevertheless, whenever he remembers him, he feels pain at his plight and bad lot. 
<b>whose chief hope is centered in his offspring</b> -- he hopes to receive from his offspring a future and a hope, either by having a name and a remnant in the world through his offspring, something human beings naturally long for. Or, he hopes through torah law, that "a son brings merit to his father" (Sanhedrin 104a), for "the crown of elders is grandchildren" (Mishlei 17:6). He first mentioned the reason that the child is a branch of his tree, and it is a logical reason that the Understanding obligates a bit. Afterwards, he brought the second reason of "natural instinct" - that even if it were without any logical reason, for natural love is without any reason. 


<b>Ye shall, everyone, revere his father and his mother</b> -- the author did not bring the commandment "honor your father and your mother" (Levit. 20:12) from the Ten Commandments. The reason being that his intent is to demonstrate that the torah commanded this from the perspective of human understanding not as a statute (without reason) like other statutes of the torah (such as shatnez or milk and meat). In the Ten Commandments, it says "honor your father... in order that you lengthen your days". Once the torah designated reward as such, the status of the commandment appears to be as a Biblical precept (i.e. not a precept derived from reason). But in the verse, "Ye shall, everyone, revere his father and his mother", there it reveals that the torah obligates this from the side of Reason. Hence, the torah wrote the mother first, since she toiled more in his upbringing. And on "honor", he brought the verse "A son honors his father, and a servant his master", which clearly shows from the language of the verse that the intent is from Reason, since it was not stated as a command but rather in a language of "custom of the world", as a natural duty derived from common sense.
 It appears the author's intent is to bring a proof from this verse that the servant is under duty to show gratitude to his master. The reason being that it is learned out from the verse's context of a son's honor for his father. If so what "honor" is a servant obligated in besides his service? Thanking him verbally. 



He fears that if it remains in his hand, perhaps it will be lost through some mishap, and it will not be his at a time of need. 
<b>praise and gratitude - [Regarding gratitude] many beseech the generous man</b> -- Even though this verse makes no mention of praise, nevertheless, since the way of the world is to beseech a generous man, if so, reason obligates that when one beseeches him and he accedes to your request that you must thank him for it. 
<b>[Regarding praise] - A man's gift makes room for him and brings him before great men</b> -- it appears from this verse that his giving acquires for him nobility, hence the receiver must praise him. 

<b>nevertheless, he is not to be left without praise</b> -- the author's intent in using this expression is that for this category, Reason has the tendency to deem him least worthy of praise than all the previous categories, because here the benefactor is acting to relieve an immediate pain he has. Unlike the previous cases, where the benefactor's benefit was not immediately felt and apparent. Even so, he is not to be left without any praise. 




<b>and their benevolence is mixed</b> -- it seems that this is the same as what he wrote before "that they were compelled to dispense it", but in truth, they are two categories. Because in the latter he was referring to their free choice - that their free choice is not completely free since necessity compels them, either due to natural instinct or worldly necessity. On the other hand, this case [that "their benevolence is mixed"] means, even if we you were to suppose they had free will (and nothing compelled them) and we will say that they are being benevolent in this, nevertheless, it is not true benevolence since certainly, "their benevolence is mixed, etc.".





Chapter 1



Chapter 2










<b>vitalize the marks of his noblest endowment</b> -- i.e. to bring out from potential to actual. He used the term "vitalize" (literally: bring to life) since a trait which exists in potential only, is without movement, like a dead thing. But when he takes it out to actual, it moves like a living thing. 

<b>Sensual lust in man is the product of natural forces and of a combination of his physical elements</b> -- "natural forces" is general [physical] human nature. Afterwards he wrote: "combination of his physical elements". Hence, the foundation of lust is in this world. Therefore, he continued "Its foundation is in this world". He added "its root in this abode", because the foundation of something is that which that something is built upon. This corresponds to the "general [physical] human nature", because on top of the necessary needs [of food, etc.] of human nature, lust builds a desire for the superfluous. Hence, to lust, the natural needs are at the level of "foundation". He wrote "root of its abode", a term connotating "dwelling place", corresponding to "combination of his physical elements". Since in them is the power of lust and there is its dwelling place. He used the term "root" because the power of lust which is in potential, is the root of the [active] movements of lust which go out from potential to actual. Understand all this. 
<b>food gives it strength</b> -- corresponding to the potential, while "Physical pleasures add to its vigor" refers to the actual pleasure a man enjoys. This pleasure strengthens the power of desire, namely, lust in its actual state, which then strengthens and vigorates [more] to attain its desires.  





<b>Prayer</b> -- is opposite to the lust for unbridledness (hefker), wildness, and prikas ol (removal of the yoke of G-d's law) which is found among immoral people, as written "the vile person says 'there is no G-d'" (Tehilim 14:1). "Fasting" is opposite lust for food. "Charity-giving" is opposite the lust for amassing possessions. "Kindness" is the opposite of jealousy and love of harming other people (i.e. cruelty), as written "For they cannot sleep unless they are doing evil, and they are robbed of their sleep unless they cause someone to stumble" (Mishlei 4:16). 





there needs to exist something which will be an aid to the intellect, that this thing can only be employed by an intellect saved from the overpowering of lust - this is the torah. For the torah cannot be employed (studied) unless one throws off of himself all the vanities of this world, at least for that study time period.

Chapter 3





Since all of his drive is due to desire for reward and personal benefit or the opposite, namely, to flee from punishment. If so, when the opportunity comes for some potential good in this world such as reward from people or praise from them, his heart will turn to this, since who cares whether it is reward in this world or in the next? This is unlike the inducement from the understanding, however, whose aim is not for any hope of personal gain whatsoever. 





<b>service due to the urge of the Torah is manifested in external good deeds</b> -- since his motive is on the reward. If so, his intent is only in fulfilling his obligation in the external act. But his heart is not so complete, for if it were possible for him to attain the reward without the deeds, he would prefer that. 




<b>Streams of water</b> -- "streams", the term connotes wellsprings, which have no end to their water. 


perhaps some periods he will weaken in the service, and then the power of lust will strengthen against him to ensnare him. 










<b>some are of limited intelligence, while some are superior in understanding (literally: recognition)</b> -- limited intelligence applies to many people. While "superior in recognition" is a different aspect, namely, since one person may recognize the nature of the world and its creatures more than his fellow, and he may have superior ability to contemplate them than his fellow despite that his fellow may have a stronger intellect.

Chapter 4



<b>out of His kindness, generosity, and goodness </b> -- "kindness" from the aspect of the receiver who was not deserving of this. "Generosity" from the aspect of the Giver who receives no good whatsoever from this. It is only out of His generosity of heart. Or the opposite. "goodness" because it is the nature of the Good to bestow good. 
<b>whole-heartedly with Him</b> -- not to suspect Him. 
<b>trusting in Him</b> -- for all his needs. 
<b>surrendering to Him</b> -- in a general way, to unload all one's ways on Him, and surrender all one's guidance to His hand, yisborach. "accepting His decrees" - after the act (of surrendering to Him), to accept with joy and a good heart all that G-d sends his way, as the Sages said (Berachos 54a): "a man is under obligation to bless [on the bad just like on the good]". 






<b>pride, haughtiness, arrogance</b> -- 3 terms corresponding to the 3 levels mentioned in Yirmiya (9:22), which are wisdom, might, and wealth. i.e. pride in wisdom, haughtiness in might, and arrogance in wealth. 



<b>revealed association of anyone with G-d</b> -- this is idol worship. 



























<b>the simple kept in check</b> -- i.e. like the methods the gentile leaders employ to lead their nations, or like those the intelligent people lead the fools. 

<b>do not believe in reward and punishment</b> -- Since according to their views G-d's intent in giving the torah was only for their welfare in this world. Hence, there is no punishment for one who rebels against it, only ruining of his worldly affairs. 










<b>joint worship</b> -- i.e. with idolatry since he worships himself not his Creator. He is called concealed in that his intent is not visible to everyone. 



Certainly arrogance is the greatest detriment of all. And in truth, he does not know from where the loss came, because a person does not become haughty unless he first imagines that he deserves to be proud. Therefore, he will not find any sins he committed. 
they know His greatness and exaltedness and recognize the matter of His conduct with His creations. 




<b>gave up to Him their lives, their children, their possessions</b> -- i.e. they resolved that their lives, children, and possessions - all belong to G-d, and they are prepared to return it to Him if need be to do His will. After this, he wrote that just like they resolved and accepted this on themselves, so too they fulfilled it when the time came and they firmly kept their faith. 


He will know the next higher degree, i.e. next higher rung. And since one needs to ascend to the top rung, he wrote "then notes the distance between the degree that he has attained and the highest of the degrees", so that he will strive to ascend from level to level until he reaches the highest.

Chapter 5

The role-playing through questions and answers, as if two people are debating, one asking and the other answering, is a deep method of clarifying a topic, to one who contemplates it. Because the way of the questioner is to strive to ask a powerful, wise question, and the Sages say (Mivchar hapeninim 1:3) "the question of the wise man is half of the wisdom". While the way of the answerer is to strive to heal the illness of the questioner by refuting it to the best of his ability. 
















<b>to humble himself</b> -- with acts which demonstrate lowliness such as fasts, sackcloth, and ashes, as written "have you seen how Achav has humbled himself before Me" (Melachim 21:24). 
<b>and become conscious of his lowliness and insignificance</b> -- in his thoughts. "lowliness" from the perspective of himself, to regard oneself as lowly which is the opposite of arrogance. "Insignificant" forbearing and humble before others. 




<b>you are pledged... and belong to Him</b> -- As is the nature of the world. The poor debtor will first give his property as a pledge to his rich creditor because it is hard for him to sell it, and he hopes that maybe he will earn some money afterwards and redeem it back. Afterwards, when he sees that he needs more money, and borrows more until the debt becomes greater than the value of the pledge and the pledge then belongs to the creditor. So too here, at first he is obligated only a little to his Creator. As time goes on, his debt increases until even his life belongs to the Creator. 

<b>a portion</b> -- i.e. even though you are not able to fully repay any of them, you can nevertheless pay some of them according to your ability. 

My yearning is strong for the future and my pain is great for the past, that I was lazy in this. Alternatively, my pain is great due to my ignorance how and what to repay for I did not have a mentor until now. 




<b>your longing is genuine and your want is urgent</b> -- "your longing is genuine" i.e. it is powerful and enduring and therefore indirectly, you will swiftly reach your want. This is the meaning of "your want is urgent". "longing" and "want" are two separate things. It is possible to have "longing" without "want" or vice versa. The term "longing" applies to strong yearning in the nefesh (soul), to cling to that which it deems cherishable while the mental imagery of that thing is in its thoughts. Hence, it works in a kind of natural way. Nevertheless, perhaps he will not "want" that thing due to some impediment. For example, consider a person who feels extremely hungry on a fast day. It is correct to say that his nefesh (soul) longs for food but nevertheless he does not want the food. Because the term "want" applies to will by cognitive choice. It is possible also to find "want" without "longing". For example, if a man takes a bitter potion for healing purposes. He "wants" it by necessity but his nature does not "long" for this. It is known that in all human powers, there are varying degrees, higher and lower. Likewise for "longing". There is a strong longing, and there is a stronger longing. However, there is no such thing as an utterly lax longing, since if it is lax, it is not at all a "longing" (by definition). Through this presentation, you will understand all of the author's words regarding longing and want. Understand this. 
<b>my want was lax</b> -- the term lax applies correctly to "want", but not to "longing", as [I explained] before. Therefore, he used the term "false", which connotes ceasing, for it is possible for a man to long for something and afterwards his yearning cools down, hence his longing is [retroactively] proved false. 

<b>my want is clear</b> -- i.e. strong. He used the term "clear" because what causes a want to become lax is the mixtures of impurities of outside interests which conflict with that want. This is like the mixture of impurities in a man's blood which conflicts with the natural health and weakens his strength. But when the "want" strengthens, this indicates that the impurities have shed and it is now clear [pure]. 

<b>from your beginning</b> -- the beginning of your existence. From the beginning of the formation of the body, the soul was joined to it. Regarding the "forces", he wrote "earliest years of your growth" since these are the superfluous things which he has accustomed himself in when he has attained some understanding. Hence, he did not write "beginning" regarding these since one is not in control of his ways while in his mother's belly.

<b>rest</b> -- from physically toiling with one's limbs. "tranquility" means tranquility of heart from the toil of thoughts. 



<b>keep far from you, with all your strength, the forces and dispositions</b> -- he first mentioned the "forces" which are the causes which maintain the dispositions. One must first remove the cause for when the cause is removed, the effect (i.e. the bad dispositions) will also be removed. 
<b>cutting off of one piece of flesh or to the loss of one of his limbs</b> -- i.e. when flesh is cut off and it eventually heals, there is no recognizable loss. The entire suffering was the pain of the cutting it (and its healing), therefore he used the term "cutting off". But for a limb, where the loss is also in lost functionality he used the phrase "and its loss". 

<b>concentrate your mind</b> -- At first one must picture in his mind the two extremes, and afterwards to employ one's faculty of contemplation to weigh the difference between them. 















<b>faithfulness to him, exerting himself</b> -- i.e. faithful in his matters and exerting himself in them. The author's intent in these two terms is to divide the matters of slavehood into two divisions, namely, duties of the heart and duties of the limbs. On the duties of the heart he wrote "faithfulness" while on the duties of the limbs he wrote "and exerts himself". 
<b>reverence and fear</b> -- fear due to picturing his ability to punish those who transgress his will, even though, G-d is beyond any representation of the mind, nevertheless, He is close from the aspect of His providence. Therefore, he wrote "reverence and fear". Reverence from far and fear from close. 








<b>be afraid</b> -- literally "be afraid that he WILL BE falling short" - that perhaps he is falling short in his commandments. He wrote "will be" in the future tense, i.e. he is afraid perhaps it will become known to him on the day of reckoning that he had fallen short. Alternatively, as our Sages said that a righteous man is afraid on future sins. Alternatively, the author's intent is that he pictures "fear" to himself when preparing for some act of service that perhaps he will fall short in it. 





<b>he should accept and bear his condition patiently</b> -- "accept" favorably [the hard condition the master subjected him to] at the beginning and bear the condition throughout its duration, without trying to remove it from himself through human strategies. 
<b>never suspect the master of unfairness in his judgment</b> -- on the small portion the master has allotted him for his needs while his eyes see much greater good that the master has allotted to others. He should not suspect that there was favoritism. 
<b>nor charge him with perverseness in his decree</b> -- if the master decreed some bad for him, he will not ascribe perverseness to the master. We find these two divisions in parsha Haazinu (Devarim 32:4) "The Rock, His work is perfect, For all His ways are just", corresponding to G-d's allotting of benefits. The verse continues: "A G-d of faithfulness and without injustice, Righteous and upright is He", corresponding to the decrees of bad. Afterwards, he explains his words "He should be contented with what the master favors him with" corresponds to the first division. "and justify the master when he has punished him" - corresponds to the second division. 
How he is the property of his master.
in all of his thinking, one will find that his mouth expresses remembrance of his master.
 To learn for himself the ways of his master, as written (Devarim 28:9): "you shall walk in His ways".
All of the service he renders to his master has no other aim than to find favor with him. 
To not be joyful of any thing in the world whatsoever except in performing the service of his Creator. 
"a seeker" refers to one who exerts himself on something to attain it. He wrote that the slave will not exert great exertion on anything in the world except for attaining the favor of his master. 
<b>abstain</b> -- [the literal translation is "stand"]. The intent of using the word "stand" is that he "stops"... i.e. that he will not fear and halt from doing anything in the world when he senses that it is harmful like he panics, trembles and halts from some matter when he senses that he is rebelling against his Creator in that matter. 

For any matter in the world, he will not consider it so much to be steadfastly strong in it and so that he won't slip in it, except for his faithfulness to his master - he will strengthen himself with all of his might in it so that his heels will not slip. 
He compared the fear of G-d to a garment that a person wears to cover and hide his naked parts. So too, the fear of G-d will cover the disgrace of lowly traits in man's potential so that they don't come out to actual. 
One who is very much beloved to someone, due to that person's great love, his picture will cleave to his heart. And the picture which clings to his heart becomes manifested and pictured before him always as if it were placed before him. This is the pshat (plain meaning) of the verse (Tehilim 16:8) "I have set G-d before me always". 
When something is beloved and precious to a man, it is the first of all his thoughts. Immediately when he wakes up, it precedes other thoughts in entering his mind. 








 in all matters, one can know and recognize the unknown side from the known side which is its opposite. For example, a poor man can picture the goodness of being wealthy through his recognition of the sufferings of poverty which is its opposite. On this, they wrote "knowledge of the opposites is one". The intent here is that once we have clarified the conducts which are good in the eyes of the master, indirectly we also know that the opposite conducts of the slave are bad in his eyes. And one must renounce the bad and adopt the good.

Chapter 6













<b>share the fate of the beasts of the earth</b> -- his matter will be like the animals. i.e. even though you may see him at a time of success, nevertheless, they are being well fed and fattened up to prepare them for slaughter. 






 i.e. the special goodness itself was the source of their rebellion like Korach and his company that through his wealth and distinguished lineage, he rose up against Moses. 

<b>for the king it is prepared</b> -- i.e. that the Gehinom's fire was made deeper and wider for the king than the rest of the wicked individuals like him of his nation. Because since he was the king, singled out for benefits, his sin is exceedingly great. Therefore, his downfall and punishment will be greater for his wickedness. 


Immediately, it enters my mind that my aim and intent in doing this deed, is in order to receive potential reward in the future due to this act of service. 
<b>I thank Him for His great goodness to me in words but my thought and intent</b> -- in my words, one can hear only thanks on the past which He already bestowed. This is proper. However, I recognize my lacking - that my main thought and intent in the thanking is to seek the continuance of this good, i.e. that this good will continue and maybe even that it will increase more.
<b>I am not like the one who renounced</b> --- in truth, a man needs to direct his mind to make his heart abandon the desire for increased or continuance of good as before. Then his heart will be perfect in intent of thanking only for the past. Behold, he first said "continue and increase" and afterwards said "increase and continue", since in both instances he spoke in the way of "not only this but also this" (lo zu afzu). Understand this. 

<b>therefore teach me the minimum of service</b> -- teach me a minimum amount whereby I would be fulfilling my duty and this would be considered an acceptable service. Because if you load on me a great amount of service, perhaps it will be too much for me and I will not be able to bear it. But if this is a small amount, I will be assured that I will be able to endure it. 

you do not take any step in the service of G-d nor help any human being unless you hope to gain some personal benefit from it. 



<b>fit for..due to you</b> -- "fit" from your side, that you are more fitting and prepared to receive the good when you understand His kindness. "due to you" - from His side, from the side of His trait of goodness which necessitates bestowing to those worthy of the good.

Chapter 7


"insignificant" in quality. "small" in quantity. 

that he prides himself that he possesses what is fitting for obtaining that thing therefore he obtained it. i.e. if it is something which needs to be obtained through strength, he will pride himself in his strength and say that his might and strength obtained for him this thing. If it is something obtained through plan and strategy, he will pride himself in his wisdom and say that it is due to his wisdom. Similarly for other things. 
through this good, his evil thoughts and interior will be exposed. For example, a person whose heart desires illicit relations and he prolongs desiring them and has no fear of G-d before himself. The only thing holding him back from actualizing his desires is that he is poor and lowly, and lacks the means to pay the prostitute. His evil heart is hidden from other people. But when he attains wealth, his evil interior will be exposed, and the Sages said (Yoma 86): "It is proper to publicize the identity of Chanafim (hypocrites) to prevent Chilul Hash-m". 




<b>he should endeavor to direct his heart to G-d</b> -- that at least for the little service which he is upholding until now, his heart should be with proper intent in it. 


<b>proud of his piety and negligent in his duties</b> -- two bad things will befall him by this. One, by seeing his fellow who is more negligent in the service than him, he will become proud in his heart and will say to himself that he is better than them. Two, through this, sometimes when he feels laziness, he will also become lax in his duties saying to himself "it's enough for me to be like him". 

i.e. this is part of the test and the system of free will granted to man so that it will seem to a man as if he is safe from Divine retribution, therefore his heart entices him to rebel against G-d. But if G-d did not delay the retribution, then a man would greatly fear at all times that the evil inclination is enticing him to sin due to the punishment immediately incurred from a sin and its swift execution. Hence, he would have been forced to guard from sin and would have been without free will.

Chapter 8

<b>treatment ... recovery</b> -- "treatment" refers to the early stage of healing, before the [physician's] work is finished, while "recovery" refers to after the work has been finished. Alternatively, the author's intent is that "treatment" refers to internal illnesses while "recovery" refers to external wounds. Because a man has internal illnesses in his soul, namely, in matters of emunot v'deot (faiths and outlooks), and external wounds attributed to the soul, namely, [bad] physical deeds. 



<b>relieve me of the pain...remove the worry</b> -- this is the extra [pain] of the wise man over the fool. The fool is compared to an animal, without understanding, which was struck with some pain or illness. It has only the suffering of the sensation of feeling the pain or the illness. This is unlike the wise man, which besides the pain also has the worry of what will be the outcome of this pain or illness, and how much will it pain him before it leaves. This is the meaning of "more understanding more pain" (Eccles. 1:18). Therefore, he specified these two distinctions. 
<b>I will be delivered from my worst suffering</b> -- I will consider it that I have been saved from the worst of all illnesses. 
<b>and will be near a cure of all my afflictions</b> -- for this illness is the root and cause of all illnesses. And when one removes the cause, the effect is automatically removed. 















<b>a contrary view</b> -- since one cannot instruct, command, or rebuke, one who is forced in his deeds. 






<b>a human being's activities are sometimes in accordance with his thoughts and desires and sometimes they are against his wish and intent</b> -- sometimes things turn out like his thoughts and desires while other times, they turn out against his wish and intent. Behold the author changed the terms. He first said "thoughts and desires", that it turned out perfectly according to what he wished from the beginning, and so he may pride himself and consider himself a wise man, who sees the long term consequences and predicts the future, and it all turned out perfectly according to his best wish. Then the author wrote the extreme opposite "against his wish and intent" - that it did not at all turn out as he intended, and the result is completely against his wish. Understand this. 







he called free will "righteousness" because it is through free will that a man can be called righteous. Unlike if his actions were through "necessity" [i.e. divine decree]. 







































Behold even though the author seemingly brought this verse incidentally, come and see, and be amazed, how each verse of this Psalm corresponds one-to-one to each of the points raised by the author:<br>"L-ord, my heart is not haughty" - to attribute the free will to myself, and to think that my choice is released and depends only on my free will. G-d forbid, I do not hold this arrogant view.<br>"nor did I lift up my eyes" - i.e. likewise, G-d forbid, for me to lift up my eyes to heaven, and to attribute all of my actions and movements to You, and claim that I am forced in them. Hence, I do not hold of either extreme view.<br>"Nor do I involve myself in great matters, Or in things too high for me" - Likewise, I know that I am incapable of distinguishing between "necessity and righteousness". These are the words of the author for "one who goes deeply into these subjects will not escape sin and will stumble". He wrote "great matters" corresponding to their magnitude. And "too high for me" corresponding to the concealment of their essence.<br>"Surely I have stilled and quieted my soul" - i.e. you know and can testify that I indeed conducted myself like this.<br>"stilled and quieted" - "stilled" means strengthened myself such as "I stilled myself until the morning" (Isaiah 38:13). i.e. I took on myself to hold on to both views - in some of them I strengthened myself and told myself "See now that I, even I, am he, and there is no G-d with me" (Deut. 32:39), for G-d left the free will in my hands. Namely, in matters of [doing good] deeds. As the author wrote earlier "the proper course to follow is to act on the principle of one who believes [that actions are left to a human being's free will, who will therefore be rewarded or punished for them]". While in other matters I "quieted my soul" anticipating G-d's will, namely in matters of Bitachon (trust in G-d). As the author wrote "At the same time, we ought to trust in G-d with the trust of one, fully convinced [that all things and movements, together with their advantageous and injurious results happen by the decree of the Eternal]". This is the meaning of the term "quieted", and this term is used in scripture regarding Bitachon (trust) such as "wait quietly for the salvation of the L-ord" (Eicha 3:26) and "Wait for the L-ord and hope for Him" (Ps. 37:7).<br>Afterwards, he clarified his words in saying "like a weaned child with his mother", that in being on his mother's breast, he is entirely dependant on her will. But after he has been weaned, his matters are dependant on both his will and her will. Namely, to fulfill his needs, he must engage himself to walk with his feet to the place of food and to take it with his hand and place it in his mouth, and likewise to put on clothing. But he is still lacking the ability to obtain his needs independently . Therefore, he must place his trust in his mother, that she will provide for him. This is the meaning [of the double expression]: "like a weaned child with his mother; my soul is with me like a weaned child". Namely, that for matters of bitachon "like a weaned child with his mother", while for others, namely doing good deeds, "my soul is with me like a weaned child", that it depends on me. The Psalm ends with bitachon (Trust) which is the foundation of Judaism, and its perfection, saying "Let Israel hope in the L-ord from this time forth and forever".

Chapter 9




















The fool who did not know their secret, did not eat well even in the time of his reign. Even at night, he did not rest because he was busy and troubled in the matters of the country, to build palaces and towers, and other fortifications. This is the way of kings, to engage heavily at first in fortifying the country so that he can sit afterwards in peace and quiet. Hence, the fool lost out in both places while the wise man reached his desire in both. 










<b>enlighten you with the gift of His knowledge</b> -- He granted you of His knowledge, as our sages said: "[On seeing the Sages of Israel one should say: Blessed be He] who has imparted of His wisdom to them that fear Him" (Berachot 58a). Wisdom is called "light", for "the fool walks in darkness" (Eccl. 2:14), and "wisdom excels folly, as light excels darkness" (Eccl. 2:13). And since He granted of His wisdom to His people, He called them His "treasured people". 
<b>tried and tested</b> -- it is known that the term "trial" is from the verse "lift up a banner over the peoples" (Isaiah 62:10). Because through trials the level of the tzadik is elevated. This is G-d's intended purpose in doing this. The term of the actual act of testing is called "test". The author first said "tried" because the thought preceded the act. 

<b>by your bearing the yoke of His service</b> -- G-d's service in this world, is hard as stone and grueling work against the physical nature of man which tends towards physicality. But the righteous man bears it. Through this, the righteous weaken the power of their physical side and purify their hearts. G-d refers to them as "pure of heart" (bar levav) just like the grain of wheat, after it has been purified from the waste of chaffs and husks through threshing is likewise called "bar". 




















"well-ordered union -- i.e. these three intermediaries are intertwined so that through them the soul may be attached to the body.  

<b>three requisites</b> -- he mentioned earlier. establishing the understanding, the test of free will, and the bearing of the yoke of the service. 

<b>entices and seduces... the L-ord your G-d</b> -- Behold the power of the yetzer (evil inclination) which brings a man's heart to sin is of two kinds. One, when a man is hesitant and not keen on doing a bad thing, whether due to fear of G-d or fear of something else. The yetzer comes cunningly and removes the fear from his heart, either by some rationalisation. Therefore he is called in this aspect "mesi" (enticing, literally "lift up") the heart of a man, which connotes lifting up, for he lifts up the man's hesitations.... The second aspect is that he intensifies his lust and warms his heart with imaginitive pictures of the pleasures of that act. Then he is called "seducer" (mesit)... (see there for more).... Now reader, the author ended with the words "the anger of the L-ord, your G-d". Certainly, he did not write two Names of G-d for nothing. They correspond to these two aspects. For the first aspect, where one removes the fear of G-d from his heart, he also arouses the wrath of the trait of mercy [the name "L-ord" corresponds to the trait of mercy]. But that which his heart turns towards superfluous lusts, there is room to have mercy on him and say that he is only entangled in the physical and he arouses only the wrath of the trait of justice [your G-d (Elokim) which corresponds to the trait of justice]. 











<b>necessity and the divine decree</b> -- these servants are the matter of necessity stated regarding man, as you said "whatever G-d wants He does" (Tehilim 135:6), and other verses brought earlier. We asked how this can be reconciled with free will. However, in truth, man does act in accordance with his will and choice, and nevertheless it is correct to say that man's deeds are ascribed to G-d because G-d commanded man's servants to listen to his choice and do his bidding. This is the answer to the big question of the philosophers regarding free will - how is it possible for man's will to be left to his wish and to do things contrary to G-d's will? The answer to them is that this itself is G-d's will - that man be endowed with free will. Hence, it is incorrect to say this is against G-d's will. 





<b>not entice you</b> -- to follow after them [the lusts]. 





<b>severe punishment...prolonged affliction</b> -- regarding bad deeds, he wrote "severe punishment". The intent is on the acts of punishment which a man is actively punished by, just like he sinned with actions, as written regarding sinners "for their worm shall never die, and their fire shall not extinguish" (Isaiah 66:22). While on refraining from doing good, he wrote "prolonged affliction". The word "affliction" connotes withholding something good and desirable such as the "afflictions of Yom Kippur", which are all withholding of desirable things (such as washing, eating, etc.) Likewise, in truth, on the wicked it is written there: "behold My servants will eat and you will go hungry.." (Isaiah 65:13), and "he will not see the good" (Jer. 29:32). Therefore he wrote regarding active punishments "severe" and regarding afflictions "prolonged". For since, the affliction is withholding of good, it is not proper to say "severe affliction". For it is not correct to say this withholding is greater than that one. It is only proper to use the term "prolonged", namely, that the affliction will be for a long time. Furthermore, regarding the active punishment, which is incurred for bad deeds, it is only for a limited time just like his bad deeds were limited in time. On this it is written: "He does not maintain a dispute continuously or remain angry for all time" (Ps. 103:9). But for the affliction, which is withholding [good], it could be, G-d forbid, forever. For just like he refrained from doing these good deeds, so too he will be completely withheld from the good, and will never ever merit it. Hence, the intent in the word "prolonged" is on eternity, as they expounded the verse (Kidushin 39b):"you shall prolong your days" (Deut.22:7) - to the world which is eternally prolonged. Hence, it is correct to use specifically the term "severe" for this, and "prolonged" for that. Understand this. 



<b>a counselor, wise and faithful</b> -- these are the two necessary conditions for a counselor whereby one can trust his counsel. One, that he is wise and knows what is good for the asker. Two, that he is faithful to him, and will not betray him by giving him bad advice.

Chapter 10


 the intent is that a person should feel joy by remembering that through his service to the Creator, he is prepared and designated to "gaze at the delight of G-d" (Ps.27:4) and that "light is sown for the righteous" (Ps. 97:11), which is a constant and eternal pleasure which has no mixture of pain, unlike the worldly pleasures. 
<b>Then you may permit (literally 'release') yourself the emotion of joy</b> -- He used the term "release" metaphorically, that this trait be restrained until you release it when you need it. 
<b>cannot (1) remove nor (2) separate from</b> -- a man can get rid of a trouble in two ways. Either he removes this pain from himself or he separates himself from that painful thing. For example, regarding a fire. He may have the ability to extinguish the fire or to run away from the flames. Hence he wrote here two expressions. 






<b>courage</b> -- the intent is on courage of heart. While timidity refers to softness of heart. 
<b>when you meet the enemies of the L-ord</b> -- as David said [regarding Goliath]: "For who is this uncircumcised Philistine, that he should mock the armies of the living G-d?" And David put his life at risk, and strengthened his heart to wage war against him.
<b>bear all distress</b> -- for the trait of forbearance requires courage of heart....
<b>all distress and all trials</b> -- bad things happen to a person sometimes to sadden him and make him suffer for his sins, as written (Eicha 1:16) "Look and see if there is any sorrow like my sorrow..which the L-ord inflicted". And even if he is a tzadik (righteous person), he bears for his generation (to atone for them) like the prophet Yechezkel. Sometimes the intent is to test him. 


<b>you refrain (literally: delay) from standing up</b> -- he used the term "delay" since one needs only to delay and be patient. For due to surprise, and lack of deliberation and calmness, a man gets upset at one who rebukes him and stands up against him. But if he delays this, certainly, after time, he will understand that this is foolish and a great sin to pay them back evil for their good intent, and he will change his mind completely regarding standing up against him. 
That you be ashamed to rebel against your Benefactor with the very same good that He is bestowing you - the wise man with his wisdom, the rich man with his wealth, the strong man with his strength.  
<b>to His face</b> -- i.e. before Him, as in "a people who without ceasing provoke Me to anger to My face" (Isaiah 65:3). The author specified 3 aspects 1. to His face, 2. in His hands, 3. while He rebukes you. The first aspect is that he rebels against G-d with the good itself. On that he wrote "to His face". Secondly, that he knows that he is in G-d's hands, like pottery in the hands of the potter, who can do whatever he wants with it. How could he not be ashamed to rebel against G-d? Thirdly, that G-d already warned him. Therefore, he wrote "while He rebukes you". 



<b>wicked</b> -- these are the mufkarim ("free men" i.e. of religious duty) who are deliberate. "transgressors" - this refers to those who sin due to their lusts.
<b>those who oppose the truth</b> -- even though one may not see them committing acts of sin, just that when one hears their words it becomes apparent that they oppose the main principles of the true faith - we must stand up against them. 
<b>to exhort men to do kindness and to warn people to avoid what is reprehensible</b> -- one must also use the trait of boldness and to strive to be a man - to exhort people to do kindness and warn them to refrain from reprehensible deeds. These last two are warnings for how to behave in the future. Afterwards he wrote: "to shame sinners..", that it is proper after he has already warned them privately and they did not heed and they returned to their wickedness, one must rebuke them publicly, to curse them and shame them until they desist from their sins. Thus our sages learned from Nechemia (Moed Katan 16a). 
when you see people turning away from the way of truth, namely, the way of the torah of truth. He wrote "way of truth" corresponding to the commandments between man and G-d and the "rule of righteousness" corresponding to those between man and his fellow. Behold, earlier regarding the trait of courage, he wrote "when you meet the enemies of the L-ord". There the intent was on the wicked who come to strike out at G-d's torah or His people, as written "For behold, Your enemies stir, and those who hate You raise their heads; Against Your people they plot cunningly, and they take counsel against Your protected ones; They said, 'Come, let us destroy them from [being] a nation, and the name of Israel will no longer be remembered.'" (Ps.83:35). There showing anger to them is not enough. Rather one must stand up against them and foil their plans, as written there. For this one needs courage, which is strength of heart, to be moser nefesh (self-sacrificing) in G-d's war, like David in the war against the Philistines, especially in the battle against Goliath, or like the Chashmonaim in the war against the Greeks. Here he is talking about individuals who are being wicked by themselves, and it is enough to show anger to them, to show them that you disapprove of their deeds, and that their deeds are evil in the eyes of G-d. Through this they will feel ashamed and perhaps they will repent. 
when he sees people acting properly, everything falling in its right direction and in its right place. These three expressions are opposite to the three he used earlier. Corresponding to "rule of righteousness", he wrote "all things fall in their right direction". Corresponding to "when falsehood prevails over truth", he wrote: "in its right place". Corresponding to "when you see a departure from the way of truth", he wrote: "always keeping the ways of truth". 
<b>needy (dal), poor (ani)</b> -- the sages counted 7 expressions for the poor man (Vayikra Raba BeHar). Each one applies to a specific aspect. The term "dal" (needy) refers to one whose flesh is scant, with little fat, such as "Why are you becoming so thin, O' son of the king" (Samuel II 13:4). The term "ani" applies to his being submitted, such as "How long will you refuse to humble yourself before Me?" (Ex. 10:3). 


<b>who does not know how to guide himself</b> -- his understanding is not sufficient to guide him in the proper course whether in matters of this world or of the next. 

<b>one who regrets his iniquities, one who weeps for his past sins out of fear</b> -- This expression is of the type: "not only this but also this". i.e. One who regrets his iniquities without being prompted by the [fear of] punishment - his regret is due to his sins only. After he repents, he regrets his bad deed of rebelling against G-d. Certainly it is proper to have pity on him. Not only that, but even one who weeps out of fear of punishment - it is also proper to have pity on him and to teach him the way of his rectification. 
<b>paying back the wicked</b> -- refers to those who are bad towards G-d. "Exact vengeance on the corrupt" refers to those who are bad to human beings, and who oppress them. Regarding the latter he used the term "vengeance" for them but not for those bad to G-d since the term "vengeance" is incorrect because if they acted wickedly, what [damage] did they do to G-d? And even though it is written in scripture sometimes, it is just a borrowed term. 






<b>pious</b> -- in doing good. "pure" - pure and of clean hands from not doing bad. "G-d fearing" - that he places the fear of G-d opposite his face constantly. He preceded the fear of G-d to the torah wisdom as the mishna says "he whose fear of G-d precedes his wisdom [his wisdom endures]..." (Pirkei Avot 3:12). "occupied in the service of G-d" - generally, all his occupation is in the service of G-d. Even when he is doing his physical needs his intent is to serve G-d. However, it is not correct to call this "serving" hence he used the term "occupied". 

<b>accept on yourself the justice</b> -- i.e. that you accept the justice of the evil that befell you and receive it with love as an atonement for your sin. 

Correspondingly, there are two reasons to hate the wicked. Either because they transgress the will of G-d, and hate Him. Or because joining their company is a substantial snare which can bring you to slip and stumble. "stood up against the men of truth" - i.e. if we see a man standing against the men of truth, such as Korach and his company, even though we don't know his deeds, it is proper to hate him since he hates those G-d loves. 
<b>to assign to everything its proper place</b> -- to volunteer to put your attention to the conduct of your fellows, that their matters be in proper order. 
<b>every good-character person</b> -- since on the surface, we cannot know about someone whether he is truly G-d fearing. But if he is of good character, than we can assume he is also G-d fearing. And it is proper to grace him with money, if he needs, or to teach him wisdom. For it is not proper to teach wisdom (torah) to a student who is not worthy. As the sages said in several places such as Chulin 133a and Makot 10a. 

<b>the cruel and foolish (enticed)</b> -- corresponding to generosity with your money, he wrote "the cruel". Since they are cruel on others, why should one be generous towards them? Corresponding to wisdom he wrote the "foolish", which are enticed by their evil inclination to distance themselves from wisdom. 
<b>who do not recognize themselves</b> -- their low worth. Therefore the beneficence of G-d is not big in their eyes. Alternatively, because they do not recognize the greatness of the good. All the more so for one who does not recognize either one, as he wrote in the introduction to the Gate of Examination. 

<b>He that reproves a scorner gets to himself shame</b> -- regarding stinginess with one's money, no proof is needed because since they are evil why should you give to them? Furthermore, you will be reducing what you have. This is unlike wisdom, which is similar to lighting a candle with a candle and the first candle does not lose anything, and maybe this wisdom will improve them. Therefore, he brought a proof from the verse that he is damaging himself. And regarding one who does not appreciate the good, he brought the teaching of the sages "He who does a favor to an ingrate...". 

<b>the spiritual pleasures</b> -- this is the pleasure of the wise in [the study of] wisdom, and their delighting in it. On actual good deeds, he wrote "and in doing deeds".

Fourth Treatise on Trust

Introduction







Chapter 1



Chapter 2




















The fifth condition was that no one else ever benefited him. This sixth condition refers to ability - that the ability to benefit or harm him is only in his friend's hands. No one else has any ability to benefit or harm him... 

...since this is the case, his heart will not look towards trusting others and he will place all of his trust on his friend. 







One may think that He is only merciful on those who are already in pain, but not before this, and therefore trust in Him will not help to be saved from future troubles. Therefore, the author brought the second verse from Nineveh, where G-d had pity on them even before the troubles came and annulled the decree. 






First verse shows that decrees of G-d, whether for good or for bad, do not go out of the boundaries He has decreed, rather as He decreed - so shall it be.  
Second verse: Perhaps one will think that only the beginning of the matter is from G-d, but it will not endure unless a man completes it and perpetuates it, therefore - "the grass shall dry out", i.e. every man, just like his existence is ephemeral, as he is like grass, which wilts and dies, so too the kindness man does is like a temporary flower, which passes but the "word of G-d will stand forever", i.e. just like He is eternal, so too His decrees and acts are eternal.





i.e. my intent was not as a proof otherwise I would have brought more verses, but rather only as a remembrance, namely, when these verses are constantly on a person's mouth - he will remember, through them, the 7 factors. 
He first stated two general phrases:<br>(1) "he will place his trust in Him" - for providing his needs. (2) "give himself up completely to Him" - this refers to a general consent and acceptance that G-d will do with him as He wishes, even for what appears bad to him.<br> Then he explained the two phrases: "and leave the guidance of his life to Him" is an explanation of (1). "never suspect Him in His judgments, nor be upset by what He has chosen for him" is an explanation of (2).<br>This latter subdivides to: (a) "never suspect Him in His judgments" - if G-d sentences him to some bad trouble which is specific and short term. (b) "nor be upset by what He has chosen for him" - if G-d choses for him a widespread life-long matter such as poverty or a bad wife, or the like.

Chapter 3

When he understands them to their full depth and after this he verifies the truth of them in his heart to absolute truthfulness - then his trust in G-d will be complete. 























That which the latter verse ascribes the creation specifically to "the ends of the world", this is to convey that G-d's power is infinite, therefore the nature of His handiworks also must be boundless and immeasurable, as, in truth, they are [physically boundless] among the spiritual creations. However, when G-d's divine wisdom ordained to call into existence a world of finite character, He constrained His power in His handiwork and held it at a certain amount. And this is an amazing feat to the thinking person, and this is what the verse alludes to in saying: "there is no fathoming His understanding". 


i.e. just like he cannot help himself, so too he cannot help others without the permission of the Creator. The expression "nor in mortal man who has no help" alludes to both points simultaneously. (1) That if the generous man helps him, the help is not ascribed to him but rather to the Creator, since he cannot help him without the permission of the Creator. (2) The expression "who has no help" also alludes to that which the generous man also cannot even help himself. Both interpretations are true and simultaneously intended. 













i.e. that all of G-d's conducts with His creations is for their benefit. Through realizing these two points, there will be trust. 
If you see oppression of the poor and deprivation of justice, etc., do not wonder, since certainly it has already been decreed on the wicked to get what they deserve, only that G-d will bring their retribution through chains of many causes (which are coordinated with everyone affected). Therefore, their retribution is delayed. But when the causes are finished, they will also be finished. This is what is meant by "for the Highest over the high watches over them, and there are higher ones", to teach that thus Divine wisdom decided to implement the divine decrees through many causes. 





The reason the author counted this as one of the introductions/prerequisites to trust is only for the phrase: "He also knows whether a man's trust in Him is with a sincere heart or not", that through a man's remembering that G-d observes Him in all of his words and thoughts, he will also remember that included in this is G-d's observing whether or not his trust is sincere.  




The talmud says (Eruvin 50a) "a pot of partners is neither hot nor cold"
 i.e. that for two people who are entrusted with a task, even though they are of approximately equal worth, nevertheless, each one is not pleased with your trust in him since you also charged the second person to head the task and trusted in him. All the more so that it is hard on G-d to be pleased when you equate a servant with his Master.
















i.e. by Him are all the number of means which cause each and every thing to occur. And if one of the means were missing the thing would not occur. And since it is not so clear from the first verse that He is the First cause which prepares the other causes, one might think that they are merely known to Him in number. Therefore the author brought the second verse "Who is great in counsel and Mighty in carrying it out", which teaches that He is the Master of all causes and the one who carries them out... And if one is still stubborn and wants to say that there is no proof from these two verses. They only teach that the causes are attributed to Him since He is the Creator of everything, therefore the author brought the third verse which teaches that the matter was from G-d with specific intent for that thing.







Since he no longer needs to be tested because his heart has already strengthened in the service of G-d, and he is full of fear and trust of Him, and also he is not liable to rebel, so why should G-d trouble him further?




the author said "through his intention and choice" because the status of the choice is according to the intention, namely, if he chooses good with bad intentions, such as choosing good with intent for flattery or boasting himself, or arrogance - he is evil. Likewise for the opposite, as our Sages taught us (Nazir 23b) from Yael.
The intended purpose of all this was so that the pure men "will receive reward from the Creator for this".
..


From here we see that indulgence in physical pleasures makes a man's heart coarse, thereby causing him to refrain from doing the commandments. 


























To exchange for him a fleeting world for an eternal world.
To show the world that the Tzadik bears the bad of this world, with good patience and a good countenance, and despite his suffering, he does not budge from the service of his Creator in order to ease the bad. Unlike the wicked, that even for something he is forced to bear, he bears it with an angry heart, and therefore he throws off the yoke of service in order to ease his troubles. 
Here G-d knows that the people of his generation won't learn from him and they will get no benefit from this. Nevertheless, G-d tests him in order to demonstrate his level and worth and contrast it with them. That even though they are in enjoyment and he is in a life of suffering, they are ungrateful towards G-d while he is good with Him and serves Him in truth and wholeheartedly. The intent in this is so that they will acknowledge G-d's justice in the end of days when they will see the exceedingly great reward of the Tzadik. And like our sages said in Pirkei Avot 5:3, "Avraham was tested with ten trials..to show his high esteem." 




































For example, one for who the trait of compassion dominates him should distance from becoming a butcher. And likewise, the sages said: "a kapdan (impatient/overcontrolling) should not be a teacher" (Pirkei Avot 2:5), and similarly for other traits. 

Chapter 4








<b>(on the 3 terms: permission, decree, judgment)</b> -- To not think that some human being's advice can possibly be beneficial unless it is through the permission and decree of the Creator. For example, regarding the healing of a sick person, the talmud expounds [on the verse shmos 21:19]: "from this we learn that permission has been given to the physician to heal". The power in nature to heal through medicinal means is a permission of the Creator. This is a universal matter. And this is combined with the decree of G-d who decreed that this illness be healed through this specific doctor, as the talmud says (Avoda Zara 58a) "through such and such a doctor, using such and such a medicine". This is for the good category. On the bad category, if a man planned to harm him and succeeded, or that he led him in the bad path, and caused him to stumble, certainly, this judgment was sentenced by G-d, otherwise, he would not have succeeded.  
The author specifically stated the passive form of the verb "to be engaged" (in means...) instead of the active form "to engage" (in means...) since we are talking about a person who fully believes that all his movements are given over to the hands of the Creator, and if he does some thing, he is not doing it, rather it is being done to him by G-d, like an ax in the hands of a woodchopper. 









If you ask: "why was it considered a lacking by Moshe but not by Shmuel?". The answer is that Moshe was commanded "go and speak...", therefore certainly he will be granted the power of speech and he will be able to speak, therefore [G-d rebuked him]: "Who has made a man's mouth?.." However, by Shmuel, his question was not against the command. It was possible for him to fulfill the command to anoint David and afterwards for Saul to kill him. 


























From this verse we see that it is really His word, namely, His decree that heals - not the means. 













A man's nature is to desire to indulge a bit in luxuries beyond his subsistence needs. Only that, he should not squander his time in occupying himself in this, since it is not essential. Rather, let one trust in G-d that he will find his desire also in this [i.e. in living at subsistence level], because "He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him" Tehilim 119:15 





the Creator will make this thing a strong means to test him. A man is tested in this more than any other test, because the magnitude of a test is measured by the greatness of the temptation of the evil inclination, and certainly the temptation of the evil inclination in this is exceedingly strong, to close one's hand from providing for the poor and destitute, and to not be concerned about providing their needs, thereby diminishing his wealth, as written in Devarim 15:9: "Guard yourself lest there be in your heart", and this is what he meant by "tests and sources of temptation".  



And likewise "wives and relatives" is referring to all men [i.e. every man is master of his household and provides for his wife, children, elderly parents, etc.] 



























His intent is that there are two causes why the masses honor the wealthy. (1) Because they are hoping, seeking, and longing all of their days to attain that which will bring them wealth, and since these things are very important in their thoughts, they also regard the wealthy as important. (2) Because the masses hope to draw from their hands and benefit from them, therefore they flatter them. 

 i.e. he who is worthy of the Creator's honor due to his praiseworthy traits. And since man's worth is extremely puny to be conceivably worthy of the Creator's honor, he brought a proof from the verse "Those who honor Me, I will honor".  










If so, all of the bitter and wearying toil he exerted himself in this means was for nothing, because it could have come to him through a light and easy business. 
































He specified 4 points (distraction of the heart, great loss, great exertion and strain), the first two is the harm from desiring them, namely, when they are near, the eye sees them and the heart desires and he becomes always distracted from them, on this he wrote "distraction of the heart". And inevitably the constant desire will bring him to habitually have marital relations with them always. This causes great loss to a man's strength and health as the Rambam wrote in Hilchos Deos 4:19, on this he wrote "great loss". The latter two are the damages which come from providing for their needs (ex.big house). That when they are near, they persuade their husbands and act playfully and seek luxuries which brings to two harmful things, namely, "great exertion" in exerting oneself to provide for their needs and "strain" of the mind in the mental distraction of providing their needs. And the Sages already said (Sotah 47a): "yetzer, child, and woman, let one's left hand push away while the right hand draws near".
Afterwards, he wrote: "to focus on matters of the afterlife and to be repulsed by matters of this world", because in distancing from them, the heart is free to think on matters of the afterlife, and also through being repulsed by this powerful lust, the heart of a man will habituate in being repulsed by the other lusts of this world. 















Corresponding to "Nor should you do this out of love of being honored or praised by them", he wrote: "and G-d will place his praise in their mouths". Corresponding to "(nor should you do this) out of desire to rule over them", he wrote: "and they will hold him in high esteem", that he will seem great and awe-inspiring in their eyes and automatically they will do whatever he says. Therefore without intending to, indirectly, he attained all of their benefits in this world, similar to what our sages said (Nedarim 62a): "study the torah out of love, and in the end, the honor will come". And his primary reward will be in Olam Haba. 





i.e. that he does not trust in his heart more that his request will be completed if he asked a strong person than if he had asked a weak person since he believes that the man is only an intermediary and that G-d is the one actually doing it. 















In his examples, he first wrote "fasting" and "praying", since these mitzvos are logical, and were practiced before the giving of the torah. Adam also fasted and prayed for his sin. Afterwards, he gave the examples of received mitzvot, and started with "sukka" since of all the mitzvot which apply today, it is the reminder of the clouds of glory in the desert (i.e. the exodus from Egypt), and lulav before tzitzis since it is preceded in the torah. 

























 <b>after choosing it</b> -- means: to make a strong decision in his mind to not budge from it. 
<b>with a pure heart</b> -- means: making efforts to do it without outside interests but rather "for the sake of His great Name". 



<b>To wholly devote his heart</b> -- means: that his thoughts be only in G-d's service, not in the vain worldly desires and to strengthen his choice that it be enduringly set and firmly established. 
















If he cannot hide it and therefore, he is afraid lest the yetzer put in his heart ulterior motives, as before, then let him remember. 

<b>his deeds will be spoiled</b> -- G-d will not accept his deeds and also he will lose his reward. 













<b>the soul in its simple, ethereal state: "simple"</b> -- in that it is divested of the entanglement of its physicality.
<b>ethereal</b> -- in that its essence is extremely fine in spiritual constitution.

<b>after it had been purified and made radiant when its deeds were good in this world</b> -- i.e. the soul will attain this through purifying itself in this world. He specified two terms "purified" and "made radiant" because there are two evils which the soul is susceptible to from the entanglement and sickness of physicality. One, that the physicality defiles it by causing it to do bad deeds and sins. Two, the defilement from the superfluous desires. Even though the latter does not cause "corrosion" on it as much as much as sins do, nevertheless, it will not escape from some defilement and filth which it absorbs from the physical. 



Their foolishness was to such a great extent that it was not hard to see from what is written in the torah, namely, their hearts' craving for the desires such as asking for meat and other complaints, and little understanding in fundamental matters of purpose, as we see from the incident of the golden calf or their complaints regarding the spies and the congregation of Korach. 



 Two forms of strain are needed in the study of [torah] wisdom. One, that a person is required to be imprisoned in the prison of the study halls of wisdom, to be constantly entrenched at the feet of the sages, as the talmud says: "it (the torah) is not to be found among merchants and dealers" (Eruvin 55a), and likewise in Shabbos (120a) on the verse "I will not be a chovesh (binder up)" [the talmud expounds:] "I will not be of those who shut themselves up in the Beit Hamidrash (house of torah study)". Two, the strain of the learning itself, as the talmud says (Sanhedrin 26b): "why is the torah called tushia (in Isaiah 28:29)? Because it weakens the strength of man [through constant study]".  
Corresponding to these two the author used two expressions "(1) bear the hard discipline and (2) the learning", and correspondingly he wrote two expressions: "(1) the son would not have the patience to bear this, (2) and would not listen to his father",  
<b>because he does not understand them</b> -- he does not understand the exalted levels which this will lead him to. 









<b>and their intent in the service would be to Him</b> -- refers to the intent in each specific act, that they would direct their intent to G-d in every act that they do. And for the general conduct in the service he wrote: "they would direct their conduct towards Him", that all of their aspirations in their conduct would be to cling to Him. 













The above verse mentioned "fear" which is concealed in the heart of a person, and ascribed to it concealed reward [in future tense]. Afterwards, the verse continues that those who "take refuge" in Him, i.e. who cling to Him in acts which are visible before the eyes of "the sons of men", and on these G-d already payed the reward, hence "which you have done" is in past tense. 






















that the remembrance of the affairs of this world and the ways of its inhabitants be desolate and absent from his heart. Or, the intent is that one is astonished and wonders in his heart from the world and its inhabitants, how they busy themselves without a [true] purpose, and "follow the vanities, etc." (Melachim II 17:15) and to abhor their affairs, as in (Daniel 8:27) "I was appalled by the vision; it was beyond understanding".

Chapter 5



<b>yearns to augment, increase, and hoard in</b> -- corresponding to these three terms, he earlier wrote three terms denoting pain, namely: (1) "he is always pained" - to augment. corresponding to love of pleasure, that whenever he is enjoying something, he is "pained" for augmenting the enjoyment from that thing. (2) state of continual anxiety - to increase. corresponding to love of beneficial things, namely, money and possessions, he will "worry" always to increase his money  (3) "saddened and grieving" - to hoard in. corresponding to what he already possesses but which is spread out here and there and causes him mental distraction, he will be mourning to hoard it in. Likewise what his land produces and is outside in his field, he is saddened in that it is not assured from damages until he can bring it to his domain. All this is during the times of prosperity. But during bad times, he is very pained and disturbed,  
<b>because he is disgusted by it</b> -- corresponding to his taava (love of pleasure), whereby a person is disturbed and repulsed by the matter, either: (1) because of absence of extra things, and on this he wrote: "it is contrary to his desires", or (2) because of absence of necessary things, and this subdivides into two general categories: (a) "nature": That the matter disturbs his nature. For example, one who is of cold nature (i.e. he needs to stay cool), he is disturbed by bearing things which are too warm or vice versa. (b) "traits": That the matter disturbs his traits. For example, one who is hot-tempered is irritated by those who act brazenly against him. And the opposite, one who is of calm nature, is irritated by the company of the hot-tempered.
So too, the wise man said "all the days of the poor are evil": that one who is not a baal bitachon (firmly trusts in G-d), is always poor in his mind, as above. 


















 the intent of the verse is that even though both extremes are bad, because even excessive scattering (donating) is not proper, as the sages said in Ketuvot 50a, since sometimes one will become poor through this. Nevertheless, some do not become poor [by excessive donating], on the contrary he will increase from what he had, but "one that withholds more than is right" this leads only to poverty. 
<b>to also prepare provisions for his end, and needs for his appointed home</b> -- the word "provisions" applies to what a man will use on a journey, as written (in the exodus from Egypt) "nor had they prepared any provisions for themselves" (Shmos 12:39), or "Prepare provision for yourselves, [for in another three days you will cross this Jordan...]" (Joshua 1:11), and when the soul leaves this world until it reaches its place, it will need provisions, as Rabbi Ploni said (before dying) "the provisions are scanty and the road is long" (Kesuvos 67b). And when the soul arrives to its appointed place, it will be sustained there forever and ever with what it prepared, and on this he wrote "needs for his appointed home". 










He thinks "any preventing of attaining his desires is caused by them", or he thinks that even though they did not cause him to be prevented from attaining his desires, but nevertheless, since it is in their ability to assist him to attain his desires and they don't assist him - he will hate them. 


<b>he will despise others, slander them, curse them, and hate them</b> -- He specified four types of denigration corresponding to these four previous divisions. Corresponding to: (1) "any preventing of attaining his desires is caused by them", he wrote: "he will despise them". Corresponding to: (2) that they don't want to assist him in attaining his desires, he wrote: "slander them", since he is upset with them because of this and he speaks bad of them calling them mida sdom (cruel and apathetic), or the like. Corresponding to: (3) "if some harm comes to his money or his children, he will think they caused it", he wrote: "he will curse them".  Corresponding to: (4) that they don't want to save him from his troubles, he wrote "and hate them", since according to his view they hate him and rejoice on his troubles, therefore he also hates them. 














<b>he thinks of his death and the arrival of the day of ingathering</b> -- "thinks of his death", the intent is on the death of the body and the nullification of his [worldly] desires. Thinking of "the arrival of the day of ingathering", the intent is on the ingathering of the soul to its place. Both contemplations are necessary because in remembering the death of the body, he will be repulsed by its desires, while by remembering the ingathering of the soul, he will worry on his sins, which prevent the ascent of the soul to its place.

Chapter 6

<b>foolishness and error</b> -- Some of the matters he will bring demonstrate to the person that he is a complete fool, similar to one of the boorish people who have no human understanding. Other matters he will bring do not demonstrate his foolishness so much but rather show that he is mistaken, such as the fifth, sixth, and seventh.  

Afterwards, he wrote: "there is much to shame and rebuke..." corresponding to these two "foolishness and mistake", because a man is shamed when he is called a fool, and on the "mistake", he wrote "and rebuke", namely, to clarify his mistake to him. 




<b>who doubts the decree of the Creator</b> -- you are of those of little faith, who doubt the decree of the Creator, i.e. who doubt whether or not all of a man's guidance and needs are governed exclusively by the decree of the Creator. 








<b>no end by him</b> -- to the amount of his needs since he does not know how long he will live, and corresponding to the desire for luxuries, he wrote "no measure" since there is no measure for luxuries. 






This is because the intent in the word "return" is: the receiving of a favor that the benefactor receives in return from the one who he benefited. But for G-d, it is completely not applicable to render to Him any favor from His creations. Therefore, it cannot be considered a "return". 

<b>his days will have passed and his end will have come</b> -- two expressions corresponding to two categories of a person's death. One, that the number of days allotted to him from the time of his birth have passed, as is known, that every person has a fixed number of days allotted to him. Two, due to a heavenly decree because of some sin for which he incurred a death sentence. 















The latter two reasons do not need a proof [from scripture], because who is so foolish as to not know that He is living and among us, and that He has no trace of dishonesty or stinginess, ch'v. But on the first reason, perhaps a person will think "from where will G-d pay me, since He does not make coins?" On this he brought the verse "silver and gold is Mine", that nevertheless He has full capacity to give to whomever He wishes. 


<b>this demonstrates falsehood and foolishness</b> -- either he is mistaken in this, or he himself knows this and deceives with this excuse. 






 the hidden reward cannot be imagined by the human mind. All the more so, it cannot be described verbally.

Chapter 7









The degree of level of trust among people, namely, the degree of trust which people differ in is "according to the amount of knowledge of G-d, etc". 


















<b>He will give himself over to G-d</b> -- regarding G-d's guidance of all of his needs.
<b>surrender his body and soul over to His judgment</b> --  If some bad thing happens to him, he receives it and bears it with a good countenance. 



When he is in solitude, away from people, and nothing distracts his thoughts, he will greatly delight in this because then he can remember Him with a focused mind.

Fifth Treatise on Devotion

Introduction




when a man desires to embellish himself, namely, to appear good-looking to his colleagues in his service to G-d, even though his motive is good, nevertheless, over time, through this he will come to the trait of flattery, which means, that his motive in the service of G-d will be out of hypocrisy. The author calls hypocrisy with the term "flattery", because anything which is not "tocho kebaro" (inner matching exterior appearance) is called in hebrew "flattery".





Chapter 1



Chapter 2



<b>pillars of his service and the roots of his actions</b> -- Some of these 10 matters are like "pillars", namely, "foundations", which the building of the service stands on. While others are like "roots", which the trunk and the branches grow from, such as the second, ninth, and tenth. The others are like pillars which support the service so that it does not shift and crumble.

Chapter 3





<b>in order to appear important [literally: to arm oneself] in the eyes of others</b> -- from the term "armaments of war", i.e. like a warrior who girds weapons of war, that through them he appears honorable and important, and his awe is upon the weak. This is his intent, that through these deeds, he will be seen as important by other people.

Chapter 4

He does not understand His loftiness, BB'H, nor His good traits.

Chapter 5


<b>that people will watch out for them</b> -- from these examples, people will learn and acquire for themselves the trait of "zehirus"/watchfulness. 





<b>watching your steps to lead you astray</b> -- this is the correct text version. Literally each and every one of your steps, he lies in ambush to entice you after his will, namely that this particular step be with intent for something opposed to the will of G-d. 













<b>your faith and religion</b> -- "faith" corresponds to the duties of the heart, while "religion" corresponds to the duties of the limbs, which contain [physical] acts. 





Do not say that you are not free to fight with him due to being busy fighting with others, namely, human beings which harass you. Because his war is more necessary... Furthermore, if a man comes to damage you, certainly, he is not capable to damage you unless he was given permission through the decree of the Creator. Unlike the yetzer which does not need permission because he was created for this. 





















<b>the many bad urges, bad thoughts, and disgraceful incidents</b> -- "bad urges", refers to thoughts of sin. "bad thoughts" to stray from the good. "disgraceful incidents" - he is given permission to set up incidents on a man to steer him away from the service [of G-d]. 




<b>the soul cannot exist without a body</b> -- i.e. that the soul came to existence simultaneously with the coming into existence (formation) of the body, and that it cannot exist without the body. Not like our sages said on the verses in Bereishis 7:4 and 8:7 and the verse "Let the earth bring forth living creatures" (1:24) and the verse in Divrei Hayamim 4:23, and in many Midrashim that the souls preceded the world. 












<b>naturalists</b> -- (literally "men of descendants") Who believe that the creator fathered another divinity. You already know who these people are. Alternatively, the intent is to the scientists. 


<b>does not need His creations, and does not lack anything</b> -- He does not need nor lack anything, that would need to be completed through our service. He doubled the expression "does not need" and "does not lack" because it is impossible from both perspectives. If from the perspective that all of us are His creations, and since He created us from absolute non-existence, if so, we and everything we have, and everything that results from our power is all given to us from His hand and from His power it came to be... Therefore how is it possible to claim that He needs us? For this the author wrote "He does not need His creations". Secondly, besides that we are His creations, needs of any kind does not apply to Him because He lacks nothing. Corresponding to these two he wrote: "therefore your service to G-d has no reason and no purpose". 

<b>on the matter of prophecy</b> -- whether or not there is such a thing as prophecy. and the prophets" - even if there is prophecy, it is doubtful whether or not there are human beings, who are all of coarse physical bodies, that are suitable for the prophecy to settle on them.  
<b>the torah and the principles of its authenticity and necessity</b> -- the true principles which it depends on. 
<b>and necessity</b> -- if it is necessary from a logical perspective that the torah be given from G-d [to man], because the giving of the torah is something which is logically necessary. 
<b>sending of a prophet</b> -- it was necessary to send a [human] prophet, that through him the torah would be given to human beings. Likewise, the sending of the other prophets, each in his era, to strengthen it and safeguard it. 




<b>explanations of the oral torah regarding amount, kind, time, place, and other circumstances</b> -- As an example, "sexual relations" is among the rational matters since reason mandates that it is necessary for the survival of the human race. Likewise, promiscuity and excessiveness is evil and very damaging. However, it is not in man's power to determine the correct "quality", i.e. which woman is permitted and which is not. However we found in the tradition the boundaries, whether in "amount", namely the "ona" which the sages set for each [type of] person, and this also includes the "time", and likewise the "kind" which are the "sheniyot l'arayot" (secondary forbidden [incestual] relations not specified in the torah). The "place" here means in a modest place and to refrain from it b'achsanya or in a holy place or a place near holy books or tefilin. 


Behold, the torah punishes by death to one who rebels against the tradition. Therefore, it must be that it is primary and not a "higher measure of piety" [i.e. non-essential]. ...



To believe in astrological fate or that the world was abandoned to chance, that people are confused about these things as explained in the Moray Nevuchim and the book "Haemunos". 


There is little explanation of it in the torah, and the torah did not mention it much. And even this small amount is not clearly apparent, and is not revealed openly nor explicitly explained for all to see. This is what the author meant by "little apparentness in it". 

<b>(1) to preoccupy us in our secular interests - eating, drinking...etc, and to (2) derive enjoyment</b> -- he specified two evils. One, through being stuck in these things and wasting his time in them, he will be preoccupied and without any time for the service [of G-d]. On this, he wrote "to preoccupy us, etc". The second, deriving enjoyment from physical pleasures - they themselves destroy a man's heart, and expand his mind to kick (be ungrateful) like a wild cow. On this, he wrote: "to derive enjoyment". 
<b>And when we listen to him regarding eating</b> -- i.e. to have intent for enjoyment in the necessary eating, from this he will embellish to us the superfluous things.
<b>strive to live like them</b> -- in their great [desire of] heart. "adopt their practices" - to rule over the masses.
<b>go in their statutes</b> -- the pursuit of physical enjoyment is constant and habitual, a statute that cannot be broken. Like the necessities are for the masses. 
when the yetzer sees that we desire and want in this. He said "desire" which means "yearning" for them, before we attain them, and "willingness", i.e. delighting in them after attaining them. 
<b>Girdle your loins, bare your arms</b> -- i.e. tighten your belt... 
and roll up your sleeves so that the clothing does not encumber you in swift movements. It is a phrase of encouragement to move to action. 




















<b>rash/hasty proofs</b> -- which suddenly grab the heart of a man, and are impressed on his mind before he can calmly deliberate it. Like a man in a panic, who is frenzied and rushed.
For example, if we start with the premise that Reuven is taller than Shimon and Shimon is taller than Levi. Then the conclusion that necessarily follows is that Reuven is taller than Levi. However, it is possible that the premises are not true, that Reuven is not taller than Shimon or that Shimon is not taller than Levi, and the conclusions are automatically null and void. The second example, if we establish that Reuven loves Shimon and Shimon loves Levi, and we want to draw the conclusion that Reuven loves Levi. Even though the premises are true, the conclusion does not necessarily follow. 
that you are wise and know the ways of proofs, which ways they are headed, then automatically you will know how to guard yourself from their fallacies when you contemplate them and see that they do not tread on the path of truth. 




<b>his enticements on you will be increasingly stronger</b> -- this is referring to the simple enticements mentioned earlier (for enjoyments). And on his overpowering a man by arguments and proofs, he wrote: "and will overcome you more frequently". After he has habituated your mind with the arguments and proofs, they will be more prepared and readily available to invoke on you one after the other.  
<b>His ruling over you</b> -- he will rule over you to entice you to do disgraceful acts, and surround you with the hardship of the lusts of the world. 
<b>in your outer and inner life</b> -- i.e. in your actions and in your thoughts. 



<b>he will let up from you</b> -- he will let up on you and leave you a bit, since he no longer needs to strain himself on you because your intellect has become evil and stands in his place to entice you and help him.






<b>Hoy! They are wise in their eyes</b> -- the wise man said: He who thinks himself wise is a fool. Because one who is truly wise does not think of himself as a wise man.
<b>they have rejected the word of the L-ord; and what wisdom is in them?</b> -- from this verse one can recognize and test himself. If he senses that his wisdom has led him to evil, certainly it is not true wisdom. 
<b>For the ways of the L-ord are just...etc</b> -- Perhaps a man will think that he will not be punished for this since his wisdom has deceived him and he is unintentional in this. On this he answered that it is not so, because no one will err except he who seeks to err and desires in it so as be liberated through it (i.e. the true truth seeker will not err. But he who has ulterior motives will be attracted to the convenient lies of the yetzer), because the righteous will certainly walk in the ways of G-d while the transgressors themselves will stumble in them. On this the Talmud says (Bava Basra 14b): "Moshe wrote and he who wants to err will err". Specifically "he who wants", i.e. no one will err except he who wants to err and seeks excuses after it.


through this swaying away, a man is prepared to do all sin and iniquity whether inwardly or outwardly.










<b>nor to take counsel only with yourself</b> -- nor with other people of the same level as you who are also enticed by their yetzer lest they lead you astray. Take counsel on how to wage war with the yetzer and to avoid his traps. This is for steering from evil. 
<b>Do not reason on your own</b> -- on how to sustain the yoke of G-d's service . This is for doing good.
<b>Do not distrust your forefathers</b> -- that you inherited falsehood. 
<b>Do not reject their advice in what they taught you</b> -- in what they taught us as to how to wage war with the yetzer. These are the fences they instituted to distance from his traps.


You think that this thing is just, and it is possible that it truly is good in the beginning, but its end will be evil and bitter. Hence with your little yishuv daas (clear-headedness), you grasp its beginning but not its end.






<b>far from lusts</b> -- Since sometimes the stringency is a ploy of the yetzer in order to satisfy through this another desire such as the lust for honor and [to receive] praise for this, or the like. Therefore he said that one must examine himself in this if it is remote from his lusts.

It appears to us that the author's intent in this is that whoever performs his deeds only within the bounds of the torah is not fulfilling his duties. Rather one must be stringent and add to the obligation... And the verse which says 'without the true G-d', the intent is that he does not put to heart to fence himself [with stringencies] in order to not come to stumble in the mitzva itself. This is the intent of the "additional" [things]. If so, he is not mindful that G-d is described with the attribute "the G-d of truth". The intent of the word "truth" is eternity and permanence. Therefore the sages said: "the seal of the Holy One is truth" (Shabbat 55a), and just like He is permanent, so too His words are permanent. Likewise the blessing on the shema "He is permanent (kayam),etc. and His words are kayam (permanent/everlasting)". Understand this. 
<b>he who does no more than his duty is not doing his duty</b> -- i.e. the extra is not secondary. Rather it is primary for one who needs it, just like the duty itself. This is what the sages said (Yevamos 109b): "Whosoever says that he has only [an interest in the study of the] Torah, does not even have [reward for] torah [study]"... Nevertheless, one should not precede the extra to the duty itself because "these extra acts are not accepted until one first fulfills the obligatory duties".


















The matters of your benefit must come through human beings since a man is social by nature. You are also liable to be damaged by them if you are not loved and considered important in their eyes.
<b>endeavor in things that will please them</b> -- (1) that your deeds will please them, namely, some favor and benefit that you do to them. (2) And on self-embellishment before them without benefiting them he continued: "and that will find favor in their eyes".





Just like if one's enemies make peace with him, it is a sign that G-d is pleased with him, so too if the public loves him, without any exertion on his part, it is a sign for this. Hence, the intent of the sages teaching ("One who is pleasing to his fellow men, is pleasing to G-d") is only as a sign. And the sign is only valid if there is no exertion on his part. 


<b>And this is a clear and powerful proof that the Creator is pleased with him</b> -- because love of good simply because it is good, not because of any enjoyment or benefit received is something found only in men of quality. However, here, if the entire public praises and loves him, certainly, this is not a natural love and must be from [divine] providence.






All kindness that a man does to his Creator is insubstantial, like the flower of the field which is charming to the eye but has nothing substantial in itself.

In the previous case, he spoke of the yetzer's enticements to a man, that from today on, he will do his deeds with intent to receive benefit from human beings, and that it is sufficient what he did until now to have intent for the service of G-d. Now, he comes to entice him that he can continue to have intent for the service of G-d, only that he should reveal his deeds and not conceal them. Thus he will gain from this praise of people and it will not damage his service of G-d in the least.






<b>you have ruled over your inclination</b> -- forced yourself to steer from the traps of evil. "and overcome your base desires" - to sanctify yourself also with the permitted things, namely, the trait of chasidut (see the book Path of the Just). And since it requires great strengthening to distance from the permitted, he wrote "overcome".










<b>I will lose my good deeds in that I did not having intent to G-d</b> -- I will lose my deeds in the reward of the next world. Because any intent which strays a little bit to something other than G-d is necessarily a form of hypocrisy and ruins the reward, whether a little or a lot, even though his primary act was for the service of G-d.































The reason the yetzer is successful in his plan and is able to distract you is because while doing these things, namely, prayer or torah study, you were ready in body; i.e. you prepared only the limbs of your body but did not prepare for this your heart and mind. If you had mustered them for this completely, there would not have been any opening for the yetzer to enter in your heart/mind.












<b>(1) seek forgiveness....(2) And he pleas to G-d</b> -- it appears from the movement of his limbs that he is truly pleading but his heart and thoughts turn from Him. In both ways, his external is opposite his internal. From the first way, where he was seeking forgiveness for the past while [internally] preparing himself to sin in the future. From the second way, where he pleas and seeks some matter, but one who pleas must cleave his thoughts to the one he is pleading to and to find favor with him... and promises to be faithful.. but here his heart is not with G-d.










Since if you merely conceal them, perhaps they will ponder you and realize that you conceal your deeds. Then they will investigate and examine to know them. Therefore, you must be smart and show others the opposite of what is in your heart. Thus, they will think you are one of the simple people and will not ponder you at all. Then, you will be successful in concealing your deeds and will not become known.









<b>slowly without noticing, you will wind up losing even your faith</b> -- This is the way he snares people with his traps. After confusing you in the good, he will topple you into the light bad, and from the light bad to the heavy bad, and from the deeds to the faith, until he eventually brings you to kefira (denial of G-d). And since he comes slowly in stages, and especially since the initial enticement appeared good in your eyes, therefore you did not even notice your downfall.
<b>you have already helped my enemies</b> -- since in this enticement, the yetzer disguises and enclothes himself as if he is a loving friend, as if he is the good inclination, and that he is coming to help a man against the evil inclination. Therefore, a man should tell him: I recognize that you have not come to help me, but rather to help my enemy, the yetzer hara. You, like him, are waging war against me.









Even though the sages said: "do not do a mitzva in order to receive a reward" (Avos 1:3). However, [here] his intent is for reward which is acceptable to G-d, namely, that "a mitzva leads to another mitzva...[and the reward of a mitzva is a mitzva]" (Avos 4:2), or likewise the motive "[One thing I ask of the Lord]...to behold the pleasantness of the L-ord" (Tehilim 27:4) through this deed. Understand this.










<b>self-worship</b> -- You serve yourself since all of your aspirations are to benefit yourself. Behold you are both the worshipped and the worshipper. 


This is evident from "that you exert yourself in things that will bring you selfish pleasure and joy", "pleasure" in the hope for reward, and "joy" in being saved from punishment, 
and "that will repel from you worries and despairs", "worries and despairs" also corresponding to these two things.
<b>If it were not for your hopes for these</b> -- you revealed your attitude that were it not for the hopes of reward, you would not be zealous and would not see yourself under duty in this. Hence, you are a denier of the beneficence of G-d. 
In addition to this, you revealed your understanding that you don't know the greatness of G-d, and that it is fitting to serve Him, due to His power, etc.
<b>due to His greatness, infinite power, and the manifestations of His wisdom</b> -- the author included in this the three attributes (in the Amidah prayer) "hagadol, hagibor, vehanora" - on "hagadol" (the great), he wrote "due to his greatness". On "hagibor" (the mighty), he wrote "infinite power". On "hanora" (the awesome), he wrote "the manifestations of His wisdom", that when a man contemplates His wisdom (exhibited in nature), he is very amazed, and is in awe of Him, as it is written by Shlomo (Melachim 3:28) "and they held the king in awe, for they saw that the wisdom of G-d was in him".
<b>necessity</b> -- Whether a man is forced in his deeds, without any free will. According to this outlook, there is not one righteous person in the world, because the righteousness is not attributed to him. "righteousness" - Or he performs his deeds through his own desire and free will, and therefore "righteousness" can be attributed to him.
<b>He would force you and make you zealous in this</b> -- for some act of service which you want to refrain from doing, he will tell you that if the Creator wanted you to do this, he would force you to do it. And on some act of service which you do lazily and sluggishly, he will tell you that G-d would have made you zealous in it.
<b>How can you stand up against His decrees or defeat His judgments?</b> -- he specified two parts corresponding to things between man and G-d and things between man and his fellow man. Corresponding to sins between man and G-d, he wrote "against His decrees", i.e. G-d decreed and this thing came to be, therefore I was compelled to do the sin. Corresponding to sins between man and man, he wrote "defeat His judgments", that G-d sentenced that person to suffer on that matter through you. Therefore, you were forced to cause him pain.









If he does not succeed in inducing in you arrogance, he will try nevertheless to diminish your humility.

<b>by being disgusted by them</b> -- due to their little faith, "and despising them" - on their bad deeds. Both of these are in the heart. After this he will progress to the same two divisions verbally: "Recall their faults", corresponding to their bad deeds, and "publicize the wickedness in their hearts", corresponding to their little faith. And since the bad deeds reveal the wickedness in their heart, he specified that first. "shame them and rebuke them for it" - shame them generally by telling them "be ashamed of your evil ways". Afterwards, rebuke them in the details to explain to them logically the disgrace of their deeds.




























You are not capable of doing everything completely, since the goal is impossible to reach.




















that you rejoice and enjoy the sin, and delight, in the past, in your striving to attain it.


<b>If you sense his deception</b> -- in that he places worry and sadness in your heart, "and stay alert for his many traps" - that he traps you by placing joy in your heart when doing a sin.

<b>he will knock you down suddenly</b> -- from the good deeds.
<b>and empty his arrows on you</b> -- his arrows refers to bad deeds.

Chapter 6


According to the improvement of thoughts will be the improvement of conduct. Likewise, according to deterioration of thoughts will be the deterioration of deeds. 






Because the final reward is coming close to G-d, and likewise in this world, since G-d is far from the wicked. 





i.e. lest, G-d forbid, you become discouraged from the service due to seeing my words and how many mishaps it is liable to that need to be guarded from. On this, he countered - on the contrary, due to this you should cling to the service, because this is evidence of its great value, "Because, according to the value and importance of a matter..."

Sixth Treatise on Submission

Introduction





For servant hood and master hood are two opposites, and a man cannot be deemed a complete servant of G-d if he is not utterly removed from the trait of master hood. And this is accomplished only through submission since "submission alone is what separates a slave from the traits of master hood". 

i.e. besides that submission distances a man from arrogance as mentioned earlier, its nature is also to distance from "grandiose, presumption, etc." He specified six terms. Coveting is not a type of arrogance, even though it is an outgrowth of it. In addition to arrogance the sum totals seven. In truth, each one of these certainly has a specific instruction [to combat it]. These correspond to the seven traits which our sages counted that a man becomes proud of. Therefore, they said that these traits are good for the righteous because they don't become arrogant in them. Corresponding to these seven, Shlomo said seven "vanities" (Koheles 1:2) "Vanity of vanities, said Kohelet; vanity of vanities, all is vanity" [vanities plural counts as 2, hence 1+2+1+2+1].





Chapter 1

<b>lowliness</b> -- refers to one who is low from the beginning. "bowing down" refers to one who was erect from the beginning. Likewise, when the soul feels in itself that it raised and elevated itself a bit, it will hasten to bow and lower itself. 
<b>not thinking much of itself</b> -- is relative to others. Understand this. 



<b>soft tongue</b> -- he speaks soft words and supplications with every person. 
<b>humility at a time of anger</b> -- even when he gets angry, he does not become brazen faced. This indicates he has acquired it a kinyan atzmi (in his essence) since when he acts [with submission] at a time of non-anger, perhaps it is only incidentally by him, since even by arrogant people, sometimes one sees them acting humbly incidentally. 
<b>little exacting revenge</b> -- he said "little" even though it is proper for a man to completely avoid taking revenge as written: "Do not seek revenge" (Vayikra 19:18). Rather he said "little revenge" because of the example of the king that he brought, since certainly a king must show some revenge to instill fear, as Rabeinu Hakadosh exhorted us (Ketubot 103b) "cast bile...", only that he should be satisfied with little as in the story, that he had the whip brought to scare him which served as a "little revenge". 

<b>I would have exacted a severe revenge on you</b> -- i.e. it was proper to exact a severe revenge on you according to your evil deeds. However, I am refraining from this since I sense in myself great anger, and anger stems from arrogance. Therefore, I am abstaining from vengeance in order to break my anger and arrogance.

Chapter 2


He does not know and recognize his soul's esteem, which is greater in level than other creations. If he knew and recognized his soul's esteem, he would not submit and bear everything like now. Because since he regards himself as base, and his level is low in his eyes, he bears everything with a good countenance. He is like the peasant who bears the smoke of the stove which stings his eyes and does not wonder about this since he thinks little of himself and says to himself "why should a nobody like me care about things like this? Am I a prince or an important minister?"

 The patient bearing that one sees in them is due to spiritual poverty. That their soul deems itself lowly and of little worth. 

<b>therefore, it cannot raise itself</b> -- since they have no intelligence, they don't recognize their soul's worth. Therefore they cannot raise their heart. Hence, their humility is animal-like humility. 


<b>This elevation stems from having greater wisdom</b> -- this elevation and departure from associating with the previous things, the soul obligates itself to undertake due to its superior wisdom over them and superior quality of soul.
 <b>When submission and lowliness comes after this elevation - then it is a praiseworthy trait</b> -- "submission" to G-d and "lowliness" in bearing [things He decreed]. 





<b>since it does not apply to all human beings</b> -- because there are many human beings in the world who never need [favors of] other people. Afterwards, he wrote that even those human beings who do need other people, this need does not last all of their days, for "the prisoner...", and "the slave..", and "the lender...", all this was corresponding to what he said "at all times". Afterwards, "the student..", and "the poor man...", corresponding to what he said "in all places". 
<b>to submit to them, and to humble and lower themselves</b> -- "to submit" - to their command, to follow their discipline. "to humble themselves" - in heart. "lower themselves" - from the term "to bow" in practice, i.e. to give them honor.
these are the opposites of the seven terms of arrogance mentioned earlier [in the introduction]. 
<b>nearness to G-d...stand before Him...be accepted by G-d and be pleasing to Him</b> -- The intent of this three stage melitza (poetic phrase) is to allude to a peasant whose heart inspired him and he related to his friend saying: "aha my friend, how, how much my heart and soul longs and yearns to serve my king. Would that it were that he would allow me in the palace and that I could be among those who stand before him and minister unto him. But three obstacles prevent me. One, the road is exceedingly far away and unfamiliar to me. Two, even if G-d grants me and I will reach the palace courtyard, who knows if I will be accepted to be among those who stand before the king. Perhaps, they will immediately oust me forcefully and tell me that I am not fit and worthy for this. Three, even if perhaps I will be accepted and will stand to minister before him, how can I be sure that my service will be proper in his eyes and will accepted and pleasing before him?"<br>His friend answered: "I advise you, bow your ego, and lower your pride. Then everyone you will meet on the way will have compassion on you and will help you go from city to city until you reach the destination (royal city) you wish to go. When you get there, it will be noticeable from your face that your goal and intent is not out of lust for royal feasts or desire for dominion over others. The truth will lead for you the way, that your motive and desire is solely to minister your king. Certainly you will be found just and acceptable for this. Likewise, if your service is done with submission and humility, undoubtedly you will be found proper and pleasing in the eyes of the king." The analogy is clear.

Chapter 3



<b>And He submitted their heart with toil</b> -- i.e. from "toil" which means sufferings, their heart becomes humbled. 












 i.e. with the good itself that G-d has bestowed on him, he rebels against G-d, namely, with the physical limbs G-d granted him, the strength G-d gave him, the wealth G-d graced him with, and the like. 





He will regret that many of his days have already passed for nothing, without benefit. And also his life wasted away, i.e. his natural strength has weakened without attaining anything.

Chapter 4

<b>despised and disgraceful is he in his own eyes</b> -- all of that Psalm speaks of the conduct of a righteous man with other human beings, [such as:] "works righteousness, etc.", "who does not slander with his tongue, etc.", "nor does evil to his friend, etc." Behold the psalmist attributed everything to: "disgraceful is he in his own eyes". 


 i.e. I yearn that the righteous person will reprove me harshly and break the malice in my heart, and I will consider this a kindness. 
<b>When one is praised for his good qualities, it is his duty to submit himself</b> -- so that his spirit will not become proud, in that other human being are praising him. 


<b>to chasten him and rebuke him</b> -- To "chasten him" on things he knows are bad. To "rebuke him" to his face on things which he judges himself favorably. He wrote "to chasten him and rebuke him" corresponding to two aspects. One, so that he suffers from this, for the disgrace from other human beings is also considered sufferings (which atone). The second aspect "to rebuke him", i.e. to clarify to him through human beings that what it is reprehensible, and that perhaps he was mistaken until now and thought there was nothing wrong with it. 


that the Creator intends in this to bestow good to him. 
A "trial" in financial matters consists either of bearing a large monetary loss for the Creator, or it takes the form of abstaining from a large profit. For this, the author used a double expression. 
Also in this, there are two aspects. One, the wealth becomes a means of exacting retribution from him for his sin, as the sages said regarding one who incurred a [divine] decree of death (Midrash Koheles Raba 5:18) - that he becomes arrested by the government or a bandit murders him, and G-d sends him wealth so that he will be murdered to take his money. Two, sometimes a man mortally stumbles because of his wealth such as Korach who become proud of his wealth and sinned.  













i.e. In truth, G-d's intent is for exacting retribution. Only that it appears to the eye as a benefit.

Chapter 5


































<b>and the L-ord alone shall be exalted on that day</b> -- Behold the verse ties the exaltedness of G-d to the lowliness of man, implying that pride of man is contrary to His greatness, and it is considered loathsome by Him.

Chapter 6

<b>the infinite greatness of the Creator and His exalted omnipotence and supreme wisdom</b> -- these three things correspond to the three attributes ascribed to the Creator (in the Amida prayer), namely "HaGadol" (the great), "HaGibor" (mighty), "veHaNora" (the awesome). Hence, "the infinite greatness" corresponds to "HaGadol", "exalted might" corresponds to "HaGibor", and "supreme wisdom" corresponds to "HaNora", as written by Shlomo (Kings 3:28): "and they held the king in awe: for they saw that the wisdom of G-d was in him".  











 i.e. certainly it is not reasonable to hold that speaking negatively about an animal's carcass is reprehensible, since the carcass has no perception and hence no pain from this. Rather, it was "to not habituate their tongues...". And likewise, for the opposite, when speaking of its positive aspects. 


<b>You love all devouring words</b> -- this expression teaches that the matter [of speaking badly] becomes an acquired temperament - to love all corrupt speech, and the acquisition occurs through habit.  
<b>What does it give to you</b> -- since there is no benefit whatsoever from this, therefore it must be occurring only through habit. 










In the previous section, he wrote from the aspect of raising and lifting oneself to a higher level than the one he is currently in. Here, he is writing from the aspect of mourning for his shortcomings and beseeching help from the Creator. 










Earlier in the psalm, King David wrote: "my soul clings unto the dust...", "my soul melts away for heaviness..", "remove from me the way of falsehood...", i.e. the way of physical lusts, and after he said all of these things and curtailed his desires, he then said that through this his heart will be free to "run the way of your commandments"

Chapter 7







<b>return it to me, or throw it back into my face</b> -- When a gift sent to a king is not accepted by the king, he returns it to the sender, and perhaps in his anger towards him, he may even throw it to his face."

Chapter 8






 One cannot truly ascribe any [extra] piety to a believing Jew before he first discharges his basic duty, i.e. it is incorrect to ascribe to him any extra measure [of piety] whatsoever before he first discharges his obligation in the obligatory duty. 
Because if he does not have a strong mental picture of his servanthood fixed in his mind, why would he obligate himself in the service? 

 i.e. by habituating himself in submission and lowliness, etc. And since there is no extra piety before discharging his primary duty, and the discharging of the primary duty depends on picturing slavehood on himself (that he pictures that he is a servant of G-d), and slavehood depends on submission, if so, behold, submission precedes all good qualities, and all of them are secondary and stem from it. He specified three terms "submit himself", "humble himself", and "lower himself". "Submit himself" due to G-d's greatness, "humble himself" due to G-d's benefits, both are in the heart, while "lower himself" is in action. 


 since they have submitted themselves, I will not destroy them because submission is the beginning of repentance, and the beginning is half of the whole, and certainly they will complete their repentance.

Chapter 9











<b>This will cause him to look down on others</b> -- due to their little wisdom "and despise them", due to their deeds which he deems reprehensible. These two are in the heart. And afterwards, "and speak badly of them" which is verbally.

Chapter 10


<b>peace of mind and minimize his anxiety</b> -- peace of mind due to not desiring more than he attained and "minimal anxiety" from losing what he has because even if he loses some, he will be satisfied with the remainder. 














<b>Plea to Him for it, in order that you be drawn closer to Him, and attain His favor</b> -- ask the virtue of submission from the Creator, and your intent should be to attain it in order that through it you will draw closer to the Creator and will attain His favor.  

<b>be on guard against the imaginations of your heart</b> -- because if a man lets loose the imaginations of his heart, automatically the evil inclination will entice him to pride and haughtiness. 


<b>your longing for exalted spiritual levels</b> -- certainly it is in the nature of man to long and yearn to attain exalted spiritual levels.

Seventh Treatise on Repentance

Introduction




the soul and the body are the basis of his composition, and they are diametrically different because the soul tends towards the spiritual while the body tends to the physical.





Chapter 1


<b>after he went out of it</b> -- out of the good. "and transgressed against it" - committed the bad. 
<b>and to restore what he lost in it</b> -- the mitzvot that were in his power to do

Chapter 2




Behold they regretted temporarily and prayed to be saved, but G-d scorns them for this in saying "Has this house... become a cave of thieves in your eyes?". The intent is that the thieves are bandits who hold up travelers on the road. They stay in a concealed cave and from there run and plunder travelers. But when they sense a large crowd approaching them (to arrest them), and from far they sense that people are coming and searching for them - then they panic and flee swiftly to their hiding place. When they reach the cave and saved their necks, and call out "we are saved". Then most of them regret their deeds in seeing how close they are to mortal danger. But afterwards after some time has passed, when their hearts' agitation and arousal has calmed down, they return to their villainous work. And all their days are back and forth. 



i.e. that he is assured that he will not return to his folly under any circumstances, namely, after he destroyed the remnants of his abominations and no trace of them remains.

Chapter 3












<b>the remedy for his illness and the road to healing</b> -- Repentance is the remedy for the illnesses of the soul and it is the "road" which leads to "healing" from his evil deeds, i.e. to remove the acquired evil, which he acquired in his nature through habitual practice - namely, the longing to do evil, - that he will no longer do evil deeds in the future. These two expressions correspond to regret and abandonment of the evil deed. Understand this.

Chapter 4



Chapter 5

i.e. besides fear of punishment, through reflecting in his heart on G-d's greatness - he will regret. This is yirat haromemut [fear of G-d's greatness.] 





















<b>(1) return stolen things, (2) refrain from sin, and (3) from doing harm to any human being</b> -- he specified three expressions corresponding to the teaching in the talmud (Bava Basra 165a) "most are guilty of theft, few in forbidden relations, and all in evil speech", the latter's intent is solely to harm since there is no benefit. 


<b>Is this how you repay the L-ord</b> -- corresponding to reflecting on His greatness, "you disgraceful, unwise people", corresponding to rebuking and shaming oneself, "is He not your Father, your Master? He has made you" to clarify the matter in the way of debating.
<b>Will you not fear Me?</b> -- also corresponds to reflecting on His greatness.

Chapter 6




















Here the author does not use the term "success", which refers to being spared from punishment, since behold he was already inflicted with punishment, he suffered, and was purged of his sin. For this the author substituted the term "success" with "return", which means that he heals from the wounds of his punishment and recovers to his former state.  
 the other penitents, have their repentance accepted immediately, when they start to repent, unlike this penitent who is not accepted and pardoned until he fulfills all the conditions of repentance, and then he will be accepted by the blessed Creator.)

Chapter 7




Even though the sin itself is small, nevertheless, the disregard of the Creator's honor which it demonstrates is big.

Chapter 8








<b>pride and flattery</b> -- that he becomes proud of his deeds, even though in the beginning he did them l'shem shamayim (wholeheartedly to G-d). Through this he will come to the trait of flattery, to do it from the beginning hypocritically - to appear honorable and important in the hearts of those who see him. After this, he will love and endeavor that others praise him in speech.

Chapter 9












<b>if he lives long enough</b> -- i.e. to not procrastinate his repentance thinking he still has much time to live, since behold, the repentance needs a long time, therefore how can he push it off?

Chapter 10














































Just like regarding the previous analogy which you heard from someone else regarding a person who "visits a village and announces, etc.", that certainly it is proper that you would need to ready yourself and prepare provisions, so too let it be clear to you through that which you see with your own eyes, that "death consumes etc".

Eighth Treatise on Examining the Soul

Introduction







Chapter 1







<b>(on the verse "None returns it to heart, neither is there knowledge nor understanding")</b> -- At first one must recall and remember in his heart all the matters that are forgotten from him, as if he recalls and returns a person who left him, and after this one needs knowledge and understanding to do the spiritual accounting with his nefesh but he did not look at his matters nor account with his nefesh.

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



The phrase "emergence from non-existence to existence" refers to the formation of the drop (of semen) from blood which itself was formed from food. And it was still just a putrid drop, without human form, and afterwards its development and formation in the womb into human form. And still his existence was as nothing, removed from all assemblies, hidden from all eyes, until he was born and came into humanity - this is what he meant by "from nothing to something".  




















The term "good" refers to benefiting others... Among the traits in man some are of the class: "benevolence" such as generosity. Some are of the class "noble" such as being content with little and some are of the class "honorable", such as humility, since "who is honorable..." (Avos 4:1). I have given one example of each type from which you can extrapolate the rest. 















He wants that his soul be at rest and tranquility not busy, toiling to investigate and grasp the depth of its matter. 









 The double expression (faultiness and lowliness): One, for being lazy in the study of the torah. Two, for not being lazy in the letter of a flesh and blood king. This is like what the prophet said (Yirmiya 2:13): "For My people have committed two evils; they have forsaken Me, the spring of living waters, to dig for themselves cisterns, broken cisterns that do not hold water", and likewise for the following story. 



















































How can we want that our conduct towards G-d be in a manner that we would not be happy with if our colleagues conducted themselves towards us like this? And even if it is possible to say an excuse on our friends, that their heart is not sincere towards us because they do not know if our heart is also sincere towards them, and certainly if our hearts is in truth not sincere with them. And even so, we become angry with them for this, this is what he meant by "despite their ignorance, etc". All the more so, if we conduct ourselves with G-d like this. 












All this is due to his great desire that he wishes and hopes that the king will realize his good heart and wholeheartedness towards him. 

















The mind does not have the power to stand on one position and meditate on some thing and this is due to the great swiftness of thoughts and ideas which constantly pass in a man's heart one after the other. 
Through the words, it becomes easier for a man to have intent, since the words arouse the intent, and the intent follows them...and since our primary purpose for uttering the words is to arouse the heart, therefore we find that the heart is the main purpose. 














The beginning is the root of every act, therefore the wise man said: "the beginning is half of the whole". 

















He used the term "returns", since it is impossible to tell a person to think on this always without any interruption, since many thoughts need to pass through one's mind for torah matters, prayer, business matters, rather the intent is that one should put this to mind only from time to time, that this thought be with him leaving and returning always. 


If until now his service was in sadness...from now on, it will be with joy, and if until now he was always afraid of stumbling in the trap of sin, from now on he will be assured of not sinning again.  







Then he will not know what debts other people owe him and what debts he owes other people, like the common way of all business dealers, who are attached and entangled with each other.
















































Even though one should not degrade him so much for this ugly deed, since he has a valid, obligatory excuse, namely, to "satisfy his soul when he is starving", even so, if he is caught, he will pay sevenfold - behold we see from here that an excuse does not save a person from punishment. 































We busy ourselves with saving our bodies from ailments and maladies while forgetting to heal the ailments of our souls. The author specified three points (1) "spiritual ailments" corresponding to faith and character traits, (2) "our evil inclination" corresponding to the desire for bad things, through the enticements of the yetzer, and (3) afterwards said that even without the empowering of the yetzer, human nature tends towards the "base desires", and on the base desires that a person has pleasure in and rejoices in... 
... he later says "And to this drunkenness...", since wine arouses enjoyment and rejoicing in a man's heart. 










The analogy is that a man must fulfill his debts in the service of G-d while he is still alive, and since his lifespan is unknown, it is like a debt without a fixed time of repayment.






He who pictures in his imagination and thinks always on death - we are certain that this man rectified himself. 














since one may divulge his private dealings with them and afterwards they will be able to use the information to damage his money or talk to others of his faults which he revealed to them. 

Through his enjoyment of their company, he will crave to acquire a name among them, and this will bring him to try to appear pleasing to them in his deeds. 




If you ask, on the contrary, this very reason obligates us to join their company and to put an eye on their deeds in order to know their faults and rebuke them, which would be impossible if one kept a distance from them and remained ignorant of their deeds, because then one would not be able to perform the mitzva of rebuke. On this he said, this is incorrect since either way - if they will heed his words and he can effectively rebuke them, even if he does not know the details of their misdeeds he can speak general public words of mussar, thereby fulfilling the mitzva of rebuke. And this is what he meant by "rebuke the wicked in any event", i.e. even without knowing anything. And don't say "how can I rebuke without knowing anything? Maybe it is for nothing?" On this he added that rebuking the masses is needed at all times since "the common people are not free from shortcomings". 




























































 <b>they are fitting for him</b> -- refers to refraining from doing good, that just like he strays from His service, so too it is fitting that G-d removes His providence and protection from him, and he winds up fitting and liable to all troubles and damages, like a target to an arrow. And for not refraining from evil and actually sinning, he wrote "and he deserves them", that he deserves all these things due to his sins, unlike for refraining from good which the term "deserve" is not correct since punishment is not meted out for positive commandments (Menachos 41a). 




















































To consider and see to it, that one loves and is joyous with what would bring them good in these matters, that one yearns that they will attain good in these things, just like one would love and wish and yearn that one attains these good things for himself. 























strive not to anger any person, so that many will be your friends, but even so, do not reveal your secrets except to one in a thousand which you have tested and verified that he is a faithful friend. 

















Do not think that I was advising you to imagine something false, because in truth it is indeed so, that the fool is like a blind man.   






















A little foolishness is heavier than, and outweighs all of the wisdom and honor and nullifies them.






















 He used the term "beginning" regarding a test only, since for the suffering which comes from a sin, man is the one who starts it, but that which comes as a test - G-d is the initiator.
He used the two terms "test" and "trial" since that which comes to purge his traits and humble his heart is called a "test", while that which comes to demonstrate his virtue and love of G-d is called a "trial".







That which you considered yourself a Baal Bitachon (one who places his trust in G-d) during the good times is worth nothing, but now when your circumstances change reflect on the above analogy.



























And since all the strangers help each other, certainly they will attain the collective benefit.

Chapter 4



That the soul yearns after for and accepts to undertake them on itself. This depends on its understanding of them, and according to the amount of understanding will be the corresponding yearning.

Chapter 5


Awe refers to something far away, while fear refers to something closeby. So too picturing G-d's loftiness, according to how distant it is from our ability to understand Him brings "awe". While picturing the verse "the entire world is full of His glory", and the nearness of His providence on us brings "fear". 
You should know that in truth, a small act from you, He considers it as alot. But from your perspective it should be the opposite - that even a big deed should not be big in your eyes, even if it is done for His Name, without any blemish or outside interest. 
Since all of the good deeds do not add any benefit whatsoever to Him. 

Chapter 6








<b>without effort</b> -- refers to the duties of the heart, that it won't be for him an effort and an exertion on the heart, while "without toil" refers to the duties of the limbs, because an act which causes sadness is called "toil" (amal), as written (Tehilim 73:16) "it is a toil in my eyes"

Ninth Treatise on Abstinence

Introduction







Chapter 1



 the author has specified two expressions corresponding to two things which cover and hide from a man the true nature of a thing until he brings himself to contemplate on it: The first: the veil of the physical which obstructs the clear thinking of the soul until he willfully contemplates and reviews over and over in his thoughts. This is the meaning of: 'the cloak is removed'. Because the physical is like a thick garment, a fur cloak which conceals the light of the soul, as written "You have clothed me in skin and flesh" (Iyov 10:11). The second: Pursuing unnecessary enjoyments, which is like a tight seal, which shuts and locks one away from reaching the benefits of abstinence. On this he said: 'the seal is broken'. And corresponding to both he then said 'its hidden matter will appear, and its purpose will be revealed' - which means that the true purpose and goal of abstinence will be revealed to him.

Chapter 2















 The worldly enjoyments which storm up a person's heart are like a stormy sea, while the worries and pains that result from excessive indulgence are like waves of the sea. 







their outlook is confused, what they see as good is bad and vice versa, as in "Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that change darkness into light, and light into darkness" Yeshaya 5:18). 




















Sometimes, they befriend each other to help each other attain more, sometimes they get angry with each other, and afterwards make amends - everything according to what appears to them will be beneficial in attaining more.
 <b>bellies as their god</b> -- the main purpose of creation is for man to serve his Creator, and to put his heart and all of his aspirations to this always, as written: "all my aspirations are in You" (Tehilim 87:7). But instead they worship their bellies and put all of their thoughts and aspirations to it.

Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5























One does not need for his work any intermediary, i.e. any tool, or other thing for doing the sin. For example, in eating prohibited food, the food is the intermediary, or for prohibited relations, that woman is the intermediary, and perhaps he will not have the opportunity so quickly for that food or that woman, unlike the tongue which does not need anything to sin. 




















when you abandon one of them, behold, all of them will be annulled.

Chapter 6



Chapter 7










































































<b>regret...worry</b> -- when the wicked person sees there (in the afterlife) how much good he lost, he regrets a tremendous regret, and on his worry and pain in paying the price for his sins, he wrote: "and the worry which will never end", because this is a crookedness which he can no longer straighten out there, and a loss which he can no longer recover.

Tenth Treatise on Devotion to God

Introduction







Chapter 1





















<b>despise the body and its lusts</b> -- either due to the baseness of the physical lusts or due to the pettiness of the body, that it is not worthwhile to expend effort for it and fulfill its lusts.

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4




Since human nature is to guard one's life, which is the opposite of losing it. Hence, when one's soul offers to give up her life for the Creator, the human nature stands opposite it since this runs contrary to it. 





since it is difficult on the nature of a man to reach this level without divine help, and through coming to purify oneself on his own by reaching the first level, G-d will help him to reach this second level...and when exerting to reach the first level, one should have intent to not remain there and be satisfied with it, but rather he should have intent that through it, G-d will help him to reach the second level, which is that G-d's will is more primary to you [than your own will], and that you are more joyful in fulfilling it, than you are joyful in fulfilling your own will.