For the Perplexed of the Generation
לנבוכי הדור
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/For_the_Perplexed_of_the_Generation
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

For the Perplexed of the Generation



Chapter 1

The fact that man is created “in the image of God” is the basis of the Torah. The main character of “the image", is the complete freedom that we find in man by virtue of which he possess free will. And if there were no free will, there would be no place for Torah, as Maimonides writes in The Laws of Repentance. If so, then free will is the basis of the Torah from a practical perspective. If so, then the knowledge that man is "made in the image of God" comes to teach; that the complete perfect freedom will must exist in the true and perfect Being, may His name be blessed (Hashem), This is the intellectual basis of the entire Torah upon which all actions rest.
A person whose heart is truly a human heart and who understands the glory of freedom, who sees with his mind’s eye the entire system of the human progress [toward] perfection  is actually only in order that a person should achieve complete freedom, will not find in himself any doubt that it is completely impossible that this supreme aspect of perfection [i.e., the progress toward perfection] could be missing from [only] One Whose existence is necessary, though obliged by the conditions of obligatory perfection.
This is the depth of the truth in the Torah and its teachings, that everything is attributed to the Will of God. And one who walks in the way of God draws out that Divine favor.  It is not like the way of philosophy, which uncovers deterministic laws throughout entirety of existence, and desires to attribute some aspect of constraint on God, may He be blessed. By doing this they take away the luster of the world and its glory.
It is possible understanding the ascribing of all actions to the Will of God in two ways, one superior to the other. The first way is the viewpoint [that God] is necessary, that without [God], there is no place for any true ethical perfection. The second way of understanding that ascription is that it is a mere, refined viewpoint, without which an ethical world remains possible.
Maimonides already wrote that the reason that the [concept of the] eternity of matter is in opposition to the entire Torah is not merely because it goes against the teaching of Scripture. If the entire focus of the Torah could co-exist with the notion of the eternity of matter, it would have been possible to reinterpret the verses by way of imagery, just like we have done with the anthropomorphism apparent in the text of the Torah taken literally, especially if there were some compelling proof . However, the fundamental idea that contradicts the whole Torah is that the eternity of matter is connected to determinism, and with determinism, there is no place for [Divine] omnipotence, nor for miracles, nor for reward and punishment.
However, all of this only follows from the narrow concept of eternity of matter that was held by Aristotle - that the world and everything in it that we see before us has always existed, has not deviated and will not deviate from its nature, all as predetermined by the Supreme Intellect. However, according to new research, it is well-known that it is foolishness to say that the world, with everything in it, has been this way forever. The changes that have taken place in Creation are tremendous.
With this, we are able to expand the notion of the eternity of matter.  We can say that the Divine Intellect compels spiritual and physical existence, with all of their components, and all of their details, no matter how close or distant they are, to bring the entirety of existence, natural, emotional, and intellectual, including human intellect and will, with all of man's ideas, traits, and tendencies, to the ultimate perfection. Now since for this perfected state to obtain, there would have to be some influence from the Divine Intellect, a divine light of prophecy, and orderly workings of Providence, [such "that He pays a man according to his actions, and provides for him according to his conduct” (Job 34:11)] and an orderly move toward perfection, as divinely arranged, through one nation, which is most prepared [for this mission], and to draw along with it many and varying circumstances which, together, will all act upon that nation such that they manifest the proper relationship to all of humanity and reality.  As a result of this, Higher Intellect would require a notion of reward and punishment, which perfects the human spirit, and as well as all of those things that strengthen or weaken the spirit of this nation.
With this [conceptual] expansion, nothing in the notion of the eternity of matter contradicts the Torah. Nevertheless, the depth of intellectual perfection requires us to ascribe everything to [Divine] free will, for it is impossible that the loftiest aspect of the notion of perfection, graspable to anyone of sound mind who [attempts to] grasp it, should missing from the Truly Perfect One, whose necessary perfection necessitates His Being. The necessity of [God's] perfection is the same as the necessity of His existence, and from Whom emanates all perfection and all existence.
Know, that even the foundation of prayer and all of its details, such as the precedence of one prayer over another, and the added importance of the prayers of the righteous, do not require negate the concept of determinism, when taken in its full breadth.  That is, we would say that the Divine Intellect, (or, “God, may He be blessed”, as you wish), would necessitate, from the standpoint of its perfect existence, that part of the ongoing perfection of all existence would be the ongoing perfection of the human soul, which, with all of its freedom, would actively yearn with all of its strength only for that which is good and upright. Therefore, it is impossible that all of the means that perfect toward this goal would not be ready and prepared. Therefore, causation is composed in such a manner, that prayer which takes part in refining the spirit, should yield fruit. Now, since the refinement of the spirit is that it yearn for perfection with all the heart and all the soul, and since prayer does have affect - and the prayer of upright even more powerfully draws souls toward the good and the upright - therefore, the Divine Wisdom would require that this dispensation exist with all of its details, down to the very subtlest.
Indeed, one who views in truth the greatness of perfection will recognize that it is appropriate that perfect free will should exist most appropriately in the true, perfect One. Then, his prayer will be a most natural function, and with the knowledge that all of the details that are changing are not part of God per se, but rather they are related to [His] ever-changing creation, [such a person] will  know how to draw forth favor from God, and walk in His paths wholeheartedly, and the qualities of trust and faithful love of God will be drawn forth from the nature of the pure soul, prepared to shine forth with the light of truth.

Chapter 2

When the medieval sages such as Rabbi Saadia Gaon and Maimonides saw an increase of heretical books in the world, and that intellectual storms and mistaken ideas about the roots of Torah were being placed in people's hearts, they made great efforts to take the perplexed out of their perplexity. Thus, they straightened out the path for the people of their generation.  They taught people that it is impossible for the products of true reasoning to contradict the Torah, God forbid - neither its roots or any of its teachings. Rather, sometimes we become wiser through [employing] the tools of research, and comprehend the depth of the Torah. It should be counted for us for righteousness that we merit [thereby] comprehending a point of truth in the understanding of the Torah.
Behold, from the time of the medieval sages until our generation, ideas have proliferated, and, expanding, these new ideas have sometimes encroached upon the estate of our faith. For those who do not explore the depths of the Torah, there is now more room for newly perplexities, for which the original resolutions [of the medieval sages] are insufficient, because in those days the cause that bring about new perplexities were not yet known.
Therefore, it is the obligation of the true sages of our generation to follow in the footsteps of our medieval rabbis to look after our perplexed people and to broaden their knowledge of the intellectual disciplines, according to the newest researches. They must show them how all truths must be viewed from the perspective  of Torah. Without a doubt, everyone involved in this, applying mind with a pure heart, will be successful. The spirit of God that chose the Torah to be the light unto the world, will teach them them to comprehend each matters, and establish it on it true basis.
And there is so much work to be done! For, not only does one need to understand all the new matters so as to influence the people of our generation - especially the young people who have turned to the sciences - so that they do not remain perplexed, by making known to them the depths of the roots of the Torah in their purity, which is above anything that could cause contradiction or diminish its value. But more than that, much work is needed to inculcate and recall the words of wisdom, regarding instilling true faith in the hearts [of people], which were said up to now by our medieval teachers, such as Rabbi Saadia Gaon, Maimonides, the Kuzari, etc. Since, sometimes there are matters in their words that cannot be said in light of the condition of modern scholarly research, a shallow individual may come to think that because one non-essential detail of their words is no longer true, we can no longer rely on the essential matters, [which in fact] are deeply rooted in truth and will persist forever.
Therefore, we must bring together in a new integration all the ways of teaching the refining of [tradition beliefs and] opinions, and how they are consistent with the clarifications and investigations that use the ways of research of our times, so that our generation will understand how to extricate itself from any perplexity. Then they will be wholehearted in faith in God's perfect Torah while lending support to all the ways of new sciences in all of their details.

Chapter 3

In our generation, when ideas have become exceedingly entangled, and philosophy in general has gone down in esteem for many people, the way of healing the hearts of the perplexed does not come primarily from explaining abstract axioms and very lofty matters of wisdom. Rather, we need make our primary focus a matter which is eternal and which no person who has any human traits can deny: ethics and justice.
Ethics and justice are the depth of wisdom and its foundation. Only through them can we engage all people, for there is no person who obligated who isn't obligated to give morality and justice their due.  Therefore, as a gateway for entering Torah observance and fear of God, it is incumbent upon us to explain all obligations of the Torah in their entirety, whether they are obligations of the limbs  or obligations of the heart,  according to the axioms of ethics and justice. And towards this explanation, it would be very helpful to contemplate the reasons for the commandments, and, specifically, the national aspect of them.
When a person is perfected through keeping the Torah according to the recognition of the demands of natural morality, then that person will proceed from height to height, until he also understands the purity of loving and fearing G0d. However, in order to leave room for justice and morality to motivate all the members of our people to return in complete repentance to the Torah and God and to the perfection of their adherence to our covenant with God, we need to remove the trip-stones from the path of natural inquiry, which might present themselves as portrayals of natural morality [impeding] alignment with ways of the Torah. This [can be achieved] by clarifying well those concepts which, because of an imperfect understanding of Torah, seemingly contradict natural morality , just as our medieval sages strove to make the philosophy of the time consistent with Torah, to the degree possible, regarding such issues as the [apparent] corporeality [of God] and [whether He is subject to] being acted upon. 
Thus, expansion of the reasons for Torah and the commandments, and broadening and correlating the ways natural ethics in accordance with Torah teachings, is the essential service we need to do for our generation; we must write the books which can bring about the rectification of the generation.

Chapter 4

There are things that it would have been appropriate not to discuss them, because they are among the mysteries of the world, and when small minds see them in books and do not understand them to their depths, they end up corrupting their ethics and beliefs. However, since in our generation many writers have thrown off this ethical yoke, and have spoken derisively about matters that are beyond them, it is incumbent upon us to explain, according to the truth of the Torah, those principle causes that bring shallow people to breach the fences of the world, and to point out their error - though it is only [this] necessity which compels us to explain things that would have been better to hide and leave only for the wise who understand from their own knowledge.
The big questions regarding Creation versus the eternity of matter and all the theological questions related to them have been reawakened in our time. The stance of research has begun to side with a view that at first glance seems to be against the foundations of our beliefs. It is clearly understood that even though those modes of research are not at all proven, and are really just speculations, nevertheless, these theories are enough to rob the faith from hearts of men who have not yet prepared themselves in any way to acquired knowledge of and familiarity with of [religious] faith.  Now, seeing that a person who truly looks deeply will understand that even according to these new speculations, there is nothing that blemishes the foundations of our faith, but instead, that through them, he can renew many deep ideas, which, themselves, are not really new, therefore I think that by explaining these things many hearts may be calmed from their spiritual storms.
The [notion of the] eternity of the matter, in the crass form [propounded by] the ancient philosophers] was a stumbling block to the faith of Israel. This idea posited that the world with all its creatures is now how it always was, it has never changed and will never change. With this theory there cannot be any sign, wonder, or change, since all the laws of nature are necessary ones. Therefore, Maimonides explained at length that Aristotle had no proven foundation for his notion, and that since there is doubt, we can return to our tradition, and it is better for us to be students of Moses and Abraham - especially since the concept of creation fits better with the ways of ethics and the paths of righteousness, which [itself] is indication and proof of the truth of the entire idea.
However, the idea of eternity in this form has already passed and been nullified from the world. Those who engage in the latest research see eye to eye with us regarding evolution and the changing forms of all of creation, to the extent that if someone were to come today and claim that the world, with its lifeforms, and man had been this way since the beginning of time, he would appear as a lost soul and a fool, an outcast of society.
The newest speculations say that we see before us worlds which are continually developing, from the chaos of the ether, until they arrive at their full development and perfection. And there is no way for us to turn aside this claim our world also behaved like this, for there is no room in logic and experience to say that the world was created in its fullness all at once, or that it was always like this.
The Kuzari says [the claim that] matter is eternal does not damage our fundamental beliefs, because the Torah only deals with the imparting of form to matter - but this is not the opinion of a number of the sages of Israel.
An evolution that happens extremely gradually over billions of years, that is what causes the trembling of hearts of the shallow-minded. They think that [such a notion of] evolution gives room to deny the Living God, but they are very mistaken. Knowledge of God is built only on the knowledge of unity. When we take a look at the great creation, how it is laid out with such a wisdom,n orderly wisdom, and how all the ways of life in body, spirit, and intellect, that everything is integrated into a single system, behold we see the great spirit that is here, bringing life and giving a place for everything.  If the ways of wisdom obligate us to believe that all this comes about by means of an evolution of myriads upon myriads of years, we should be even more awed at how great and exalted the Living Eternal One is, for whom those myriads of ceaseless years which bring about some desired result are like nothing, a mere moment.
Free will versus determinism when it comes to God is something that wise men of all generations have wrestled with. At first glance it seems that if we accept determinism, there would be no room for Torah and the commandments. Indeed, speculation, according to the latest research, lean towards determinism. However, one should know that determinism only contradicts the Torah when it is limited to the mechanical laws of nature. But when the idea of complete unity expands—that all the rules of righteousness and wickedness, ethics and corruption, and all the things which follow from them which improve the ethical state of man, are also part of the whole of reality, and are also established through that same power of the steadfast, universal laws of the fundamentals of existence —then we will understand well that we can attribute neither will nor compulsion to the True Existence, the Living Eternal One, for He is beyond those limitations. Indeed, we can [only] say that He exists, is. Now since the laws of morality also have a basis in reality, and since the laws of morality make many demand which would be impossible to resolve except through the existence of a universal will for righteousness and uprightness - behold, the existence of this dispensation is compelled from the necessity existence of the Perfect Being, therefore free will can and must be a reality as well.
Were the existence of gratitude and recognition of the good lacking from existence, the spirit of man would be left without sparkle or shine. Therefore it is impossible for existence not to include this perfection, because it is only manifest when free will is engaged in benefiting the creation.
The main thrust of our agenda when we assert that free will is a necessary aspect of the Divine, may He be exalted, is that it is proper that, through knowledge of God,  there emerge within us  those traits that should emerge in those who act with free will - such as fear and love [of God], faith and trust - which build human happiness, and through which God is revealed to us as acting with free will. Therefore, we know faithfully that when we speak and think according to the understanding that God acts with free will in his relations towards us, and we base all our actions and our hearts' feelings on this idea, then we are walking in the path of truth. And if we express and think the opposite, and we direct the way of our minds, our emotions, our actions, according to the idea of determinism, that is the way of darkness. For we only know of any idea through how it relates to us - we cannot conceive more than that. Even sensory experiences - we perceive colors according to the picture imprinted on our visual sense, and what is soft and hard, hot and cold, light and heavy, through whatever is perceptible to us, but do we have any way of describing things as they actually are in their own essence? Therefore it is understood that the true basis for knowing God is according to what can properly be found in our knowledge, and the person who corrupts those ways is mistaken and causes others to be mistaken.

Chapter 5

That the creation story in the Torah is not entirely literal, but that it also has a depth of metaphor in it, has already been stated by Maimonides.  In any event, [whether or not the creation story is to be understood literally] is not one of the basic Torah principles. He said, may his memory be a blessing, that if he had proof for the eternity of matter, he would explain the verses regarding creation  in the same manner that he had explained the verses [that describe God using] anthropomorphism. However, elsewhere he had said that our flight from [the notion of] eternity of matter is not only because of the sense pf the verses, but because it contradicts the foundation of the Torah, for [the notion of] eternity of matter cannot coexist with miracles and change of nature; the pillar upon which religion rests would be nullified, God forbid. It is well understood that the ways of modern research, which make claims only regarding evolution, pose no problem at all to the foundations of the Torah, not even to the sense of the verses of the creation story.
Were a person to claim, for example, that the geological processes forming the planet happened over thousands of years, and therefore he doesn't see the hand of God here, and then were he further to claim, “[If God is the Creator,] why should it take so long?” and, “Why wasn't all of creation made ready in an instant?”, we would respond to him with reason and knowledge, that the stages of evolution, and gradual emergence of orderly existence don't distance us at all from knowledge of God; they only draw us closer to Him with love and loftiness of the soul. For, though we see cause and effect with our eyes every day, nevertheless, since we see that everything operates according to a wondrous order, with much wisdom, kindness, and great mercy, we recognize that there is an Activator who is giving life to everything, a Living God, to Whom there is counsel and resourcefulness, kindness and mercy. What essential difference is there between the evolution of the planets and the stars over myriads of years and the formation of the fetus in its mother's womb over the course of months? In any case we recognize that  "wonderful are Thy works; and that my soul knoweth right well....when I was made in secret, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth. Thine eyes did see mine unformed substance, and in Thy book they were all written"
And how much more so were we to list the stages of evolution through which the organic parts moved, from when they were simple elements until they became a complete, living and intelligent person, righteous and upright, and full of might and strength. Behold, the era is very long, and things progress at their slow pace - and it is precisely these things which attest to the power of God, as they reach their final purpose.
Behold, it is very obvious to anyone who knows Torah, that the account of the works of creation in the Torah is presented in extreme brevity. The Sages said in Midrash Rabbah, “It is impossible to relate what happened at Creation to people of flesh and blood. Therefore Scripture concealed it by beginning with 'In the beginning did God create'.”  The basis of this statement is that the Torah only relates that which is relevant to our planet, and even then, only those matters that would be understood as having an ethical aspect, that touch on straightening the ways of man, in his outward behavior and his inner emotions.
When we look at the order of the creation of our earth, from where the Torah begins to relate it, it appears that there was no order, and from the great amount of smoke and thick moist vapors, it was full of water and darkness.  The first step was that the vapors dissipated somewhat, so that some light could penetrate. But the air wasn't yet sufficiently transparent to enable seeing the actual celestial bodies. Therefore, from the perspective of our planet, only light was created, and the actual stars were not considered to have been created from its perspective, for if a person had been standing [on Earth] he would not have discerned that there were celestial bodies in existence. Nevertheless, there was  morning and evening, because of the rotation of the planet, and the air then became transparent enough that it could now be called a sky, though the moisture was still so great above the sky that one could discern it by sight, had a person been standing there at that point. Afterwards came the gathering of the waters of the earth to one place, and the emergence of vegetative growth.  Afterwards, the air cleared up even more so that the heavenly bodies could be seen with sufficient clarity for [subsequent] intellectual development in humans to ponder their orbits. Only then was the atmosphere sufficiently refined for animal life. Birds were created, which could fly through the now rarefied atmosphere, and fish [were created], which do not require highly purified air. Finally, when the air reached its highest level of purification, it was now fit for the formation of animals that walk on land, and humans.
Behold, it is not written in the Torah, “And God made on the first day", or “And God made on the second day", etc. Instead, it ordered all the actions in a sensible, gradual order, and at every dividing point, it states “And it was evening and it was morning, day one”, “...day two”, etc, which makes no difference for us whether we interpret the actions as taking place within the span of a complete day of twenty-four hours or [whether we interpret] that the Torah was does not actually indicate how long each stage of development took. The appropriate understanding is to depict in our minds that is that everything was arranged in an order, with intent, and adequate preparation for the purpose of God's wisdom and morality, that there should be an impact on the process of human perfection. Seeing as how the seventh day is holy, and devoted to remembering the work of Creation, therefore, the [Torah] understands these six general divisions as if they were six actual days. There is also nothing which prevents such an interpretation, neither from the standpoint of Scripture, nor from the standpoint of the obligation of [appreciating] the holiness of the Sabbath, which is intended to correspond to the inner workings of the human mind.
And should we explain further in an allegorical manner the order of the creation of Adam, his placement in the Garden of Eden, the naming of things, the building [of the woman] out of [his] rib, there would be nothing in this that contradicts the foundations of the Torah, if the intention is that after man achieved the level of human awareness, and his emotions started developing in a manner appropriate for goodness and morality, as well as beauty and pleasantness, he would find the land a Garden of Eden [lit. refinement] before him, and from his own nature and his own internal feelings he would have recognition of a recognize a relationship between himself and the One who created him. He would conclude according to his inner recognition, which had been greatly intensified because of the power of the natural human soul, which had not yet become sullied with all sorts of calculations, that he should properly cling to the natural guidance and not arouse his desires too much. It was actively revealed to him that through the purity of his natural soul there was a way of perceiving ethical development, close to being understood through his intellectual makeup as well through the full strength of the imaginative faculty, and that through the perfection of those faculties together he could get to the level of complete prophecy.  Therefore, immediately, when there was an awakening of the relationship between himself and his creator who was guiding him on the good path, that's when the word of God was revealed to him, “From all the trees of the garden you can surely eat.”  Just one tree, the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, was understood through his natural recognition that it had the power to increase the storm of his desires, to take him out from his natural tranquility. From that would come the stumbling block that he would no longer have faith in the tranquility of the One showing him the straight path. Instead, he would evaluate if perhaps evil is not evil, and he would only depart from evil when it is clear to him emotionally and intellectually that it really is evil.  From that came all of the historical plots which instruct man by that which makes him feel that evil with all the depth of its bitterness. But how much evil is humanity going to have to infinitely suffer, which was unnecessary in that state of natural tranquility, where it was appropriate to just know good?
Behold, man began to feel a need for a relationship between himself and his creator, in a very moral way, by guarding the purity of his nature. [However,] he had not yet acquired a concept of family life, and he didn't have a proper relationship to the rest of the animals. After [that stage of] development, his perception developed to understand his relationship to the rest of the animals, “and whatever man would call the animals would be their names”,  and [thus] he recognized his superiority over them.  Then he started to feel a need for a family life, “and Adam could not find a helper opposite him.” As he was immersed in his turmoil, sleep fell upon him,  and in a vision he saw that the [idea of family life was that the] woman existed from his taken rib. The foundation of family life is to recognize that only through partnership can the edifice be complete, and not just to have a “helper”, for individual ends, but instead to complete each other -- “opposite him”. He received this idea in an impressionistic manner through the function of the vision in his sleep. At that point, man started to realize the value of family life in its purity.
However, the natural state that man was in and man's companionship with the animal kingdom brought him to understand animal communication and instincts. And animals as well, specifically the more cunning of them, also understood some impression of the ways of the psychology of man. Therefore, the snake, in his desire to cause damage, started to go in his natural way to arouse feelings of desire in the heart of the woman, towards fruits of that known tree, and he breached the wall of tranquility, and the power of this desire began to overcome the desire for tranquility, and that is what led to all of the tribulations of life.
[And it doesn't matter if we picture the snake as completely figurative, and, in the same way, the Tree of Knowledge as the emergence of a tendency to go out of this state of tranquility and simplistic refinement.] {This was in the side of the notebook, and isn't clear where it should be placed.}
In the state of tranquility, there was no need for work, nor for the awakening that comes from pain in order to strengthen morality,  because truth, righteousness, and knowledge of God were concepts that were clear, simple, and accessible to anyone who had not breached the wall of the purity of the natural tranquility of the soul. There was no need for illness or death. And perhaps, the body would have served the soul to a point that it would complete its duty and then [the soul] would have left happily and goodheartedly. Alternatively, the state of tranquility and the purity of life, natural, spiritual and physical would have brought with it no need at all for any separation of the spirit from the body. It would certainly not have become too crowded for everybody, because with the increase in gradual perfection of humanity, we would have discovered easily other ways to settle on innumerable other planets and galaxies. The love of children would have come about as a result of the intellect, and through the recognition of righteousness and natural morality, and it would not have had to be bolstered with birth pangs (like the nature of everything that is very precious to us based on the difficulty that it takes to achieve it).
However, when the state of tranquility unraveled, these capacities began to burst forth from their boundaries to yearn according to urges of pleasure, and not according to the natural tranquility. Then, they recognized that they were naked, and they began to feel regret, in all its pain. Their powerful emotions and the natural power of their intellects which were still firm, [though,] along with the power of their imaginations which had not yet been muddled, and so their readiness for prophecy was still available to them immediately. In their natural feeling they made belts for themselves and they hid from the voice of God.
That's when the state in which humans distanced themselves from animals began. Man distanced himself greatly as he departed from his natural tranquility that [the animals] were still situated in. And there was a recognizable hatred for the snake, as evil to man and also evil to other animals, for while man was close to them, he was still in a position to be able to elevate them.
And the status of the woman also had to change, in order to place limits upon the intensification of the unraveling tranquil state by the urges of the moment, and the burden had to become very heavy.  With it would also have to be death, which is also necessary in any case to place an end to this unnatural state. In their perfection of their knowledge and recognition, the hand of God was such that it made for them garments of skin. With that the breach began to be healed, but through a very long healing process, laden with many difficult pains and sufferings.
Behold, this transition was passed through by someone who has reached a completed state to be fitting to be called “Adam”. Through these psychological causes, a great breach was created between him and life. This individual is “Historical Man”. From here and onward, the Torah will tell mankind's story in precise detail.
If so, there's nothing in the new research, even according to the opinion of Darwin (though it's just a theory), that contradicts the cornerstone of the Torah, the foundation of which is only the recognition that all of the great cycles [of life]  - since they're all set up with wisdom and they all tend towards mercy and loving-kindness - are done with wisdom and knowledge, and that everything emerges from the source of light and the perfection of “divine intelligence”,  (or, if you want to call this matter  "divinity" , or “God's nature",) which obligates that there should be a very gradual process. But, it is impossible that anything be lacking that is needed for the perfection of something more perfect, which is the perfection of the spirit of man and his full awareness, until he returns to his natural tranquility and the garden of his refinement ["Garden of his Eden"], but in a manner that is even more perfected, a refinement that the eye of no creation has ever seen. It was all set up from the start, the power of the soul and the readiness for prophecy, the possibility of miracles at their [appropriate] time, and whenever miracles would be needed for the perfection of the spirit of man and his way of life. As a result of a lack of thinking, the confused of our generation think that the theory of evolution according to Kant, Laplace, Darwin, and other wise people of the day brings with it a destruction of the Torah, God forbid and forfend. Our holy Torah in its entirety, with all of its historical and reliable traditions, does not budge one iota from any criticism. And if rational thinking brings about a verification of those theories, and all the more so if absolute proofs are developed for them, they will become merely ways of helping us explain the creation story according to what makes sense to the mind.  But historical truth and knowledge of God, and with it the obligation of keeping the entire Torah, does not have to change even one bit as a result of the impressions of the new knowledge and research. Rather, they further expand the heart and they increase the concepts of knowledge of God and love of Him and fear of Him, and the desire to go in the ways of good and justice, which are the ways of God, of great advantage.
In sum, despite the fact that the theories of the latest philosophers and researchers have not been proven, still, the generation tends toward these theories that appear to be correct according to the results of whatever investigations and research that appears reasonable, and these [theories] have already managed to destroy the faith in the Torah in the hearts of stumbling youngsters. And there are more coming who are like those [youngsters], with a laxity in their ability for understanding and recognition of the straight. Therefore, it is incumbent upon us to explain that even if all of this research becomes verified, it does not damage the foundation of the Torah and its offshoots at all. Instead, it awakens us to explain the esoteric creation story, as our sages have already told us, “To relate what happened at Creation to people of flesh and blood is impossible. Therefore the Torah concealed it, 'Bereshit Bara Elokim'.” And the Kabbalists have already explained specifically, relying also on the Midrash  that “God created worlds and destroyed them”, meaning that there were many eras in creation before this state of being. But the fundamental principle of the matter is just to understand that the morality and justice that are placed in the hands of man with his free will are found within the powers of all existence all of the paths toward his perfection. Perfection of human morality is the higher end-goal of all of existence, which is continually built according to all the orders of life and all the processes of history in general, and especially of the Jews .

Chapter 6

Prophecy must be understood without any change from the standpoint of the Creator, not before the prophecy, not after the prophecy, not during the prophecy [itself].  [Prophecy] is nothing other than intellectual readiness connected with a perfected imaginative faculty. When this [experience] is proven through tangible axioms, or it seems that his words are lasting, it is a reliable foundation upon which to build laws of morality, both specifically and generally.
This system of perfection, which is never-ending, must be a [system in which the] satisfaction of man will continue to grow more and become more perfect in his process of perfection, while at the same time covering all areas of satisfaction, the physical life and spiritual life, while making sense and a straight path, with justice and morality.
It is not far-fetched to imagine that this development will reach a point where this equalization of the perfection of human wisdom and together with ethical holiness, will reach the highest level, a solution will also be found for eternal life. And at that point, another transition will be the ideal to bring the world's dead back to life. This is also seen from the words of the sages, that the goal of the resurrection of the dead is going to come through perfected people. However, we cannot imagine that at a time of great satisfaction there would be perfection of wisdom without a great and exalted moral yearning.  The great smart person who is perfectly righteous will be the one fit to bring about the resurrection of the dead. As our sages say,  “In the future, the righteous will be those who will bring about the resurrection of the dead.”
פרק ו1
The heresy that arose as a "rod of wickedness" [Ezekiel 7:11] because of the theory of evolution, came from a lack of intellectual rigor to go to the depths regarding [the concept of] evolution in all of creation, and brought about negative results in terms of [its] relationship to the Oral Torah. Since these researchers began to see that in all of existence the development of things happen slowly, the researchers of our nation also started to believe that the great and glorious edifice of the Oral Torah that all of Israel lives according to also wasn't developed all at once, but, rather, was developed very slowly, little by little, generation after generation. Behold, as this theory began to spread, many heretics rose up who wanted to throw off the yoke, who wanted to break the bonds, and they sought to “turn the plate over on its face”, and to change religion and rite.
These heretics who “wear out the world” didn’t understand that “the subject isn't similar to the proof”. Though evolution at the material level requires time - because every physical movement requires time, and movement itself marks time - the intellect taking flight has no boundaries on its speed.  A person of feeble mind cannot estimate how in a single moment a wise person can embrace the “arms of the world”, and how he can gaze upon a vision of hundreds of thousands of years, and with a single glance can take in an infinite amount of details. If so, should we be in wonder about the ways of the very lofty and exalted intellect, the divine intellect that was in the prophecy of the master of prophets [Moses], that in the laws and ordinances that he commanded as an "inheritance for the congregation of Jacob" [Deuteronomy 33:4], he also had in mind their many details and the ways of their judgement?  How can anyone with a healthy mind have any doubt about whether or not there was material filled in and explanations for many of the details, in the same way that the rules themselves were arrived at?
However, even according to their claim [that the Oral Law developed over a long period of time], there is still no room to exempt ourselves from any idea accepted by the collective nation, because that [collective acceptance of laws] is the whole foundation of national continuity. Behold, the Torah accords authority of any doubt [about the law] to Bet Din, and Bet Din itself depends on the acceptance of the nation. If so, whether the entire Oral Torah came from the mouth of Moses, our teacher, at Mount Sinai with all of its details, or whether the Oral Law was structured over the course of thousands of years through various rabbinical decrees and clarifications from the Bet Dins, it is the acceptance of the entire nation collectively that [causes] the basis of the obligation [to abide by them]. Someone who takes himself out from the collective, it is as if he is a denier of the essence [of Judaism].
What emerges from this is that the belief that Moses our teacher (peace be unto him) received the Oral Torah in its entirety “from the mouth of the Almighty”,  is something we accepted from our forefathers and is independently true, but it is not the only thing that [the obligation of] keeping the Oral Torah rests on. Because, behold, we are also obligated to keep commandments that are definitely rabbinical [in nature].  Lest you respond [that rabbinical decrees have a basis in the Torah commandment of] “Thou shalt not turn aside...” [Deuteronomy 17:11], many of our rabbis hold that that is merely a support for the concept of the negative commandment to not turn away [from a rabbi's decision], and since that verse is merely a support to the concept of following rabbinical decrees, where does the basis of the [actual] obligation come from? Rather, this is something that is one of the most basic ideas, that it is the obligation of the collective nation to follow what its elders and wise people say, and it is the obligation of individuals within a nation to behave according to the common center as a whole. This is certainly the obligation of the Torah, truly. It goes beyond any specific obligation; it is the basis of all religious obligation. Our sages recognized that the true fundamental fulfillment of the Torah, though literally from God, was that a complete obligation needed to be accepted willingly, which is the willingness and agreement of the collective nation.  It is explicit in the Torah that we accepted the Torah on ourselves by saying, "We will do and we will hear" . Therefore, the fact that, really, everything, whether it is an explanation of the commandments, or a fence around them, has no distinction in level of stringency, whether they are “laws to Moses from Sinai” , or if they are some explanation of a Bet Din that was accepted. Once the ruling has spread in the nation, we have now been obligated a complete obligation.
If so, even if someone were to claim that all the laws of the Oral Torah were just things that Bet Dins clarified over time, the obligation still has the same status. And [even] laws that were from the rabbis, certainly the foundation of the matter is the general acceptance of the people.
If so, those people who are tempted to “bend their hearts” and bring up that bitter claim that the Oral Torah was established over the course of time by many sages and Bet Dins, and through this they want to weaken hearts and make hands waver in fulfilling the Oral Torah, their deviousness will not help them one bit. That is because the obligation only has its foundation in the acceptance of the collective nation. Behold, even those things that were accepted “laws to Moses from Sinai”, even if they were forgotten, we would bring them back through exegesis, just like what happened with the three hundred or three thousand laws that were forgotten during the mourning of Moses, which were brought back by Otniel Ben Kanaz through his expositions (Temurah 16a). And behold, there is no distinction in obligation, whether the laws were known to us through the original reception, or whether the laws were passed on though the teachings of the Bet Din.
From this we can come to understand the mistake that many whose hearts have slipped have made, that they think the reason that we believe in the greatness of the Talmudic sages is because of the rule that was given to us, “If the earlier generations were like angels, we are like humans…” [Shabbos 112b], that this is the basis of the obligation to keep the laws of the Talmud and its offshoots. Therefore, people of brazen spirit arose to critically analyze the value of the Talmudic sages according to the measuring stick of people like themselves. They thought that through this they can already exempt the world from the obligation to keep the words of the sages in their entirety. This also came from a lack of knowledge of the basis of the Torah and its obligation. Even if the people who built the Talmud had a much smaller status than what they really had, nevertheless, since we merited having a central national [legal body] to understand and to rule on all the laws of the Torah, and the nation accepted it and it spread throughout the nation, anyone who breaches that fence is losing the treasury and the foundation of the collective nation. The reports that had come to us about the greatness of the earlier sages were only because they were true, but not because the Torah couldn't be upheld without them. Or, suppose we were to imagine that they were people were just like us, which gives us permission to disagree with them, God forbid; the inability to disagree with them is not based on the greatness of the one speaking. For sometimes we find that a lesser [sage] from a later generation argues on bigger [sage] from an earlier generation, and the truth is like that later one. Rather, [the real reason one cannot argue on earlier sages] is because at any time period that the leaders of Israel saw that our nation had a fixed centrality, in which it would be proper to seal the Torah so that there would cease to be more [halachic] conflict, they decided that no one could differ on practical matters in terms of what the earlier generations had said except if it was just to decide the law between them. They decreed this for the benefit of the nation and its success, and automatically it was set as an obligation that one could not depart from, and anyone who did would be separating from the congregation and taking himself out of the collective. Therefore, once the Mishna was sealed, the rules were set and the laws of the early generations, [meaning] the Tannaim and the ones who preceded them, could never be argued against, except to determine the law between them. They also established very logical rules on how to decide the law. After that, when we were meritorious to have a central Talmud and it proliferated in the nation of Israel, the nation accepted that no one could disagree with its word, unless it was to determine something that had not yet been determined. Therefore, only the acceptance of the people is what determines [authority]. The person who is brazen enough to uproot something from the Talmud and treat it lightly is kicking against the collective nation. Brazen people like this bring immeasurable evil to our people. With our full understanding of this, we distance ourselves from them, from their committees, and from their books, as far as we can in order to strengthen the institutions of the nation, to be a nation of God forever.

Chapter 7

The loftiness of the divine purpose in preserving the character of the Jewish people is greater than the obligation of the preservation appropriate for any other nation that has the merit to exist as a nation on Earth.
The rational foundation of the matter must be that human beings must all recognize that they have to live lives of brotherhood. This can only come to its full expression in the life of nations via each nation fully expressing its unique character. [This happens] only through a full understanding [by each nation], that just like its character is proper for the world, so too the make-up of every other nation is a necessary tool for the world, and it should never enter one’s mind to cause any suffering to antagonize the progress of any nation other than itself, or think that that knocks its legs out from under it. Rather, everyone would understand that through the increase of success of every nation in its unique character, there will be an increase in the happiness of all nations, because each and every nation will utilize the talents that all the nations are using to perfect the world.  Just as one nation gives to the world the things that it is involved in developing, so too [does that nation] take from the world from the other nations things that they’re involved in developing. Therefore, only through the increasing of the success of the human collective, will each individual nation be happy.
When the finalization of this idea takes effect in the heart of the nations with all of its strength and glory, no one will [be able to] imagine at all of nations taking up swords against each other,  because every nation will understand that the sword that it lifts up against another is attacking itself. [That will be true,] besides for the fact that the concept of justice will be developed, and it will be considered an abomination to the human psyche to kill people and spill their blood. No diplomatic reason in the world would be able to purify the disgusting nature of such murder, as it becomes clear in the heart in its pure, authentic feeling.
As is the rule of all good character traits and all good deeds in the world, that the gateway into them is selfishness, reward and punishment, giving love in order to be loved, and "through ulterior motives, one comes to altruistic motives", so is the rule for nations. It is necessary that they develop first in a manner that is understood how each nation in its success improves the state of everybody. [They must also understand] that the dividing up into nations is really just a contrived agreement to increase the impact of the concept of “what’s mine is mine and what’s yours is yours” for no goal other than the loftier purpose that is embedded within it to improve all of humanity through the expanding of all professions which are unique to each nation.
With this we can understand that just as it is impossible for the system of an individual state to develop except through a central body that is situated in one place, a king, or a legislature, so too the world cannot reach the perfection of this system unless there was some set center in one place.
Behold, when the borders of nations are distributed, it is possible, even necessary, to give to each and every nation unique fields of endeavor, that through the perfection of their wisdom, and spiritual and physical work, they will be broadened without end. For example, the expansion of agriculture, with all of the necessary knowledge of botany, with all the needs of biology and physiology, and knowledge of agronomy with all the potentials of nature which are being revealed to researches all the time, and political wisdom and economic wisdom, and much more. However, divine wisdom and ethics are also certainly no less important than all the other important fields of endeavor which are aspects of the perfection of humanity, the wisdom of what is beautiful about [various] deeds and the way of serving God, concepts of divinity, and delving into the understanding of everything that relates to godly concepts.
It makes sense that in apportioning to every nation the field of endeavor that is unique to it, the field of complete spirituality of life would fall into the domain of Israel, for they are suited to this through the Torah of God that they have, and because of the fitness of their elevated spirit for things that are very lofty, and from the standpoint of their share in general history, which is their longstanding mission to enlighten the world with knowledge of God even in the darkest and most hateful times, and how much more so in times of light and love.
According to the state of human perfection, it is a compelling vision that when the human spirit rises upward, it would think about the greatest among assets, the most lofty of assets: knowledge of God and all related studies. We see it with our eyes even today, that every nation which is refined enough in its behavior and its characteristics, the recognition comes quickly investigation into the depths of divine knowledge is the advantage of the great spirit that is in human wisdom.
Therefore, in the systems of national life it is appropriate that each nation should find its true foundations in whichever area its eternal existence stands upon. [In this context,] it is understood that it is impossible for any nation in the world to have its religion and relationship to religious service to be its national identity, because its future nationality does not express itself through its unique service of God, because that aspect of its national life is going to have to be developed by borrowing those concepts from the nation that is unique to that, which is the Jewish nation.  The foundation of each nation must be dependent only on those aspects that are unique to their make-up, for it has yet to be clarified well to each and every nation what its particular talents are. That clarity itself is an important step in the bringing about of this ultimate cooperation. Once every nation searches for the truth of its unique talent, it will automatically recognize in what area it has be perfected for the concern and compassion of all the other nations. Then everyone will be all bound up together in brotherhood, a family, who divide among themselves the chores of the house in order to increase its success and blessing.
Only the Jews have had their task clarified, because the obligation has been put on them by  the historical order to be involved in their service to be a light unto the nations, even before that fortunate time arrives. Therefore, the nationality of Israel is bound up necessarily in the keeping of the Torah of God that we have. And because of all of the involvement in Torah and all of the service over generations, there is a firm foundation for increasing the wisdom of Torah for that time when the world will be filled with the knowledge of God. Therefore, habituation in keeping the Torah, and education; to appreciate faith and of the commandments, all in practicality; in order to activate the special power we have to be prepared for spirituality which is so important for all peoples; that is a national need that is necessary in the nature of our existence. The seal of our holy Torah is filled with the seal of nationalism, and it is even more stressed by the Oral Torah.

Chapter 8

It is appropriate that the understanding of religions in general be clarified, as to which religion can be called divine (making it a complete obligation to anyone who firmly grasps it, because they are part of a nation or nations in which their forefathers accepted that religion to act according to it and to guard it). [We also need to clarify] which [religion] one can say has mistaken values, to the extent that [those mistakes] make it impossible for anyone with an clear mind to be obligated to hold onto it.
The foundation of prophecy is the most perfectly clear and true knowledge which is humanly possible, whether it is also accompanied by a sensory experience of a voice, or whether it is just a perfected idea that is unique in its quality because of its divine clarity, to the extent that it would have as an impression on the psyche of the perfected prophet the impression of a voice that is heard from the mouth of a man in clear speech, yet it is clear to him without any doubt that this is divine speech, like an impression of the most powerful voice and the mightiest sensory images. From what it seems from the words of the Torah, this was the superiority of the prophecy of the master of prophets, [Moses,] peace be unto him, that no imagery was mixed in it through the activity of the imaginative faculty, and his knowledge was a knowledge that perceived the full force of the purpose that came from the divine instruction that was being commanded.
A Torah of truth like this must be fulfilled in a framework of compulsion of commandment and faith in its details, so long as humanity still needs instruction, so long as the world has not yet achieved full knowledge, where every individual will have a clear understanding of his full destiny from knowing himself. At that point, following the Torah will no longer be based on faith and commandment, but it will transcend faith to become clear knowledge.
By the simplest understanding, [faith-based adherence to commandments] will continue so long as there is any deficiency and evil in reality, so long as death still rules over man to embitter his life and to rob him of his tranquility, and with it a multitude of evils beyond comprehension, which are all results of a lack of human knowledge and lack of strength to overcome all of the evil that persecutes him fiercely and aggressively.
However, there will come an era of human perfection, when not only will all people on the face of the earth recognize that they are but friends and brothers, but they will also recognize their lofty destiny that the Torah wrote about in the beginning of the creation of man, “and dominate the fish of the sea and the birds of the heaven, and all animals that crawl upon the earth”. One should not understand [this “domination”] as referring to the dominance of a cruel dictator who uses those who he rules over for his own desires and his own pleasures, to fulfill his own plots. Rather, it is a domination that is for the benefit of those being ruled over, to shepherd them with knowledge and understanding, with an upright scepter of his kingship.
Therefore, when the time comes when the trait of kindness and the love of justice that is in man will no longer have a practical purpose in improving man's lot, then will start our ministry and concern of all beings, to teach them, to improve their intelligence, to develop them, and to bring them out of the dark valley of their wildness, to allow them to also be useful workers within existence. This would be just like the division of labor among man, not with hard labor and with a yoke, but rather with order, with discipline, with the right measure and the right pace, in a manner that makes their lives more pleasant, and supports them with honor and strength.
Eternal life is also only dependent on the general perfection of the whole of man, his physical and psychological strength. Then, the bodily machine will be able to do its service in extremely fair and easy conditions. A powerful life-force will come from the pleasure of constant basking in the radiance of the greatness of goodness, and kindness, and the complete recognition in the splendor of pleasantry of the storehouse of life, of which we cannot compare to any value or definition. And when nothing is wasted at all in existence, no action or ability or material, and how much more so for spiritual thought and creativity (for that is the most glorious of activities), it is understood that the desire will be awakened to fix the past as well, to resurrect the dead, to renew for them a life of splendor and strength according to that glorious and honorable era.
Then, the land will be filled with knowledge of God at the highest level, to the extent that no longer will one have to teach his fellow to know God. It’s understood that [the source of] obligation for the religion from the aspect of its unique reception, and the reliability of it through the prophetic tradition from Moses our teacher, peace be unto him, will no longer be through compulsion, but rather will be through [a feeling of] inner willingness and self-recognition, with love. This calls into question whether this recognition will allow room for the commandments, whether they will [still] be useful then for a lofty purpose, or not. They argued about this in the Talmud if the commandments will be nullified in the future to come or not. What they meant by “the future to come” is after the resurrection of the dead, when the world is at its loftiest heights, where everyone will be [in a state of] complete prophecy, and the collective prophecy will have already reached its perfection, and the activity of perfection will have been done, for the time will have come for the fulfilling of the yearning of the master of prophets, [Moses,] when he said, “Who will make the entire nation of God prophets, for God will put His spirit upon them.”
A religion that makes it possible to value the lofty developments for the mission of humanity through this impressionistic style is fit to be [considered] the complete truth. And there is definitely no hope for all pagan religions to reach this level, because it is only the knowledge of the oneness of God that makes humanity focus on one spiritual center that brings people to a central location and understanding, to a center of peace and love. But with the error of paganism, that hope of perfection gets lost. All that’s left is the Torah of Israel and the “Torahs” that offshoot from it. But those religious which have branched off on their own, it would not be appropriate to view the with an "evil eye". It’s possible that the founders [of those religions] had a divine idea for them to strive to improve a portion of the impressionistic portion of humanity however much they could. For this purpose, it is possible that some perceptible wonders were prepared for them, if they needed to strengthen [their messages], since this is relevant to humanity’s improvement, for the hand of God stretches from the beginning of existence to the end. However, the mistaken aspects that got mixed into [those religions] is only that which [makes] it impossible for their formula to be the true formula for guidance to perfection’s end, for it is fitting that there be [just] one spiritual center in the world. And it’s understood that except for the Jews, there is no one nation in the world that has a absolute advantage over another in terms of its spiritual assets of ethics and divine religion. Therefore, they should only void part [of their religions], as they will be bound to recognize that the single center that is fit to exist in the world, and that it is fitting to take advice and guidance in ethics from the original source in its perfection. Therefore, giving the honor of God to anything other than the Master of Everything, He should be blessed, is definitely something that should be void from existence, for since that impression of the honor of God is the lofty spiritual goal that is central to humanity, and once it is given to something other than the Creator of Everything, isn’t it possible that centers [of spirituality] will increase over a long time, and any more unity of man will be void, and all the goals for the benefit of the collective will “disappear [like the slimy trail of a] snail”?  Therefore, the entire world must recognize that there is no need, nor permission, to give honor to any god other than the one God alone, who is God, the God of Israel, “who is called the God of the earth.”  The underlying conviction in the books of those Christian and Muslim religions is that the value of Judaism has already become void, God forbid. That [idea] must be nullified in order to enable humanity to come to its eternal purpose and goal. But the ethical content in [those books], however, which any religion has, to understand and to improve, those [ideals] are things that are proper to honor, and it’s proper for anyone with a perfected mind to understand that when they involve themselves in the ethics they have in their hands, they are involved in doing God’s work according to their level. Behold, the bottom line is that all moral betterment will cause a person the possibility of getting closer to the more exalted ethical end-goal, and lifting up the collective.
And whatever divine idea it is, whether it is combined with a vision from the imaginative faculty, or whether it is just from a strong and mighty spirit, once it completes the goal of perfection for the human species, it is proper to encourage it for them in their binding to their history with whatever causes.
And understand from this also the concept of conversion to those religions. When any religion is in some way nationalistic, in whatever impressionistic way, essentially or by happenstance, the binding of themselves to their religion adds to the strength of the nation. Therefore, a nation that holds on to religion and does not lose it from its national character, when they have an apostate who sins, he is a traitor to his country, from the perspective that he is lessening the portion of patriotism which is his obligation to his country, as a partner in its religion. However, since not all religions are equal in their ethical values, and their goal is to spread to the whole of humanity, then when a person rebels against his nation’s religion because it is distant from the perfection that is included in a different religion which is closer to that [perfection], one could judge his sin in that even though he is damaging his national portion for the moment, at least he is becoming closer to humanity’s goal. The pagans who apostatize from their religions to become Christians or Muslims are justified, since those religions are closer to the improvement of humanity (which we see in their recognition of monotheism), and they bring blessing to the whole world when man’s educational period is completed. However, the matter is not so clear, because the bottom line is that these religions are not yet at the state to be able to bring the success of humanity to its ultimate purpose. By themselves, these religions cannot become a unified center, and they cannot link the emotions and ethics of the all nations together, as well as their physical and spiritual strengths. [They cannot make people come together] like a man with many body parts, [or even] clearer, like a family with different kinds of people, where all of them are driven to think only about the welfare and success of the family. However, someone who apostatizes from a more ethical religion to a less ethical religion is going backwards and darkens the light of his soul, and besides which, he distorts his ethical ways completely in order to be a traitor to his people who raised him and pampered him. He’s fit to be called a miscreant, and “wicked deeds will not go unpunished.”
The Torah of Israel is an exception to this rule, for it only yearns to get to the mighty purpose of the perfection of humanity, and it is ready for this with all of its tools, whether they be tools of ethics, actions, or history. Therefore, true, it is improper to accept converts easily, and they are “as difficult for the Jewish people as a blister”, which is because they are necessarily missing that naturally [inculcated] nationalistic program that is the foundation of the love and upholding of the Torah. Nevertheless, someone who recognizes this righteous endeavor, and his soul understands the problems of humanity that come from nations separating and hating each other, and with that, his soul yearns for truth which is not mixed in with any false imaginings, with his ethical feelings, we can’t view it as a sin when he leaves behind his own nationality and his father’s house to come and “take refuge in the shadow of the wings of God, the God of Israel.” At the end of the day, by adding power to the Jewish endeavor, he can also have a hand in improving that blissful ultimate purpose. And, in the end, he also causes a great amount of good to the nation that he left. Not only that, but any nation that merits to remain a distinct nation when that ultimate time comes in the perfection of humanity will draw ethical foundations and how to have knowledge and fear of God from the source, the Jews. Then, the added power from those righteous converts who appended themselves to the House of Jacob, [the Jewish people] will be better able to relate to the emotions of the souls of those nations, and to know how to help them with the expansion of the ethics of knowing and fearing God. Even though the descendants of those converts won’t know themselves what their own source is because they will have assimilated with the Jewish people, and will be mixed in with them, nevertheless, it is a law of inheritance that these psychological tendencies will not get erased, and those talents will help to descend to the depths of law and ways of those nations from which they were forged.
However, if a Jewish person turns his back on his honor,  it is “a sin that will go to Hell”. One cannot measure how great this travesty is, and much evil will definitely be left in its wake. Understand the measure of this travesty, for he will never be pardoned by the God of Judgment, who will punish him according to his evil. For he is a traitor to his nation, and he is giving strength to its enemies and those who seek to do evil to it, who are very numerous among the nations of the earth, since he contributes to other nations a talent that could have been for his nation’s work,  and he is causing pain and sadness to his people. He is uprooting his own spiritual level from the highest heights of the Torah of truth that is involved in the improvement of all of humanity, that is wholly the true word of God, that is to be upheld forever and ever, and he is going to broken pits that have hope only in the distant future to return to the source of truth and justice. Even if there are ethics mixed in with the fanciful imagination that can be found in other religions, [it is still good] as long as it is productive for someone who is born into that religion, because the nature of his soul has an affinity for those ideas. But for a Jew, who was born with the special ability to live according to pristine ethical ideas and divine knowledge, and who is bound to a supply of truth and purity, those other moral systems will not attach themselves to his soul. [For a Jew,] even a specific ethical value will not be attained by him in the same way that the religious person who had indoctrinated with it since he was born had attained it. Therefore, it is abundantly clear how damaged his heart is, and how evil and bitter it is for him to abandon God, his God.  For this reason, in addition to a few other basic reasons, God decided that there should be a way to embed the Torah in the world in a way that would be exalted and lofty and incomparable to all other religions, with great and powerful signs and wonders, to arrange for the innately national strength of heart, in order to have the true light remain [with them] forever.   The collective advantage that the Torah has because of how clearly true it is will be obvious compared to other nationalities in order to come to her program and her destiny in the End of Days, as Scripture says, “But as surely as I live, all the earth shall be filled with the glory of God.”  When you contemplate this, you’ll find that the main [reason] for the great miracles and the revelation of the Shechinah was that it was only needed to bring our holy Torah to the heights of its purpose, for humanity, so that it is a fitting thing to honor as a collective agreement. But from our perspective, from the aspect of our ethical obligation, for the call of what’s straight and right, it is enough for us be obligated [just] from our nationalism.  Since we find our nation bound together because of our holy Torah, which is the house of our lives, [we should be careful] also to not lift up any idea that distances our great obligation to equate all of us in our daily lives that are in the essence of our Torah and its offshoots, in order to uplift the entire nation, to increase its strength and make it glorious.
Therefore, besides the fact that our truth is clear to anyone with eyes, and besides for the fact that the truth of history is stronger than any extreme falsehoods that are from the yoke-throwers and the doubters of the truth of our holy Torah and its reception, even besides for all that, we don’t have anything to be afraid of in any of the stormy winds and tempests  of the masses’ false opinions. For, they will never be able to lie about the [fact that] our nation [continued to] exist even when we were in the land of our enemies.  If they come to be deceitful even about this, God has already prepared a remedy for the strike, “with a mighty hand and a fury poured out, I will rule over you,”  that other nations hating us and chasing after us will remind those who forgot that our nation is alone, a nation mightier than all conditions.  Since the foundation of our union is in everyone’s clear view [because] of the union [we have] through our holy Torah, the moral obligation immediately comes [to obligate him] to fulfill all of the obligations of the Torah in actuality. Once he accustoms himself to the Torah and the keeping of it, including all of the life activities that are special for us, immediately will his eyes open and he will feel the obvious truth, and his heart will bend towards God’s work, from love, with complete faith and the love of truth. And it doesn’t need to be said that [people will see this] when God returns the captivity of His people, for then will it be a truth on its own, we will be protected even more, even to the extent that we won’t need any help from other nations [to protect ourselves].

Chapter 9

The details of the commandments, in general, have two foundational principles. First, that one of the essential things that results from the impact the fulfillment of the Torah and commandments has upon man is whatever that can raise one to the highest of lofty spirituality, by doing actions [in the spiritually meaningful way] in the service of God, which impresses upon him the attribute of recognition of the honor of God. This ethical attribute can only be fixed in its full development through the punctilious observance of the word of God, for the advantage can be seen in acting in a punctilious manner that is proper for every regulated act from any governor, and commander, and enactor of conventions. Therefore, it is very appropriate to be exacting in the words and letters of the Torah, to do the commandments according to a very exact understanding of them.
Conversely, if we were to abandon this punctilious service, then the impact of this abandonment will have an opposite effect; the light of the glory of God will become dim in the heart, and the loftiness of the ethical man will be mired in much physicality and crass ideas.
However, along with that service of punctiliousness, [which has a purpose of creating a sense of] the loftiness of the Ultimate Glory, it should be further realized that every law that emerges from a specific inference should match up with the spirit of the Torah in general, which guides towards good by refining character and temperament, and has a good effect on social life, on bodily health, on strengthening intellectual prowess, on the nation in general, and for the individual.
And this is the second foundational principle, that the sages in particular, who were around when the nation was set up in its place, and the Great Bet Din which stood in the place that God chose, from which all the Torah emerged for Israel, or even the central Bet Dins in the exile - so long as the law was being explicated from the source of the Written Torah (whose paths are very expansive), and the principles with which the Torah is explicated require the weighing of a great mind, an explicator who does not deviate from the proper path, the second foundational principle was always in their minds, to see the value of the good effect that would emerge from the details of a commandment through explication. Then, it is verified even more when it produces the preserving of the preciseness of the words and letters of the Torah, which adds another good guiding effect. Or whatever foundational principle that helps the collective nation, in its behavior, physically and morally, and strengthens their political life as well.

Chapter 10

The obligation of explanation is placed upon the current leading sages of Israel of our day to explain the fundamentals of the faith, and to prove how greatly good they are for our nation, when we all return to keeping the way of the Torah and commandments. They also have to show clearly that there is nothing at all in the foundations of the Torah on an intellectual level that that would place any barrier to the expansion of knowledge and development of wisdom in our nation. [They would have to show] how the fulfillment of Torah does not restrict life in any way, and, instead, makes life more pleasant and more refined. Therefore, it is upon us to present the many details and general principles of the Torah, of knowledge and deed, how they expand the ethical life, and how they better the collective nation. In order, for example, to inform as to the preciousness of the value of the Torah and the commandments (since the level of innocence in simple faith  has already been lost from a large portion of our children), we must enter into the method of the intellect and research.
Only through this will we succeed. The truth is, that for a long time [the question] whether to explain the Torah this way [or not] was an argument between the sages of Israel. On one side of the argument, many claimed that the Torah requires an intellectual awareness. On the other side of the argument, many claimed that this [method of explanation] would show a dangerous aspect that is inherent in revealing investigations to the masses who are not able to [fully understand an idea to] its end, leaving them perplexed, in addition to causing some of them to become heretics and to loosen their binds. But this [latter] concern is irrelevant in our generation, for heresy is increasing, and every day there are new heretical books, and Torah and faith are being trampled upon. And if we don’t stand up in the breech to defend the nation of God, to respond to those who shame us, with the strength of intelligence and a search for truth, they will destroy "the great and mighty." Therefore, now is not the time to be quiet [in concern for creating more heretics], but rather to respond [to prevent more heretics].
The question has already been asked in the study house of those free-thinkers of our nation who know no boundary, about the issue of the purpose of the Torah: What does it yearn for? We are obligated to explain and to clarify, to the best of our understanding, the value of wisdom and the lofty yearning that our Torah has, and how it is impossible to get to [that goal] unless [the Torah] is actually kept. If we work hard and investigate, and if we’re not afraid of causing [others] to stumble in sin (for it is “a time to do for God”), we will certainly be able to understand and we will be successful, and we will find what we seek. It is an explicit verse, (Deuteronomy 32:47) “It is not an empty thing for you,”  which our sages  clearly interpret, “If it is an empty thing for you, it is because you did not labor in it,” and if we labor in [understanding] the Torah’s wisdom, we will surely find it.
There is no doubt that the Torah yearns for human civilization at its loftiest height, as the prophets went to great lengths to explain what we are hoping for: everlasting peace, and true freedom. However, even more than that, to go beyond the realm of humanity to encompass all living [creatures].
However, these yearnings, inasmuch as they are embedded and hidden in the Torah, were set up with a wondrous divine wisdom [in such a way] that the keeping of the Torah, the belief in it and the reviewing of it, will manifest these lofty yearnings to actuality. However, just as they require an impetus to emerge into actuality when the time is right, so too they also require a screen and a barrier to hold them back so that they won’t burst forth when the time is not right, when humanity is not ready [to handle them]. For it is a great rule that when any lofty idea becomes publicized in the world that is much loftier than what the purview of humanity [can handle], not only will no one listen to it, but it could also cause damage in many ways. Additionally, it will have a large opposition that will push it away so much that it will not be able to be reintroduced so fast, and many generations will have to pass without this precious [idea].
Let us hold up, for example, the ethical yearning of not killing any living thing for human purposes. It’s impossible to deny something that is sensed by any feeling heart, that there is a general ethical deficiency in the human species that it fails to uphold the good and lofty feeling that it is wrong to take the life of any life for its own needs. And it’s completely impossible that the good God would make an everlasting law in a very good creation dictating that the human species could not sustain itself unless it clouds its ethical feelings by spilling blood, even the blood of animals. There’s no doubt to any intelligent person that when the Torah that says to Adam, (Genesis 1:28) “dominate the fish of the sea and the birds of the skies and any creature that crawls on the ground”, it does not mean a domination of a cruel dictator who treats his people harshly in order to bring about his own personal desires. God forbid that a law of servitude as disgusting as that should be of the ways of the good God, about whom it is said (Psalms 89:3) “the world is built with kindness”, and we see that all His ways are filled with kindness and compassion. Isn’t it self-explanatory from the Torah, from the fact that Adam was not allowed have meat for eating?  If that’s true, what kind of domination [was he to have] over all animals and insects, if it wasn’t for the well-being of those being dominated,  to develop them, to improve their situation, to be involved in the development of them physically and spiritually? However, after the generation of the flood, where meat was allowed to be eaten, it certainly wasn’t meant to remain that way forever, for how can there be an ethical situation that changes and becomes nullified after it had already been the way to act? We are to increase holiness, not decrease it! Rather, the Divine Intellect saw that man had fallen from his ethical state, and until the time comes of recognition and awakening of true ethics, we cannot burden man with an ethical level that does not accord with his value system.
Behold, there is no doubt that if the prohibition against man killing animals had been practiced at that time [after the time of the flood], while man’s ethical state had not been corrected, it would have caused tremendous damage. When the animalistic desire to eat meat would intensify, it would not make a distinction between [the eating of] human and [of] animal, since anyway both would be prohibited to do, and the eating of human meat would then become a very constant sight.
Also, [we need this allowance of eating meat] so long as the ethical recognition has not reached a clear status, so long as we have not reached that level that we have been promised about, that (Jeremiah 31:33) “I will place my Torah within them, and on their hearts I will write it,”  which means that morality will then be felt with all of its brilliance in the hearts of man. (Jeremiah 31:34) “And they will no longer teach each other, a man to his fellow, a man to his brother, to say ‘Know God’, for everyone will know Me, from the smallest to the biggest.”  And what is “knowledge of God”? The prophet has already taught us, (Jeremiah 9:23) “This is what a person can praise himself with. Think and know Me, for I am God, who does kindness, judgment, and righteousness in the land, for these I desire, says God.”  Behold, it is the natural morality in its widened understanding that itself is truly “knowledge of God”! So long as man requires educators from the outside [to teach him] the obligations of human ethics and morality, he will also need many guards and fences so that the way that he lives does not get corrupted, as well as to make him ready to receive the appropriate and desired instruction. Sometimes, we also need to give up on some perceptible aspect of the ways of morality, in order to get humanity ready for an even higher level, because if we were to put first what should really come later, then we would lose everything.
For example, so long as the ethical state of man still hangs flimsily, a person’s animalistic self-love is still prone to overwhelm him, [even] to the extent that all of the rules of ethics and morality would be a joke to him. It’s understood that human beings must distance themselves from the societal association with lowly animals. Man should not see himself as one of them, for then they will have an impression on him with their animalistic ways to bring him down to the murky valley of the lowly animals. Man would be prone to leave the advantages he has as a human and will consider himself as a beast of the field. If it were so that the obligation to behave in an upright way towards all living things was a value just as it was towards other human beings, it would leave the impression of a community and equivalency between man and all other living things. Even if this [impression] was not harmful for the best people, the ethical level of the masses would be lowered very much. [With this impression,] the ethical weapon that the expert ethicists have always had to awaken the ignorant in the nation that they should raise themselves up to the level of humanity would be weakened. The expression, “Don’t be like a horse which doesn’t understand” would not be accepted as much in the hearts of the common man. The desire is greater to lower oneself to animalistic ways in order to exempt oneself from many ethical calculations, and to enjoy the many crass enjoyments of the moment.
Therefore, it is immeasurable how good the influence in the world is of the idea that severed the relationship between humans and all other living things. That needed to be ratified by exempting the [man] from many ethical obligations [to animals], and allowed him to fulfill his desires even by killing them, for the sake [of man] recognizing very deeply that he is above them, so that his soul will be raised up to the loftier ethical yearnings. [In this way,] in the end, absolute ethical truth (which is truly the knowledge of God) will win out, so that man won’t even need these concessions. If ethical obligations were in practice in abundance between man and animals, then at a time when there was not ethical perfection, it would have caused a great amount of evil to humanity. Man’s good feeling seeks to quiet his hunger; sometimes a corrupt person will choose to do charity in order to quiet the ethical anguish of his gut because of the theft that is in his hands. In any event, the sinner feels in himself that his “idol is false”, because his ethical ideas teach him that betterment of others is good, and what good is it if he does charity if he is also corruptly sending out his hand and causing pain to the hearts of the oppressed? However, if it was axiomatic that there was an ethical side to being kind to animals, then there would be many people who would depart from ethics, and would volunteer to choose as their ethical behavior being kind to animals. [A person would find this easy to do, for animals] anyway don’t have any jealousy towards him, and they never try to impinge on his honor or his dominion. And all sorts of false ideas would find context in which to implant in the hearts of many that there’s even a possibility of bringing humans as sacrifices for the good of animals, and specifically, if humans were viewed as corrupt, something animals are not viewed as. Then, someone of shallow thinking might decide that it’s indeed worthwhile to sacrifice what’s good for humans in favor of what’s good for animals, and there’s no end to the confusion and the suffering and the corruption of justice that would come out of conclusions such as this.
Therefore, there was a necessary decision by reason of the Divine Wisdom, Who discerns inner thoughts, to sever the connecting thread between humans and animals, so that the ethical focus of humanity could be specifically on its own good, and then its beatitude will be able to win out at the end of days. And when [that ethical development] brings humanity to its happiness and its freedom, then man will automatically also recognize his relationship to the animal kingdom that is appropriate to him from the standpoint of a pure morality, [meaning] that he doesn’t need any concessions that are forced, for the Torah only speaks as a concession to the evil inclination, in order to walk in the way of absolute goodness. This is the foundation of the creation story in the Torah, for the Torah’s only purpose is to teach us ways of life, how to behave morally, to bring man to his heights of perfection. The main point of the creation story is not the story itself, but the deep ethical program that emerges from it, that the Divine Wisdom prepared descriptions, that through them there would set into human morality forever, [to make man] prepared for the rising to the perfection of his heights. Just like the ethical perfection of man needs to build a philosophy through the description of a creation in six days and a resting on the Sabbath, so that the idea of resting on the Sabbath should be connected with the general concept of knowledge of God and the practical morality of resting one’s slaves and cattle, so too there had to be a direct description of the severing of man from the sphere of the animal kingdom, which came through [Adam] not finding a companion opposite him.
It also seems that there was also a divine step taken to connect humanity with all other living things. This was indeed the best thing from the standpoint of divine perfection, that in the end, man will yearn for the highest ethical nobility, that he will demand of himself his obligation towards all creations, his friends in creation and in life.  But for man [himself], he could not find a companion opposite him. Man is not prone to actualize his humanity if he has an urge to understand that he has a partnership and brotherly connection with animals that are more lowly than him. Therefore, he was disconnected from them through that slumber, where it was revealed to him that his bond of companionship is different than all other living things, and the small bond he had with the most devious of all animals, [the snake,] caused man a moral downfall to the point that he would only be saved from it through the placing of animosity between the two species, (Genesis 3:15) “I will place animosity between you and the woman, between your offspring and her offspring.” But when the Torah gave permission to eat meat, it when on at length, (Deuteronomy 12:20) “When your soul desires to eat meat...” as a boundary, as if to say, "When your natural ethical state does not abhor the eating of living things like you would abhor the eating of human meat..." That’s why the Torah doesn’t have to explicitly prohibit cannibalism, for [man] has already acquired the correct natural idea in this, and the Torah doesn’t need to give an exhortation, just like it doesn’t need to specify good and bad character traits, which are embedded, and familiar. But when the time comes of an ethical state of disgust for meat because of a natural repulsion to it, there will be no “urge of your soul to eat meat”, and it would [theoretically] be prohibited to eat.
In order to make an impact towards the ethical result for the End of Days, the commandments regarding the ritual slaughter of animals were only permissible for animals that rely generally on humans for food, and any others are anyway more appropriate to prevent man from damaging his nature turning into a cruel hunter, as medieval sages have made well known. However, covering the blood of a bird or an undomesticated animal is like a protest against the permissibility of eating meat, as if to say that there is shame in this behavior, that it is proper to cover up the shame of humanity that they have not yet reached the level that is appropriate for them, to understand that it is something unsavory to take the life of a living thing for one’s needs. However, the ethical preparation is done by our actions, so that it can emerge when the time comes.
This is also done steadily and balanced. [For example,] it is still improper [to cover] the blood of a domesticated animal, even for the recognition of the complete shame in slaughtering something that was provided for and had its needs cared for. If the covering of blood also applied to domesticated animals, it would awaken those ethical feelings too strongly.  It is enough for us to have the strict prohibition on eating blood to awaken anyway in us at the very least that spilling blood is a disgusting ethical trait for humanity anyway. If shame would start to be felt even in the slaughter of domesticated animals, that would work to accustom us to the transgressing of our inner moral feeling, more than what would work in the end to hold [that feeling back]. Certainly not all moral feelings would come all at once, but rather step by step. If man first steps up to the level that he can recognize that it is immoral to take the life for his own needs those animals that do not rely on him for food, he has still not reached the feeling to provide for an animal that he does raise, even if in its old age when it can no longer work, because of moral obligation. Therefore, there cannot be the same moral impact between the slaughtering of birds or undomesticated animals that are usually hunted and the slaughtering of domesticated animals that eats out of its owner’s trough.
The prohibition of eating the [forbidden] fats [of an animal] is also to remind us anyway that it is inappropriate to kill animals needlessly, even [an animal] that is taken care of by its owners. Therefore, it is the tastiest part that is forbidden, for it is certainly possible to get nutrients without it. However, with regard to animals that are hunted, [such as] wild animals and birds, they have a more penetrating idea to hold back from killing them in the commandment of covering the blood, of covering humanity’s shame. With that, there is no need for the prohibition of fats, and that’s why their fats are permitted.
The moral levels will rise when that fortunate time comes when (Isaiah 11:9) "the land will be filled with knowledge of God like water covers the sea, and all of our children will be taught of God," and natural human morality will be fixed in the hearts of every individual, and the Torah will be a pillar of light that the reasons for its commandments will light the way of life, as our sages say at the end of the chapter of “These Are The Transgressors”, “a light that is precious and frozen”, this is referring to the reasons of [the commandments of] the Torah, that are precious in this world, and frozen in the World to Come. Step by step, humanity will develop to illuminate in the light of God.
There should still be a moral impact through the utilization of things that are the property of animals, even if [taking those items] does not involve killing the animal, like milk or wool, because anyway there still needs to be moral instruction regarding these things. However, it should be recognized, that there is nothing ethically wrong with taking wool from sheep during a time that even the owner of the wool, [i.e.] the sheep, has its burden lightened by it. But it is ethically wrong when [the motivation] for taking the wool is solely for the benefit of the shearer, if the sheep needs its wool for itself. Then it’s just “legal” stealing, just the struggle of the strong over the weak. And the same thing is true regarding milk. Therefore, it should be internalized that the taking of milk should not be done in the same way as the taking of meat, which is by causing it pain and suffering. Therefore, the connection and relationship of meat together with milk would multiply the impression of ethical deficiency, even at a time when humanity’s education has not been perfected. The heart will be awakened [in preparation] for that most fortunate time [in the future], when not only will it be appropriate to hold back from eating meat from the standpoint of the upright ethical level that will be reached, but even milk will be an ethical value, that one should hold back from having milk when taking milk is done in a similar fashion to taking meat, by pain and causing loss to an animal, and similarly regarding wool. However, man could use linen  as much as his heart desires, and his heart never has to bother him that he did any sin at all, which is not true by taking wool from an animal, which does need a protective fence, that he is not to use wool in an abundance, in a time and place that would cause it pain, or would even just make it ugly. Therefore, one should not view wool and linen as equivalent to each other. Therefore, in order to activate the ethical seeds so that they should come to out into the light in their proper time, the prohibition of meat and milk, and the mixture of wool and linen into shatnez, were established together.
The category of “chukim” is [defined as] commandments that we cannot find an ultimate purpose for them in the present, and are rather a sowing of the seeds and a preparation for the future. Only when that fortunate time comes, only then will we sense how great the purpose acquired by this wondrous nation is, a preparation for instruction so lofty as this.  When our judges and advisors will expound the Torah and will find our nation ready to bring out to actuality those buds, then the light will go out to the entire nation. The nation that is so lofty for that wondrous leadership, in the inner natural feeling of compassion, of meekness, of acts of kindness that come out from our full understanding, that will surely be a (Isaiah 42:6, Isaiah 49:6) “light unto the nations”. When all the nations hear about these chukim, they will say (Deuteronomy 4:6) “Surely this great nation is a wise and understanding people”.
The sacrifices, however, certainly the entire time that the ethical state of humanity necessitates them or to become straightened by it, to use it for its material needs in the killing of animals, it is proper to be used for a better purpose, which is to teach the inner recognition of the obligation to be grateful to the good God, and that should be through the sacrifice of animals. Additionally, perhaps it will continue even in this era, and the ethical values will be carried until the [concept of eating] flesh of any life will be revolting. However, the idea of the existence of the attribute [of God] of [divine] judgment and the use of cruelty in the world, is proper for them to be found certainly in whatever era, to guard the spiritual state of man, so that he won’t fall lower through the evil deeds of those who stumble in social ethics. (Isaiah 65:20) “The sinner who is 100 years old will be cursed.” Therefore, the concept of sacrifices will impact anyway the one involved in that idea, [internalizing in him] that there is still [the concept of] the attribute of [divine] judgment in this world. However, when their status becomes loftier, to a most exalted fashion, where no preservation is needed at all any longer, then certainly the great Sanhedrin that will adjourn in that place that God will choose, they will delve into the Torah whether it’s possible to [still] sacrifice then to God all living things, [at a time] when no one will be able to desire it in any way because of their ethical awareness, and it says, (Leviticus 19:5, Leviticus 22:29) “According to your will should you sacrifice.”  And once it will be impossible for there to be willingness [to sacrifice] in any perfected person, certainly the Great Bet Din will have the power to switch animal sacrifices to vegetable offerings, and on this that final testimony stated, (Malachi 3:4) “Then shall the offering of (minchat)  Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant to God,”  precisely an offering (mincha), and not a sacrifice (zevach). And our sages say about this, (Leviticus Rabbah 9:6) “All sacrifices will become nullified, but the thanksgiving offering will not become nullified”, [because it] is made up of bread which is the great fundamental about it. Obviously, it is impossible to define the specifics of that era, in which the power of authority will only be [given] to the Great Bet Din in that place God will choose. Anything they will decree in the explanation of the Torah and its boundaries, whether through the “reason of the verse” (taama d'kra), or whether it is through finding support from the Torah (asmachta), once the opinion of the Great Bet Din is unanimous, that is the complete Torah. Someone who disagrees with [their rulings] is a “rebellious elder” (zaken mamre). There will be no sin that will be as despicable as that at the time of perfection.
Behold, combining wool and linen was forbidden in order to impress [upon man] the moral idea [that man should] value the preciousness of animals according to their true value as creations of God, that one should not take what’s theirs. This did not apply to the vestments of the priests, because the priests are appointed for sacrificing animals, and the sacrifices themselves are only going to continue so long as ethics have not reached the point of recognition of the full obligation of justice towards animals. Similarly, there is no need to be careful by [the commandment of fringes on a four-cornered garment,] tzitzit, which are meant to recall all of the commandments in their totality. And by remembering the totality of Torah, and all of what it is meant to produce, one recognizes the value of the full obligation of animal rights, relative to the use of their natural possessions, as part of that perfection.
The prohibition of “neveila” and “tereifa” serves to emphasize even more the attitude of compassionate feelings that man should have for all living things. That pathetic tereifa, isn’t it more appropriate to feel compassion for it, just like one feels more compassion for a suffering or sick person than a healthy person? However, the partnership that is found in compassionate feelings [for a tereifa animal] manifests itself in actuality when the time is right, together with the preservation of physical and spiritual health that is inherent in [the prohibition of eating tereifa], specifically that one should not share the same traits of animals of prey. And to awaken one to the fact that it is proper to distance oneself from their traits, and to be effective as well for their betterment, one is forbidden therefore to eat a tereifa lying in the field. A neveila that died on its own, hits at the root of terror from an kal-v'chomer argument, that if one is warned by the Torah to not take advantage of the tragedy and loss of life that happened to an animal that died on its own, even though [the animal] doesn’t lose anything from that, except as a sign of partnership in its suffering one could have by moving into the realm of its feelings[, then surely we should not take advanatge of animals that are healthy and have what to lose]. Through this, one would come to expand one's ethics to form a lesson that would improve the lot of animals ethically and physically. Certainly when that awareness has been completed, when man has the complete picture of the prohibition of eating neveila, he will not be able to raise his sword against a living animal that is dwelling with him and enjoying the sparkle of life.   And when the depth of these prohibitions come to fruition, that is when the destiny will be fulfilled which is spoken about, (Deuteronomy 14:21) “For you are a holy nation to God your God.”
And how perfectly that dovetails, that end-purpose description of the commandment to cover the blood [with dirt] - which inspires feelings of humanity’s embarrassment when the time is right for them - with the law that one must prepare dirt to be under [where the blood lands]. The preparation that’s done before the covering over [of the blood], which is usually also done before the slaughtering, rouses us to the fact that it is proper to be encouraged and to think even before the act is done, when the blood has not yet been spilled, that this is something ethically shameful. The purpose that will emerge from this is the general withholding of this [slaughtering] when the time of decency arrives.
Fish that do not have scales are lacking in natural protection. This is meant to have a bigger impression upon our feelings of compassion to prevent us from eating them.  However, for those fish that do have have scales, when the time of full knowledge comes, man’s heart will realize that if the wisdom of their creator was that [these fish] should have natural protection in order for them to survive, how could the most supreme creation be involved in destroying them? In this same awareness, fins are also included, for their function is also to save them from attackers.
It makes sense, that then, when the perfection of man will be at the height of his perfection, that there will be no more poor people, and embitterment, famine, and sickness will not be found. Lack of knowledge will cease to exist, for everyone will be learned about God, everyone will be wise of heart. The learning of wisdoms, of art, and all skills, will [come] very easily. When humanity’s talents develop in all their breadth, world peace will reign. There will no longer be any competition or conflict, and all the labor and all practical skills will only be useful to humanity in order to make their general situation better, ethically and physically. Then will people seek to spend their portion [of time] doing righteousness and spilling the spirit of his kindness on it, and he will not find [anyone to help], for all of humanity will be well-off, living lives of contentment and success, physically, ethically, intellectually. Then man will turn, with his storehouse of wisdom and experience, to his lower brethren, to the animals, and he will find ideas according to their level to improve them, to teach them, to make them intelligent. There’s no doubt that man will increase and glorify the science of animal intelligence, developing animals until they are raised to a level so high we cannot even imagine it now. One of the aspects of this perfection will be the acculturation of predatory animals. (Isaiah 11:7-9) "The lion will eat straw like an ox, and the cow and the bear will graze together, and the nursing child shall play at the hole of the cobra. They will not damage, nor destroy, in all my holy mountain, for the land will be filled with knowledge of God." And when the land is filled with the knowledge of God, that will be the real holy mountain.
Who cannot understand that at that fortunate time, where (Isaiah 30:24) “the young donkeys… shall eat clean provender which has been winnowed with the shovel and the fan,”  that this will be because humanity will elevate animals so much, and will nurture their traits and the rest of their spirit, that it would be impossible to entertain the thought that man would take his children in spirit whom he has nurtured, caused to proliferate, improving them and to making them intelligent, and then to sacrifice them with seething cruelty. Therefore, the Torah embedded sacrifices with a condition: “according to your will shall you sacrifice”, to teach us what the level of society is during the era of sacrifices.  Therefore, the Torah creates a relationship between sacrifices and the north, and it is our national heritage that that side is [considered] deficient in its completeness, “the world is like a patio, and the northern wind does not circumvent it” (Bava Batra 25a), to teach us that only because of human deficiency is there a place for sacrifices, so long as there is an enjoyment of meat from living things for non-sanctified purposes, and [even] further in that much later time period when [the eating of meat is still] appropriate for the guarding of the ethical perfection [so that we do not slide back]. Certainly the ethical fruit is going ripen much earlier for the Jews, they will still be doing sacrifices, (Isaiah 56:7) “their burnt offerings and their sacrifices shall be accepted on My altar, for My house shall be called the house of prayer for all nations.”  And the ultimate fate will be that the “mountain of God” will be Mount Moriah, that it should be a source of “orah” [light] and “horiah” [teaching] to the world. And it will be a "house of prayer" instead of a "house of sacrifices."
However, the whole time this ethical state continues, from all of its aspects, whether from the aspect of the weakness of human physicality, which also comes from the ethical weakness of our own sins and the sins of our fathers, or from the aspect of ethical weakness, humanity still has to be "bandaged" with regards to the eating of animal. How disgusting is it, for man’s table to be filled, but his Master’s table empty? For his own animalistic needs, man is willing to kill an animal, but to show an inner recognition of gratitude for God’s kindness, he’s unwilling to offer a sacrifice from the best of his sheep and cattle? Therefore, this is needed for human culture during the process towards success, that as nations and kingdoms all gather together to serve God, they will [desire to] express from the depths of their souls a deep appreciation [in a way] that has the most impact according to man’s nature and emotions. And this also teaches [man] that the honor and gratitude towards the Master of Everything, the Gracer of goodness and kindness, is more [important] than one’s own feelings, until all of humanity rises itself up to the abstain from meat, which he will no longer need, because [man's] natural strength will be stronger because of the blessings of nature, and from the traits of souls that are good and strong in lofty ethics. Then, all sacrifices from living things will be nullified, except for the thanksgiving offering of bread. Only the mincha will be pleasant to God, as it is stated about it, (Leviticus 2:1) “and when a soul offers a mincha offering to God.”  [Only] the mincha comes from the approval of the pure soul of humanity.
And how beautiful is the prohibition of mixing animals, [whether] by leading [them together for work in a field] or by cross-breeding them. This is to teach the entire rule of cruelty [to animals], that one should not go outside the bounds of morality; one should care for their honor and the balance of their strengths.
However, for a purpose of humanity such as this, the only thing that will bring future generations to this is the keeping of these lofty chukim that are designated to sow the seeds of righteousness. For the heart cannot be transformed except through the emergence of a multitude of actions over the course of many generations which are directed towards a lofty ultimate purpose. And the ultimate purpose, even though it can only be perceived by individuals who understand it, when that time comes when it is proper for the entire nation to inherit it, this impact will be accepted and closely guarded. If so, anyone who keeps the chukim of the Torah is doing (Deuteronomy 33:21) "God’s righteousness", with the whole world in general, and with the Jews especially, and his soul will be filled with light, with the recognition of the greatness of the value of the general goal of the Torah, which can only be completed with the practical keeping of the Torah, that is built with the sagacity of God; (Kiddushin 30a) “I created the evil inclination, and I created Torah as its antidote.” If man's nature is (Genesis 6:5) "only evil all the time", isn’t the Torah a “tree of life” to sweeten [life’s] bitterness? And who is he that takes his share [of responsibility] in this lofty and enlightened future of humanity? Only someone who keeps the Torah. And how great is the shame, and how grievous is the loss, for any soul that can take part of that lofty ultimate purpose, through not separating from the community, and going in the way of life of his nation, even from the aspect of the crass recognition of the masses to recognize the holy mission; how evil and bitter is it when he sees that his own hands have caused him to lose his share in doing the collective good for all of humanity, and for everything that has a living breath. How mighty is that pure feeling of those who see the future purpose. (Malachi 3:18) "Then shall you return, and you will discern between the righteous and the wicked, between he that serves God, and those that do not serve Him;" (Daniel 12:2) "these are for everlasting contempt" and "these are for everlasting life".

Chapter 11

Our young people are going and straying, going and becoming more distant from the way of Torah and faith, and it is making many despair. Many have decided that this matter is unfixable, because [they believe] that such is the way for those who have taken hold of a large portion of European literature, that it is impossible for them to also be religious. However, this is a mistake that has been absorbed from the crass air of the influence of a religion that lacks in knowledge of Torah. Our pure and whole Torah is not guilty of that, God forbid, God forbid. Our Torah is appropriate to be accepted and well understood by the very enlightened wise person, and even more to the wisest of the wise. In truth, the more a person increases his knowledge, the more he increases his faith and his love of the Torah and its commandments. However, his ideas of belief must be refined according to his level of intellectual ability. Certainly if his ideas of belief are mistaken and primitive, and his mind is like one of this generation, sifting through opinions and investigating thoroughly, then obviously his faith will not hold. Therefore, we have no other remedy other than to teach [the young intellectuals] the fundamentals of the Torah in a way that fits and is acceptable, according to all the winds [i.e. movements] that are blowing throughout the world because of increasing wisdom in the world. We have to uproot the crass mistakes they have in their outlooks of knowledge and faith. Then, without a doubt, they will see and they will be enlightened, the gashes in their hearts will be healed and they will recognize there is no need, as in it is not possible, to find a different spiritual idea that will unite the whole nation. Only the concept of the holy and the pure, the idea of pure faith, is all encompassing.
For example, our young people feel that everyone's desire for life will [only] be realized, particularly in our day, through heavy war. The desire for life of an entire nation that wanders in all directions certainly needs fighters. This means not only fighters with swords and with spears, but also those who make great efforts [for the nation], those who unify, those who are involved in the development and the achievement of all the ways of [the nation's] preservation. They see in Zionism the desire of the nation's soul. Besides for that, they think that the cause for weakness is the idea of faith, casting everything upon God, and therefore the nation does not stand up for itself. Therefore, are they not right to distance themselves from these ideas that weaken the power of the national life? A generation of fighters will come to us who know that the life of the people depends on their efforts and they will do it and be successful. However, let’s see, please: Is it true that the concept of religion of faith and its true understanding cause a barrier to the full efforts of the revival to rebuild that which has been destroyed for our nation and to bring life to its body and spirit? No! The concept of religion these young people have, which stems from their lack of knowledge of Torah, which stems from a lack of teachers who would establish the fundamentals of the Torah with a simple, clear, and deep understanding, [because of this] they have acquired mistaken ideas. These [mistaken] ideas could actually dim the power of life of the national movement, but not if the concept of religion was properly understood.
Our nation has never had any doubt, even from the beginning of its development, that the way to develop its vitality and achieve its establishment depended on its diligence and its efforts. The ethical connection to the value of effort was always to recognize that God gives us the strength to do acts of strength, but it is always dependent on effort and industry on our part. Did we only put in a little effort and a little war for the land that was promised to us by God with an absolute promise to our forefathers? However, it is not lack of effort that causes the pure faith, rather it is strength of heart and perfect hope, which in the end will bring about our soul's desire. It therefore increases strength and bravery, and distances us from despair.  The idea of faith only brings us to the perfection in an all-inclusive and authentic understanding that we are not only built through physical strength, but additionally, and especially, through moral strength that perfects us along with them. That, without a doubt, is the ratified covenant. That is understood by anyone who understands and pays attention to the ways of our people and its inner vitality.
Our nation needs to be perfected according to its spirit; that spirit needs to be built with a full appreciation, from an emotional understanding and an inner recognition, of the great history of our people, and our future as well, and its wondrous possibility that no complete thinker can doubt. The spirit [of this nation] cannot be upheld properly except through the observing of the Torah.
Therefore, just as we need to worry about all of the nationalistic preparations, so too and even more so we need to strive to get our youth, the ones who want to build our nation, to accept faith into their hearts. It should be so accepted and imprinted in their hearts, that they can recognize and know that there is no burden nor a barrier in the path of life of someone who has faith and guards it. If they do meet with some barrier, they have to understand its limits [how much of a barrier it truly is]. And us, for our part, must explain to them how the benefits [of having faith] outweigh the detriments [of that barrier to belief], how this hypothetical small barrier can be a defense, a great salvation, and lasts. How can we explain all of this to them? Only through books of ideas and delving into religion that will have great influence, in a way that will satisfy all the feelings of the heart. Only when many scholars and great sages spend their time working in this field, in the Torah of opinions and the wisdom of morality, the inner-workings of the Torah, will we, without a doubt, be able and be successful in revealing the light within the Torah and presenting it to our generation in a way that capture the heart, like how Maimonides, Rav Saadia Gaon, and Rabbi Yehuda Halevi did for their generations.

Chapter 12

If the entire purpose of the Torah was only in order to prepare souls for morality and spiritual feelings solely for the present, then truthfully, it should be possible that it should change every generation according to the [ethical] awareness of that generation. [If this were true,] then deed and its observance, with intent and details, with all of the teachings that empower the observance [of the commandments] in practice, would no longer be a priority. However, the purpose of the Torah is not only for the present, but [also] for the future, and the very far off future as well, which is very exalted and broad. All of the deeds and commandments in the Torah are long chains, tying the present to the future. Therefore, actual observance [of the commandments] is a great fundamental. The Kuzari built the foundation of his book on the phrase “Your intentions are desirable, but your deeds are not,” and the emergence [of an idea] developed from this that the exactitude of deeds are of primary importance in the Torah.
However, our generation needs a very specific explanation why the deeds are so important, for they find in the deeds only external religiosity, and they therefore find it easy to disparage them. They view all religions as equal, and they don’t pay attention to the difference between Judaism and our Torah [on one hand], and all other writ and religions [on the other]. Rabshakeh spoke (II Kings 18:33-38) about the Jewish god like the pagan gods,  without knowing the immeasurably broad distinction. People of our generation don’t care to understand the differences in value between the Torah of Israel (which all wise people admit is the mother of religions), and all [other] writ and religion.
Therefore, it is incumbent upon us to explain, to analyze, and to delve deeply, to enlighten the eyes of those who are (Cf. Isaiah 50:10) "walking in darkness", but not with noise and antagonism. It is upon us to judge favorably even the most mistaken of their opinions. (Jeremiah 50:6) “Wandering sheep is my nation, their shepherds have lead them astray”; their shepherds are also lost shepherds, who have been lead astray by those who have lead them. Without anyone to straighten out the path, and without anyone standing in the breach providing a way out of perplexity, (Isaiah 9:17) “they will be overcome by the intensity of the smoke.” And the perplexity has kept growing, to the point that they have lost the way. Instead of [the Torah appearing as] upright paths, ways of pleasantness in the Torah, they view them in their eyes as a great confusion and perplexity. Their souls which thirst for light, lead them to falsehood, which they find by rejecting Torah and faith.
Therefore, it is upon us to explain even the things that appear to us as obvious. If they appear as simple to us because we are placed in the light, we, who have been raised from our youth in Torah and its commandments, it’s because we more easily understand the value of Torah and keeping it, at the very least in a measure that is enough to love it and a desire to keep it. But for these children who are astray, whose education has not helped them in unfortunate times to love the Torah, but rather to hate it, with them we need to start from the beginning. We should not [view it] as a burden upon us to explain every little leaning, which because it has been closed off, causes them to go astray. By being explained, much light will be able to fill much darkness.
Were it true that the entire point of the Torah was only to accustom man in submission and subjugation to God (which is how people understand it now), then of course exactitude of deed would be secondary and intent would be primary. However, even if it is a very important thing to accustom the psyche to worshipping and cleaving to God (for these form a stake and cornerstone for all morality and good process), these are not the only things that will save humanity and all living things. To come to this fortunate axiom of the perfection of their development, [we have] one all-inclusive ethical principle, which springs from a source of true recognition of the relationship between man to his creator, and his spiritual soul. But life is very broad, it’s very long, and it spreads out into the distant future; the commandments of the Torah are wondrous instructions to bind the future to the present, and this program is completed with the establishment of the entire vision. When deed is lacking, there could still be this intent and yearning for cleaving with love for his creator, but he will still remain underdeveloped, still not knowing at all how this will fulfill the goal that the Higher Intellect finds appropriate to deal with this great creation.
Once we recognize that the commandments are not empty symbols which can be filled up with any representation or make-up that a person invents with in his heart and spirit, but are rather paths of tangible axioms, which fulfill the great purpose of bringing the whole of humanity, at the very least, to the desired future, then, the teaching will be very clear that it is impossible to think that intent is the most important thing, and action is [just some] coarse shell, to be proper for the enlightened to disparage. We will just recognize that action, like the intent, is essential, and its essence is very precise. Even though the general principle that covers all other religions is not missing from our holy Torah, meaning, the spiritual refinement of man in his relationship with his creator, through his inner ethical feelings; but that is only one percent of the multitude of goals which all coalesce and all emerge from the treasury of Torah, when it is kept in all of its exactitude and details.

Chapter 13

Worship and rebellion are related to each other in many ways. There are many claims in the world of ideas, that on their own can curdle hearts, and take the vitality of Torah and religion away from the masses. With just a bit of extra explanation, while deep and heartening, these very ideas themselves can make hearts take heed, and bring them closer to Torah and to faith.
Faith in the Oral Torah, and the seeking of fixing religion according to the zeitgeist (which brings a great darkness to the world), go hand-in-hand on a psychological level. The depth of these passions come from a single force, but they go and detach from each other, one turning towards the path of holiness, and one towards causing blasphemy and desecration of all that is holy, (Ezekiel 28:24) “a prickling thorn.” But once we explain to those passionate souls the basis of their claims, and how [their claims] should best be judged, then the anger will die down, and hearts will return to their rightful places.  It is not right to be silent about this, where a defender of faith comes to make a claim, and he gives no other room for a claim of another point of view, thinking that there should be no room in the heart at all for these sensational claims. He will not be successful in his endeavor [to defend beliefs], for claims [always] have a basis to them. One just has to know where they come from, and [how to] respond according to the level best suited for them.
There is no doubt in the world that the basis for holding on to the Oral Torah with the Written Torah is so that the Torah can be expounded upon in Bet Din in every generation. Their rulings, even though they are accepted in essence, have many fine details, innumerable. And in the very distant future, there will definitely be new interpretations that will be extremely helpful, according to the generation and the times. Perfect faith is [believing] that the true foundation of the Torah is that any Bet Din representing Jewry that has the support of the community can interpret the Torah for any doubt. However, the Bet Din needs to be “in the place that God chooses.” Obviously, that means that it’s impossible to have a strong and secure center without us having the Holy Temple, and a king, and an establishment that protects us from any obstacles, in the land of our forefathers.
The sealing of the Talmud was a preparation for the needs of the exile and was very necessary, done under the live central [authority] that has [since] ceased to exist because of our sins. Therefore, if someone wants to destroy the centrality of the Talmud by expressing his contempt for its laws and customs in the nation, because his personal vision is that he feels that this is a burden and a definite deficiency, he is damaging the soul of the nation and its centrality, and he disconnects the links in the [chain toward the] great goal of our Torah on his part.
Don’t doubt it for a moment, that when we merit to have the true Oral Torah, the Great Bet Din in the Chamber of Hewn Stone for example, “in the place where God chooses”, with national strength, fortified and safe, we will no longer be shackled to the sealed Talmud. They will [then] interpret the Torah and decide as they see fit. [Look at] Anan the Karaite also, who said, “Search diligently in the Torah [on your own, and don't rely on my opinion]," in a time of exile and scattering, and he caused more sins, and he caused a part of the Jewish people to break off, and caused them to separate from the nation of God. And if the majority of our nation had listened, one cannot even begin to explain what a disaster this position of free-mindedness would be, bringing affliction to Israel to crush them.
But when we are nationally secure, full of vigor and strength, then will not (Micah 4:2) “Torah will come from Zion”? The Oral Torah will be revived, and it will return to its greatness, and will certainly be an upright activity with the Written Torah. Scripture writes, (Deuteronomy 17:11-12) “Do not deviate from the things that they declare to you, right or left. And the man that does so presumptuously and does not listen to the priest… [shall be put to death],”  and (Deuteronomy 17:9) “the judges that will be in your days,” and that would be fulfilling it in its fullest understanding. Then, the nation would no longer be able to complain of having to endure the decrees that are no [longer] according to the times, and that there are teachings that are no [longer] relevant to the generation, for it will only be the judges of that generation who will be the Torah leaders, and [only] to them [will people] be obligated to listen to. But someone who wants to “force the end [time to come]”, and to be accustomed to making explications that we are only obligated and able to uphold when we have the Temple, [saying] that we should do them while still in our dispersion and weakness, and he breaches the boundary of the lofty national center, the Talmud and its finalization, because of the pleasure of the moment, and interpretations of the aesthetic of the times, exchanges the everlasting world for a passing world in the context of the nation, and brings chaos to the world. The rule for our nation, through the natural inclination that was given by the kindness of the Divine Intellect even to all lowly insects, is that it runs away from this kind of “improvement” as if it were a snake. Not only do these interpretations not bring national improvement in regards to freedom and increasing strength, but they only allow in too much of the inclination towards extremism. We learn this in every generation, and even more in our weak generation, of the suffering caused because of those many “improvers” [reformers], who speak a lot but don’t even do a little, who are sure about their “hairs that float in the air”, to destroy full worlds and ancient everlasting mountains with the inanity of their mouths.
The foundation of the Oral Torah is spoken about explicitly in the Written Torah, that anything that is too difficult to decide, whether it is civil law or criminal law, should be done only according to the verdict they have announced to us from the place that God chooses.  See, the “difficulty” [that is too difficult to decide] can be cut in many ways, for there are many facets to the doubt. But all doubts in the world must be decided only by the Great Bet Din in that holy place. The Oral Torah like this makes sense, because that is the beatitude and vitality of the nation. There’s nothing that limits the power of the Great Bet Din to act and to make amendments for the sake of heaven, according to all the needs of the generation, in all the minute details of the commandments. Besides for the [concept that the sages can say] “shev v’al taaseh” , [allowing people to passively abstain from a positive commandment], there is a law that gives the sages the power to uproot something from the Torah, even with an [exhortation] of “kum v’aseh” , which is understood to be for when there is a need and a necessary collective goal. Even though the conclusion of the Talmud Yevamot 90a is that [the sages] do not have the power to uproot something from the Torah, nevertheless, the Great Sanhedrin in the Chamber of Hewn Stone, when they are set up properly, will not be chained to this detail. Behold, Rav Chisda , as well as many other Amoraim, held that Bet Din does [indeed] have the power to uproot something from the Torah, even for a “kum v’aseh”. And if the great Bet Din will decide like those [Amoraim], they certainly have the ability to do that, for it makes no sense that we should be chained to the decisions of the deciders of Jewish law [who came] after the Talmud. There were also medieval authorities who sided with Rav Chisda, and when there is a need and a proper reason, Tosafot  has written that they do have the ability to uproot something from the Torah, even a “kum v’aseh”, specifically if they can come to it through expounding the text, as we find,  “I have found a verse and I have expounded it.” It’s like what the sages said in [Tractate] Sanhedrin  about the change in the [Torah’s] font, which they find support for with the verse, “mishneh Torah” [change/copy of the Torah],  the font of the Torah will be changed in the future. If the great Bet Din brings proofs [for their positions] from Scripture by way of interpretation and support-texts, then nothing is uprooted from the Torah at all. Specifically, we don’t have a clear tradition regarding which specific details of Jewish law are “laws of Moses from Sinai”, and which ones are things that were decreed and expounded by Bet Dins in each generation.
Therefore, [we see that] certainly the great Bet Din has the power over all the details of the Torah to amend and to innovate when there is a need. Anyone who rebels against them, whether to be more lenient or to be more strict [than what they say], he is transgressing and rebelling against Bet Din, and he is judged like a “zakein mamre” , because he is uprooting the foundation of the nation and its center. To illustrate, it is a Tannaic argument whether we can determine the reason for Torah [commandments]. [So,] if the great Bet Din establishes that the law is like the [opinion] that [Bet Din] can establish a reason for the commandments,  as well as to innovate many laws according to those reasons, they definitely have that ability. Anything that comes out by their approval is the complete Torah. Don’t be concerned at all, God forbid, that the Torah would be nullified through this, for all the ways of the Torah are pleasant ways and paths of peace.  If Bet Din needs to innovate some details, they are certainly causing the framework of Torah to be strengthened, enriching our nation, physically and spiritually.
It’s understood that just like the great Bet Din will have the power to be lenient at times regarding things which are normally strict when they have found a satisfying reason and support for it in the Torah, so too they will definitely be allowed and obligated to be strict at times when there is a time of necessity for such a thing, to make restrictions for the Torah, to strengthen and bolster it. If so, whenever the nation is fastidious in keeping the commandments, the Bet Din similarly will be able to be more lenient at times regarding whatever fences and restrictions [they want to be lenient with]. Without this, then there would be much more breaching and emotional weakness of religion. So, they will need to be stricter, and make fences for the Torah.
Therefore, one of the conditions for the early development of our national life in the future is that we should be accustomed in general to go in an upright path, and keeping the way of the Torah and its commandments. Then, there is hope that when we merit to a national life in all of its details, along with a living center for the Oral Torah as well, that all upright opinions will agree how it is appropriate to cherish and keep anything that comes from them with all alacrity and strength. This is certainly a Torah commandment, explicit in the Written Torah. Then, our moral instruction, of keeping the Torah and the commandment according to the center we are accustomed to in the exile, the center of Talmud, and of law-deciders who understand it, will be able to be taken over by the great Bet Din in the national life, without the necessity for fences and decrees. But, if there will be too much breaching, and [if] religious feeling, which is the national life, will be very weak, then they will be forced to burden [people] with fences and strictness. It’s understood that these will form the footsteps of the nation in its development. But this is how it has to happen. For [our] ethical status, and full religious feeling, is the foundation of the life of the nation and its germination. Therefore, any person who passionately and truly loves his nation, and wholeheartedly desires its advancement, lifting the burden of Torah and its commandments on his shoulders with love, with every material in them according to the customary eternal way of Jews, according to the center of the Talmud, which is standing for us in place of the great Bet Din, until that glorious time when our judges will be returned as [it was] originally. Then, from Zion will Torah and light come out to all of Israel, even to all of humanity. (Isaiah 2:3) "And many people will go, and they shall say, ‘Come, let us go up to the Mount of the Lord, to the House of the God of Jacob; that God may instruct us in God's ways, and that we may walk in God's paths.’ For instruction shall come forth from Zion, the word of God from Jerusalem."
This is the goal that is proper for any wise-hearted person to bind to his heart, to greatly cherish the means which bring [us] to a glorious end-goal, and to know that it is completely impossible for the end-goal to happen unless there is an expanding of the means. With this trait, when he matures properly, making room for the trait of lofty patience, [he has a trait] that many successful nations have been endowed with. Therefore, they carry that burden with love, and many generations labor for the sake of the lofty concept of purpose in the end. This is the courage of any wise person, that he toils in all the preliminary investigations for the perfection of his wisdom. So too is the courage of the whole nation that recognizes the value of its purpose, to love all of the broad means that bring them to this [point] with all the modes of its state. If we can at all, [we should] view our bitter national life in the exile only through the lens of it being as a means to our true national life, which will come to us in our land when we come to the center of our national completeness.
Therefore, we should love as well all of the ways for our preparation and support to uphold our national life in our exile and dispersion, and our unity and our representation as a living nation. We will be set to accept the seal of the perfect nationality, which will come to us to revive the life of our true nationality. This will happen through us guarding, with honor and love, the spiritual national center, our life-conduct according to the Talmud, whose seal has already been set for the nation for 2,000 years. A life according to the Talmud would not cause all kinds of crisis for us, God forbid. It will not hold back our national development in any way. We must strive to increase enlightenment in our nation, wisdoms and sciences, strengthening the body and the soul, handiwork and art, a fierce spirit, and self-recognition, as is appropriate to a nation that is glorious and full of power. And all of these are acquired together with moral boundaries by way of the teachings of the Talmud.
There are some things where, according to current ideas, there is no compelling reason to them, except for the superior side of morality that says that it is possible to find a reason in trends like these, where we no longer know the values that many laws are built upon, which we have to uphold with faith. An even easier [response] that will calm down any seeker, would be to say that it is upon us to guard our national center, which we don’t have when we don’t have national fortification with full reach to a glorious and agreed-upon center, in a national form like this. Therefore, we must distance ourselves from any change or innovation that drags along [with it] a breach in the wall of the Talmud, which is the storehouse of the Oral Torah, which our future hope and complete mission is built upon. It is proper for us to bear whatever burdens [we have to] for that sake, for the ethical end-goal and national end-goal together, until the time our power returns to us. Then, our judges will lead us from “the place that God will choose”, in an upright way, directed by the aura of the Living Torah, with a much more expanded interpretation, according to what is appropriate for us, according to our good status during the good times that will come with the help of God.
The agreed-upon rule in the Talmud  is that a Bet Din cannot nullify a fellow Bet Din’s ruling unless it is greater than it in wisdom and number. But this cannot possibly stop the complete Great Bet Din from ruling on things that were agreed-upon in the Talmud, to decide upon them, just like we judge any agreed-upon thing from [modern-day] halachic deciders by way of logic and proofs from the Talmud. [This can be understood] from many angles. Firstly, in general, the sealing of the Talmud happened from the acceptance of the entire nation for the Talmud to express [how] lawgivers judged according to [its principles] for all ways of the Torah. This acceptance, however, was because of exile and dispersion. If that’s true, ipso facto it’s understood, that we will have a full and secure national revival, where we won’t have to abandon the root of the Oral Torah, which is spoken about explicitly in the Torah,  “from the place that God will choose”, a living center. This is because the [Talmud’s] seal is only because of exile. Certainly, the entire nation will not accept it upon them until the time that our national powers fully return to us. Furthermore, that [rule] was only about amendments and decrees [of the Bet Din]. But things that were said by way of reason and logic, the depth of the law is that you only have [to rely] on the judge in your days, and “Yiftach in his generation was like Shmuel in his generation.”  Without all of that, our complete hope will be fulfilled only when our natural powers return to us, like the days of old, “the day when God will bind up the breach of His people.”  And then, when a new and vibrant life will be awakened within us, and they will be "learners of God," and it will be a very lofty level, to the extent there will no longer be the foundational rule [of the authority of the sages], that the pressure of the exile, in which each day is immensely worse than the day before, causes hearts to become continually smaller, and “if the earlier [sages] were like angels, we are like [regular] people.”  But when the settling of Israel will burst forth and flower in the land of the forefathers, our previous strengths will return, with more intensity, with more strength, and God will save from those who rise up against us. The ability for prophecy, as well, which our nation had back then, will return to us, and no one will be able to say that our Bet Din is smaller in wisdom and number in comparison to the earlier sages, and will rather be much loftier, exalted, and higher. Knowledge and fear of God, with all kinds of understanding and knowledge of the Torah, of its clarity and truth, will return to us in high degree. When we have these wise leaders appointed for the Bet Din of Israel, we should have no concern, not about them making errors in sentencing (for God will attend to their ways), nor for [them] holding back because of religion and faith in the way of life. For “God’s Torah is perfect”,  always giving strength to Israel, protection to wholesome people.
I know, though, that this lofty idea can be damaging to light thinkers who want to “push the end-time”, chasing after the distance future when it’s not its proper time. They are “damaging foxes”,  for even though their feelings are lofty and exalted, their spirit is not the calm [kind of] spirit that is appropriate for any upright individual that knows what’s in front of him. A person whose mind is settled has no stirring at all of his heart’s desires for the future from besieging his mission. He upholds and does all of the commandments of the Torah according to the teachings of our sages, the founders of the Talmud, and he recognizes with an inner awareness how to fulfill the true ethical obligation for the life of the nation and its destiny. That is precisely the depth of the end of the word of the truth – the will of God and His work, that He desires righteousness, justice, and all types of good.
The obligation is upon us to learn an understanding of these young people, and enlighten them with pleasantness and love. Do not turn your back on their ambitions, and nullify with mere words! Rather, explain to them all of the required steps we need to pass through until we get to that fortunate end-purpose.
Take the sick man who is forbidden from [doing things] because of his sick state, in ways that are not necessary for a healthy person. If he is a prudent person, he will not hate [those rules], and he will uphold them with love and patience, all the while hoping to reach the natural delight of a completely healthy person. Such is the way of our nation when it comes to religious behavior that is according to the sealed Talmud, which is a great bandage to the wound that is the exile. It may be heavier than how the behavior of our holy religion would be under a life that is natural and healthy. But how greatly disastrous [would it be] if we foolishly say, “We are healthy! We don’t need these prescription of medical restraint!” while our blow is still fatal and our sickness is so great, while we are still far from even the shadow of a secure nation, when it comes to us, which is a disease that troubles us. Therefore, the things that we have decided to bear have to be beloved and favored by us, for from them are a source for our house’s life.  Something that has yet to be clarified by settled minds is whether the Talmud’s portion of practical morality is proper to bear for an enlightened and delighted nation to go in the way of life that is rich and successful, materially and ethically in holiness, and with true justice. Indeed, there are many things that only those with hearts filled with madness think are obstacles and burdens. It is up to us to hope that our peoples will be rebuilt, and will be established in the style of a holy nation, full of a pure life’s power, stocked with justice, and filled as well with a spiritual enjoyment, more pure than physical pleasure (which brings down the individual’s value system, and with that also the spirit off the collective nation.)
An additional thing to consider is we reach our natural state, we will begin to love the laws of God’s Torah again, to take pleasure in the grandiosity and pure moral grace that is gushing out upon them, to the point where the pure, natural tendency will be to yearn to increase Torah and to glorify it, and we will have joy and gladness of heart when involving [ourselves] in the minutiae of Torah law, and upholding it with learning, and with action, to the point where there no hunger at all, nor any desire for an empty life of abandon for those who sign up to worship God and follow the Torah. This is what the prophet was saying, “I will put my Torah in their hearts, and I will inscribe it onto their hearts,”  “I will take away the heart of stone from your flesh, and I will give you a new heart of flesh,”  “[And I will put my spirit inside of you,] and cause you to follow my laws.”
Nothing has ever pained us and exacerbated the wounds of our nation as much as all the ways of extremism and division have. To illustrate: because of historical events and education, passion for learning Talmud has grown stronger in recent centuries. [Because of that,] we have accepted many wonderful morals, we have acquired a national force through the boundary of religious emotion and faith, and [we have] extra fondness for all our holy [religious] emotions which come from an increase of Torah and its glorification. This certainly cannot be denied. However, with all of that, we also became more deficient, spiritually and physically, and a large portion of people who diligently labor in Torah have become weak-bodied. [We became] deficient in the necessary sciences of man as he is, and [we became] deficient in ethics that come as a result of uniting the work of the intellect, specifically with the details and nuances of Jewish law, where [we] pay attention to the heart’s feelings, and make sense of moral rules.
However, all these disadvantages didn’t occur to us because of our diligence in learning and keeping the Talmud, but rather because of the exaggerated extremist [position] that we cannot allow in any room for education from others: to train [us] in wisdom and the sciences, to [show us how to] strengthen our bodies, and to expand knowledge and reasoning in regards to the morality of the Torah. The leaders of every generation already cried out about this, but because of our lack of spirit we didn’t listen to them. This tendency towards extremism hurts us in every area, [whether it’s] extremism in regards to education, in [one’s] actions, or, in the same vein, extremism in regards to [theological] opinions. Once upon a time, our nation understood the value of separating itself from the nations which the Torah spoke about, and they felt it in their hearts well, as a natural understanding that includes all refinements and all of the tools which were outside of learning the Torah. Therefore, many turned their backs on all the power and demand of the rest of the spirit that comes from the influence of the nations that we live amongst.
However, now that [our] generation has come to the realization that this is not a negative [thing], and we don’t have to separate ourselves at all from the rest of humanity in the world, in terms of what’s relevant to a good life for humanity, an extremism on the edge has also come from that, which decided something which [must] be completely denied. [That extreme position] said that our attitude towards faith and religion should be the same as [the way] all other nations relate to their religions. And that [idea], really, is what we should separate from.
It is impossible for all other religions in the world to have nationalism as essential to them.  Some of them are completely cosmopolitan, and they are not connected at all to building their nation. Some of them have nationalism, but it is not possible for them to have nationalism as integral to them (meaning that all of their religious endeavors would be necessary conditions for the preservation of the nation), since never has there been a single [other] religion that has come to establish a nation from the start of its creation to its development. For this thing could only happen with a divine force, “has God ventured to go and take Him a nation from the midst of another nation…[like God did for you?]”  Therefore, in those cosmopolitan religions, when a nationalist force matures in the nations, there is a weakening of religious feeling, because they don’t really need [religion anymore] to tie the nation together, and natural ethics are already able to preserve any nation’s culture, with the help of science and moral cognition. Nationalist religions also would not really be needed to preserve their nation, for the nationalist feeling had already come to fill that which was being filled [by religion], for all of those religions are not nationalistic except by happenstance.
But our religion, which only through its wondrous history, guaranteed in every era only because of its Torah and tradition, did we get our wonderful nationalistic strength (which no wind in the world can move from its place), and the religious spirit worked on us until all of our life and our ways were made better through religious Zionism, and they placed us into one group in the world. We don’t have anything else in the world that has the same power of binding, to bind all the scattered of our nation into one organic body, as we have the religious unity that is in practice constantly in life. And we have nothing that scatters our nation’s strength to the wind, and shatters it to pieces, like the nullification of that religious unity.
The difference that there were between us and the other nations, from which came national hatred, also came as result of the difference in lifestyles, which is derived from religion. However, how strange is it, the lifestyles of those who keep the commandments, and those who have thrown off that yoke? Such a huge difference like that cannot exist between someone who has thrown off the yoke of keeping the commandments of action, and a person from the nations we are immersed in. We must educate others that this difference in style causes hatred between brothers, which is [even] harsher than the national hatred that disgusting nations have. We have no connection whatsoever to that which we find, that in all fixed nations who have abandoned religion but nevertheless participate in everything to do with nationalism, and their nationhood is not eclipsed from their viewpoint. All nations, specifically the ones we are immersed in, do not have a religion that encompasses their lives. It’s possible for a person who keeps his religion and believes in it to interact with a person who abandoned his religion in all ways of life, to eat in his house with him, to be a guest as well during his holidays and Sabbaths, and to enter as well into a marriage contract between their children. This is not true for us. The man who keeps the Torah, is he able to eat anything in the house of one of our brothers who eats nonkosher food? And someone who desecrates the Sabbath and holidays, [we] are unable to eat with him at his table the food he cooked on the Sabbath, or [food] he made on the holidays in a forbidden way, [food] that was purchased from the marketplace on the holiday, and things like that. Whoever does not keep the laws of family purity, a person who keeps the Torah has to be concerned about, and shy away from, marrying off [children] with him. Those children are “damaged”, in that they are children of a menstruating woman. That impression stays in the heart, and stands forever, and hatred will inevitable burst forth from that. Changing this unique character works against the unity of the nation.
Therefore, besides all the great value of the splendor and glory of the divine holiness that is in our holy Torah (which is the light of the world and life for those who grab onto it), it is upon us to recognize that keeping religion is the top tool of nationhood. And between all of the national tools that we have to worry about them, on how we can acquire them and develop them, it is proper that there should be inquiry into what to do with all of our people, to teach them to walk in the way of Torah, and to live according to faith and religion in all of its ways, to be a top priority.

Chapter 14

Investigating the reasons [underlying] the commandments is also a part of the secrets of the Torah. Secrecy was of extreme necessity, for it is completely impossible for the specific [aspects of the commandments] to be understood according to their general rules, except by great enlightened ones who discipline themselves, even in the way they live, according to lofty ethical heights, and whose minds are settled. But most of the many investigators [of the reasons for the commandments] could not recognize the relationship between the specifics and the general rules, and the reasons [for them], and they therefore disparage the specifics through their revealing of the general reasons. As the sages said, (Sanhedrin 21b) "Why weren't the reasons of the Torah revealed? Because there were two commandments whose reasons were revealed, and the greatest of the generation stumbled because of them."
However, just as most of man’s success comes [to him] through pain and tribulation, and for most, it is only necessity that brings [them] to seek some strategy to save themselves, and because of that, a good society grows, so too the revealing of the reasons for the commandments also comes from necessity, because of those of stubborn heart who destroy things, who raise a sledgehammer against the entirety of the Torah. Therefore, it is incumbent upon us to defend [the Torah], with our teachings of the light that’s in it, as much as we can. Then, through this necessity, it will come out that many reasons for the commandments will be explained. We should not be ashamed [to do so], for this is “a time to do for God.”
And there is added benefit in this, for when the necessity of defending the roots of the Torah causes the clarification of the reasons for the commandments, the common conception of keeping the particulars of the [commandments] will not be damaged, for time has already shown enough, how the general principles have been abandoned because of the abandonment of the particulars. If so, it is enough for us to have general reasons, [which explain] the necessity of the principles, to make sure that the details are also kept, besides for common foundational reasons, which necessitate the fact of the details also for their own value.
The holiness of the Torah must always be combined with any reasonable reason [for the commandments], for clear knowledge of how the keeping of the glorious spiritual center that is the Torah is an uplifting thing for the Jews for all generations, which forms the basis of all reasons [of the commandments].
For example, the commandment of (Leviticus 19:27) “Do not destroy the corners of your beard.” Let us examine the reasoning which is the most simple one, which is that there was an idea in their days that hewing the beard was a symbol of wrecking of one's visage because of mourning and slavery, and the Torah desired to uplift the spirit of the nation of Israel in their exodus from slavery to freedom, and so it forbade them from anything that destroyed the glory of the face, like (Deuteronomy 14:1) “Do not cut yourselves and do not make any baldness… [for the dead],” and so on “You are children to God your God,” the Sages commented, “and [therefore] it is appropriate for you to be pleasant and shouldn't be ‘cut’.”
Behold, from the reasoning of preserving the spiritual center that is in the Torah, and the knowledge that this is the counsel of God to teach the way of life: if the nation begins to treat it a bit lightly, isn't it established that the nullification of one thing will [cause] the nullification of everything? Therefore, God forbid that one letter should be nullified from the Torah, even if the times change [to a time] when a shaven [face] is considered beautiful and glorified. Further, we must comprehend that even with this accepted [opinion], if we consider the unshaven beard as beautiful and glorified, that adds within us an inner beauty and lofty holiness, because [it] connects us to the foundation of the matter that our lives, from their aspect of their loftiness, are dependent on it.
However, in order that one does not deal obliquely with the spirit of the time, openings have already been found for permissibility for decorating [the face] by way of removing the beard, with potions, with tweezers, with a carpenter’s tool, with scissors, etc. And there are ways that work on us to with holy stirrings and uplifting of faith for our holy Torah, when we encircle the beloved actions through loopholes, without transgressing the word of God’s Torah. This imprints the loftiness of the value of the Torah, which is able to somewhat integrate in one’s innards the exalted roots, to the extent of what seems to us to be in the past. With all this, we are to be careful not to transgress its words, because of the divine holiness that’s in it, and the influence of wholeness and consecration of actions, and traits that work on us, being that we feel that we are whole with guarding all of its laws.
The prohibition [regarding] menstruation is also something rational. From the standpoint of the rights of the wife, she shouldn’t be debased by the inflexibility of a husband who is immersed in his crass desires. From the perspective of guarding of the expansion of our nation, the days of menstruation are not fit for conception, and the nation will be diminished because of the breach in this holiness. Those who are born from a menstruation pregnancy, they are prone to diseases and lesions, as is known by medicine. Furthermore, a woman’s mind is bothered during this aching, and her spirit is broken, and she is prone to depression and lowliness. Children born during a mood such as this are not prone to holiness and uplifted soul and the spirit of God. Therefore, anyone who breaches this holy fence, concerning God’s property forever and for generations, is “cutting the holy shoots”, and bears the iniquity.
The rule that menstruation [laws] continue until she immerses herself, is because of the return of the holiness and pure spirit, and uplifting of the soul, for the knowledge that spiritual purity has returned to her has the impact to shift her from [her] sullied mindset, which had degraded the glory of spiritual feelings. [She will feel] that when spirituality stays at a lowly level, only the crass, animalistic feelings can take over and rule, and the offspring [of this] continues in this sullied animalistic quality. Therefore, it is necessary that making oneself sanctified from being in menstruation be stamped with the seal of religion, and with a feeling of holiness, for only then will spiritual purpose come, which isn’t true for simple washing which is only imprinted with a feeling of physical cleanliness. However, in order so that the immersion should have this characteristic, which can lift the trait of spiritual purity onto her, it has to be defined as 40 sa’ah of water, which the entire body can fit into. Only then will this be a guaranteed certainty, that this washing will be a fixed [ritual], without disparagement. [The water must] be specifically in the ground, and not in vessels, because [vessels] are overtly about physical cleanliness, and so with drawn [water], which also only has a feeling of physical purity, without the uplifting of spirit and necessary holiness. The water that is gathered by flowing naturally can also be from spilled water, which is very much the opposite of physical cleanliness. Therefore it is necessary that imbedded [in this] is that the gathered water should be specifically a natural pool, which, for the most part, is prepared [for it], and it will end up also fitting with the [concept of] simple purity, which is also necessary. A spring, which doesn’t need to be maintained so much, is kosher in any fashion.
Since there is a foundation that is the foundations of these matters, through which a seal of holiness is established, then these things have an impact on the feelings of the soul, when the matter is spread throughout the nation, and progresses for generations.
Therefore, only through the keeping of the details does the purpose come out to its end, and by abandoning them one destroys the place where all these lofty things stand, which are foundations for the holiness of the Jewish collective forever. Other nations do not need such a guarding of their spirit. However, Israel is brazen. Religious feeling and the holy spirit that is exalted in them needs more handle and care, and much spiritual elevation....
Chapter 14-1
There are other people who think that a person can only properly have perfect faith in the Moses’ true Torah only if one also believes that other faiths are all “false and foolish” , and that there is nothing positive in holding on to them. But it’s not true. However, there are ideas that the Jewish nation are accustomed to, which cause much of the masses to think this. This view is indeed useful in that it sometimes strengthens Jewish faith in the hearts of the simple ones, for they cannot understand the lofty value and the holiness of our holy Torah without also thinking of other faiths as mistaken and completely useless. But, there is also much evil that comes from this unperfected view. For, the contempt that is imprinted deep in the heart of the masses for other faiths, also causes those wicked people who throw off the yoke to consider pure Jewish faith the same in this regard, and they say, “Both ways are equal, this is a faith and that is a faith.”
Therefore, to save the young of our generation from an evil corruption such as this, we need to delve into [the topic of] the value of other faiths according to the Torah. And behold, we need to delineate overviews of the faiths of the world into three divisions, apart from the Torah of Israel, for even according to the secular researchers of religions, [Judaism] is the mother of religions.
The lowest of all of them is the faiths of idol worship, which don’t know or recognize a single creator at all. Higher than that are the faiths that have not been cleansed from the traces of idol worship. And higher than that, are faiths clear of all idol worship, but nevertheless walk in a different path from our holy Torah.
Concerning idol worship, we are prohibited from tolerating it in practice. This is something unique to the nation of God. No other nation or culture in the world can compare to us in this regard, for we uphold God in His world for us to be testaments for His honor, for the light of His divinity and His providence, and the knowledge of His blessed name.
Therefore, we are obligated to give over all of our actions, our speech, and our thoughts, the detailed and the general, only to this end, to cause the knowledge of the name of the one God in the world. The human species can reach its perfection, both spiritually and physically, only through the name of God filling the earth. For only then will [man] have the true knowledge affixed in the heart, that all people will be brothers, and obligated to act with love and brotherhood, despite the differences of their nations and countries. Also the lifting of individual human consciousness, to a higher level of pure and true views, is completely impossible without knowledge of the true God. Therefore, idol worship prevents any divine good from appearing in the world. The obligation is uniquely upon us that we should not treat it tolerantly. However, we are not free to hate worshippers of idol worship, and to consider them guilty because they worship idols, for what guilt can we associate with them, after it has become “the actions of their fathers in their hands”? Rather, we need to guard ourselves, and the human collective, that by us lifting up the flag of God and his honor in front of [everyone], recognition of the truth will come. Therefore, it is upon us to distance ourselves very much from anything regarding idol worship and its extensions.
Behold, in this matter there is a general principle and a specific principle. From the standpoint of it being an impediment, where idol worship impedes the collective good of God’s light from coming to the world, in that respect all types of idol worship are equally bad, “You should throw it out like the menstruant, you should say to it, ‘Get out!’”  However, there is another side as well, which is that the basis of idol worship comes from a perspective of crassness, for it is impossible for them to elevate themselves to a greater level, of the purity of mind required to recognize the glory of the one God, master of all creation, blessed be He. Therefore, it must be that moral abominations be found with idolatrous religions, and within that, not all idolatries are the same. For sometimes there are nations whose ethics lift them up, to the extent that despite the fact that they are idol worshippers, they are standing on the proper level with regards to morality, with [good] character traits, and decency, and as a matter of course, their ethical practices and idolatrous worship are not so disgusting and filled with abomination as others are. Therefore, one cannot assume that all idolatrous nations are of one viewpoint and one way.
Behold, even within idolatry, there are sparks of morality. From the perspective of their trepidation, they separate themselves from things that are very evil, every nation according to its ideas, and they bring themselves close to good deeds within human society nevertheless. And the accustoming to good deeds, and the distancing from evil, acts to purify man’s soul. And coming generations, even from these idolaters themselves, are already more prepared for the true light. For through the light of the good character traits and good deeds with which the worthy religions that are found among the idolaters guide their followers, they will come to recognize how distant they stand from the great light that is the knowledge of the glory of the one God, and these religions themselves will be a cause in converting the people to a clear language, all of them to call in the name of God.
In general, it is upon us to understand that inasmuch as the world is driven by the providence of God to bring people to their fortunate goals, therefore it is known that all the time that idolatry is still in existence, there is still a purpose in it. That is, that there are people who have fallen so low in their values, to the extent that they cannot walk on the upright paths, through recognition of the one God, and they cannot ascend to the lofty human traits except by the means of unrefined concepts of idolatry. And if we were to force upon them to accept the yoke of God, and leave behind their idols before they've come to the proper level, then 'instead of wheat we would get a bramble', and instead of helping them, we would be harming them. Because their souls will not be able to absorb the divine light, yet they will abandon their trepidation toward their unrefined idolatry which was holding them from doing many bad things.
For example, one can already imagine a man standing on a level such that only if he says to a chunk of wood, 'You are my father', and sees his god standing next to him in his house looking upon him (as he imagines it) with angry eyes, will he cease doing despicable things, such as murder, theft, adultery, etc. When we initiate him into the higher level of knowledge of the Master of all creation, may He be blessed, his trepidation will be released, and we will effectively lower him from the level he has already acquired from himself.  We are warned against teaching Torah to the nations of the world because we are not certain whether the pure, holy, divine teachings would not in fact actually shatter these imperfected souls.
Behold also in the midst of the darkness of idolatry, it is possible to find individuals pure of heart who would want to reprove and improve the ways of their people.  And since they recognize that the pure, true, divine life is greater than their (fellows') power, they will guide their people in accordance with their (present capabilities) by means of positive mores and practices that bring the people to a greater degree of perfection in the future.  And regarding such individuals, it is stated in Tanna Devei Eliyahu: "I bring as witness heaven or earth, that whether man or woman, whether bondsman or bondswoman, whether gentile or Jew, the holy spirit imbues itself upon all of them according to their actions."  And it's even possible that there will be found exceptional individuals that will be guided by divine assistance in setting ethical mores and practices that in the end will bring those who practice them to recognition of the truth and divine light.  And since such ethical practices guide these people in accordance with their way and capability to ascend step-by-step to higher levels until they come to the true level such by that by the light of the Jewish people they recognize in the end the glory of Hashem, the true God.  These practices possess a religious value which it is truly fitting to hold dear.  And we are able to recognize them, though they stand at a distance, as ones who draw close to the light of Hashem.  And to feel that they are doing what is right for them in holding fast to their cultural tradition and to the practices which their elders established for them, since those elders were at times great visionaries, who elevated themselves for the moral and material betterment of their people.  Therefore, one should not come to the conclusion regarding the entire religion that it is in error, nor to belittle those who hold fast to it and to deride them, except to the degree that it is fitting to arouse our souls to the great goodness and the holy inheritance that has graced us, that He has separated us from those who err and given us a Torah of truth and implanted eternal life within us.  We don't need to concern ourselves with such lowly guiding practices, which according to our lights are in error.  Yet according to their low level, it is indeed possible that they are acting appropriately.
Those religions which were founded upon the basis of the Torah and the prophets, they certainly have a substantial value, for those who hold fast to them, they are close to the light of Hashem and the knowledge of His glory.  Even though they are missing that foundation that is revealed only to individuals amongst them, however, it is also true that Hashem's desire in the world must be finished by the Jewish people just like He, may He be exalted, began His works, showing His glory and greatness by means of this people he chose for Himself, it will likewise be that the conclusion and seal of  God's glory filling the entire world will also be means by the light of Israel.  In any case it is already possible to find amongst them, [shaped] by the great moral principles which they took for themselves from the light of Torah which revived in them with great power, individuals possessing a pure spirit who when they came together established religious practices which fulfill their destiny to elevate the soul to good characteristics and love and fear of God.  Therefore, [adherents of those religions] are certainly obligated to follow the ways of their lawgivers who have been recognized in their nations as holy people according to their levels and characteristics.  
Behold, prophecy has a number of levels, such that the lower levels of holy inspirations, which results from the benefit of pure spirit and a heart filled with enthusiastic energy to be a spokesman for that which is just and true, are also included in prophecy.  And it is appropriate for every nation to follow the advice of the greatest of its accepted and confirmed (spiritual) leaders, who, for the most part, were God-fearing people who considered ways to improve the people's inner life.  Now, the highest level of prophecy, which encompasses knowledge of Hashem and His goodness (as it extends) until the end of all generations.  This is a special inheritance for the Jewish people, so that they may be a reliable locus to serve as the center for the oneness of the knowledge of God in the world.  But the lower levels of arousal to that which is just and good which are not fit to be fixed as a general center for all humanity, but they are fit for a given people to which they have already bonded, it is possible to find these in every people and culture.  Therefore, the religious customs which are set by the rulings of the great and pious of the nations, they are fit to be recognized regarding those nations as a form of a worship of Hashem, and it is not fitting for us to denigrate them whatsoever, for "Hashem is close to all who call upon Him, to all who call upon Him in truth", and "every heart is searching for Hashem". 
The guarding oneself and distancing of oneself which it is fitting for every Jew in particular to practice regarding drawing close to other religions' religious practices and teachings, it is fitting to compare to the distancing of oneself due to modesty regarding the wife of one's fellow, which does not come out of envy and miserliness, God forbid, but rather from a pure soul and holy character traits and deeds.  This is because just like intimacy and gestures of love are appropriate and beautiful to make pleasant and perfect family life, yet, when they pour forth from an outsider, they can foul the family life and its purity, and through keeping our distance from other woman, we are loving her as a human being and exerting ourselves for her benefit.  Likewise are the ethical paths and the ways through which good character traits whose root is the fear of God are acquired thereby.  They are apportioned to every people in accordance with those things which befall it, according to its biological stock, its land, and events which occur regarding material matters and spiritual matters.  And that which impresses the splendor of the light of God and the glory of Heaven on one people will not have the same effect on another people.  Therefore the religious practices are apportioned out as they aim at a single goal: awe of God and acquiring good character traits.  If a man would be so foolish to depart from his ancestral tradition to graze in the vineyards of strangers, those same practices which are fixed not according to the path which is fit for his soul which is imprinted with the nature of another people and which received an imprint the historical matters of his people and its unique stock and all its other matters will turn to treacherous waters.  So that because of this the Sages, may their memory be for a blessing, forbade the non-Jew to engage in the study of the Torah of Israel, and even converts were not desirable to them, and they said "converts are as difficult for Israel as leprosy", however, it is impossible to deny that there is a particular benefit to the religion of Israel which is a fount of Godly light in the world, therefore, with all the specificity that there is for each nation regarding its customs and the content of its ethos, there is also in it a general value, such that it is possible for scattered individuals from the nations of the world to perceive well the general value and the light of the Torah of Israel  for all human beings on the face of the Earth.  Therefore, it's impossible to not accept those who are truthfully striving to enter under the wings of the Shechinah, in order to assist the universal goal of the oneness of the light of Hashem in the world, from which the whole world will be filled with light by increasing power that they impart to the Jewish people, but regarding the particularistic value, it is fit for every person to be satisfied with his religion and cling to it as a stronghold and distance himself from all admixtures created by drawing close in practice to the customs of another religion which is not his patrimony, so that he should not reduce the power of the good teachings whose fruit will be found specifically if he conducts himself in accordance with the way that fell to his portion from the Hand of God according to his birthplace and stock.  

Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18

A great reason for losing one’s connection to Jewish tradition is the failure to prepare students to look beyond the immediate circle of learning Gemara and Halachot.  People were accustomed to think that there is no wisdom in the world superior to learning Halacha, and this approach expanded to encompass the questions and fine points of the Torah.  Therefore, when there were some people who peeked at the broader learning of worldly wisdom, including spiritual teachings, such as theology and divine philosophy, they parted from the Torah entirely.  Therefore, we need to demonstrate in a clear fashion that even according to the Torah, we are obligated to think that great matters of intellectual speculation, such as the elevated matters as the work of creation and the work of the chariot, in accordance with the thought of the Rambam, that is, physics and metaphysics, and in accordance with the truest explanation of the Kabbalists, these include all the spiritual and material wisdoms, to the point that they include also psychology and ethics, and they are indeed intended as an investigative or speculative goal, and as a worthy endeavor for human beings.  And engaging in the halachic portions of Torah, it has as its main goal only to guide one’s actions straight and properly with a Torahitic constraint, which is most necessary and delimits the holiness of Israel, and the it is indeed permissible to consider practical learning not as a goal in itself, but rather as a preparation for action.  Regarding a portion of the Torah which is a goal in itself, it’s possible to apply this to the spiritual aspect of the Torah, whether we are going to the opinion of the philosophers or the Kabbalists.  And there’s also a basis for considering that there’s a significant portion of the Jewish people who are only suited for practical learning (…)
By means of depth and breadth, towards the love of Torah, it brings one in a general sense to the most universal, elevated goal, also considering that it’s impossible to limit every investigation to that boundary which is necessary for practical purposes, but rather as one finds it’s necessary to expand and explain, from the richness of these matters, one will find enough to satisfy the demand for practical Torah.  In any case, when one accustoms oneself to to knowledge, to become familiar with Torah and halachic learning, in accordance with their true value,  and to know that there’s a place in the heart with them to seek and to yearn for great and wide expanses of knowledge that sweep away through their natural radiance the soul of a person.  Yet, even with this, that which needs to be given to Halachot and their observance is not reduced at all.  A place will be found which silences the argument which rages in those who turn to other wisdoms and literature and those who engage in Torah.  All of them will be Torah observant and walk in the path of Torah as is appropriate.   
It’s truly the case that the value of any particular knowledge does not reduce the claim of observing those conclusions which are not encompassed by it.   For example, a person can think that knowledge of astronomy is greater than knowledge of medicine, nevertheless even though he chooses astronomy as his field of endeavor, he will certainly behave if he is a sensitive soul according to the hygenic guidelines of medicine.  Everyone is liable to think that knowing the local rules of regulation of his realm has less value than those wisdoms that have a general value.  Nevertheless, he won’t belittle because of this the necessity to observe all the laws that are for the good of his realm.  Therefore it is a great disaster that we have accustomed ourselves to see people in one of two ways: either one thinks that there’s no wisdom in the world that can compare to studying Halacha and its minutiae and then he will be one who keeps Torah and fears G-d, or he’s already glimpsed that there’s beauty and light in many wisdoms that are distant from the realm of Torah, and it’s already taken root in his mind that the reason for observance on the Torah, which is ingrained in this people, it is inextricably intertwined with that opinion that no worldly wisdom of the world has any value.  Therefore, when this foundation will be for him a refuted value, he’ll find inside himself a void when it comes to keeping the Torah and the mitzvot, which are the essence of the halachot.  Therefore, it’s important to repeat that this notion has no basis in the fundamentals of Torah.  This, despite the fact that it's opposite is also not the case, that it has no value, and people who find themselves capable of investing all of their efforts for Torah for its own sake within the disciple of Halacha and its fine points, happy is their portion.  They do a great good for the House of Israel with this great service of G-d.  But also one whose heart motivates him to judge in accordance with the Rambam that the wisdom of the Torah is in its inner secret dimensions and in its enlightenment, while classic halakhic learning is a great thing because it leads to action.  And if in accordance with his spirit he can't find himself settling down comfortably in the realm of halachot alone, let him take for himself the spiritual disciplines in Torah as his engagement.  And in doing so he is also engaging in Torah, and even if he also engages in other wisdoms, given that he is obligated to fix times for Torah study, nevertheless, he is not in any way exempt from observing all the mitzvoth in the Torah, in accordance with a summary of study of the halachot and their elaboration, for these are the practical teachings that guide us on G-d's path.  

Chapter 19

The pure concern that nests in deep in the heart of every sensitive man with a pure soul, how best to benefit society as a whole, that is in the divine spirit in the soul of man, that through its development and perfection by means of walking paths that are desirable to G-d, and through fitting studies will become a great light that prepares a person, if his path merits, for the spirit of prophecy.  Therefore, a person very much needs to develop in him this pure sensitivity, and if he is a thoughtful studious person, then he will not ignore those special times of goodness when he finds his soul excitedly yearning to burst out even more than its capable of doing.   The ideas that run back and forth then deep inside his soul, let him bring them forth into light.  Let him pour them forth on the page.  They will become good words that will benefit others at the very least to arouse them also toward a good yearning.  As time goes on the ability will become adjoined with desire.  The one who comes to purify is given assistance.  And if he is incapable of setting his words down on the page, at least let him express with his great lips his elevated longing.  And this is the foundation of the matter of Tikkun Chatzot, and mourning for Jerusalem and the exile of the Shechinah.  Regarding this it is said in Tanna Devei Eliyahu, any sage in the Jewish people who possesses true words of Torah and groans in his sorry for the impugned honor of G-d and the impugned honor of the Jewish people, immediately the Holy Spirit imbues itself upon him.  
But let him not choke this divine voice which is calling to him from the inner purity of his soul.  Let one not consider these elevated ideas which are beyond the realm of capacity that are roiling inside of him as words of foolishness.  For doing so he would nullify those yearnings.  Rather he should bring forth his yearnings from potential to actuality, and if he lacks means to bring them forth to full realization, at least let him bring them forth to partial realization, let him organize them so that they are fit to contemplate, and let him rejoice over his good-heartedness and the light of his soul.  Since the Holy One, praised be He, connects good intentions to deeds, it’s impossible that a person will not have impact upon his surroundings, on his household, on his family and city.   Therefore, when that  holy inclination to yearn for and crave goodness and justice, the light of G-d and his goodness and justice, expands inside of him to increase actions for the benefit of society at large, from his side, though he does not know the way by which he will reach his desire, the pure desire which comes form the light of G-d in his soul is very good.  The stronger and more clarified is his yearning, the more it will benefit his soul and prepare him thereby to become a vessel for the realization of his holy inner yearning.

Chapter 20

To understand the value of all the mitzvoth and the fine-points of Torah, how they are drawn towards that great general goal of the Jewish nation, which is to make known the name of G-d in all the world by means of its very existence and its way of life, which is the tripping point for all of those who fall away, and its easy to restore them to the root principle but it’s difficult to stand them up on an intellectual illumination such that they shouldn’t come to uproot the plantings and their branches.  Behold, how to understand that the name of G-d in the world is impossible to be invoked except by means of Israel, you only have to know that invoking the name of G-d by means of which the world is purified from its impurity, it cannot be understood by means of mere familiarity.  For as long as the name of G-d is invoked by people yet it doesn’t enter deeply into all aspects of life both general and specific, then that hoped for universal peace will not follow from it, for several reasons.  Firstly, for as long as knowledge floats and is not deeply embedded in the heart, then it cannot increase its power to the degree necessary so that though we are certain that all human beings see themselves as partners and brothers in this exalted knowledge, that is to say, that they all work together to establish universal peace and true goodness for all of G-d’s creations, nevertheless, their personal accountings will rise no higher than this awareness, and therefore, violence will yet raise up and establish itself for an extended period of time to wreak havoc on the Earth.  Secondly, the very certainty of this knowledge such that there will be any doubt that this is the general human goal needs preparation of the heart such that the internal feeling should be filled with it such that it’s impossible to imagine that one could behave in opposition to this general awareness.  For these two reasons, the name of G-d needs to be made known not just quantitively but also qualitatively, that is to say, the matter is not decided by the large number of people who say in a routine manner that they believe in one G-d, but rather the value of this knowledge should be so deeply imprinted such that it can certainly be a cornerstone for all the detailed human accountings by means of which life becomes complicated from which emerge conflicts and stumbling blocks and quarrels throughout humanity causing nations to strive against nation and family against family.  The special power to deeply imprint in the heart the concept that fills all of the splendor of life which is the one G-d, “you shall love the L-rd your G-d with all your heart and with all your might” is only by means of many deeds.  “The Holy One Blessed be He wanted to convert merit, therefore He gave them much Torah and many mitzvoth (Masechet Makkot)”.  Therefore, just like there is a purpose for that very power which unifies the people in all its individual characteristics, by means of that broad array of Torah deeds and their fine points, which fill Jewish life and give them that special imprint, likewise, all of these have a root, also in accordance with that more distant vision, the ultimate goal that emerges from that great vision of the separation of nations, and however a person is given in his thinking and feeling, whether to turn towards the national dimension or towards the universal vision, he needs to recognize the great obligation to be G-d fearing in keeping the Torah and the mitzvoth out of love.  All the fine points of the Torah and the detailed practices of the Sages, which have the effect of engraving deeply upon the heart, the exalted universal goal will be considered a great act of righteousness, which spreads forth to infinite reaches.  “And let justice well up like waters and righteousness as a mighty stream (Amos 5)”.  

Chapter 21

Compassion: Compassion for our brothers, for our young children, that from the manner in which the estranged world has been revealed to them in a fitting manner, as opposed to that, the inner Jewish world is closed and sealed off from them entirely, and as a result they’re not able whatsoever to comprehend the foundation of Jewish life, and all the more so, it is impossible for them to imagine the great value of the details of fulfillment of Torah and mitzvoth with a holy passion, in the stronghold of the name of God.  This compassion needs to burn like a fire in the heart of every sensitive soul and through its power we need to be urgently motivated to do everything in our power.  This compassion toward our people as a whole and as our children as individuals will cause tears to flow from our eyes much more than it will arouse our spirits toward anger and rage at the scandalous sight of what is done in the House of Israel regarding our holy Torah and the covenant of God with us.  We need to depict for ourselves that in the depths of the soul of every Jew there lies a hidden anguish and awful torment.  Everyone would desire to draw close to God, to taste the delightfulness of God, the taste of holy and complete yearnings for Torah.  Everyone would yearn for the holy passion of our pure faith and for the divine light that sparkles with the light of holy joy for all those who uphold the mitzvoth with wholehearted faith.
Since they wandered far away, they sunk into the mud and it’s not that they don’t yearn, but rather they are incapable of entering into the light, of believing, of feeling, of clinging to the Torah and mitzvoth as is appropriate for Jews, whether out of concern for one’s own self, or whether out of relating to the people as a whole and its future flourishing.  Therefore, it is incumbent upon us to remove the obstacles, to clear the paths, to give those distant ones the possibility of grasping the Tree of Life.  Then there is a great hope that joyously grasp and be supported by our Tree of Life and eat of its fruit and live forever, therefore it is incumbent upon us to explain the reasons that brought heresy to spread in the world to such a degree, and to show the mistaken foundations through which  it impacted the hearts, until those who have gone astray will find the path that they are truly searching for.
The reasons are many, but there are two, generally speaking: The first reason is superficial and mistaken understanding of the values of the Torah.  Now since this mistaken understanding has staked out a large place to the point that this is the way to understand religion, though for simple folk who have not been exposed to the scientific light of the external world, this poor understanding will not harm them regarding leaving the faith entirely, yet it will leave them in a lowly situation, from which there is not much ethical growth, which certainly depends on the degree to which one clarifies religious concepts, but for the clever ones knowledgeable in the sciences, the matter has caused damage to the very foundation.  And this was always the case.  Before the knowledge of negating divine corporeality with all of its implications spread throughout the people, this lack was a dripstone for many who had basked in the splendor of external wisdoms, regarding the earliest of the Rishonim could testify, until they invested the effort and explained unfettered wisdom, that wisdom which investigates according to the nature of the human mind, and this in itself is the correct and true religious position.  A situation similar to this can be found in our generation, also regarding many particular points, which we need to teach and explain that its impossible that there should be a barrier separating between clear understanding of the obvious truth and religious understanding and the fundamentals of the Torah.
The second reason is dependent upon clarifying the positions themselves to distinguish between matters of good sense and reason, things which are fit to be taken as established truth, and between matters of superficial rhetoric that have no substance, but which became widely accepted due to the weak-mindedness of most reasons.  These views, especially if they lighten the burden of the ethical realm, are most easily accepted.  Amongst the enemies of our people, that literature which denigrates the value of Israel and expounds regarding its lowliness is most readily accepted, because those laws that lightened the ethical burden of loving the stranger against which their evil inclination protests greatly.
These two fields: 1) the clarification of the paths of faith in Torah in relation to the opinions which are becoming ever more popular as the most extreme expressions of contemporary science, and 2) the clarification of the opinions themselves between each individual ruling, between correct reasoning and deceptive illusory.  These are two great broad channels to which we need to turn to save many souls for upon them is dependent the saving of the entirety of our people in its spiritual sense, which in truth is also bound and related to the people’s material state.  Therefore, we need to reflect, to investigate deeply, and to write, and when we produce what we produce, it will be a precious and good bounty, and though this great work is not for one individual.  Let no one one who works in this field be dispirited.  Let him do what he is able and as time goes by many will join him.  Many will work in these precious and fundamental fields and they will save the Jewish people.

Chapter 22

The worst thing of all which has always caused the tumult of confused opinions in the world and which has noisy dominion also in this time, being a time of intellectual foment, is the reduced compass of the theological perspective.  The imagination of anyone who views some portion of some virtue whether they are intellectual or ethical or practical, communal or personal, with his imagining that only that part which is beloved by him and close to his position is essential and the rest of the facets of life are not worthy of attention, and further, if matters which are distant from his circle require by their very nature expansion and detailed attention and enhancement, then a great battle will awaken from all sides, as though they’re coming to swallow and uproot that particular facet which is beloved of him.  It’s certainly understood that this roar and outrage itself generates a similar response for those who are in other circles to also follow this extreme path in defending their own circles and to also see anything which is outside of their circles as something which is destructive or at best meaningless and strange.  This kind of things happens in the world at large and amongst Jews in particular. 
When will they open their eyes to see that we have no need for destruction and decimation.  We need to build, to add and not to reduce.  It is sufficient that the natural conflict which is often necessitated when two matters meet, each of which is beneficial, but neither time nor power is sufficient to do just to them both.  Then, the conflict arises over which is to be thrust aside.  However, even a conflict such as this needs to be carried out with consideration, not to humiliate to the dust of that matter which we find necessary to push aside because that which we take in its place will be for us more necessary and beneficial.  It’s just the opposite.  We need to make it known that the reason for leaving beside a matter is not dependent on denying the value of the particular intellectual, practical, or ethical attainments, but rather it’s due to our inadequate power, because we are not able to place into our limited vessels all of the precious objects, we need to weigh which to draw close and which to push away.  This is the path of deliberation, which is built upon the foundation of truth that is also able to bring about the blessing of peace on those who carry the burden of choice, the desire to take apart and destroy something without complete necessity is rooted in the evil urge, in his exaggerated self-love, which also leads to hating the Other.  The prohibition of destruction expressed by the words ‘Baal Tashchit’ stands strongly against the wildness of this trait.  Already, in the early days of the extension of Torah thinking by means of the influence of the Enlightenment upon our people, this ferment occurred, and similar developments and branches of it continue to manifest themselves in each generation.  Abstract intellectual matters and the ways of the Torah when understood deeply, they are understood to be separate things, but when there is a need of war between them, that thought came about through short-sightedness.  Those inner directed people who comprehended the inner dimension of ethics and yearned for the inner perfection of man in his ethical goodness by means of natural free justice, instead of recognizing as they should have that the Torah’s laws give great support to the development to the purely ethical in man, if so, there are several virtues that the Torah’s laws give us, and therefore, if we turn to a different circle that we would call in our conceptions broader than that simple notion of the yearning only for the fulfillment of those laws, it would be always appropriate to search for the path of peace between these conflict positions, how it’s possible to integrate the two virtues together, the benefit of pure natural ethics and the benefit of a legally based ethics, and if they would have sought this, they would have found it.  The ethics connected to fulfilling the laws, not only does it not constrain natural pure ethics, but rather it creates a foundation for it and expands it, but this is not what those who were passionate for pure ethics did, instead they cried out that law-based ethics constrains the progress of natural ethics, so that they began zealously to engage in heresy.  Those who were close to the law-based ethics, observing Torah and mitzvoth, they saw the war [waged by the heretics] that resulted from the inflamed passion for natural ethics, they began for their part to find defects in natural pure ethics, and as a result, a wide chasm opened up to the point that those who sought natural ethics began to violate Jewish observance and separated into their own sect, from which afterwards branched out an outgrowth which opposed that same people from which they drew their inspiration.  They stood on one basis: the basis of natural ethics and all of their great goodness that law-based ethics gives they destroyed with their own hands, for they considered it to be a worthless commodity.  Therefore, they did not achieve their goal.  Not only did they not reduce the degree to which people took refuge in law-based ethics, but rather it became an absolute necessity to guard the very life of law-based ethics, which is the force which eternally vitalizes natural ethics that it should not fall from the blows of the imagined war that was invented by who pursued natural ethics, as if natural ethics really did battle with rule-based ethics.  As a result, it became necessary to strengthen the rule-based ethics and great energy was devoted to developing ever greater details of the laws, which wouldn’t have been necessary otherwise.  However, in the end, the depth of the precision will internalize the divine aspect deeply in the heart and the dimension of greatness that is in Torah deeds and this will prepare one to think and investigate the foundations of ethics upon which the laws are built with a wondrous divine light until one’s outlook expands and draws close to the far-flung edges and explains the mistaken notion of destruction and brings about comprehension of the great value of Torah as the living source for natural ethics and universal justice.

Chapter 23

For any positively useful thing, it is not appropriate to desire that it be gone from the world.  Precisely the opposite, it is appropriate to expand it and perfect it, even if the matter is seemingly a trifle.  Do not dismiss anything that does not have its place.  Corruption occurs only when values are misplaced, one ignores the appropriately useful setting for a matter.  For example, there was a time when most of the talented Talmud scholars inclined toward far-fetched dialectics distant from the point of truth from the perspective of objective considerations of halachic analysis.  Therefore, those who objected to it were correct, but when is that objection correct?  At a time when the use made of these far-fetched dialectics stand in place of investigation, analysis, and clarification.  This is not so when one who uses it knows well its value that it does not have the value for investigating legal rulings, but rather when he wants to give it an aesthetic content and this is a matter that is dependent upon taste.  Beauty refines and expands the heart.  The substance of beauty depends upon the closeness of a person to the Torah concepts such that there is one who is so attached to the love of Torah and its investigation such that also the form of the substance of beauty is comprised of rays of Torah teachings and Talmudic laws and he feels in this complete beauty sweet to the soul.  If so, this inclination is nothing more than a substantial indication of a soul clinging with love to the Torah to the extent that the aesthetic sense also seeks its substance there.  Therefore, for such a goal, the sages of the generations permitted using the path of far-fetched dialectics and it is appropriate in truth to give it its due to the degree such that it does not stand in place of profound halachic analysis and it will turn out that one whose inner sense is attuned to it will derive from it the benefit of great joy in his soul in addition to sharpening students and expanding limits when these dialectics are carried out in a skillful manner.  Therefore, it is not appropriate to the most austere rationalist to look with disgust at even the most far-fetched dialectics as long as they are carried out with appropriate skill.  If there is someone who does not enjoy those depictions, behold, anything which is connected to feeling and taste is not given equally to everyone, and it is fitting for one is who far removed from taking pleasure in such far-fetched depictions and not to disparage those who engage in it appropriately, and he should give them credit for their efforts in a matter that the end result is bringing benefit and spiritual delight such that the more there are who enjoy it, the more love and honor of Torah is increased.  There are good and well-founded outcomes from this.  It is appropriate also to bring such words under the famous rubric: The Holy One, Praised Be He, takes delight in the dialectics of Torah.

In the body of a person and in the body all living creatures which are subject to injury and damaging processes, the Master of all deeds placed a loving kind law of joining together for the good and a negation of joining together for the bad.  The life force proceeds from the heart and from the center of life in the brain and joins with even the farthest of limbs, pours forth also on flesh and fat, which is present in the body as a defense against lean times and similarly on the skin, hair, and nails, this is the natural binding together relating to goodness.  However, in regards to badness, when an injury occurs, there are times when a bad occurrence obligates amputation of one or more limbs, and nevertheless life does not depend upon such limbs.  The living creature will rise up to reclaim the integrity of his life, though he remain blemished.  There are those whose loss will be restored to them by means of the abundant power of life.  However, if he is in a situation where he must remain a blemished person, nevertheless, his blemish is only external, but the power of life itself cannot be blemished.  A blind person does not beget a blind person, and a lame person does not beget a lame person.  Anyone connected to life there’s confidence that a perfect, whole life force will emerge form him, which will aid with all the splendor of its wholeness and perfection, himself and his fellow.
From this secret of Creation, our Sages contemplated this secret of Creation to establish the viability of the foundations of the Torah in the hearts of people in a fashion which is fitting for the overall guidance of the entire people in the ways of G-d and they set up an enforcement system to reflect the values of Torah opinions and actions so as to mark the principles on one array and their outgrowths on a separate array.  Similarly, regarding the practical commandments, the more and the less severe all arrayed and marked out, those that regarding which and due to which life is given as their redemption, i.e. the severe ones — let one be killed and not transgress and the more lenient ones amongst them that one should transgress and not be killed.  There are those that are capital and those subject to heavenly punishment and those that are d’Oraita and finally those that are d’Rabbanan.  This categorization is highly beneficial because in the best of times when the moral and religious situation is well-founded and there are no evil winds dominating the world, then the life-force flows like the waters of the Shiloach stream, slowly, from the pinnacle heights of the foundation of all and the root of all, it charts its course in the most distant outgrowths and details over all of the acceptable and true opinions that bring about goodness and blessing over all of the upright and holy actions which are differentiated in their particulars like the differentiation of logical details from any general rule.  However, when the times are bad, this differentiation will be like a fire wall, which stops the power of fire in its tracts, as if to say “This far you may come and no further”.  The nature of this categorization is appropriate and natural because divine wisdom set up this powerful arrangement as a self-governing defense mechanism, and though in troubled times its power will be revealed as a shield and redeemer for the last remnant from which the entire structure will be founded and rebuilt in peak of its strength, this natural, logical array will be sweet at all times, therefore, despite the many detractors, the people as a whole gave its assent to the ordering of the principles even though also all of their outgrowths are holiest of holy and all of them taken together are beloved beyond limit.  It’s also true of the number of mitzvot, even though their details are numerous, whose obligation is set very deeply in the heart and soul of every single Jew.  Even amongst the principles themselves, the Rambam agreed to make a distinction between the rest of the fundamental demands and that foundation of all foundations the existence of G-d.  Also, regarding healing the disease of the opinion regarding the eternity of matter, which undermines the foundations of Torah and its outgrowths, especially regarding the course manner in which it was conceived in those days.  Nevertheless, he did not stay his hand from expounding on the necessity of the existence of G-d, may He be exalted, also according to those who hold the eternity of matter, and even more so, according to their opinion, for according to the notion of Creation, miracles are more apparent and do not require so much intellectual effort and precise contemplation, therefore, it is incumbent upon us also to follow in the footsteps our forefather for the destruction of the elders is construction in actuality.  When we come to establish by means of our writings the structure of Torah in deed and in thought in our people, we need to give great thought how to set things evenly upon their foundation to arrange them into an intellectual arrangement in such a way that any damage that might be caused to one who has not yet been perfected in their knowledge and practice of Torah, if they are harmed in one particular area, it will not drag along with it a general overall weakening of the structure as a whole, but rather the structure will remain standing on its foundation and hope will smile upon us for its strength will be renewed and to reestablish also the damaged parts by means of the steadfast vitality that will be found in that essential exalted root which remains in hand.  "And if there be yet a tenth in it, it shall again be eaten up; as a terebinth, and as an oak, whose stock remaineth, when they cast their leaves, so the holy seed shall be the stock thereof (Isaiah 6:13)."

Chapter 24

There are five general forces that need to be tended to so that they should be whole in the life of the collective and the individual.  Then, appropriate force will be found in them to keep all damage at a distance to enhance life in the appropriate way.  The first is physical and mental health leading to a  full and joyous embracing of life.  The second are those human forces that are properly developed, the feelings for spiritual delights, beauty, poetry, healthy imagination and included amongst them are those qualities which make for good friendship, founded on the notion that basic decency precedes Torah.  The third is the national feeling that needs to be adequately developed in each person according to the character of his nation and its needs, its nature, its position (in the world) such that his heart is alive and his soul senses with a healthy bravery that which is good for his people.  He yearns with a living natural love to increase its value and its success.  The fourth  is developing a religious sensitivity which is a lofty feeling planted in the spirit of a person by the Creator of his soul, in order to imprint in his inner most parts the true relationship between man and his Creator, in the sense of a relation which is appropriate to be between Designer and product.  This religious sensitivity embraces all of the foundations of life and ethics in a general and particular sense.  The fifth is development of the intellect, knowledge of the universe and Being, wisdoms both speculative, practical and abstract so that one feels a natural necessity to take delight in the glory of abstract wisdom that relates to divinity and all things that accompany its knowledge.  
Every single human being has a natural predisposition to acquire one of these general endowments, each one according to his nature and measure.  However, health will only be found when all of these powers are in proper balance with one another, not when one of them oversteps its boundaries at the expense of one of the others.  Expansiveness is not always bad in-and-of-itself.  At times expansiveness will be sensed as something detrimental to a composite entity, such as when it disturbs the equilibrium due to its abnormal imposition on the composite entity.
In order to restore equilibrium there are two paths: either to reduce the excess or to increase the other forces such that the excess will be balanced. It’s clear that as long as the there is a possibility is to increase the other forces such that the excess is now excellent, as is appropriate, it’s certainly the preferred path over diminishing the excess, for doing so would diminish the divine image and reduce life, if on the level of the individual, individual life, and if on the level of the nation, national life.  
One of the places where obstacles lay before human society is when they take as their security and as their solution to their problems only one of these general forces, even several but not all of them, for even if they find the strength to shore up a breach detected at some point in time, and the breach was created by the lack of some matter which has developed from a corresponding lack in one of the particular forces, which has led to this negative development.  Nevertheless, as long as all the forces taken as a whole are not in balance, the breakage will not be repaired, for immediately many other disputes will emerge created by the destruction of the equilibrium in a general sense, which is needed to balance out all of the powers which is in accordance with their values — how many measures of each are necessary in order to assemble the web of life.

Chapter 25

When a person is truly free, and with an unfettered spirit, he looks upon the entirety of being and upon its corporeality and spirituality and upon its wondrous arrays, upon the wisdom and love that are poured into it, and he places before his eyes that behold there are two paths before him regarding solving the great question: the eternal riddle of being. The first way, the dark path of heresy, that in truth offers no solution, it covers up the eyes so that they do not look upon nor see the majesty of G-d, and with this path, one finds oneself enshrouded in darkness, without purpose or goal, no light of hope, nor a life of truth.  The other path is the path of light, recognition of the Source of life, of wisdom and of loving-kindness, of order and governance, of will and ability in their most general sense, in accordance with healthy human nature, one would recognize one’s maker and exalt and magnify His Name from the depths of an understanding heart. It is true that clear sighted recognition can divide into two paths: either one recognizes G-d in a sense of a lofty being which encompasses everything and creates anew existence outside of Himself or he recognizes in accordance with a Spinozean approach that there is no other existence other than a G-dly existence.  Existence in its particularity and an apparition of revelation in accordance with the specific cognition of the cognitive soul, which in itself is nothing but a specific revelation of a divine spark, to which everything seems to be something which exists independently.  In truth, this sort of thinking is not strange at all, it just needs not to remain incomplete in the midst of its path, but rather to recognize thereby that since every revelation of existence is a divine sparking in relation to that detail being revealed.  Likewise, the intellectual and practical cognitions that accompany it, amongst the apparitions of existence, the difference between every existent thing according to its level is all in accordance with the degree of divine revelation that accompanies it.  The level of existence will be assessed according to the individual revelation and according to which there is a place for an elevated condition and a lowly condition, not according to the true value of existence in its universal source, for everything is one, and everything is good.  According to the elaboration of this approach, there is room for Torah and mitzvot and simple faith and piety, and this approach is assisted by the teachings of the Kabbalah, especially by the Kabbalah as taught by the Arizal, which is particularly profound, that particular manifestations are not new in their essence, that they stem from a general reduction of divine revelation, therefore they appeared to be individuated and separate essences of being.  These paths work so much good on the heartfelt feeling towards Torah, such that the great Hasidic masters expand these teachings and make them accessible to the masses, with the hope that the religious feeling and the love of HaShem in the world would be broadened thereby.  In any case these teachings which are the conclusions of the most rational philosophy, they truly correspond to the inner content of Torah and perfect faith.  When a man sees that according to his thinking, the cognition of faith will obligate him in more duties than he is inclined to desire, then immediately he finds within himself an inner opposition and he loses his own normal path and out of a confusion of his settled mind, he will incline more to the path of heresy which is the opposite of nature and completely lacking the pure, reflective, intellectual inclination.  This, indeed, comes because those powers which need to help the religious sensitivity has not been sufficiently developed with all its power and glory.  Only complete health in all of the five fundamental faculties, 

Chapter 26

There’s no heretic from any nation or language quite like a Jewish heretic, who is obligated by his heresy to falsify his national history, to acquire a false image of his people’s nature, and further, to cover his people with scorn and to rob it of its national honor and glory.  It’s impossible for him to do what he does only due to imperfect intellectual outlook and conception, he must be tremendously blemished and lacking in his soul, he must be entirely lacking in true national feeling.  Additionally, he must be lacking in a true sense of uprightness that dwells in pure hearted individuals who seek truth.  These deficits of soul can stem from various causes.  In some cases, the deteriorated condition can bring a person to such a clouded perspective that he has no faith in his life and is driven insane.  The explanation is simple that the most ravaging disease that expresses itself in the sickness of despair and denial in our generation, for it is in truth, after exhausting all judgment it is merely that same aggressive doubt that comes from a handful of destructive individuals to the camp of Israel in the form of biblical criticism to post-date the writing of the Torah from the days of the events that are written in it.  For the establishment and the faith of the Exodus from Egypt and the journeys of the generation of the desert and our entry into the Land of Israel, how all those events were by the word of G-d and filled with the manifestation of G-d leaves no room for any fundamental heresy.  For behold when a person is truly free in his spirit and considers without prejudice the nature of the Torah and its stories, like we consider any historical writing, he will immediately sense his spirit’s inner truth and will recognize that it’s impossible to forge an entire history of a whole people in such a revealed and obvious fashion such that the historical events are so precise, explicit, and interwoven, featuring the names of the people who its subjects and their biographies while indicating the places names and chronology that specifies days, months, and years, all the more so, when one looks upon the character of our people in the present, its stance, its activities in the world, its inner spirit, its existence and its commitment, then without any masking, the truth will be revealed like the light of day that the words of our Torah are living faithful words, then will a person feel in his soul how much intellectual crookedness and stubbornness is needed to bear heresy that falsifies the very spirit of Israel.  After all of this, it achieves nothing in any fashion.  In normal times, it would be impossible for this Jewish heresy to find ground to stand on once exposed to the light of healthy free inquiry, but all of this is true when the soul is healthy and the national feeling is alive and is aware of its position and its relation to its people, but when the situation is broken, then the person becomes a strange creature, there’s no natural relationship or connection, therefore there is no healthy love or natural sense, from all the defenses the only thing left is a weakened mind, confused by the blows of evil winds, what can possibly save in such a situation?   Consider for a moment regarding another specific fundamental: in ethics a person’s relation to his parents.  This also requires the power of faith and its’ not so clarified like the historical and revealed clarify of our Torah.  If his natural sense of relatedness to his parents is taken from him, which stems from the influence of family life, in a natural and healthy state, if he would lean only upon the single support of reason would he be able to resolve the problem of this relationship in a manner that satisfies the heart that brings in its wake all of those beautiful ethical actions that normal family life and spiritual reliance of children upon fathers, wouldn’t the question always be “perhaps he’s not my father? or perhaps I was a foundling?”  and similar questions, which destroys the harmony and truth of a good precious family situation which is also holy and honorable to man.  Rather, a healthy spirit and a sensitivity which is impacted by natural social customs, they set the mind on its true basis and imparts to it a path in life and action with great strength and might.  The same is true of general, national matters, especially regarding the Jewish people, there’s no way to preserve the healthy national spirit except by incorporating oneself with the people and its way of life, by way of the commandments of memory, such as Shabbat and festivals, by means of the Jewish table, by means of blessings and prayers, by attendance at synagogues and yeshivot, by means of all the patterns of Jewish life, only then is the development of the national spirit impressed upon, only then does Jewish historical consciousness develop in a person, which becomes live and vital and so powerful that even death cannot separate them.  When the mind awakens afterwards in awe of its strength, it already finds for itself a fitting basis for refining its concepts to adapt its national and human sensitivities, its expanding scientific perspective, and together with the preservative effect of Torah study, he will recognize and understand its light and truth, until the spirit inside of him becomes alive and steadfast, then no weapon wielded against it will be successful and he will refute any claims made against him.  And regarding this it is stated, "Trust in G-d in all of your heart and do not rely upon your own understanding (Proverbs 3:5)."  Know well that the power of understanding, the images generated by the assessing mind, it can only travel its path toward knowing the truth, and especially that truth that fastens the present to the past, on one hand, and to the future, on the other hand, when available for it are all the powers required for perfecting its images: Healthy senses, fully responsive emotions, purity of will.  In some, the entire heart and all of life needs to be prepared to make available to the assessing mind the matter necessary for its judgements as true witnesses that support the throne of its judgment, then will understanding be full understanding, in order that he see with his eyes, hear with his ears, and return and be fully healed.  When will this be, when all five lights join to form a single torch, health of body and soul, full strength for upright human justice, a well developed fully awake and alive religious feeling, a healthy and powerful national feeling, and above all of them, a well developed mind that comes from the combination of exploring the Torah both in its practical and speculative dimensions, together with a knowledge of the world and of life and of all the inclinations of the sciences, as is appropriate for an enlightened individual who loves wisdom and knowledge.  Only a correct integration and a corresponding harmony, comprised of healthy and invigorated powers that build body and spirit together, shall we build and establish a generation filled with valor, which lives a full life, a life of strength and power, in the ascendant name of HaShem, the G-d of Israel.  In responding to these demands taken together, it is obligatory for us to strengthen ourselves and our yearning to achieve them, for only then shall we discern that we are directed toward HaShem, and that we are yearning for the destiny that has been prepared for us from the very beginning, from the time of our ancestors, from the days our people's youth, from the time we emerged from Egypt, therefore, brothers, let us work the work of our people.  Let us all know that we need to add and not to take away, to build and not to destroy.  Let each individual and each grouping discern what is its unique ability in order that that person or group shall use its talent to influence those of lesser ability in that area, while at the same time, let no one forget the attribute of humility to know what it is lacking in order that it should yearn to be perfected by the influence of another group upon it.  It hasn't been such a long time since the historic dispute Hasidism and its opponents.  The dispute ate away at us significantly, but when we look at the matter, in truth, with all the detriments that no human development can be free of, all the more so, in our scattered situation, nevertheless, we recognize that two tendencies collided, both of which need to be perfected, the power of the practical element in religion and the accompanying expansion of learning all of its many and powerful branches, and the power of the emotional element with all of its expansion, where in truth, both of them taken together are truth, but in a single person simultaneously will not be perfected in all of their strength and axiomatically this is true for a grouping of individuals.  Therefore, when individuals felt the need to enhance the power of the emotional dimension by means of emphasizing the value of prayer, poetic learning, exaltedness of the heart, and also to strengthen the imagination in a good way, when this was taken up by the masses, a great suspicion arose lest this demand widen the boundaries to such an extent to the point that it undermined the practical element, and this suspicion was well-founded, and there was truly a need for defending against this potential excess.  Nevertheless, from the collision of these forces, great spiritual attainments were added to our people.  This foundational event is very important for us to learn from it how great is the power of the demand for tolerance for the benefit and success of the people as a whole. 