Torah Ohr
תורה אור
Maamer B’Etzem HaYom HaZeh
https://www.chabad.org/torah-texts/5750690

Torah Ohr

Bereshit



Noach



Lech Lecha



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6

“On that selfsame day, Avraham was circumcised.” To clarify the question posed by many Torah commentaries: Why didn’t Avraham circumcise himself beforehand? The Talmud declares, that Avraham fulfilled the entire Torah before it was given, including even Rabbinical decrees such as eruv tavshilin. If so, why didn’t he circumcise himself as well? To understand this concept, we must first understand the nature of circumcision. Circumcision is alluded to in the verse, “ It is not in heaven that you should say: (מי יעלה לנו השמימה ) Who shall go up for us to heaven?  The first letters of this phrase serve as an acronym for the Hebrew word Milah ( מילה ) meaning circumcision. The final letters of those words are an acronym for the G d’s name Havayah י-ה-ו-ה.
The concept can be explained as follows: Besides the physical deed, circumcision reflects a spiritual service. We find two references to this concept in the Torah. One verse declares, “You shall circumcise the foreskin of your heart.” The second declares, 6 “G d, your L rd, will circumcise your heart,” i.e., there are two aspects of circumcision: one performed by man in his striving to elevate himself from below to above. This service necessitates that we circumcise the foreskin of our hearts, removing the impediments to spiritual sensivity, i.e., it refers to the service of teshuvah, as it is written, 7 “You shall return to G d, your L rd.” This is expressed through the fulfillment of Torah and its mitzvos, and will lead to the Future Redemption, as our Sages declared,8 “If the Jewish people do teshuvah, they will be redeemed and if not, they won’t be redeemed.” Regarding the era following the redemption and the return of the dispersed remnants of our people, the Torah declares,9 “(G d) will bring you to the land… and He will grant you goodness....” This represents the second level of circumcision, involving the descent of G dliness from above to below, the level described in the verse, “And G d will circumcise your heart.” (Therefore, the verse says, 9 “He (G d) will grant you goodness even more than [granted] for your fathers,” i.e., He will reveal “the great good that You hid....”10 The connection between circumcision and good can be seen in the case of Moshe, who was born circumcised.11 Concerning his birth, the Torah comments,12 “And she saw that he was good.”) Thus, the initial aspect of circumcision is an arousal from below, i.e., a striving of man to ascend from below upward. This is followed by the second level of circumcision, an arousal from above, the revelation of “and G d will circumcise your heart.” Regarding this second level of circumcision which will be revealed after the return of the exiles and the fulfillment of the entire Torah. This is the level of circumcision referred to in the verse, “Who shall go up for us to heaven?” which serves as an acronym for the word milah ( מילה ), circumcision. This level of circumcision transcends the level of the Torah, for regarding the Torah, it is said, 4 “It is not in the heavens” for it has descended below. The Torah deals with material entities and its laws are decided by scholars living in this world, as the Talmud states, 13 “Rav Yehoshua declared, ‘We pay no attention to a heavenly voice.” Why? because Torah is not in the Heavens, but below. Therefore, the Torah is called the Torah of Havayah (Yud-Hay-Vov-Hay) for that name of G d also implies a process of descent. Yud — standing for contraction, Hay — for expansion, Vov — for drawing down, etc. Through this name G dliness is drawn down below, to our material world. However, the higher level of circumcision mentioned above transcends the name Havayah. Therefore, in the aforementioned verse, its acronym is alluded to by the phrase’s first letters, and the name Havayah by the phrase’s last letters. Circumcision is thus on the level of “heaven,” above the dimension of the Torah that has descended from these heavens. Concerning this level of circumcision, our Sages declared,15 “Great is circumcision; thirteen covenants were established over it.” When they declared “great,” they referred to the greater aspect of circumcision, the revelation from above to below in which “G d will circumcise your heart.” Because of the transcendence of this level of circumcision, thirteen covenants were established over circumcision. To explain, as is well-known, 16 a covenant also represents a bond above intellect and knowledge. For example, when two friends establish a covenant to continue their friendship,what in fact they are doing is compelling their feelings of friendship to endure. Even if at a later time, based on their logic and knowledge, these feelings would not be naturally expressed, they nevertheless force themselves to express feelings of love, revealing a connection that transcends the limits of intellect and knowledge. Similarly, circumcision is related to thirteen covenants, because in order to reveal and draw down the higher level of circumcision mentioned above (which is the level of “Your great good...”), it is necessary to arouse the Thirteen Attributes of Mercy, which also transcend the limits of wisdom and logic. Therefore, circumcision transcends the limits of the name Havayah and the limits of Torah, (just as the Thirteen Attributes of Mercy transcend the Torah. Therefore, this level is the source for the forgiveness of our sins.) This principle is brought out by the verse, “Until Your people pass over, O G d.” The name of G d used in the verse is Havayah. The verse can be interpreted — “Until Your people pass over and reach a higher level than Havayah.” …. (The connection of the word“ pass over ” to this level is emphasized by the fact that in connection with the Thirteen Attributes of Mercy, the Torah states,18 “and G d passed over. ” ) With this foundation, we can answer our original question: Avraham fulfilled the entire Torah before it was given. Nevertheless, he did not fulfill the mitzvah of circumcision. Why?Because he wanted to reach the higher level of circumcision, the level connected with the revelation from above to below. Therefore, he fulfilled the entire Torah that was on a lower level than circumcision and through those efforts he merited that higher level of circumcision from above.
To highlight this, the Torah states, “Avraham was circumcised,” using the passive voice
and it does not say he circumcised himself.
By contrast, regarding the circumcision of Yishmael and the servants Avraham purchased, the Torah uses the active voice, “he circumcised,”
for they merited only the lower level of circumcision
the level that can be achieved by man’s actions in “circumcise[ing] the foreskin of your heart.”
However, Avraham was worthy of the revelation of the superior level of circumcision, “G d circumcise[ing] your heart.”
Therefore, the Torah speaks in the passive voice, “Avraham was circumcised,” implying that he was not the active agent in establishing the covenant; G d was.
Therefore the Torah declares “in that selfsame day;”
The Hebrew word for selfsame, etzem, also means “essence.” The verse can thus be interpreted as meaning “in the essence of that day, Avraham was circumcised.”
The word “day” is a reference to the Era of the Redemption “the day which is all long and all good.”19
The essence of the day refers to the essence of the great revelation that will take place in the Ultimate Future,
the revelation of “Your great good”
and therefore, it is “all good.” 
Therefore, when the essence of that future day was revealed to him, Avraham was circumcised then.

Vayera



Chayei Sara



Toldot



Vayetzei



Vayishlach



Vayeshev



Miketz



Vayigash



Vayechi



Shemot



Vaera



Bo



Beshalach



Yitro



Mishpatim



Terumah



Tetzaveh



Parashat Zakhor



Ki Tisa



Vayakhel



Megillat Esther



Supplements

Vayechi



Shemot



Yitro



Tetzaveh



Ki Tisa



Vayakhel



Megillat Esther

