Mishneh Torah, Gifts to the Poor
משנה תורה, הלכות מתנות עניים
Maimonides' Mishneh Torah, edited by Philip Birnbaum, New York, 1967
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH002108864

Mishneh Torah, Gifts to the Poor



Chapter 1

When a man reaps the harvest of his field, he must not reap the entire field but should leave some standing grain at the end of the field for the poor, as it is written: "You shall not reap all the way to the edge of your field" (Leviticus 23:22). It is immaterial whether he reaps or plucks up by the root. What he leaves is called <i>peah</i> (field corner).
Just as a man must leave <i>peah</i> in the field, so must he leave a little for the poor when he picks fruit from the trees.— —

The same law applies to gleanings: when he reaps the harvest and binds the sheaves, he must not gather up the fallen ears of grain but must leave them for the poor, as it is written: "You must not gather the gleanings of your harvest" (22).— —
The same law applies to grape gleanings during vintage; so too, the young grapes, as it is written: "You shall not pick your vineyard bare, or gather the fallen fruit of your vineyard; you shall leave them for the poor and the stranger" (19:10). So too, if the binder of sheaves has forgotten a sheaf in the field, he must not turn back to get it, as it is written: "If you forget a sheaf in the field, do not turn back to get it" (Deuteronomy 24:19).— —
Just as the law of forgetting applies to sheaves, so it applies to standing grain: if he has forgotten to reap some standing grain, it belongs to the poor. And just as the law of forgetting applies to grain and the like, so it applies to trees, as it is written: "When you shake the fruit from your olive trees, do not go over the branches a second time" (20). The same applies to other trees.
Hence you learn that four gifts are reserved for the poor in the vineyard: single grapes, young grapes, <i>peah</i>, and the forgotten grapes; three gifts in grain: gleanings, the forgotten sheaf, and <i>peah;</i> two in trees: the forgotten fruits, and <i>peah</i>.







What limit is prescribed for <i>peah</i>? Biblically it has no prescribed limit: even if one left a single ear of grain he has fulfilled his duty. Rabbinically, however, <i>peah</i> should not be less than one-sixtieth part of the harvest, whether in Eretz Yisrael or in the Diaspora. One should add to the one-sixtieth according to the size of the field and the number of the poor and the yield of the harvest. Example: If a field is too small, so that one-sixtieth of it would be of no help to the poor, he should increase the rate. So too, if there are many poor people, he must increase it. If he sowed little and harvested much, having prospered, he should increase it in accord with the blessed crop. Whoever increases the rate of <i>peah</i> will receive a higher reward. There is no prescribed limit to this increase.

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6

Another gift, a sixth one, is reserved for the poor in the yield of the land; it is the tenth part given to the poor, which is called the poor man's tithe. The order of priestly contributions and of tithes follows:
When a man has finished reaping the grain of the land or picking the fruit of the trees, he sets aside one-fiftieth, referred to as great <i>terumah</i>, and gives it to a priest, as it is written in the Torah: "You shall give him the first fruits of your new grain and wine and oil" (Deuteronomy 18:4). Then he sets aside one-tenth of the rest, referred to as first tithe, and gives it to a Levite, as it is written: "The tithes set aside by the Israelites … I give to the Levites" (Numbers 18:24); and it is written: "And to the Levites I give all the tithes in Israel" (21).
Then he sets aside one-tenth of the remainder, referred to as second tithe, which belongs to the owner who consumes it in Jerusalem, as it is written: "If a man wishes to redeem his tithe…" (Leviticus 27:31). "You shall set aside a tenth part … and you shall consume it in the presence of the Lord your God in the place which he will choose" (Deuteronomy 14:22-23).
This order of tithing is followed during the first year of the seven-year cycle, as well as the second, fourth, and fifth. During the third year of the seven-year cycle as well as the sixth, however, one sets aside another tithe of what remains after the first tithe and gives it to the poor; it is called the poor man's tithe. During these two years there is no second tithe, but poor man's tithe.— —
During the sabbatical year, all agricultural products are considered ownerless [and available to all]. No <i>terumah</i> contributions and no tithes are given away that year at all, neither first nor second nor poor man's tithe.— —
The Levite sets aside one-tenth of the first tithe he has received and gives it to a priest; this is called the <i>terumah</i> of the tithe.— —
The field owner gives to every poor man passing by his field some of the tithe he has, so that the poor may eat their fill, as it is written: "That they may eat their fill in your settlements" (Deuteronomy 26:12).





If a man and a woman come into the house, the woman is treated first; after she has been attended to, the man is given his share. In cases of a father and his son, a man and his relative, two brothers, two partners, one of whom being poor, the other may give him his tithe that is reserved for the poor.
If two poor persons have leased a field as land tenants, they exchange between them the poor man's tithe which they set aside.

Chapter 7

The Torah commands us to give charity to the poor among the people of Israel, each according to his needs, if the donor can well afford it, as it is written: "You must open your hand to him" (Deuteronomy 15:8). "You shall maintain him; whether stranger or sojourner, he shall live beside you" (Leviticus 25:35). "Let your brother live beside you" (36).
If anyone noticed a poor man asking for something and ignored him, and failed to give <i>tsedakah</i>, he has broken a prohibitive command, as it is written: "Do not harden your heart and shut your hand against your needy brother" (Deuteronomy 15:7).
You are commanded to give the poor man whatever he needs. If he has no clothing, he should be provided with clothes; if he has no house furniture, it should be procured for him; if he has no wife, he should be helped to get married; if it is an unmarried woman, she should be provided with a husband. Even if an impoverished person is used to ride while a servant is running in front of him, a riding horse should be procured for him, and a servant to run in front of him, as it is written: "Sufficient for whatever he needs" (8). Though you are commanded to relieve his needs, you are not obligated to make him rich.



The non-Jewish poor should be maintained and clothed along with the Jewish poor for the sake of peaceful relations. A poor man who goes around begging should not be given a large donation but a small one. One must never turn a poor man away empty-handed, even if you give him a dry fig, as it is written: "Let not the downtrodden turn from you disappointed" (Psalm 74:21).

If a poor man refuses to take charity, he should be given it subtly in the form of a gift or a loan. A rich man who starves himself because he is a niggardly with his money, so that he neither eats nor drinks, should not be attended to.

It is forbidden to solicit or collect charitable contributions from an over-generous person who donates more than he can afford, or deprives himself and gives to the charity collectors in order not to be embarrassed. Any collector who embarrasses and solicits such a person will eventually be punished, as it is written: "I will punish those who oppress him" (Jeremiah 30:20).

A man's poor relative has priority over any person; the poor in his own household have priority over the poor in his town; the poor in his town have priority over the poor of another town, as it is written: "Open your hand to your brother, to your needy, to your poor in your land" (Deuteronomy 15:11).

Chapter 8



Chapter 9

Every Jewish community must appoint collectors of charity, who are trustworthy men of repute, to go about among the people each Friday, taking from every one what he can afford to give, or what he is assessed. They are to distribute the money from Friday to Friday, giving every poor man sufficient food for seven days. This is what is called <i>kuppah</i> (fund).
So too, collectors are appointed who fetch bread and foodstuffs from every courtyard, as well as fruit products or money, from anyone who donates for the needs of the moment. They distribute the collections among the poor in the evening, giving each pauper his daily provision. This is what is called <i>tamḥuy</i> (charity plate; soup kitchen).
We have never seen or heard of a Jewish community without a charity fund; as to a <i>tamḥuy</i>, however, there are localities where the custom is to have one while in others it does not exist. Nowadays there is a widespread custom that fund collectors go around collecting every day and distribute on Fridays.

The charity fund is collected by two persons only, since no less than two persons may hold public office dealing with money. It is, however, permissible to entrust the money of the fund to one person. It must not be distributed by less than three people, because it is comparable to any civil-law case [requiring three judges] inasmuch as they distribute among the poor what each needs for the week. The charity food (<i>tamḥuy</i>), being indefinite, is collected by three and distributed by three [to avoid suspicion].
Charity food is collected daily, and the community fund each Friday. Charity food is for the poor that come from anywhere, while the community fund is intended for the local poor only.





If one has stayed in a town for thirty days, he should be compelled to contribute to the community fund along with the population of the town. If he has stayed there for three months, he should be compelled to contribute to the <i>tamḥuy;</i> if he has stayed there for six months, he should be compelled to contribute toward the clothing of the local poor; if he has stayed there for nine months, he should be compelled to contribute to all the burial needs of the poor.


If a citizen travelling from town to town has run out of funds on the road and has nothing to eat at the moment, he is permitted to take charity, including the four gifts to the poor described in the Torah: gleanings, the forgotten sheaf, <i>peah</i>, and the poor man's tithe. He is not obligated to repay when he comes home, because he was poor indeed at the moment. He has the status of a poor man that has become rich, who does not have to pay back anything.

Chapter 10

We must observe the precept of <i>tsedakah</i> more carefully than any other affirmative command, because <i>tsedakah</i> is characteristic of an upright person, the offspring of our father Abraham, as it is written: "I have singled him out that he may charge his children … to do what is right" (Genesis 18:19). Only by means of <i>tsedakah</i> will the glory of Israel be reestablished and the religion of truth perpetuated, as it is written: "In righteousness you shall be established" (Isaiah 54:14). Israel will be liberated only through <i>tsedakah</i>, as it is written: "Zion shall be redeemed by justice, <i>tsedakah</i> shall be the saving of those who return" (Isaiah 1:27).
None ever becomes poor from giving charity, nothing bad or injurious is caused by <i>tsedakah</i>, as it is written: "The Lord will be kind and compassionate to you and multiply you" (Deuteronomy 13:18). If anyone is cruel and shows no mercy, there is reason to suspect his lineage. Cruelty is to be found only among the heathen, as it is written: "They are cruel, pitiless" (Jeremiah 50:42). All Israelites and those who associate with them are regarded as brothers, as it is written: "You are children of the Lord your God" (Deuteronomy 14:1). And if a brother shows no mercy to a brother, who will be compassionate to him? On whom then should the poor of Israel depend? On the people who hate them and persecute them? Alas, they must depend only on their own brethren.

Anyone who gives <i>tsedakah</i> to a poor person in a surly manner and with a gloomy face completely nullifies the merit of his own deed, even if he gives him a thousand gold pieces. He should rather give him cheerfully and gladly, while sympathizing with him who is in trouble, as it is written: "Did I not weep for him whose day was hard? Was not my soul grieved for the poor?" (Job 30:25). He should speak to him graciously and comfortingly, as it is written: "I gladdened the heart of the widow" (Job 29:13).

He who urges and activates others to give <i>tsedakah</i> receives a greater reward than the donor himself, as it is written: "The effect of righteousness will be peace" (Isaiah 32:17). With regard to the collectors of charity and the like, Scripture says: "Those who turn many to righteousness shall be like the stars" (Daniel 12:3).
There are eight degrees of charity, each one higher than the other. The highest degree is to aid a Jew in want by offering him a gift or a loan, by entering into partnership with him, or by providing work for him, so that he may become self-supporting, without having to ask people for anything. In regard to this it is written: "You shall maintain him; whether stranger or sojourner, he shall live beside you" (Leviticus 25:35); that is to say, maintain him so that he may not fall and be in need of help.
The next, inferior degree is when he who gives charity to the poor is unaware of the recipient, who in turn is unaware of the giver. This is indeed a religious act achieved for its own sake. It is like the chamber of secrets within the Temple, where the devout used to put their gifts in secret and the poor of good family received support from it in secret. Of a similar character is the one who contributes to a charity fund. One should not contribute to a charity fund unless he knows that the man in charge of the collections is trustworthy and intelligent and knows how to manage properly, as in the case of Rabbi Hananyah ben Teradyon [who administered the communal charity funds so scrupulously that once when money of his own chanced to get mixed with the charity funds, he distributed the whole amount among the poor].
The third, lesser degree is when the giver knows the recipient, but the recipient does not know the giver. The great sages used to go secretly and cast the money into the doorway of the poor. Something like this should be done, it being a noble virtue, if the charity administrators are behaving improperly.
The fourth, still lower degree is when the recipient knows the giver, but the giver does not know the recipient. The great sages used to tie money in sheets which they threw behind their backs, and the poor would come and get it without being embarrassed.
The fifth degree is when the giver puts the alms into the hands of the poor without being solicited.
The sixth degree is when he puts the money into the hands of the poor after being solicited.
The seventh degree is when he gives him less than he should, but does so cheerfully.
The eighth degree is when he gives him painfully (grudgingly).



One should ever patiently strive not to be dependent on other people and not to be a public charge. So too, the sages have enjoined us, saying: "Rather make your Sabbath a weekday [with regard to festive meals] than be dependent on men" (Shabbath 118a). If reduced to poverty, even a distinguished scholar must not disdain manual work, no matter how unworthy it is of him, in order to avoid dependence on others. One should preferably flay animal carcasses instead of telling the people: "I am a great scholar, I am a priest, provide for me." The sages have indeed commanded us to act like this. Some of the great sages derived their livelihood from chopping wood, carrying lumber, watering gardens, working in iron or making charcoal, and asked no help of the community; neither would they have accepted charity had it been offered them.
If anyone is not in need of relief and yet receives it by deceiving the public, he will not die of old age before becoming a public charge. Such a person is included in the biblical utterance: "A curse on him who relies on man" (Jeremiah 17:5). On the other hand, if anyone is vitally in need of relief, and simply cannot go on living without obtaining it, as in the case of an indigent old man who is ill and suffering, and yet he is too proud to accept help, he is guilty of bloodshed in committing a deadly sin.— —