Mishneh Torah, Gifts to the Poor
משנה תורה, הלכות מתנות עניים
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Mishneh Torah, Gifts to the Poor



Chapter 1







We find that there are four types of gifts to the poor in a vineyard; individual grapes that fall, underdeveloped grape clusters, the corners, and forgotten produce. There are three types of gifts of grain; the gleanings that fall, the forgotten produce, and the corners fo the field.  There are two types with orchards; the forgotten produce, and the corners of the fields
All of these gifts to the poor, the owners have no claim of benefit.  The poor can come and take them against the will of the owners.  Even a poor Israelite (owner) can have them taken from his hand.  






What is the minimum measure for the corners of the field?  From the Torah there is no minimum measure.  Even if he leaves one stalk of grain, he has fulfilled his obligation.  But from the words of the Rabbis, one should not leave less than a sixtieth (of the field), whether one is in the land of Israel or not,   They add to the sixtieth according to the greatness of the field and according to the number of poor, and according to the blessing of the crop.  How is this so?  If there is a very small field and he leaves from it a sixtieth and it does not satisfy the poor, then he should add to the measure.  And if there are many poor, he should add.  And if it is a small crop and he gathers much, since he was blessed, he adds according to the blessing.  All who add to the corners of the field add to their reward.  There is no limit for this reward.  

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7

1. It is a positive commandment to give Tzedaka to poor people according to what is appropriate for the recipient if the donor can afford it as it says "You shall surely open your hand to him" and it says "And you shall strengthen the stranger and he shall live among you." And it says "and your brother shall live among you."
2. Anyone who deliberately ignores a beggar and does not give to him commits a sin as it says "Thou shalt not strengthen thy heart nor tighten thy hand against your poor brother."
3. You are obligated to give the poor person what he lacks. If he does not have clothing, clothe him. If he does not have furniture, buy him furniture. If he is single, marry him/her off. Even if the poor person used to be extremely rich and ride a horse everywhere and had a slave to run before him, provide that as well as it says "[make up to him] his lack which he lacks." You are commanded to make up what he lacks, but not to enrich him.
4. With regard to an orphan for whom people are seeking to find a wife for him to marry: First, we rent for him a house, provide for him a bed and all his household necessities and then we seek to find a wife for him to marry.
5. When a poor person comes and asks for his needs to be met and the giver does not have the financial capacity, he should give him according to his financial capacity. How much? The most desirable way of performing the mitzvah is to give one fifth of one's financial resources. Giving one tenth is an ordinary measure. Giving less [than that] parsimony. A person should refrain from giving less than a third of a shekel a year. A person who gives less than this has not fulfilled the mitzvah. Even a poor person who derives his livelihood from charity is obligated to give charity to another person.
6. If there is a poor person that you don't know , and he says "I am hungry," you should feed him without ascertaining whether  he is being dishonest . Rather you should feed him immediately. If he is unclothed, and he says "clothe me," check to see if he is being dishonest. But if you know him then clothe him immediately ,without checking into him, because it is for his honor (I.e. Dignity). 
7. We provide sustenance and clothing for the poor of the gentiles together with the poor of the Jewish people as an expression of the ways of peace. If a poor person begs from door to door, we do not give him a large gift, but we do give him a small gift. And it is prohibited to turn the poor person away empty handed. Even if you give him a single date, as it says, "do not turn the downtrodden away humiliated." 

Chapter 8










Redeeming captives takes precedence over feeding and clothing the poor. And there is no commandment as great as redeeming captives, for a captive is among the hungry, thirsty, naked, and is in mortal danger. And one who averts one eyes from redeeming him/her violates, "You shall not harden your heart, and you shall not shut your hand," and, "Do not stand by your brother's blood," and "You shall not work him with hard labor before your eyes," and has neglected the commandment, "You shall surely open your hand to him," and the commandment, "And your brother shall live with you," "And you shall love your fellow as yourself," "Save those who are take to death," and many like these. And there is no great commandment like redemption of captives.






...If there were many poor people to give charity to or many captives to redeem and there is not enough in the [public] purse to provide for all, clothe or redeem them all, a Kohen comes before a Levi and a Levi before a Yisrael and a Yisrael before a Halal and a Halal before a Shtuki and a Shtuki before an Asufi and an Asufi before a Mamzer and a Mamzer before a Natin and a Natin before a convert - since the Natin was raised with us in holiness - and a convert comes before a released slave since he [the released slave] was among the cursed.

Chapter 9

Every city that has Jews is obligated to set up charity collectors from among themselves - people that are known and trustworthy - to go around to all of the people from the eve of [one] Shabbat to the eve of [another] Shabbat and take from each and every one that which it is fitting for him to to give and that which is assessed upon him. And they distribute the money from the eve of [one] Shabbat to the eve of [another] Shabbat and they give provisions that will suffice for seven days to each and every poor person. And this is what is called the <i>kuppah</i> (container).   
And so [too], they set up collectors that take bread and types of produce or money from each and every courtyard from whoever donates it at that time on each and every day. And they distribute that which was collected on the eve among the poor people and give sustenance for the day to each poor person. And this is what is called the <i>tamchui</i>.   
We have never seen or heard of a Jewish community that does not have a charity <i>kuppah</i>. But [regarding] a <i>tamchui</i>, there are places where they are accustomed to having it and there are places where they are not accustomed to having it. And the [more common] custom today is is that the <i>kuppah</i> collectors go around on each day and distribute [what they collect] from the eve of [one] Shabbat to the eve of [another] Shabbat. 








We force one who dwells in a city for thirty days to give charity to the <i>kuppah</i> [alongside] the people of the city. If he dwells there three months, we force him to give to the <i>tamchui</i>.  If he dwells there six months, we force him to give charity for clothing with which we clothe the poor of the city.  If he dwells there nine months, we force him to give charity for burial [costs], with which we bury poor people and take care of all the burial needs.

Chapter 10

We are obligated to be careful about the commandment [to give] charity, more than any other positive commandment for charity is a sign of the righteous, the seed of Avraham, as it says "For I have known him, to the end that he may command his children and his household after him, that they may keep the way of the LORD, to do righteousness... " And the seat of Israel is not established nor is the True Faith preserved except through charity as it says "In righteousness shalt thou be established" nor shall Israel be redeemed except through charity as it says "Zion shall be redeemed with justice, and they that return of her with righteousness."
A person is never impoverished through charity and no bad thing nor any damage is caused by charity as it says "And the work of righteousness shall be peace." Anyone who is merciful, [God is] merciful towards them as it says "and give thee mercy, and have compassion on thee and increase thee." And anyone who is cruel and not merciful, is under suspicion [regarding] his lineage for cruelty is only found among pagans as it says "they are cruel, and have no compassion." All of Israel and all who are attached to them are like brothers as it says "Ye are the children of the LORD your God" and if a brother will not have compassion for his brother, who will have compassion for him? And to whom will the poor of Israel lift their eyes? To the gentiles who hate them and pursue them?! Their eyes look only towards their brothers.
Anyone who ignores [the chance to give] charity is called a barbarian just like a pagan is called a barbarian. Regarding pagans, it says "Certain barbarians are gone out etc." and regarding one who ignores [the chance to give] charity it says "Beware there not be a barbaric thought in your heart etc." and is called "evil" as it says "the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel." And he is called a "sinner" as it says "and he cry unto the LORD against thee, and it be sin in thee." And God is close to the pleas of the poor as it says "thou hearest the pleas of the poor." Therefore one must be wary of [making them] cry out for they have a deal cut with them [and God] as it says " and it shall come to pass, when he crieth unto Me, that I will hear; for I am gracious."
One who gives charity to a poor person with bad grace, and his face in the ground (i.e. with a bad attitude) , even if he gave a thousand gold pieces he has destroyed his merit and lost it, rather [we must] give with a cheerful expression and gladly, and commiserate with him about his troubles as it says "If I have not wept for him that was in trouble, and if my soul grieved not for the needy" and speak gracious and comforting words to him as it says "and I caused the widow's heart to sing for joy."
[If] a poor person asks you [for money] and you have nothing to give him, placate him with words. It is forbidden to rebuke him or to raise your voice at him because his heart is broken and crushed and it says "a broken and a contrite heart, O God, Thou dost not despise." And it says "to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones." Woe is he who shames a poor person, woe is he! Rather be like a father to him, both in mercy and in words as it says "I was a father to the needy"
The reward of one who forces others to give charity and compels them [to do so] is greater than [that of] the giver, as it says (Isaiah 32:17), "And the deed (which the Rabbis in Bava Batra 9a interpret as 'the compeller') of charity is peace." And about collectors of charity and those similar to them, it says (Daniel 12:3), "and those that find justification (interpreted as those that cause charity) for the masses are like the stars."
There are eight levels of charity, one above the other. The greatest level that has nothing above it is to strengthen the hand of a Jew who has become poor and give him a gift or loan or create a partnership with him or make up some work for him, so as strengthen his hand until he does not [any longer] need to ask others [for help]. And about this it is said (Leviticus 25:35), "and you shall strengthen the hand of a stranger and a resident and he shall live with you;" meaning, strenghten him until he no [longer] falls and becomes needy.  
Lower than that is when one gives charity to the poor and does not know to whom he is giving, and the poor person does not know from whom he is taking - since, behold, this is [performance of] the commandment for its own sake. Like this was the secret chamber which was in the Temple, to which the righteous would give secretly and from which the poor of the wealthy families would support themselves  secretly. And approaching this is the one that gives to the charity box.  And a person should not give to the charity box, unless he knows that the one in charge of it is trustworthy and wise  and knows how to manage it appropriately, like [was the case with] Rabbi Chananya ben Tradyon.
Lower than that is when the giver knows to whom he is giving, but the poor person does not know from whom he is taking. An example of this were the  greatest of the Sages who would secretly go and place the money at the entrances of the [homes of the] poor. And it is fitting to do like this. And it is a good level when the charity managers are not behaving appropriately.
Lower than that is when the poor person knows from whom he took and the giver does not know. An example of this were the  greatest of the Sages who would bundle money in their sheets and lower them behind them and [then] the poor would come and take [the money], so that they would not feel embarrassment.
Lower than that is when one gives it to him in his hand before he asks.
Lower than that is when he gives it to him after he asks.
Lower than that is when he gives him less than what is fit, [but] with a pleasant demeanor.
Lower than that is when he gives it to him sadly.
The  greatest of the Sages would give a small coin to a poor person before every prayer and afterwards they would pray, as it is said (Psalms 17:15), "I will see Your face in righteousness (alluding to charity)."
One who gives sustenance to his older sons and daughters who he is not obligated to sustain in order to teach the males Torah and to guide the daughters in the straight path, such that they not be disgraced; and so [too] one who gives sustenance to his father and his mother - behold, this is in the category of charity. And it a great [form of] charity, since the one who is closer is prior [to others]. And any one who gives food and drink from upon his table to the poor and to orphans - behold, [when] this one calls to God, He answers him and and he is made to enjoy, as it says (Isaiah 58:9), "He will then call and the LORD will answer him." 
The Sages commanded that the poor and orphans should be [part of] a person's household. Instead of [using] slaves, it is better for him to use these and benefit the children of Avraham, Yitschak and Yakov from his possessions, and not to benefit the seed of Cham from them. Since anyone who who uses many slaves adds sin and iniquity to the world each day. But if the poor are of his household [instead], he increases merits and [the performance of] commandments each day.
A person should always push himself and live in misery and not require help from others and not thrust himself upon the community. And so [too], did the Sages command and say (Pesachim 112a), "make your Shabbat to be like a weekday and do not require help from others." And even if he was a sage and an honored man and became poor, he should engage in crafts - and even in abject crafts - and not require help from others. It is better to flay the skins of animal carcasses than that he should say to the people, "I am a great sage, I am a priest (Kohen), support me;" and this is what the Sages commanded. There were from the greatest of the Sages wood-choppers, beam carriers, water bearers [who would bring it] to the gardens and iron and coal makers; and they would not ask [for help] from the community and would not take it from them when they [offered to] give it to them. 
Anyone who does not need to take [charity], and tricks the people and takes [it], will not die of old age without having to need the help of others. And behold, he is included in [what is said] (Jeremiah 17:5), "Cursed is the man who trusts in mortals." And anyone who needs to take [charity] and cannot live unless he takes [it] - for example, an elderly person or a sick person or someone in great pain - and makes himself proud and does not take [it], behold, such a one is a spiller of blood and is liable to recieve the death penalty. And he does not get anything for his pain other than sins and guilt. And anyone who needs to take [but is able to somehow do without it] and pushes it off and lives a life of misery so as not to burden the community, will not die of old age without supporting others from his own [income]. And about him and all those similar to him, it is said (Ibid., Verse 7), "Blessed is the man who trusts in the LORD." We have completed the Laws of Gifts to the Poor, with God's help.