Kitzur Shulkhan Aruch Yalkut Yosef
קיצור ש''ע ילקוט יוסף
Translated by gabrielle chasine ⋄ Edited by Michael Senter
sefaria

Kitzur Shulkhan Aruch Yalkut Yosef



Chelek 1



Siman 1

We learned in Masechet Avot, Yehuda son of Tema says, (Pirkei Avot 5:20) "Be bold like a leopard, light like an eagle, run like a deer, and strong like a lion to do the will of your Father in Heaven." And they learned from here four rules in serving Hashem "be bold like a leopard" when someone does a Commandment (Mitzvah) they shouldn't be embarrassed from those who mock him. "And light like an eagel" to quickly close his eyes from seeing bad things because the watching of eyes are the start of the sin. "And run like a deer" That the feet should run to do good things. "And strong like a lion" this is a overpowering over the human will. And therefore one should power-up like a lion to stand in the morning to serve Hashem, like you awaken the dawn. No matter what one shouldn't be late to the time of of prayers or the time of saying SHEMA ISRAEL. [The main strengthening  should be in the heart to, to overcome his will to win it, like a powerful man overpowers his hater and wins him and drops him to the earth. This is how one should fight is evil inclination, like a lion, get up from his sleep to server hashem ]. (Yalkut Yosef, Hashkamat HaBoker pg. 57). And never the less, that one who does a mitzvah, he should not be embarrassed from those who make fun of him, and anyway don't quarrel with them and fight the them, in order that he wouldn't get used to the trait of boldness which is very improper. And if his aim is to influence the eyes of the community in the matter of Torah or Mitzvot, and he tried already the way of peace but wasn't successful, then he is allowed to bolden himself to fight with them to defeat their wrong thoughts.
One should be careful to be modest when he dresses or undresses, and one shouldn't say "Behold I am in hidden rooms 'who can see me?' because Hashem's presence fills the entire universe. A person who usually dresses modest should be careful not to reveal [skin] out of respect for Hashem. When one arises he should be very swift to dress himself. A child who understands things should be taught from a young age to dress himself modestly. (Yalkut Yosef, Hashkamat HaBoker pg. 207).