Iggerot HaRambam
איגרות הרמב"ם
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Iggerot HaRambam

Khiddushei HaRambam



Iggeret Teiman



Maamar Tekhiyat HaMetim



Maamar Kiddush HaShem



Teshuvat HaRambam



Maamar HaIbur







The second section - about the knowledge of the years of a cycle and their number, and why this was such; and knowledge of the regular and intercalated [years]: You should know that from the time that the moon aligns to the same degree (in the sky) as the sun until they align a second time is twenty-nine days, twelve hours and 793 parts. This is the time of the new moon. And when you multiply this sum by twelve months, which is the sum of the months of the year, the result is 354 days, eight hours and 876 parts. 

Maamar Neged Galinos



Teshuvat She'elot









And with regards to your question about the nations: Know this: 'G-d desires the heart.' And following the intent of the heart -- those and only those are the things [that count]. For this reason our Sages of blessed memory said "The righteous ones of the nations of the world have a share in the World to Come" - if they achieved that which is fitting to be achieved of the knowledge of the Creator (may He be blessed) and improved their souls with good traits. There is no doubt that anyone who improves their soul with optimal fitness of the character traits and optimal fitness of wisdom and intellect, with faith in the Creator (may He be blessed), is certainly among the people who will merit the World To Come, even a gentile who engages in the Torah of Moses of blessed memory is like a High Priest. The whole point of the Torah of Moses is improvement of the soul towards the Creator may He be blessed. As King David of blessed memory said, "I have placed the Lord before me always, for when He is to my right I will not stumble." And Moses our teacher of blessed memory was only praiseworthy for this reason, as it is written "and this man Moses was exceedingly modest." This signifies the ultimate point of improvement of the soul. In a similar vein, our sages of blessed memory, the wise men of truth, said, "Be very very humble." And a story is told of a wise man, a great philosopher, who was travelling by ship, and was sitting in the area of the trash, and one of them (that is, a crew member) came and urinated on that philosopher, where he was sitting on the trash heap. He raised his head and held his silence. He then responded and told them that he had now clarified for himself that "my soul is most certainly at the top level attainable, that I did not feel insulted at all." In  similar vein, our sages of blessed memory, the wise men of truth, said, "that which wisdom has made as a crown for its head, humility has made as a heel for its sandal." That is to say, humility is the culmination of good traits. Furthermore, the philosophers have said, it is a difficult thing to find a complete man, full in virtues and wisdom and if such a man would be found, they would call him a divine man. Certainly one like him is in the highest of places. And this is the desire of the Torah and the wisdom of the commandments, to improve the soul in the area of virtuous character traits and faith in the Creator. This is the intent of the verse “Surely, that great nation is a wise and discerning people.” There is no doubt that the patriarchs, and Noah, and Adam, who did not observe the words of the Torah, will not inherit hell, but rather, undoubtedly, because they achieved what should be attained, they are deserving of the highest order. This achievement does not depend on fasting or prayer or shouting without understanding of faith in the truth, as it says "You are close in their mouths but far from their deepest thoughts." The main thing is: there is nothing that sustains forever but the Creator, may He be blessed.

Pirkei HaHatzlakhah



Mikhtav HaMeyokhas LaRambam



Iggeret Kanaut

