Ibn Ezra on Zechariah
אבן עזרא על זכריה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Ibn Ezra on Zechariah



Chapter 1



Verse 1

The level of prophecy are many and there is no way to count them. Because the strength of the souls that receive the Holy Spirit to prophesize are not on the level and path of the honor of Israel before the exile. Prophecies before the exile were clearer and didn't need to be explained as much, for example, "Behold a son will be born to the House of King David and Josiah will be his name," is a very easy to understand prophecy that is self-explanatory. But after the exile they are visions that need explanations, like the visions of Daniel. Because if the angel didn't explain to Daniel, he would not have known and neither would those after him. And the visions of Zechariah are similar to that of the angel who explained through him. Because visions at night are known not to have explanations. They are closed and sealed off from the eyes of the educated. And if we found in earlier books that told that what the prophecy was speaking of would be from the wars, it would be a blind guess, we would be like blind people feeling for the walls saying, "Maybe this is what the prophecy referred to," but we don't have anything to rely on. And, I saw in the book of French scholars explained what Zechariah saw is backwards. It's about things that already happened in by the time of this prophecy, like the reason that Judah was sent to exile in Babylon. The explanation of the two sticks is they are Israel and Judah and about them the pasuk says, "see my slaughtered sheep," this is a prophecy about the future that was already in the times of the prophet. And now I will begin to explain.
...בחדש; the word "laomer" means "to Israel" and it's the right thing for the prophet to say

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Verse 1



Verse 2



Verse 3



Verse 4



Verse 5



Verse 6



Verse 7



Verse 8



Verse 9



Verse 10

"And I will pour out" — I will pour out a spirit of grace and supplication upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem. Before this, trouble will come upon them, because Messiah ben Joseph will be killed. Then God will become angry and destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem, and this is the meaning of 'And they will look to Me' — then all the nations will look to Me to see what I will do to those who pierced Messiah ben Joseph.
"And they will mourn for him" — his people.