Tosefta Sotah (Lieberman)
תוספתא סוטה (ליברמן)
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Tosefta_Sotah_(Lieberman)
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Tosefta Sotah (Lieberman)



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6


Rabbi Akiva expounded, "At the time that the Jewish people ascended from the Sea, they sought to recite Song; the Holy Spirit descended upon them and they recited Song. How did they recite Song? Like a child reciting the Hallel in the house of the scribe (teacher) and answering each and every item after him: Moshe said, 'I will sing to the Lord'; and the Jewish people said, 'I will sing to the Lord.' 
Moshe said, 'The Lord is my strength and might'; and the Jewish people said, 'The Lord is my strength and might.'" Rabbi Lazar the son of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili says, "Like an adult reading out the Hallel in the synagogue, and they repeat the first item after him: Moshe said, 'I will sing to the Lord'; and the Jewish people said, 'I will sing to the Lord.' Moshe said 'The Lord is my strength and might'; and the Jewish people said, 'I will sing to the Lord.' Moshe said, 'The Lord is a Man of war'; and the Jewish people said, 'I will sing to the Lord.'" Rabbi Nechemiah says, "It was like people reciting the Shema in the synagogue, as it is stated, "and they said, saying." [This] teaches that Moshe would begin with an item first, and the Jewish people would answer after him and finish [it] with him: Moshe said, "Moshe then sang'; and the Jewish people said, 'I will sing to the Lord, etc.' Moshe said 'The Lord is my strength and might'; and the Jewish people said, 'this is my God and I will glorify Him.' Moshe said, 'The Lord is a Man of war'; and the Jewish people said, 'the Lord is His name.'"






Rabbi expounded: Behold [Rabbi Akiva] says (Zachariah 8:19), "So says the Lord [...], 'The fast of the fourth, [the fast of the fifth], the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth, etc.'" The fast of the fourth is the Seventeenth of Tammuz, on which the city was breached. So why is its name called the Fourth? As it was the fourth month. The fast of the fifth is the Ninth of Av, the day upon which the Temple was burnt down. So why is its name called the Fifth? As it was the fifth month. The fast of the seventh is the third of Tishrei, the day upon which they killed Gedaliah ben Aḥikam; for Yishamel ben Netaniah killed him. That is to teach you that the day of a righteous person's death is as difficult before the Omnipresent as the destruction of the Temple. So why is its name called the Seventh? As it was the seventh month. The fast of the tenth is the Tenth of Tevet, the day when the King of Babylonia closed in on Jerusalem, as it is stated (Ezekiel 24:1-2), "And the word of the Lord came to me in the ninth year, in the tenth month, etc. 'Son of man, write, etc.'"
But I say the fast of the tenth is the Fifth of Tevet, on which the news came to the people of the Exile, as it is stated (Ezekiel 33:21), "In the twelfth year of our exile, on the fifth day of the tenth month, a fugitive came to me, etc." So they heard and they made the day of the news like the day of the burning down. And [according to Rabbi Akiva,] is not [the fast of the tenth] fitting to be written first; why was it written last? To order the months according to their order. But I see my words to be more [correct] than the words of Rabbi Akiva. For Rabbi Akiva says that the first is last and that the last is first, whereas I say that the first is first and that the last is last. The chapter is finished.   