Mishneh Torah, Creditor and Debtor
משנה תורה, הלכות מלווה ולווה
Maimonides' Mishneh Torah, edited by Philip Birnbaum, New York, 1967
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH002108864

Mishneh Torah, Creditor and Debtor



Chapter 1

It is a biblical positive command to lend to Israelite poor people, as it is written: "If you lend money to my people, to the poor among you" (Exodus 22:24).— — This precept is greater than giving charity to a poor man who asks for it, since the one is already in need of begging while the other has not yet reached that stage. The Torah is strict with a person who refrains from lending to the poor, as it is written: "Beware lest … you grudge help to your needy brother…" (Deuteronomy 15:9).
Anyone who acts as a creditor toward the poor, when he knows that the debtor has nothing to repay, breaks a prohibitive command, as it is written: "You shall not act like an extortioner toward him" (Exodus 22:24).— —
One is forbidden to show himself to his debtor, or even to pass in front of him, when he knows that the debtor has no money to repay, lest he might frighten or embarrass him, although he makes no demand upon him, and needless to say if he does demand payment. Just as the creditor is forbidden to demand payment, so is the debtor forbidden to detain the creditor's money in his possession and to say to him <i>go and come again</i>, provided he has the money, as it is written: "Do not say to your neighbor: Go, and come again" (Proverbs 3:28). So too, the debtor is forbidden to borrow money and spend it for no purpose or waste it, so that the creditor will find nothing to collect, even if the creditor is very rich. Anyone who acts in this manner is evil, as it is written: "The godless never pays back what he borrows" (Psalm 38:21). The sages have enjoined: "Let your friend's property be as precious to you as your own" (Avoth 2:17).

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4

The Hebrew terms <i>neshekh</i> and <i>marbith</i> (usury and interest) are one and the same thing, as it is written: "Do not lend him your money at advance interest, do not give him your food at accrued interest" (Leviticus 25:37). Thereafter the Torah says: "You shall not deduct interest from loans to your brother, whether in money or food or anything else that can be deducted as interest" (Deuteronomy 23:20). Why is it called <i>neshekh</i> (biting)? Because the usurer bites, inflicting pain to another person and eating his flesh. Why has Scripture used two different terms for interest? So that the usurer should be punished for transgressing two prohibitive commands.
Just as it is forbidden to lend money on interest, so is it forbidden to borrow on interest, as it is written: "You shall not cause your brother to bite" (20), which is traditionally interpreted as a warning to the borrower, namely: do not let yourself be bitten by your brother.— —

Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15

If a man lent money to another in the presence of witnesses and told him: "Pay me only in the presence of witnesses," the borrower must pay him in the presence of witnesses on account of the stipulation, whether the lender told him so at the time he made the loan or thereafter. If the borrower claimed, saying to him: "I did what you told me and paid you in the presence of so-and-so who have gone overseas or died," he is believed, and he takes an exemption oath and is released.— — If, however, he told him: "Pay me only in the presence of so-and-so," and the borrower said: "I paid you in the presence of others who have died or have gone overseas," he is not believed. It was to forestall such a plea that the lender stipulated with the borrower, saying to him: "Pay me only in the presence of Reuben and Simeon," who were staying with him in the same place, so that the borrower should not dismiss him by claiming: "I have paid in the presence of others who are gone."
There are talumdic texts in which it is written: "If a man said to another <i>pay me only in the presence of witnesses</i>, and the borrower then claimed <i>I have paid you in the presence of so-and-so who have gone overseas</i>, he is not believed." This is a scribal error. Those who have given a decision in accordance with those texts have been in error. I have examined the old texts and found therein that he is believed. In Egypt, I have obtained a fragment of an old text of the Talmud written on parchment, upon which they used to write some five hundred years ago, and I have found this <i>halakhah</i> (rule) written on two specimens of parchment as follows: "If he said <i>I have paid in the presence of so-and-so who have gone overseas</i>, he is believed." Because of this error, which has occurred in some texts, some Geonim have taught that if he told him <i>pay me only in the presence of so-and-so</i>, and he paid him in the presence of others, he is not believed even if he has produced the witnesses in whose presence he paid him. This too is a serious error. The true law is that if witnesses came and testified that the borrower had paid the lender in their presence, the borrower is released; and there is no room here for any doubt.— —
If the lender stipulated with the borrower that he should be believed at any time he might say that the latter has not paid him, he collects what he claims without an oath, even though the borrower pleads that he has paid him. But if the borrower produced witnesses of payment, the lender collects nothing.

If the borrower paid the debt and the lender claimed that he had not been paid, and the borrower paid him a second time because of the stipulation, the borrower may sue the lender, telling him: "You owe me such an amount because I have paid you twice." If the lender has admitted, he must pay back the extra amount ; if he has denied, he must take an exemption oath to the effect that the borrower paid him only once. The same applies to all similar cases.

Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18

If a man lent money to another vaguely (without express terms), all the debtor's estate serves as security for the loan. Accordingly, when the creditor comes to collect the debt, he sues the debtor first. If he has found property in his possession, whether movables or real estate, he collects out of these with the debtor's consent; and if the debtor has refused to give his consent, the court compels him to pay. If the debtor's available property has been insufficient to cover the amount of the promissory note, the creditor may collect out of all the landed property which belonged to the debtor previously, even though it has been sold, or transferred in the form of a gift to others. The creditor may evict the buyers or the donees, since the debtor sold the property, or transferred it in the form of a gift to others, after he had become obligated for the debt. A creditor seizing the property which has been sold by the debtor is called in Hebrew <i>toref</i> (seizor, one who seizes). This applies only to landed property owned by the debtor at the time he borrowed the money ; but property which he acquired after he had borrowed the money has not been mortgaged to the creditor, and he may not seize it. If, however, the creditor stipulated that all the property which the debtor should ever acquire should serve as mortgage for the payment of the debt, and the debtor acquired property after he had taken the loan and then sold it, or transferred it in the form of a gift, the creditor may seize it.
All this applies only to landed property, but movables do not serve as security.— — If, however, the debtor conveyed a security title to all his movables in conjunction with such title to his land, the creditor may seize such movables. — —

Chapter 19



Chapter 20

If a man has many debts, the creditor whose loan was advanced first collects first whether from the property of the debtor himself or from the purchasers. If a creditor who is next in time hastened to collect first, the court takes it back from him, because the lender who is prior in time is prior in right. This rule applies only to landed property which the debtor owned at the time he took the loan ; however, the law of priority does not apply with respect to property which the debtor acquired after he had borrowed from many creditors, even if he did write in the note which he gave to each creditor: "What I will acquire is mortgaged to you." All such creditors are equal, and if one of them collected first, he was entitled to do so, even if he was the last one.
— — The law of priority does not exist with respect to movables, but whoever hastened to collect from them was entitled to it, even if he was the last. If a non-creditor seized some of the debtor's movables to obtain title on behalf of one of the creditors, the latter has not acquired title, because anyone who seizes movables on behalf of a creditor where there is another debt outstanding against the debtor does not acquire title on behalf of such a creditor. But if there is no other debt outstanding against the debtor, he does acquire title on the creditor's behalf.— —