Pur Hu HaGoral; Homilies for Purim
פור הוא הגורל; דרשות לפורים
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Pur Hu HaGoral; Homilies for Purim

Introduction



Preface



Part I; Shabbat Zakhor

Between the Two "Remember"s; Shabbat and Amalek



Part II; Purim

The Knowledge of Not Knowing



Amalek; Will to Power





























The will to Hamanite power is expressed also in subtle things like disgust for small revenge, “And it was disgusting in his eyes to put his hand out against Mordekhai alone” (Esther 3:6). The desire for totality, expressed by the forcing of all the ministers to bow down before him, to the point that the existence of one minister who does not consent to bowing deeply offends his mood. It also brings him to want to destroy <b>all</b> the Jews, to uproot the problem from its source. It is not enough to eliminate Mordekhai; rather there is a need to uproot and get rid of Judaism itself from the world, since it does not allow for submission to a great man like Haman. Here the move to a metaphysical struggle takes place: The God of the Jews diminishes the elevation of man; Jewish ethics is against the Hamanite will to power. Hence these ethics themselves must be uprooted; there must be a war with Divinity itself.
These things sound familiar. Very similar claims, as is well known, were heard from Hitler, may his memory be blotted out, and his ideologues before World War II broke out. Preceding them and philosophically enabling them was the Nietzschean philosophy of the will to power.  

The Secret of the Mask



"They accepted it willingly in the time of Ahasuerus"



The Canonizing of Esther and the Redemption of Purim



Flashes of Fire
















More than once, joy has been perceived as superficial in comparison to tragedy and melancholy: Connection to depth usually passes through the abysmal, and dwells in the desolation of the pining away of the soul. Yet it appears that the profundity of Jewish joy is found specifically in the abyss of the broken heart. However this is a broken heart that overpowers itself and does not allow itself to fall, that knows how to turn hopelessness into faith and sadness into ecstasy. Behold ecstasy is the opposite of hopelessness and it has no center without it [as its opposite]. The difference between Purim and other holidays is the difference between joy and ecstasy.

The Palace Parable; Humor as Self Negation



Part III; Breslov Style Purim Torah

"Give strong drink"



A Tale of Yesh and Ayin Which Got Confused



Epilogue; Faith, Is or Is Not



Endnotes

