Mei HaShiloach
מי השלוח
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Mei HaShiloach

Volume I

Introduction



Genesis

Bereshit



Noach



Lech Lecha



Vayera



Chayei Sara



Toldot



Vayetzei



Vayishlach



Vayeshev



Miketz



Vayigash



Vayechi



This means that Yaakov made himself smaller in comparison to his forefathers Abraham and Isaac, and said that they had greater wisdom and understanding, until they widened the (underlying) will of G-d from their own abilities.  Even though G-d opened up a small opening (that enabled them to do so) they widened it with their wisdom in order to do the will of their creator, and understood things that G-d didn't explicitly reveal to them.  This is the meaning of the words "HITHALCHU" - they walked from their own power, but I (Jacob am different) because 'G-d is my shepherd until this day' -i.e. that in every detail of every thing that I do, I need G-d to enlighten me as to his will.  Even in this situation where I have seen G-d's will (of my own accord), I still need to see at this time what G-d wants of me.  In this light, Jacob is the greatest of the forefathers, because it is a higher level for G-d to constantly be leading him.  This was the prayer of David of blessed memory, when he prayed: " G-d is my shepherd I shall not lack", meaning that I should never lack the protection that G-d has over me, and that he should constantly shepherd me, and I should constantly recognise that G-d is my shepherd.  Because, G-d, in his goodness leads everything.  Even if man turns his head away and doesn't want to expect (something to occur) or to pray, and at a time when a person prays a complete prayer then he is answered, and he will see that G-d is the shepherd.  This is the meaning of the words " I will not lack" - that I will not turn my face away from him. 

Exodus

Shemot

"And these are the names; And it was that because the midwives feared [the Lord], He made for them houses." - For by the fear of flesh and blood, when a person fears another of flesh and blood, he won't come to any peace of mind, for fear engenders the opposite of peace of mind, however, fear of God brings rest. This, therefore, informs us as to the meaning of "He made them houses", for houses symbolize rest and peace of mind. Therefore, when the midwives gained the peace of mind which follows the proper fear of God, they no longer feared any of Pharaoh's decrees, and this is the meaning of "He made them houses". This is also the meaning of that which is written elsewhere that "Zevulun will dwell by the seashore; He shall be a haven for ships", for water informs regarding proper fear, and ships inform regarding peace of mind, as it is brought down in the Gemara (Bava Metzia 9b) "Ships sit idle"

Vaera




... The issue of the seven plagues in this sidra. They correspond to the verse "those six Ad-nai hates, seven are an abomination to God's essence" (Prov. 6:16) [Add: And you should know that all the punishments that happen in the world, including for the idolaters, as when they make a government fall and put a different one, all come from the bad characteristics mentioned in this verse.] [King] Solomon thought to order the sins, and that's why the verse begins with the least serious and proceeds in order of seriousness. And when the Egyptians were punished for all these sins that were engrossed in their hearts, [the punishment] began from more serious to less. The plague of blood corresponds to "one who incites brothers to quarrel", because the essence of distancing from the Holy One of Blessing is anger. Even though appetites might distance one from the Holy One of Blessing, it is possible to find goodness in them. But anger is what most distances [a person] from God. Corresponding to "a false witness testifying lies" is the plague of frogs. This is because the Egyptians were testifying lies regarding Israel. The expression yafiach [testifying/blackening] means that all small things are blackened and made larger. Regarding Israel, the rule is that if one saw his/her fellow sin, but there are no other witnesses, it is actually forbidden for him/her to say "Tuviah sinned in such and such way" (Pesachim 113b), and the reason is that, if there are no witnesses to the thing, it is clearly the Holy One of Blessing's desire that the sin be not publicized, and that it be hidden in this world, and therefore it is forbidden to publicize it. But the Egyptians publicized everything, an so the plague of frogs came upon them, and they croaked and grunted, and so the Egyptians could not listen to each other's voices. And corresponding to "feet quick to run to evil" was the plague of lice. Regarding Israel it is written "and justice slept there" (Isaiah 1:21), which means that they would sleep it over even when they knew that their side was in the right, they would not run [to judge] because they wanted to find other merits [to the other side]. The Egyptians did the opposite and ran to oppress Israel, but the Holy One guarded them and they weren't able to accomplish anything with their haste. And it is against this [attitude] that the plague of lice came about, since in this small creature you find haste of movements, and with all this haste it accomplishes little, since it is a little creature. And corresponding to "a heart that hatches evil plots" was the plague of wild animals. This was due to their hatching evil plots against Israel, and this is why the plague of wild animals was a mixture of wild animals which was a symbol of the mixture of evil thoughts that was present in their hearts. Regarding this plague is said "I will set apart the region of Goshen, where My people dwell, so that no wild animals will be found there" (Exodus 8:18) meaning that the Holy One of Blessing made clear that in Israel no mixture [of evil plots] should be in their thoughts. And corresponding to "hands that spill innocent blood" was the plague of pestilence [of livestock]. And corresponding to "a lying tongue" was the plague of boils, because they gathered themselves around lying words, therefore they were ashamed as it is written "the magicians could not stand up to Moshe" (Exodus 9:11). And corresponding to "haughty eyes", which is their self-aggrandizement due to all the good that was showered on them, came the plague of hail. This is due to the fact that the goodness flow in this world is rain, and see how the rain that came in your side is hail, and this is why this plague came through the hands of Moshe our teacher peace be upon him, as it is written "extend your hand" (Exodus 9:22), since Moshe otpbu"h was excellent in this charcater trait, as it is written "and the man Moses was very humble etc" (Numbers 12:3)


Bo



... The three plagues in this sidra, locusts, darkness and the [death of the] firstborn correspond to self-centeredness, superiority and bad ways. Bad ways are miserliness, appetite and obstinacy regarding eating - and it is against these that the plague given was locusts. Superiority, which is the raising of oneself above someone else to whom respect should be shown - it is against this that the plague given was darkness, as it is written "one who curses his father or mother, his light [will go out when darkness comes.]" (Proverbs 20:20) Truly, even though a person should only listen to God, and a father and a mother are only a small piece of a person, when one's parents are trying to put their child in the ways of God, one should listen to them very much and submit to them, and one with superiority refuses to submit, and regarding that it says "will go out". Self-centeredness is [one who feels] pride regarding oneself above and beyond what is found in oneself - corresponding to this is the plague of the firstborn, because the expression firstborn points to raising oneself beyond who one is.



...


Beshalach



Yitro




“Moses spoke and G-d responded in a voice.” (Ex. 19:19) We learn about this in Masechet Brachot. "From here is it derived that the translator who translated the public Torah reading into Aramaic is not permitted to raise his voice louder than the reader..." It is astonishing that as Tosafot and the Rif point out, that Moshe is the reader and G-d is the translator. The truth of this is that Moshe spoke the Ten Commandments to the Jewish people, and the root of the giving of the Torah was G-d engraving the words of Torah into their hearts, each individually according to his blessed will. And this is the idea of the Blessed Holy One being like a Translator in the giving of the Torah. After Moshe spoke the words of the Torah, G-d followed and engraved the words on their hearts; This is “the voice of the translator” from our Gemara. G-d had the ability to engrave these words of Torah in the hearts of the Jewish people according to His own Power, with a strength far greater than Moshe’s. However it is written that "there never arose among the Jewish people a prophet like Moshe." For G-d did not illuminate a soul among the Jewish people like that of Moshe of blessed memory. And this is the idea that the voice of the translator cannot be louder than the reader, that none (not even G-d) can be on a higher level than Moshe.
The text does not say “Ani,” for if it had done so, it would have suggested that the Holy One Blessed Be He revealed all of His light to Israel, in its fullness, and that thereafter they would not have been able to go deeper in His words, for He had already revealed everything. Thus the kaf [separating ani from anochi – ed.] teaches that it was not in its fullness, but rather an image, a likeness, of the light that God will reveal in the future. And all that a man will grasp in going deeper in the words of Torah will show that, until this point, he was in darkness. Day and night suggest this reality. The day is when God opens the gates of wisdom to people. The night is so that the person will not think that he has grasped everything in its entirety. For all that he has grasped is like the nighttime, when compared to the daytime that will come afterwards. And so it always is. Thus everything is nighttime in comparison to the light that God will open up in the future. This is what is suggested by the conjunction of the verse “Do not make an idol (pesel).” The Zohar teaches that “this verse is taught on account of the [later verse], ‘Make for yourself (p’sol l’cha) [two tablets],’--therefore, do not make an idol, and do not make yourself a servant of another Torah.” The idea here is that the word pesel means something which is cut, delimited, finished and without anything missing. But this is only found in the Torah of Moses. In human thought, nothing can be finished and made completely whole. As the Midrash (Ruth Rabbah 3:2) tells: Caesar said to Rabbi Joshua ben Hanania, “I am also able to make a Torah like Moses.” And he decreed that no one light a fire for three days. But in those three days he saw smoke coming from a certain house. The Caesar was told that one of his ministers was ill, and he decided to allow [the minister to make the fire in his house]. Of course, in our holy Torah we have this same rule, that saving a life outweighs Shabbat. But the difference is that one who desecrates Shabbat to save a life does not transgress the holy Torah, because the commandment to do so is part of the Torah. Likewise, in every place in which we invoke “When it is time to do for God,” we have a hint of “abrogate your law” (Ps. 119:12). Thus the Torah contains within it all of its own future abrogations, and its light encompasses all contingencies and all circumstances that could possibly come to be. No man has the power to do this. This is how the Zohar interprets “Do not make a pesel” – this refers to the positive commandments. “Or image” – this refers to the negative commandments. For nothing is revealed to any person in its entirety.  

Mishpatim



Terumah



Tetzaveh



Ki Tisa



Vayakhel



Pekudei



Leviticus

Vayikra



Tzav



Shmini

And Moses diligently inquired about the goat of the sin offering" (Leviticus 10:16). The matter of the double inquiry, like the allusion mentioned in the Gemara (Sanhedrin 106a) regarding Doeg and Ahitophel, who studied three hundred halachot implied by the tower floating in the air, hinting to the roof of Lamed, for the letter Lamed teaches about the proper mindset and order in all negative commandments, with all the doubts that arise in these matters, and also teaches about the proper mindset in the final movement from swallowing food from the throat to the body, to recognize and understand its relevance. And this is what Aaron replied to him (Zevachim 101a), "If you have heard of the holy matters of the moment, have you not heard of the holy matters of the generations?" And this is what is meant by "Moses diligently inquired." Even though you have inquired about all your needs, nevertheless, you should not be lenient regarding the holy matters of the generations. And this is the juxtaposition of the portions: after their punishment, for they desired to gaze into hidden and future matters. And it is necessary for us to understand that the holy matters of the generations are extremely severe and precious in the eyes of the Holy One, blessed be He. Therefore, it is not appropriate to eat, and after the great sorrow they experienced from the death of Nadab and Abihu, they were granted and given distinctions from forbidden foods.

Tazria

"When a woman conceives and gives birth to a male child..." In the Midrash (Vayikra Rabbah 14:2), "I will bring forth My righteousness; it is not far off, and My salvation shall not delay" (Isaiah 46:13). Rabbi Nathan said, "We calculate for the sake of our forefather Abraham. He who comes from afar." As it is written: "He renews His wonders" (Psalms 136:4), "Who makes new every day." Indeed, according to the simple understanding, what newness is there in a mother who gives birth every day? Then even renewal should become ordinary. But the matter is this: that the Holy One, blessed be He, makes something new out of the ordinary, and wonders will come into the hearts of those who await Him on everything to say, 'Who has created these?' As with our forefather Abraham, peace be upon him, for the world behaved as such for many years before Abraham came into the world, and there was no one to inquire and wonder about His conduct. And in the heart of Abraham, peace be upon him, there was a very great wonder (Genesis Rabbah 39:1). It can be said that the city without a leader: who is the owner of the city? And when the Holy One, blessed be He, saw that his question was not like the natural inquiries, but because he truly wanted to know who created these, in order to worship Him, and because of this, he despised all the pleasures of this world. Then the Holy One, blessed be He, had to reveal Himself to him and show him that He is the Owner of the city. And regarding this matter, it says, "When a woman conceives," because there is no value in the term "woman" in the world of nobility, as is explained in the Gemara (Shabbat 88a): "What is the significance of a female birth among us?" And it is said, "When a woman conceives," etc. That is, one who has a true desire with strength and vigor for the Holy One, blessed be He, and gives birth to a male child, and he is the one who clearly achieves true salvation. For the birth of a male indicates true salvation because all the good is included in the soul of the Jewish person. And this is the matter of the Midrash: "We calculate for the sake of our forefather Abraham." That is, Abraham recognized from himself that there is a leader in the world, and we too can recognize when we turn our minds to Abraham to contemplate his ways, for the awakening of Abraham's heart caused amazement to everyone who understood why he was awakened in his heart to inquire and wonder who created the world and its fullness, and how many thousands of souls were before, and it did not occur to them to ask this. From this awakening itself, we can understand that there is a Creator and Leader, for the desire that came to Abraham's heart was also from what the Holy One, blessed be He, sent to him in his heart. For if this had happened naturally, why did it not happen to all the world? And this is what the Midrash says: "We calculate for the sake of our forefather Abraham," for his name indicates his will, as is found in people who are called by their actions and professions because all their will is in the matter they are involved in. And also his name in the Gemara is will. And this is "I will bring forth My righteousness from afar," for His name indicates His will, as found in people who are called by their actions and professions, for their entire will is in the matter they are involved in, and His name in the Gemara is will. 

Metzora



Achrei Mot



Kedoshim



Emor











<b>Every Shabbat day you shall set them out</b> [literally: on Shabbat day, on Shabbat day, you shall set them out]. The reason that the first "on Shabbat day" is written with [the cantillation marks] <i>kadma ve'azla</i> and the second with <i>munach revi'i</i> is since the shewbreads teach of the love of Blessed God for the Jews, as it is said in the Gemara (Chagiga 26b) "Behold how loved you are by the Omnipresent" [in that God preserved the freshness of the bread all week]. And from this will sprout the greatness of ages for the Jews (?), and because of this blessed God commanded to bring with the bread two lambs. Since Shabbat is the interiority [פנימיות] of the six days of the working week, as it is said in the Gemara (Pesachim 106a) "From Wednesday until Shabbat is 'before Shabbat'. From Shabbat until Tuesday is 'after Shabbat'." And because of this blessed God commanded to bring two lambs; that is, to give thanks over the past and to cry out over the future. And from this bread will come the ages of the Jews (?) on the past, which certainly blessed God will complete for their sakes for the good. And because of this the first "on Shabbat day" is written with <i>kadma ve'azla</i> -- because of what has preceded and come [מה שקדם ואזל], a literal translation of '<i>kadma ve'azla</i>' [קדמא ואזלא]) and blessed God has helped it to be for the good. And the second "on the Shabbat day" with <i>munach revi'i</i> , because on all of this a person needs to cry out regarding the future, and to leave and settle their mind as much as they are able, so as not to turn from the will of blessed God. And if the person accepts upon themself, regarding the future, that all of their matters are considered in light of their ability, without turning from the will of blessed God -- then, blessed God will help them regarding the past, not to do anything without the will of blessed God. 

Behar




The idea of the Shemita year and the Jubilee year corresponds to the characters mentioned in Avot (Avot 5:10) - what is mine is yours, what is yours is yours. That is, even if the land was given to human beings, to the point that there is such a thing as acquisition of the land, that one can take from the land all the good things in the world - you know, that all good things in the world come actually from the land, as it says "all came from the dust" (Kohelet/Eccl. 3:20). And in the seventh [year/day], [when] one gives the land to the Holy One of Blessing, since one stops from working and tilling the land because of God's desire, and one observes God's commandment, one is called "mine is Yours" - that is, a person acquires for the Holy One of Blessing all one's possessions in the land. And the Jubilee corresponds to "Y/yours is Y/yours" since the mitzvah of the Jubilee is that a person returns to their holding and to their family, because in truth E-lohim made humans be on the earth, and distributed to each human an inheritance that corresponds to one's soul-root, and set each under their banner, and said to them: you are My servants. But due to the many desires of making many accounts, until one comes to expand one's boundaries and even acquires one's friends as servants, and this [friend] goes down and sells [the friend's] inheritance to the point that eventually [the friend] sells their own person, it was [necessary to establish that] God's word will exist forever and that it wouldn't, God forbid, change because of the deeds of humans, therefore even though they transgressed the laws regarding humans, [the transgression] does not reach the soul-root, since the Holy One created times when everything returns to their holding, and the [laws of the] Jubilee year were created so that every person will return to their place and the inheritance that belongs to them.

Bechukotai






..."When anyone explicitly vows to Hashem the equivalent for a human being" ~ that is, after the portion of rebuke the Holy One of Blessing gave an assurance of strength to Israel and gave them the portion of valuations, that is, a person can redeem oneself from any thing. And four redemptions are listed: houses, fields, people and animals; and they are given against the four times the word "seven" was written in the admonitions portion, since seven symbolizes that the Holy One is precise by a hairsbreadth, and for this the Holy One of Blessing gave four different forms of redemption, and not only a person can redeem oneself, but also if a person sees that their friend needs redemption the person can also redeem their friend, as it is written in the Gemara (Arachin 20a) "one can say 'the value of Ploni is upon me'." And there are 33 verses on the portion of Valuations, with the exception of the verses "And He said" (Lev. 27:1) and "These are the commandments" (Lev. 27:34) which are not of the issue of valuations. These 33 verses are compared to 33 verses in the portion of Rebuke [and put side by side.] And against the verse "you will become lost among the nations" (Lev. 26:38), which is a great fear, the verse "and all your valuations will be by the holy shekel" (Lev. 27:25). And every verse in the portion of Valuations has a correspondent in the portion of Rebuke, to give redemption to every thing that is said there.

Numbers

Bamidbar

Ad-nai spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the Tent of Meeting on the first day of the second month, in the second year following the exodus from the land of Egypt,  saying: raise the head of the whole Israelite community. "Raise" is an expression of elevation - that is, through the counting every individual will feel heightened and supported, as we read (Hosea 2:1) 'and the number of the children of Israel will be like the sand of the sea, which will not be measured, and will not be counted." And this verse seems to contradict itself (see Bavli Yoma 22b) because the beginning says "And the number of the children of Israel will be" suggesting that it is possble to count them, and after that it says "Which cannot be measured etc". In fact, all of Israel is without number, and what is written "the number will be" is said over every single specific soul of Israel, that every single one will be counted, that is, something of consequence in the counting, and important in the eyes of the Holy One of Blessing, as it is written "Ad-nai will count in the register of peoples [that each was born there.]" (Psalms 87:6) "And to Zion it says: every person was born in her" (Psalms 87:5) - this is that God does providence also with the other peoples, just not specifically on every single soul, but on all as a whole. "And to Zion it says 'every person was born in her' - this means that the Holy One is interested in every single soul. And this is the explanation for "and the number will be" that every single person is needed, since through the community of Israel the greatnesses of the Holy One are made known, and if one is missing then the demeanor is missing. This is similar to when they draw the face of the king in thousands of tablets, and if one is missing - something of the face of the king is missing. And at the moment that one is counted in Israel he is the greatest of all Israel, since all Israel is a piece of the Holy One of Blessing, as it is written "A piece of Ad-nai is His people" (Deuteronomy 32:9) and every single one holds within oneself one of the aspects of the Holy One of Blessing, and at the moment s/he is counted then the Holy One was in that aspect that s/he is held by and therefore s/he is the greatest - and through this every single person of Israel is heightened/elevated.

Nasso




"...And you shall send out of the encampment all who are leprous, and all who have an emission, and all who have come in contact with the dead.” (Bamidbar, 5:2).“Tzara’at” (Leprosy) means anger, for the word tzara’at contains the word “evil,” (Ra’a.) (Gemara, Arachin, 15b). "Zav,” meaning one who suffers from an emission, is one who is stuck in his desires. “One who comes in contact with the dead” is depression. Therefore the law requires that the leper is sent outside of all three encampments, because the attribute of anger has no place in all of Israel. The "Zav" was sent outside of both the Machanei haLevia and the Machanei haShechina, for scholars of the Torah may not be steeped in lust. “One who has come in contact with the dead” is only sent outside of the Machanei haShechina, for even Torah scholars succumb at times to depression, as it is written in the Gemara (Ta’anit, 4a), “the Torah causes him to boil,” and this “boiling” is depression. Thus he is not permitted in the place of the Shechina, because “strength and joy are in His place” (Divrei ha Yamim 1, 16:27)
...“Speak to the children of Israel . . . a man or woman who commits any of the sins that men commit. . . .” (Bamidbar, 5:6). This sin of stealing from a convert teaches of a sin where it appears to man that tshuva is of no use. (Referring to the sin of Spilling seed to waste). However, the Torah teaches that nothing will stand in the way of tshuva, and the blessed God gives advice as to how nothing will fall irrecoverably into exile. So, too, with robbing a convert, it also seems as if it cannot be rectified. The intention of Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai in the Zohar was that the sin in question causes man to tremble to the core of his inner being and propels man to plead with the blessed God, pouring his heart out before the blessed God. For it is indeed an extremely grave sin. Knowing this, when the sin does not come to man, he would, of course, be overjoyed.

Beha'alotcha



Sh'lach



Korach


As it discusses in the midrash (midrash raba portion 18:2), for what reason was the portion of Korach juxtaposed with the portion on tzitzit?  The reason was due to Korach taking a talit that was entirely techelet (blue color) and asked whether it was not required to also have blue tzitzit.  The idea from this is that techelet (blue) teaches us about awe ("yirah").  Korach claimed that awe of Hashem would be evident to him and that everything is in the hands of G-d (shamayim) including awe of G-d (whereas the accepted understanding was that everything is in the hands of G-d outside of our choice to have awe of G-d).  Thus, how is it possible for a person to do something against the will of Hashem since all will and action is from Hashem and how can one do something that is not His will.  And on this he claimed that we would not also have to color the tzitzit blue; tziztit is hint to awe.  And in truth, the will of Hashem in this world will exist through the eyes of man.  As is says in the Gemara (Hagiga 13a) that Ezekiel prayed the face of the bull and transformed into the Keruv (face of an angel), because a bull alludes to wisdom that clarifies things a lot and creates deepens everything in the context of G-d. The free will of man is not only the negative shells (negative desires) and is also not only according to his knowledge, because Hashem conceals His ways from man desires the the work of man.  And if everything was revealed before man there would be no work to do.  And this explains Ezekial's prayer that switched to a carob tree.  That the ways of Hashem are concealed and parallel to man that are functions of their free will.  And from this will come to their hearts work for Hashem which is the meaning of the face of the Keruv.   

Chukat

As it says in the Midrash that "the nations of the world nominate the Israelites etc."  The idea here is that King Solomon, may he rest in peace, glorified the life of the Isrealites against that of the nations.  As it says (Song of songs, 5:9): "What is your beloved more than another beloved...my beloved is white and red, etc."  Thus the Lord Blessed be He, behaves with the Isrealites unlike how He behaves with the nations, in that there is no evil that reaches the depth of the Isrealite's life.  In areas of lack and death there is no finality for them.  The death of an Isrealite is unlike the death of one from the nations because death of one from the nations is a "broken tool" and does not have any further ability to correct (tikkun), but the death of an Isrealite is not just a tool for a broken physical body (lit. dismanted spine).  And thus in the time of the galut ("exile), the Isrealites boast to the nations that they are not burdened even a little because they understand that everything comes from the hands of the G-d, Blessed be He.  And further in their wisdom and glory, the nations have no national conception and knowledge of G-d as does the Israelites.  And therefore the nations appoint the Israelites for three tasks on which no different in hue creates separation between them, as on this they were commanded to take upon themselves, meaning to the level of Moses, that can be found in every Isrealite.  Because Moses is the root source of wisdom of the Isrealites and to Moses was made clear the reason for using the red heifer; since a heifer is a hint to having clarity in life. And the red color is a metaphor for "cycles."  Cycles refer to "cycles of redness" which refer to not being weakened at all from cycles that exist in life.  And the idea that the red heifer must not be blemished refers to the lack of blemish in the wisdom of the Isrealites; there is no lack within it and rather only clear thought (lit. wisdom).   The fact that a yoke was never placed on the red heifer refers to the fact that the Isrealites were never under control of any force other than the Lord Blessed be He who rules over them alone.  As it says (Zecharia 10:6): "They shall be as though I had not forsaken them." And this is made clear through the parable of Joseph and his brothers.  Even though the brothers first experienced pain and then Joseph made known that he was their brother and he made clear that no harm would ever come to them.  Rather they only had pain for only a moment.  The Lord Blessed be He in the future will make clear that any pain is only for a moment and there will be no real pain for the soul's of the Isrealites.  As it says (Kohelet 7:23): "I will become wise but it was far from me." All understanding was clear to [King Solomon], he nevertheless says he will become wise which refers to becoming wise regarding knowing this understanding of the future thus saying "it was far from me."  Of Moses it says  (Midrash Tanchuma 8): "And to you I will reveal." Moses' wisdom was only to know and not to become wiser to His ways.  This was the knowledge that King Solomon also knew but was not in his currently within in conception, therefore he said it was still far from him, meaning it was outside the borders of his mind.  This is why the section on the red heifer is placed before the section of the death of the three shepherds.  Such that the Isrealites should know this and not become distressed.  The heifer purifies sin which hints to the future where everything will return to its perfected state.

Balak



Pinchas

Loading...
And you shouldn't think to say (chas v'shalom) that Zimri was an adulterer (chas v'shalom), for the K"BH wouldn't make a whole section of the Torah out of an adulterer. Rather, there is a hidden mystery in this matter. For there are ten levels of lust; the first level is one who adorns themselves and explicitly goes out for sinful purposes. This is a person who presents themselves to the Yetzer ha-Ra. But after this, for the remaining nine levels, at each point a person looses some of their free will, and it becomes impossible for them to resist the sin. By the 10th level, where someone has completely distanced themselves from the Yetzer ha-Ra and protected themselves from the sin with all their power, so much so that it would impossible to protect themselves anymore than they already have -- and even then, their desire overpowers them, and they commit the act, at that point they know for certain that their actions are the will of ha-Shem. This was the case with Yehudah and Tamar, for she was ordained to be his life partner.  And it is the same case here, for Zimri was truly protecting himself from all evil desires, yet here arose the thought that she [Kozbi] was his life partner.  And afterwards it was not within his power to refrain from this deed. Yet Pinchas spoke [as if it were] the opposite, that he [Zimri] had the strength to refrain from this.  The Gemara (Sanhedrin 82b) alludes to this: "six miracles were performed for Pinchas," as it brings there, that if Zimri were physically separated [from Kozbi at the time of Pinchas' attack], and if Zimri [defended himself and] killed Pinchas, then he [Zimri] would not be legally liable [for murder].  Because this was truly a case of reasonable doubt, yet Pinchas took upon himself the role of a chief judge, to determine the motivations as they appeared to him [alone], and he [Pinchas, viewed what was happening through the lens of] anger...Pinchas was a descendant [or the spiritual reincarnation] of Yosef, who went through a process of ethical clarification through trails and tribulations about this very matter [adultery / lust].  Therefore, Zimri's deeds seemed particularly evil to Pinchas.  Concerning this, the text says (Hoshea 11:1), "For Israel is a foolish youth, yet I love him." This is truly the case with Pinchas, who abrogated to himself the role of judge over Zimri and ruled him an adulterer, leading him to zealotry and to attack him [Zimri].  Yet the foundational depths of the matter were hidden from Pinchas, namely that she [Kozbi] had been ordained at Zimri's soul mate from the six days of Creation, as is explained in the writings of the Ari"zal.  Even though Moshe Rabbeinu did not involve himself in this capital judgement, we find Pinchas acted as a foolish youth, because he did not understand the depths of the issue, and only saw what the everyday person would see and no more.  Yet even so, ha-Shem loved him, and gave him approval, because he acted in accordance with his own understanding in what [he thought] was a great deed of zealotry, so [ha-Shem] guided him spiritually. Yet Pinchas spoke [as if it were] the opposite, that he [Zimri] had the strength to refrain from this.  The Gemara (Sanhedrin 82b) alludes to this: "six miracles were performed for Pinchas," as it brings there, that if Zimri were physically separated [from Kozbi at the time of Pinchas' attack], and if Zimri [defended himself and] killed Pinchas, then he [Zimri] would not be legally liable [for murder].  Because this was truly a case of reasonable doubt, yet Pinchas took upon himself the role of a chief judge, to determine the motivations as they appeared to him [alone], and he [Pinchas, viewed what was happening through the lens of] anger....Pinchas was a descendant [or the spiritual reincarnation] of Yosef, who went through a process of ethical clarification through trails and tribulations about this very matter [adultery / lust].  Therefore, Zimri's deeds seemed particularly evil to Pinchas.  Concerning this, the text says (Hoshea 11:1), "For Israel is a foolish youth, yet I love him."  This is truly the case with Pinchas, who abrogated to himself the role of judge over Zimri and ruled him an adulterer, leading him to zealotry and to attack him [Zimri].  Yet the foundational depths of the matter were hidden from Pinchas, namely that she [Kozbi] had been ordained at Zimri's soul mate from the six days of Creation, as is explained in the writings of the Ari"zal. Even though Moshe Rabbeinu did not involve himself in this capital judgement, we find Pinchas acted as a foolish youth, because he did not understand the depths of the issue, and only saw what the everyday person would see and no more.  Yet even so, ha-Shem loved him, and gave him approval, because he acted in accordance with his own understanding in what [he thought] was a great deed of zealotry, so [ha-Shem] guided him spiritually.


And Moshe brought their case before Hashem - in the midrash [Rabbah 21:12] we have that they brought their case before chiefs of tens and the chiefs of a hundred and they were all afraid of judging it, and also Moshe Rabeinu, peace be upon him, was afraid until they brought their case before Hashem. And the issue in this is that the sin of the wood gatherer was against Moshe Rabeinu, PBUH, as it is in the holy Zohar (Bamidbar 205b) since a portion of Moshe Rabeinu PBUH was Shabbat, as we say "Moshe rejoiced in the gift of his portion" (Mincha Amidah) and Tzelofchad did not keep Shabbat on the second Shabbat  that Israel were commanded, and if they had all kept the mitzvot of Shabbat on the second Shabbat  immediately it would have been clear to all Israel the level of Shabbat, which is the level of Moshe Rabeinu PBUH, and through the sin of Tzelofchad that transgressed the second Shabbat this light was hidden from Israel. It was because of this that Moshe Rabeinu PBUH doubted if he could transgress his own reckonings, since it is known that for personal offenses a scholar is forbidden to forget his reckonings, (Yoma 23a) and for monetary offenses a scholar is obligated to forget his reckonings (Rosh Hashanah 17a) since we read "whoever forgoes his reckonings, they forgo all his punishments." And the issue is that monetary offenses are only in this world, and it is possible to have them returned, but personal offenses is something that leave a mark forever, and he (Moshe) was unclear if this deed (of Tzelofchad) was a monetary issue in which the Holy One of Blessing could return the light to all Israel, and they could see how good is the level of Shabbat, and that the thing was not erased forever, just momentarily; or if this was a personal offense, since if some souls in Israel just knew the depth of the importance of Shabbat they would serve God with more intensity, and so he was in doubt regarding this, and all the judges were not able to render an opinion on this case because they were afraid of offending the honor of Moshe Rabeinu PBUH, and the Holy Blessed Name revealed to Moshe Rabeinu PBUH that since the light was not erased, just held back at the moment, that this is but a monetary offense, and it is possible to forgive.

Matot



Masei



Deuteronomy

Devarim



Vaetchanan



Eikev



Re'eh



Shoftim



Ki Teitzei

When you go out to war against your enemy etc and you take captives - that is the good that is found in the nation, since in every nation there is a force for good. And while that force is "among them" it is "in captivity", but when it comes "in Israel" then it is good in its completed form. And this good, while "among them" is "desire" since while it is found "among them" it is impermanent. Yet, when those who understand see that this desire will be missing, they need to make it enter "in Israel", since while the desire is "among them" it is "in captivity" - and since the force of desire comes from the Holy One of Blessing it is only appropriate to get it "in Israel."
And you desire her and take her as a wife, and you bring her etc and she shaves etc and takes off the clothes of captivity - this is that everything that finds grace in the eyes of Israel certainly has in it something good, yet, it is necessary to make many selections so as to know if this is true grace or some external trapping that met one's eye. That is why it commanded that she should distance herself from all externalities, and after that, if grace is still found in his eyes, then obviously something good is found in her.
And you see in captivity - and it is written in the Gemarah "Torah only spoke like this due to the inclination to evil" (Kiddushin 21b) - and this is found nowhere [else]. Yet, sometimes the inclination to evil can dominate a person so much that they will not be able to move [spiritually] in any way, and so it is clear that from God it comes, as we find regarding Yehudah [and Tamar] and that is why the Torah revealed this specific law, so that the awareness of the doer will not fall completely.

Ki Tavo



Nitzavim

You are standing here etc, your wood chopper your water drawer etc. - On this King Solomon said: "[The way of an eagle in the air; the way of a serpent upon a rock; the way of a ship in the midst of the sea;] the way of a human in the world."(Prov. 30:19) "The way of a person in the world" that is, like the way of Yiftach, just as our sages said "Yiftach in his generation as like Samuel in his generation". The explanation of this is that Yiftach made complete in his world everything that the Holy One of Blessing wanted from him. And on this Shlomo the King, peace be upon him, was surprised and said "there are three things which are too wonderful for me, and four I don't know" (Proverbs 30:18). "The way of a person in the world", that is, the preferred way of the Jewish people is to complete the Will of the Holy One of Blessing, 'in the world' even the smallest one of Israel [is capable] - and this is the meaning of "you are standing": you are connected to the Holy One of Blessing. "Your heads": those are the ones in the higher level, "up to your water drawer" that is, the ones in the lower level - all of you are connected to the Holy One of Blessing. "Wood chopper": the ones who have a small sense of reverence [to Heaven]; "water drawer": [the ones who have] a small sense of love [to Heaven].

"Your heads, your tribal leaders, your elders, and your officers, every person in Israel, your babies, your wives and the ger that is inside your camp, from your woodcutter to your water drawer" Behold it is stated here ten levels, five corresponding to five. And all are as one, included in Israel. Your heads, that is, your wise ones, they correspond to your babies, since taf (baby) comes from the word tipah (drop) that is, one can only find in them a little awareness, and therefore, if one mistake is induced in a person with little awareness that reaches also to the head [of the people], since even in the baby there is a little awareness that comes from the head. "Your tribal leaders", that is, the expansion of the self, since in the root of Yaakov our father, peace be upon him, all Israel is concealed, and they were then one soul, then when they separated into tribes then they expanded into different souls in different generations, and this corresponds to "your wives" since the expansion happen through birth, since when the child is concealed and included in the soul of the parents, there is no expansion possible, only once the child is born then s/he begins to expand. "Your elders" those are the ones who acquired wisdom, and this corresponds to "your ger" - since as many new understanding of the words of Torah that happen in Israel, as many gerim come and join themselves to the people of Israel, since as they join through words of Torah they will come to greater expansion, and so the holiness of Israel expands even in the sould of the other peoples, and they come into Israel. "Your officers" that is, those who have awe, and they correspond to "your woodcutters", since "cutter" comes from anger, and about this the Holy One of Blessing affirms that in every anger present in Israel there is awe. "Every person in Israel" symbolizes the trait of love, and this corresponds to "your water drawer", since water is a symbol of desire, as we know from many places, and all desire and love of Israel is towards the Holy One of Blessing.

Vayeilech



Ha'Azinu



V'Zot HaBerachah



Five Scrolls

Ruth



Ecclesiastes



Prophets

Joshua



I Samuel



II Samuel



I Kings



II Kings



Isaiah



Hosea



Writings

Psalms



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29



Chapter 30



Chapter 31



Chapter 32



Chapter 33



Chapter 34



Chapter 35



Chapter 36



Chapter 37



Chapter 38



Chapter 39



Chapter 40



Chapter 41



Chapter 42



Chapter 43



Chapter 44



Chapter 45



Chapter 46



Chapter 47



Chapter 48



Chapter 49



Chapter 50



Chapter 51



Chapter 52



Chapter 53



Chapter 54



Chapter 55



Chapter 56



Chapter 57



Chapter 58



Chapter 59



Chapter 60



Chapter 61



Chapter 62



Chapter 63



Chapter 64



Chapter 65



Chapter 66



Chapter 67



Chapter 68



Chapter 69



Chapter 70



Chapter 71



Chapter 72



Chapter 73



Chapter 74



Chapter 75



Chapter 76



Chapter 77



Chapter 78



Chapter 79



Chapter 80



Chapter 81



Chapter 82



Chapter 83



Chapter 84



Chapter 85



Chapter 86



Chapter 87



Chapter 88



Chapter 89



Chapter 90



Chapter 91



Chapter 92



Chapter 93



Chapter 94



Chapter 95



Chapter 96



Chapter 97



Chapter 98



Chapter 99



Chapter 100



Chapter 101



Chapter 102



Chapter 103



Chapter 104



Chapter 105



Chapter 106



Chapter 107



Chapter 108



Chapter 109



Chapter 110



Chapter 111



Chapter 112



Chapter 113



Chapter 114



Chapter 115



Chapter 116



Chapter 117



Chapter 118



Chapter 119



Chapter 120



Chapter 121



Chapter 122



Chapter 123



Chapter 124



Chapter 125



Chapter 126



Chapter 127



Chapter 128



Chapter 129



Chapter 130



Chapter 131

"A song of ascents. Of David.  Ha-Shem, my heart is not proud, nor my look haughty; I do not set my path to greatness or wonderous things beyond me; except that I have set before me and contented my soul, the same way a child does who is weaned from their mother; I am like a weaned child in my soul." (Psalm 131:1-2).  It's as if David ha-Melech (peace be upon him) is saying before ha-Shem (may ha-Shem be blessed), that even with all the sins that Israel has committed, we aren't separated from ha-Shem.  It's merely like a toddler, who has separated from their mother's breasts, yet even with they turn their face away from their mother, to pick up something or other, they turn their gaze back to their mother, to make sure she's not going anywhere!  Thus it is, on every occasion when Yisrael desires something well, that they direct their gaze to ha-Shem and make sure that ha-Shem has not turned away from them.  We can bring this from the Gemara (Beitza 11a, discussing the case of whether a fledgling dove is permitted if its nest cannot be definitively identified, concluding that)  the mishna therefore teaches us that anywhere that a fledgling hops and turns and sees its nest [or its mother], it will continue to hop. But if it can no longer see its original nest, it will not hop any farther.  And the community of Yisrael is comparable to a dove, as is understood (Shabbat 49a).

Proverbs



Talmud

Berakhot



Shabbat



Pesachim



Daf 1a



Daf 1b



Daf 2a

[The Mishna Pesachim begins] "On the night of the 14th, they check for chametz by the light of a candle. Every place that chametz could not be brought does not need to be checked. And why did they speak of two rows of a wine cellar as a place in which chametz could be brought? Beit Shamai says, "two rows across the whole area of the cellar." Beit Hillel says, "the two outer rows, which are the uppermost." Here the topic of checking for chametz teaches that a person needs to refine and clean himself from all dirt and waste and remove any relation of these things from himself, therefore the Mishna says that a place which one enters requires checking, but a place which one does not entire does not require it. Thus if a person knows on his own that he clean from some particular thing, he does not need to check for that thing, as it said that a person has to know himself. This is the point that the Mishna asks about when it asks why they spoke of the "two rows in a wine cellar," because the wine cellar teaches us about a Talmid Chacham and for what he needs to  

Yoma



Sukkah



Beitzah



Rosh Hashanah



Megillah



Taanit



Chagigah



Yevamot



Ketubot



Nedarim



Nazir



Bava Batra



Avodah Zarah



Sanhedrin



Eduyot



Avot



Menachot



Daf 1a



Daf 1b



Daf 2a



Daf 2b



Daf 3a



Daf 3b



Daf 4a



Daf 4b



Daf 5a



Daf 5b



Daf 6a



Daf 6b



Daf 7a



Daf 7b



Daf 8a



Daf 8b



Daf 9a



Daf 9b



Daf 10a



Daf 10b



Daf 11a



Daf 11b



Daf 12a



Daf 12b



Daf 13a



Daf 13b



Daf 14a



Daf 14b



Daf 15a



Daf 15b



Daf 16a



Daf 16b



Daf 17a



Daf 17b



Daf 18a



Daf 18b



Daf 19a



Daf 19b



Daf 20a



Daf 20b



Daf 21a



Daf 21b



Daf 22a



Daf 22b



Daf 23a



Daf 23b



Daf 24a



Daf 24b



Daf 25a



Daf 25b



Daf 26a



Daf 26b



Daf 27a



Daf 27b



Daf 28a



Daf 28b



Daf 29a



Daf 29b



Daf 30a



Daf 30b



Daf 31a



Daf 31b



Daf 32a



Daf 32b



Daf 33a



Daf 33b



Daf 34a



Daf 34b



Daf 35a



Daf 35b



Daf 36a



Daf 36b



Daf 37a



Daf 37b



Daf 38a



Daf 38b



Daf 39a



Daf 39b



Daf 40a



Daf 40b



Daf 41a



Daf 41b



Daf 42a



Daf 42b



Daf 43a



Daf 43b



Daf 44a



Daf 44b



Daf 45a



Daf 45b



Daf 46a



Daf 46b



Daf 47a



Daf 47b



Daf 48a



Daf 48b



Daf 49a



Daf 49b



Daf 50a



Daf 50b



Daf 51a



Daf 51b



Daf 52a



Daf 52b



Daf 53a

Gemara: The rabbinic students said to R' Preida: "R' Ezra, the grandson of R' Avtolas, who is a tenth-generation descendant of R' Elazar ben Azaryah, who was a tenth-generation descendant of Ezra the Scribe, is standing at the door." R' Preida said to them: "What is all this? Why do you give his lineage? ... If he is a scholar and of distinguished ancestry fine. But if he is of distinguished ancestry and is not a scholar, [may fire consume him!]" They answered him: "He is a scholar." [R' Preida] said to them: "Let him enter and come before us." When R' Ezra entered [R'Preida] saw that his mind was unsettled. [R' Preida] therefore began saying,[NOTE: Translated in accord with the Izhbitzer's explanation below]: "'I said to God," etc., 'My good is in other than you.'" 
The thing dealt with that one, i.e. that Reb Preida was at that time the head and leader of the generation and crowned with glory in courtesy, fastidious in observance and maasim tovim as indicated (Eruvin 54b) in his teaching to his student four hundred times. Also he was asked from heaven what he wants either good for his generation or longevity and he chose good for his generation over longevity. And when they asked him (Megillah 27), "on account of which meritorious practice have you attained longevity?", he said, "I never blessed in the presence of a Kohen," and, this event occurred right before his passing. For the time had arrived that God chose Reb Ezra to receive the Nasi role and, the practice would now be through Torah as a main thing and not through maasim tovim. And Hashem brought it about that R' Preida failed now, that he insulted the priest who was [also] a  tenth-generation descendant of Ezra in that he said, "I didn't bless before a priest" [but he did]. And when he rose at the door, R' Preida felt that Ezra had complaints. And they judged from the section "And the people were looking to complain" since he was then the pillar of the generation and, Ezra had a complaint about him. And the punishment of the murmurers was by fire. Therefore he said "may fire consume him", for he saw that his mind was unsettled, i.e. that he perceived that the mind of Reb Ezra was thinking that Reb Preida would be honored in his coming to him. Gemara: R' Preida opened and said: "My good is in other than you" 
I.e. that it is not according to my mind to hold for you any good that you are coming to me. [R' Preida was saying], for the important point by me is only… Gemara: "To the holy ones, they who are [interred] in the earth", 
and they are the holy partiarchs who allude to mitzvot. Gemara: "and the mighty ones, all My desire is in them." They represent good deeds and are fixed forever. Isn't it the case that in truth in the days of Reb Preida Hashem yitbarach chose this greatly that mitzvot AND good deeds were the main thing. Then, Gemara: "When he [R' Ezra] heard [R' Preida] mention the word 'mighty ones,'" 
I.e. a thing that was fixed without change then Gemara: "he began and said, 'Let the mighty come and exact retribution from the mighty,'" 
I.e., how could it arise in your mind to make mention and strongly emphasize mitzvot and good deeds since they are only the outer manifestations [lit. garments], and, in addition, nations of the world have garments and grab [merit] from them and despite that it is said of them Gemara: "The mighty ones sank like lead in the water" 
For in truth all vitality of each and every nation is through some garment from a good attribute. But, at the time that Hashem yitbarach will remove the garment Himself (if one could say so) from this attribute, then this nation will go to destruction with all its mighty ones. And afterwards, he said, Gemara: "Let a beloved come", 
I.e. if you want to know for whom a mitzvah would be successful in action that it be fixed forever, this is King Solomon a'h, for he, in the building of the holy Temple made it with success, that Hashem yitbarach chose this without any change for ever. Nonetheless another person couldn't boast for doing a thing like this, Gemara: "Let good come and receive good from good for those who are good," 
I.e. as the time when Hashem Yitbarach chose the Torah and gave it to us through Moshe his servant, this doesn't change, Gemara: "Let this come and receive this from this for this nation... this refers to Moshe.. and this refers to the Torah"
that Moshe placed for the children of Israel. For on behalf of this, the Torah doesn't change because it is the case that He only gave it to this nation, [NOTE: But not including Maasim Tovim; Hashem brought this for the generation of R' Preida, but it was not to be in the generation of R' Ezra]  and he did not give any portion within it to the nations as it is written that, "Moses put it before the children of Israel".


Bekhorot



Chullin



Oktzin



Miscellany



Volume II

Introduction



Genesis

Bereshit






...Now the serpent was the shrewdest of all the wild beasts (Gen. 3:1).
...Now the serpent was the shrewdest of all the wild beasts (Gen. 3:1).From this it appears that there is greater wisdom in the wild than in the domestic animals. The domestic animal agrees to be subservient and confined to persons in exchange for the person providing food and therefore doesn’t need provide for needs directly from God. The wild animal is wiser by not wanting to receive its needs from flesh and blood, agrees to live a narrower life provided that its support is from the Blessed Name, gazing always on the GiverThe snake, shrewder even than the other animals, surrounded itself with reasons why it didn’t need to even look to God. Rather, it wanted to receive its abundance as a requirement. Therefore, it was cursed quality by quality and would eat dust all its life since it claimed not to need service as was explained in part one (Parashat Ki Tissa: “And He Said”). Israel’s sin was that they sensed the Divine light of the future, as is written in the G’mara (Niddah 61b) that the mitzvot will be obsolete in the future and there will no need for Divine service. In truth, all of Israel’s sins are like eating unripe fruit, wanting the light before its time. As it is explained there (part one Ki Tissa) that they sensed the light of the future when God will reveal the light and there will be no further need for service. Amalek’s quality was to immediately notice what is lacking and then to claim that Amalek as well has no need for service since it is blameless on its mother’s side. The wisdom of the snake was like this.

Noach



Lech Lecha



Vayera



Chayei Sara



Toldot



Vayetzei



Vayishlach



Vayeshev



Miketz



Vayigash



Vayechi



Exodus

Shemot

And the Children of Israel sighed from their labor and they cried out. And their groaning rose up to God from their labor. At this moment, the salvation began. Once they started to cry out, then immediately "their groaning rose up" - meaning that it catalyzed the salvation. For until this moment they had no awakening to scream and pray. And because the Holy Blessed One desired to redeem them, [therefore] the scream was awakened within them. And this is the beginning of redemption, when a person is roused to scream to God. Similar to what King David, peace be upon him, said (Psalm 66:20), "blessed is God for not taking away God's prayer and kindness from me." Meaning that if there is prayer within him, then God will shine kindness upon him. For before God desire to bring salvation a person does not even acknowledge their own lack, and they are not at all aware what they are lacking. But when God desire to redeem them, God shows a person their lack, and the person therefore becomes aware that all of the outgrowths of their lacking derive from this primary root. And God sends the person the strength to pray and scream to God, and they begin to make a lot of noise about this to God - and then God shines kindness upon them.

Vaera



Bo


That is to say, the power of the month will be for you, that you should be able to renew yourselves in Torah and in your actions. The Holy One of the Blessed Name gives to the Children of Israel this power. And even though it is apparent that this [the renewal] is not [organically] from them, since it is a renewal, the Holy One of the Blessed Name inscribes/seals Godself in that this is a renewal for you.


Behold, in the first night of Passover the Holy One of Blessing instructed that a person clarifies her/his mouth. The forces of the mouth are eating, drinking and speaking. And the Holy One of Blessing commanded the eating of matzah, the drinking of the [four] cups and with that the eating and drinking of the entire year is clarified, since these mitzvot will defend a person the entire year, so that prohibited things won't come to one's mouth. And regarding the force of speaking the Holy One of Blessing instructed the telling of the exodus from Egypt, and with that there is defense from speaking prohibited things all the year. And this is so that "The Torah of Ad-nai will be in your mouth" - that all forces of the mouth will be very clarified and, and full of words of Torah.
In this portion are written three subjects: Matza, Maror and Tefilin. Matza teaches regarding the tzimtzum (contracting). Maror teaches that one should not ask for pleasures, as it is written in the Gemara (Brachot 5a): "three good gifts the Holy One of Blessing gave to Israel, and all of them were only given through sufferings" - that is, a person needs exertions, clarifications and doubts. And after that comes tefilin, that teaches regarding connecting [deeply with God], that Israel is connected to the Holy One of Blessing, because tefilin teaches about the seasons of light that is found in every action of Israel.

Beshalach



Yitro














<b>Honor your father and your mother:</b> It is found in the holy Zohar (Kedoshim, 2) that "father and mother" are hinting to the thought of the mind and the desire of the heat. And this is what God, may He be blessed, commanded us - to honor them. Such that if a person knows about himself that he is very refined and has no egotistical interests, he should not push away his thought and desire, but rather honor them. 

Mishpatim



Terumah



Tetzaveh



<b><i>Place the two stones on the shoulders of the ephod—stones of remembrance for the children of Israel; and Aaron shall bear their names before God on his two shoulders as a remembrance</i> (Exodus 28:12).</b> The idea here is that God is called “learned in mysteries” in the Talmud (Berakhot 58a:3) for creating many souls (see Mishnah Berakhot 6:8) with different minds, which contradict one another. So it ever is with Israel among themselves, that the children of Leah say that the children of Rachel constrict themselves more than is appropriate, not according to what God commanded, and the children of Rachel say that the children of Leah expand themselves more than is appropriate. If they oppose one another, how can it be that they are all good? Indeed, Aaron the priest bore them on his shoulders as one who bears a load on his shoulders, because this load is his particular load, because Aaron the priest had a good heart, which discerned and clarified for each soul in Israel that each one acts according to its own character, even beyond their own understanding, and in their season and in their time orients toward God’s will, and “these and those are the words of the living God” (Eruvin 13b:10).

Ki Tisa



Vayakhel



Pekudei



Leviticus

Vayikra



Tzav



Shmini



Tazria



Metzora



Achrei Mot



<b><i>And you shalt not pass through any of your offspring to Molekh</i>:</b> That is that idolaters worship with this power, such that there is no greater love than that of a father for a child, whereas the idolaters want to show that they are not subservient to this power. But God, may He be blessed, forbade worship through this power with which the idolaters say they have a great power from it by leaving over and delivering this power to their deity. However, God, may He be blessed, marked it in the world, that He wants this love that a father loves his child. And likewise, any idolatry of the idolaters is worshipping the power of love or the power of fear. 

Kedoshim

You shall be holy etc - Holiness is an expression of separation and an expression of belonging and invitation, that is, the Holy One of Blessing warns Israel that they will be separated from all things that carry idolatry, and are invited and belong to the service to the Blessed One.

Emor



Behar



Bechukotai



Numbers

Bamidbar


Each person shall camp with his/her flag, under the signs of their ancestral house the Children of Israel shall camp - The flag teaches recognition and publicizing to the world, and the Holy One of Blessing taught that even in the encampment of the flags there are levels, that in the East was the flag of Yehudah, and in the West the flag of Dan, which were the last ones to move to their flags. And truly, Oholiav ben Achisamach of the tribe of Dan lifted  his heart in knowledge and wisdom just as Betzalel of the tribe of Yehudah. And through this the Holy One of Blessing teaches us that Oholiav did not entertain the [bad] thoughts [such as] 'why is Betzalel first and i have to go last?' And regarding this it is written "a person with his/her flag" - that is, that each person has the recognition of the honor of Heaven and there one should one camp, and not feel jealousy towards one another - in every place there is My honor.

Nasso



Beha'alotcha










In the Book of Numbers, it is hinted that no living being will be exculpated before Him, that even precious souls, "there is no righteous in the land who does good and does not sin" (Ecclesiastes 7:20), as in this portion it is written "consuming at the edge [katze] of the camp"(Numbers 11:1)—the elite [ketzinim] of the camp (see Sifri Numbers 85), and in parashat Shelah is written the sin of the scouts "all of the men being heads of the Children of Israel,"(Numbers 13:3) who were "mistaken hearted... and not knowing the ways [of God]" (Psalms 95:10), and so, in the section of the gatherer [of sticks of Shabbat], and in parashat Korach, "who was clever... and his eyes misled him” (Bamidbar Rabba 18:8, Midrash Tanhuma Korach 5, Rashi on Numbers 16:7), and in prashat Hukat is written “the waters of conflict” (Numbers 20:13) about Moses and Aaron, and in parashat Balak about Zimri ben Salu [who was killed for improper relations with a Midianite woman] that he was a chieftain (see Numbers 25:14). This hints to what was said “Remember, do not forget how you angered God your God in the wilderness”(Deuteronomy 9:7) because ‘wilderness’ indicates the destruction and the desolation that is in every individual, as how there were worlds that were destroyed before the world of building (see Kohellet Rabba 3:11:1, Zohar 3 292b:2). And this hints to the strength of humans over the demonic and wild forces within them that want to mislead them in youthful sins, and thus also in all lofty matters, are found deriving from the force of the wilderness, as the wilderness indicates the whole world, because before the creation of the form of humanity the whole world was a wilderness, because settlement [the alternative to wilderness] is only from people, and anything before the complete finishing of the formation of humanity is called wilderness.

Sh'lach



Korach



Chukat



Balak



Pinchas



Matot



Masei



Deuteronomy

Devarim



Vaetchanan



Eikev




And you will remember Ad-nai your God, who is the Giver of your strength to do valor. It is a main principle to remember the giver of anything. And as we find regarding the tithes (Deut. 26:13) "I did not transgress Your command and I did not forget" and in the Gemara we read "I did not transgress not blessing You and I did not forget to mention Your name over the produce" (Brachot 40b). And even regarding the words of Torah, if a person did not remember to say "Giver of the Torah" one's wisdom does not amount to anything. And therefore the Holy Blessed One set it so that the Human cannot exist without food, so the Human will lack something, and your creations will take great effort, and you will remember the One who brings about the Flow - and this is the level of Israel: they remember the One who brings about the Flow constantly. And through this they receive the inner energy of food, since in truth every thing has a specific quality, such as "wine that gladdens the heart of people" (Ps. 104:15) etc, and dates that make worry go away , as it is written in the Gemara (Ketubot 10b). And the opposite we also find in the Gemara, such as that the flour of barley is hard on the intestines (Brachot 36a), and so too the five grains there is a depth that precisely those five grains give strength and power to humans, and this is why the minimal amount is a olive-size. And regarding oil too, it indicates that "the beginning of wisdom is the awe of God" (Tzidkat HaTzadik 147:1) - and in this it is all the idea that a person must not say "my strength and my power brought me all this", one should constantly remember that "from all that comes from the mouth of God does a person live" (Deut. 8:3), that the essence of existence is what comes from the mouth of God, which is found in the essence of all things , and from this one should bless so that strength and force will flow from what one brought inside oneself, so that one will be able to serve God with that strength, as it is written [wisdom says] "for through me your days will increase, and years be added to your life. " (Proverbs 9:11)

Re'eh



Shoftim



Ki Teitzei



Ki Tavo



Nitzavim



Vayeilech



Ha'Azinu



V'Zot HaBerachah



Five Scrolls

Song of Songs



Ecclesiastes



Prophets

Joshua



Judges



I Samuel



II Samuel



I Kings



Isaiah



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29



Chapter 30



Chapter 31



Chapter 32



Chapter 33



Chapter 34



Chapter 35



Chapter 36



Chapter 37



Chapter 38



Chapter 39



Chapter 40



Chapter 41



Chapter 42



Chapter 43



Chapter 44



Chapter 45



Chapter 46



Chapter 47



Chapter 48



Chapter 49



Chapter 50



Chapter 51



Chapter 52

"The voice of your watchmen- they raised a voice, together they shall sing, for eye to eye they shall see when the Lord returns to Zion."
"Your Watchmen" are those individuals whose hearts are pained within them, murmuring, yearning for G-d to heal the blemishes of their heart within this world, each and every individual according to their own particular lack. The prophet comes to assure that in the future, these watchmen will join their voices together, joyously announcing the direct vision of their redemption. When they meet each other, they will say to one another with great joy: "my friend, you wouldn't believe the lack I struggled with, that I was forced to burden, and now I am finally finding redemption". And their friend will respond to them: "I also experienced redemption from the particular lack that I struggled with, that I was forced to burden in this world".
Then "together they shall sing" as each one will take joy in the redemption of their friend, for they are all part of the collective, and the collective redemption is found within each particular, just as the particular redemption is within the collective.

Hosea



Joel



Jonah



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4

Jonah left the city and sat east of the city...until he should see what happened to the city: when the prophecy went forth - and the word of God necessarily comes to fruition - even if they repented, this proclamation could not go entirely unfulfilled. And when the prophecy went forth that Nineveh would be overturned, even if they did repent, the prophet feared remaining in the city, because at least some house and courtyards would certainly fall. And so he left the city, and God showed him that He has great power to redeem, as the entire prophecy was in the end directed only at Jonah's gourd.

Micah



Habakkuk



Zechariah



Malachi



Writings

Psalms



Proverbs



II Chronicles



Talmud

Berakhot



Daf 1a



Daf 1b



Daf 2a



Daf 2b



Daf 3a



Daf 3b



Daf 4a



Daf 4b



Daf 5a



Daf 5b



Daf 6a



Daf 6b



Daf 7a



Daf 7b



Daf 8a

<b>Rabbi Ami and Rabbi Asi, even though there were thirteen synagogues in Tiberias, would only pray between the pillars of where they were learning</b>. And in the Yerushalmi (Brachot, beginning of chapter <i>ein omdin</i>) Rabbi Yochanan says, a covenant has been made - one who tires themself with learning in synagogue will not quickly forget it. That is to say, Torah and prayer are united - Torah only is because of the strength of prayer, and prayer only is because of the strength of Torah. For even if a person understands in their wisdom the Torah, in any case to bring the strength of the Torah on the "clothing" is only due to prayer. As it was at Creation, where it is written "and there was no person to work the ground" (Bereishit 2:5) and it says in the Gemara, "teaching that herbs came out and stood at the opening of the soil, until Primordial Human and prayed for mercy and rains came down and they sprouted" (Chullin 60b). That is to say, even though God planted the Garden of Eden before, which is an allusion to Their intent to create it, They discerned in wisdom and had counsel to see the light, even so these were secured by God only in wisdom understanding and knowledge - this is the matter of the Tree of Life and the Tree of Knowledge. Even to illuminate their light, which would light up the "clothing", that human action would receive wisdom from them,  that they will know how to act - this is only by means of prayer, for there is no wholeness for the words of Torah by means of prayer. And so too, the wholeness of prayer is only by means of Torah, for in Themself the Blessed One cannot be accessed by thought at all - therefore, a person is unable to pray before the Blessed God since there is no access of the Blessed God. Therefore, by means of accessing the words of Torah, by this means can they pray before the Blessed God. And like this is written, "I am always with You; You hold me by the right hand, Guide me with Your counsel and afterwards, take me to honour" (Tehillim 73:23-4). When one prays from this side, that one sees that one is attached to the Blessed God, and They hold them always by the right hand: then one prays to be guided with Their counsel, and to have one's eyes enlightened to Above by accessing Them. This is why it says, "and afterwards, take me to honour" (ibid.) - for the honour of the Blessed God goes out in the revelation at the time that the wicked is repaid according to their deeds. And this is why, when one prays, they begin by asking the Blessed God to reveal Their honour and not to delay a moment: only, immediately, take me, and Your honour will be exalted.

Eruvin



Pesachim



Yoma



Sukkah



Rosh hashanah



Megillah



Taanit



Chagigah



Yevamot



Ketubot



Kiddushin



Bava Metzia



Bava Metzia (Yerushalmi)



Bava Batra



Sanhedrin



Avot



Zevachim



Menachot



Tahorot



Anthology

For Shabbat Chanuka and Rosh Chodesh



For the Month of Elul



For Rosh Hashanah Prayers



For Shabbat



In Zohar



For Haggadah



Birkat HaMazon



Midrah Rabbah and Tanchuma



Miscellany



Mei HaShiloach Anthology

Genesis

Bereshit



Noach



Lech Lecha



Vayera



Chayei Sara



Toldot



Vayetzei



Vayeshev



Vayigash



Vayechi



Exodus

Shemot



Bo



Beshalach



Yitro



Mishpatim



Ki Tisa



Pekudei



Leviticus

Metzora



Achrei Mot



Kedoshim

You shall be holy. As I heard that in the parasha Kedoshim it opens with "you shall be holy" [also an explanation that it is a reassurance that they will be holy in everything that is written in the parsha] that is impossible for a person to do all the mitzvot written in the parsha if one is not holding oneself in holiness in what is written beforehand. And he said, as example, that "love your neighbor as yourself" is impossible to do, what can one do if in one's heart one hates the fellow nonetheless, or maybe just does not love the fellow, and all the exertions of one's heart will definitely not help if beforehand one has not reached the level of holiness.

Emor



"You should dwell in Sukkot for seven days...  Because in Sukkot I delivered Bnei Yisrael and brought them out of Egypt" –Here, after the determination of fate on Yom Kippur, the Israelites were ordered to dwell in Sukkot.  The explanation of this by my master my teacher my Rabbi Yitzchak, the holy wise one, may his righteousness be blessed with life in Olam Habah, that in every place that Israel triumphs and succeeds over the nations, they then need to cleanse themselves with the mitzvah of Sukkah, like we find with Yaakov our father had triumphed over the other nations as it says, “And he built sukkahs for himself.”  And moreover, after Israel triumphed over Mitzrayim, it says about their leaving “Bnei Yisrael journeyed from Rameses to Sukkot…” and it also says, “for in Sukkot I delivered Bnei Yisrael…” 

Behar



Numbers

Nasso



Beha'alotcha



Korach



Chukat



Balak



Pinchas



Deuteronomy

Devarim



Vaetchanan



Eikev



Re'eh



Shoftim



Ki Teitzei



Ki Tavo



Nitzavim



Ha'Azinu



V'Zot HaBerachah



Five Scrolls

Ruth



Ecclesiastes



Lamentations



Prophets

Joshua



I Samuel



II Samuel



I Kings



II Kings



Isaiah



Jeremiah



Ezekiel



Amos



Micah



Habakkuk



Zechariah



Malachi



Writings

Psalms



Proverbs



Job



I Chronicles



II Chronicles



Talmud

Berakhot



Shabbat



Eruvin



Pesachim



Pesachim (Yerushalmi)



Yoma



Sukkah



Rosh Hashanah



Taanit



Megillah



Chagigah



Yevamot



Ketubot



Nedarim



Sotah



Gittin



Bava Kamma



Bava Metzia



Bava Batra



Sanhedrin



Avodah Zarah



Avot



Zevachim



Chullin



Arakhin



Keritot



Collectanea

Zohar Bereshit



Zohar Shemot



Zohar Devarim



Tikkunei Zohar



Sefer Yetzirah



Siddur



Miscellany

