Esther
אסתר
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.org



Esther

Chapter 1

These events took place in the days of Achashverosh - the same Achashverosh who ruled from Hodu to Kush: one hundred and twenty-seven provinces.
In those days, King Achashverosh sat on the throne in the capital, Shushan.
In the third year of his reign, he held a wine-feast for all his ministers and officials: the leaders of Persia and Media, the leaders and ministers of all his provinces.
He demonstrated the great wealth of his kingdom and the precious glory of his grandeur for many days: one hundred and eighty days.
After these days, the king held a seven-day wine-feast for all of the residents of the capital, Shushan - from great to small - in the courtyard garden of the palace.
Pale turquoise tapestries were hung from purple linen cords on silver rollers and alabaster columns.  Gold and silver benches were set on mosaic flooring made of marble, alabaster and pearl.
The drinks were served in golden vessels of all sort, and the royal wine was plentiful, as befits a king.
And rule for the drinking was "No restraint!" - the king had instructed each of his attendants to obey the wishes of everyone there.
Moreover, Queen Vashti held a women's wine-feast in Achashverosh's palace.
On the seventh day, when the king's heart was gladdened by wine, he told Mehuman, Bizta, Charbona, Zeitar and Charkas - the seven royal attendants for King Achashverosh -
to bring Queen Vashti before the king, wearing her crown, to display her beauty to the people and to the ministers - for she was beautiful to look at.
But Queen Vashti refused to heed the command conveyed by the attendants and would not come before the king.  The king was furious, and his anger burned within him.
So the king spoke with the most learned sages of the time, in keeping with royal practice in matters of religion and law:
(The ones closest to him were Karshna, Seitar, Admata, Tarshish, Meres, Marsna, and Memucan - the seven ministers of Persia and Media who had immediate access to the king and a primary position in the kingdom.)
"According to the law, what is to be done to Queen Vashti for having disobeyed a decree from King Achashverosh, delivered by royal attendants?"
Memucan spoke before the king and his ministers: "Not against the king alone has Queen Vashti offended, but against all the ministers, and all the nations, in all the provinces of King Achashverosh.
When the queen's behavior becomes known to other women, they will become contemptuous of their husbands when they consider that King Achashverosh ordered Queen Vashti to be brought to him and she would not come.
This very day, the princesses of Persia and Media - who will have heard about the queen's action - will speak of it to all the royal ministers with scorn and rage.
If it pleases the King, compose a royal decree in the inviolable annals of Persia and Media that Vashti shall never again come before King Achashverosh and that the king will bestow her reign on one who is more fitting.
This royal verdict will be heard throughout the expanse of the kingdom, and all women will give honor to their husbands, from great to small!"
The plan was approved by the king and the ministers, and the king did everything as Memocan had spoken.
Documents were sent to each of the king's provinces - to every state in its own language and every people in its own tongue - so that every man should hold authority in his home and in the language of his people.