Meshech Hochma
משך חכמה
merged
http://www.sefaria.org/Meshech_Hochma
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-YU Torah miTzion Beit Midrash
-http://www.torontotorah.com

Meshech Hochma

Bereshit



Noakh



Lekh Lekha



Vayera



Khayei Sarah



Toldot



Vayetze



Vayishlakh



Vayeshev



Miketz









‎“Now, Pharaoh should find an‎‏ ‏understanding and wise man”‎ ... <br> Pharaoh was holy to the Egyptians. As‏ ‏such, it wasn’t his role to look into‏ ‏human affairs and the ‎matters of his‏ ‏land. And because “the highest over the‏ ‏high waits, and there are higher ones‏ ‏over ‎them,” theft and robbery were‏ ‏rampant. Woe to the land whose leaders‏ ‏are many! Therefore, in ‎Egypt there was‏ ‏a tremendous distortion of justice as‏ ‏was seen when a person from a far land‏ ‏was ‎thrown in prison for life over a‏ ‏personal matter, imprisoned‏ ‏without justice. Every bureaucrat did as he‏ ‏pleased. Therefore, Pharaoh was shown‏ ‏the dreams ‎about the cows first, to‏ ‏demonstrate that Hashem wasn’t going‏ ‏to have the famine impact ‎Pharaoh, for‏ ‏the sake of the animals, “Hashem saves‏ ‏for the sake of animals.” For this reason‏ ‏Yosef stated, “As to the repetition of the‏ ‏dreams.”‎ ‎“Now, Pharaoh should find an‏ ‏understanding and wise man”‎‏ ‏‎-‎‏ ‏‎“man”‎‏ ‏and not “godly” or “holy”, for his‏ ‏greatness [in leadership] should be that‏ ‏he knows the ways of civility and‏ ‏organization. [Therefore,] ‎‎“He should be‎‏ ‏placed over all of Egypt”‎‏ ‏‎– that‏ ‏everything should be in his hands. If a‏ ‏bureaucrat were ‎to twist the law, his eye‏ ‏would be above him watching. No one‏ ‏would be able to decide law on their ‎own‏ ‏without first consulting the leader of‏ ‏Egypt. And therefore the cows were‏ ‏mentioned first, to ‎point out the‏ ‏corruption of justice in the land of‏ ‏Egypt. And when [Pharaoh] appointed‏ ‏him, he stated ‎‎- look and oversee all the‏ ‏affairs of the land, for “I’ve given you all‏ ‏of Egypt.” If there is a twisting of ‎the‏ ‏law, it will be dealt with by you‏ ‏alone. Therefore, when Yosef wanted to‏ ‏imprison his brothers ‎without a trial‏ ‏and consensus of the community, he‏ ‏said, “You are spies!”‎‏ ‏‎- something that‏ ‏would ‎involve the monarchy and would‏ ‏not need to be publicized amongst the‏ ‏populace [in order to be ‎acted upon].‎‏ ‏Similarly, Yosef stated, “I am Pharaoh,”‎‏ ‏referring to the divine monarchy in the‏ ‏Egyptian ‎language. [This communicates‏ ‏that] it is below my honour to supervise‏ ‏the iniquity and tricks of ‎people.‎‏ ‏‎“Without you...” for you will supervise all‎‏ ‏that occurs in the land of Egypt.‎‏ ‏Understand this.”‎

Vayigash



Vayekhi



Shemot



Vaera



Bo



Beshalakh



Yitro



Mishpatim



Terumah



Tetzaveh



Ki Tisa



Vayakhel



Pekudei



Haftarat Shekalim



Haftarat Zakhor



Haftarat Hakhodesh



Haftarat Shabbat Hagadol



Haftarat First Day Pesakh



Haftarat Last Day Pesakh



Hafatarat Shabbat Rosh Khodesh



Megillat Esther



Vayikra



Tzav



Shemini



Tazria



Metzora



Akharei Mot



Kedoshim



Emor



Behar



Bekhukotai



Bamidbar



Naso



Behaalotkha



Shelakh



Korakh



Khukkat



Balak 



Pinekhas



Mattot



Masei



Ruth



Devarim



Va'etkhanan



Ekev



Re'eh



Shoftim



Ki Tetze



Ki Tavo



Nitzavim



Vayelekh



Haazinu



Vezot Haberakha



Eikhah



Derush

