Bartenura on Mishnah Kelim
ברטנורא על משנה כלים
Bartenura on Mishnah, trans. by Rabbi Robert Alpert, 2022
https://www.sefaria.org/texts

Bartenura on Mishnah Kelim



Chapter 1



Mishnah 1

אבות הטומאה. השרץ – there are eight reptiles that are written in the [Torah] portion of Shemini (Leviticus 11:29-30): החלד/the mole and עכבר/the mouse [and the צב/lizard; the ענקה/gecko; the כח/land crocodile; the לטאה/lizard; the חמט/sand lizard and the תנשמת/chameleon],” they are the primary sources of ritual impurity to defile humans and utensils/vessels that come in contact with them when they are dead. And their measurements for defiling is like that of a lentil (though we are informed in Tractate Kelim, Chapter 17, Mishnah 8, that whenever a lentil is spoken of, it means…the Egyptian lentil). For the sand lizard/חמט at the beginning of its creation is like that of lentil (see Tractate Nazir 52a). But the limbs have no measure, for even less that of a lentil of a reptile defiles (see Tractate Ohalot, Chapter 1, Mishnah 7). And especially when it is moist, the reptile defiles, but it does not defile when dry, as it is written (Leviticus 11:32): “And anything on which one of them falls when dead [shall be impure: be it any article of wood, or a cloth, or a skin, or a sack – any such article that can be put to use shall be dipped in water, and it shall remain impure until evening; then it shall be pure],” similar to their being dead (see Tractate Niddah 56a).
ושכבת זרע – Specifically the semen of an adult Israelite , but that of a heathen does not defile, even according to the Rabbis, for the nocturnal pollution of a heathen is completely pure. And similarly, the semen of a minor also does not defile, as it is written (Leviticus 15:16): “When a man has an emission of semen, [he shall bathe his whole body in water and remain impure until evening],” a man/איש, but not a minor/קטן who is younger than nine-years and one-day old, for [prior to the age of nine-years and one-day] his act of sexual intercourse is not coition. And its measurement to the observer is a little bit, even similar to a mustard seed, and to contact/touching, like that of a lentil. And specifically moist semen that defiles, as it is written (Leviticus 15:16): “[When a man has] an emission of semen/כי תצא ממנו שכבת זרע,” he who is appropriate for emitting semen, for since the teacher of our Mishnah did not consider a בעל קרי/one who experienced a seminal emission (see Leviticus 15:16-18) as one of the primary sources of defilement, we learn from this that it is none other than first degree of ritual defilement, and this is taught at the conclusion of Tractate Zavim (Chapter 5, Mishnah 11), that a person who experienced a seminal emission is like one who came in contact with a reptile, and is not seen as other than first [degree of ritual defilement].
וטמא מת – a person who became defiled through contact with the dead. But utensils/vessels that came in contact with the dead are like the dead itself, and whatever comes in contact with them is made into a primary source of ritual defilement. But utensils/vessels which came in contact with a person who was defiled through contact with the dead or a person who came in contact with utensils/vessels that had been in contact with the dead, they are primary sources of ritual defilement and are defiled for seven days like a person, as is taught in the Mishnah of the first chapter of Ohalot [Mishnah 2]. But earthenware and foods and liquids that came in contact with the dead do not become primary sources of ritual defilement. And especially an Israelite becomes a primary source of ritual defilement when he touched a dead person. But an idolater and similarly a non-viable birth/premature that was born at the age of a month is not susceptible to become ritually impure if he came in contact with the dead.
ומצורע בימי ספרו – A confirmed leper (declared ritually impure by a Kohen. All the laws applying to a quarantined leper apply to a confirmed leper – who must grow his hair long and rend his garments; to purify himself when healed, he must shave all his hair, and bring a special purification offering) and who is fitted for Levitical uncleanness with [his bringing] [two] birds, and cedar wood and hyssop and two scarlet-dyed yarn and shaving, and he sits from outside his tent for seven days and one the eighth [day] brings his sacrifices (see Leviticus 14:8), and on those seven days are called the days of his counting, and he defiles humans, and it is stated “the washing of his clothing “ (“The one to be purified shall was his clothing” – Leviticus 14:8) on the day of final decision [by a Kohen] and it is stated, “the washing of his clothes” on the days of his counting (Leviticus 14:9: “[On the seventh day he shall shave off all his hair…]he shall wash his clothes [and bathe his body in water; then he shall be pure],” just as there he defiles a human being, so here [also] he defiles a human being.
ומי חטאת שאין בהם כדי הזייה – defiles him through contact. But if they have enough in order to sprinkle [of the water of the purification upon the unclean] it defiles even through carrying, to defile humans and clothing, as it is written (Numbers 19:21): “Further, he who sprinkled the water of lustration shall wash his clothes, and whoever touches the water of lustration shall be impure until evening.” But our Rabbis/teachers learned that the person who sprinkles is pure, and the Biblical verse does not come other than to give a measure to the person carrying [the waters of the sin-offering of the Red Heifer] that there must be enough for sprinkling , and the Biblical verse divided between the two kinds of water, to inform you that water where there is enough for sprinkling defiles a person to defile clothing, but where there isn’t enough [water] for sprinkling, it defiles a person to defile food and liquids but not to defile clothing.
וכלי חרס באויר – when his defilement fell in the airspace of an earthenware vessel, whether it touched ,the vessel or whether it did not touch it, the vessel is defiled. But if it the defilement touched the vessel from the outside, it was not defiled by this contact, as it is written (Leviticus 11:33): “And if any of those (i.e., an article of wood, or a cloth, or a skin, or a sack) falls into an earthen vessel, everything inside it shall be impure [and the vessel itself you shall break],” from inside it/within it, it becomes defiled, but it is not defiled from outside of it.
ואינם מטמאין במשא – that all of these primary sources of ritual defilement that are considered here are written concerning them "הנוגע"/someone who comes in contact with them and it is not written: "הנושא"/he who carries them.

Mishnah 2

מטמאים את האדם במשא – when he lifts one of them whether by his hand or his fellow lifts it upon his shoulder, and even if he [himself] did not make contact with the defiling substance, or that the defiling substance was tied with a rope and the defiling agent was lifted via the rope. Since he moved the weight of the impure thing on his own, the person is defiled by ritual impurity imparted by carrying [even when not touching them directly] to defile the clothing that is upon him, or all of the garments/clothing and vessels/utensils that he comes in contact with, except for earthenware, all the while that the defiling matter is upon his back. But after he withdrew from the defilement, he does not defile utensils/vessels through touching/contact, for whomever carries the defilement, after he has withdrawn from it is not ought but first degree of ritual impurity, but utensils/vessels do not become susceptible to receive defilement other than from a primary source of ritual impurity. But even at the time that he carries the defilement, he does not defile humans nor earthenware vessels, but rather only other utensils/vessels. And you do not have something that is defiled with ritual impurity imparted by carrying other than a human being alone, but not utensils/vessels and not food and liquids, for if there were may utensils/vessels one on top of the other and a carrion or the waters of lustration in the upper-most vessel, the lower vessels are not defiled by carrying all the while that they did not touch/come in contact with the carrion or with the waters of lustration. And similarly, food and liquids are not defiled with the ritual impurity imparted by carrying, for concerning the ritual impurity imparted by carrying, it is written "לכם" (see Leviticus 11:39: “If an animal that you may eat has died/וכי ימות מן-הבהמה אשר-היא לכם לאכלה [anyone who touches its carcass shall be impure until evening]),” and we expound [the word] "לכם"/that you – that they defile through carrying but they do not defile vessels nor foods and liquids through carrying. And just as carrion defiles through carrying, so it also defiles through movement/ היסט (i.e., by means of a lever, without actually coming in contact with it – and this applies to impurity imparted by someone with gonorrhea, a woman in flux, a menstruating woman or a woman after childbirth), for movement is from the category/species of carrying, as for example, that there was wood placed at the tope of a tree or at the top of a wall and a carrion was at one end of the wood and a person comes and puts the knee of the balance down on the second/opposite end, since he lifted the end on which the carrion on is on account of his additional weight, it is defiled with the ritual impurity of movement, which is like carrying.
וחשוכי בגדים במגע (and to make unclean the persons alone but not their clothes) – meaning to say, the clothes are prevented from defilement if there is contact without carrying, for the person who comes in contact/touches the carrion or the waters of lustration but does not carry them does not defile even the clothing that is upon him, as it written (Leviticus 11:39, though this verse, which is brought by the commentary of Rabbi Pinchas Kahati on this Mishnah does NOT exactly express what Bartenura writes – perhaps he is referring to Leviticus 11:27): “anyone who touches its carcass shall be impure until evening” (and see verse 27: “whoever touches their carcasses/הנוגע בנבלתם shall be impure until evening. [They are impure for you/טמאים המה לכם”), and the washing of clothing is not mentioned there, and with the waters of lustration, it is also written (Numbers 19:21 – and this verse does not match the Hebrew text brought by the Bartenura commentary, but is also referred to by the commentary of Rabbi Pinchas Kahati where he mentions that in both places, the washing of clothing is not mentioned: “Whatever that impure person touches shall be impure until evening/והנוגע במי הנדה יטמא עד-הערב”. On the other hand, use of the Bar Ilan Responsa project takes the reader to Numbers 31:24: “On the seventh day you shall wash your clothes and be pure, and after that you may enter the camp.”). [The word] חשוכי – is the language of prevention, like (Genesis 22:16): “Because [you have done this] and have not withheld your son/ולא חשכת את-בנך, [your favored one].”

Mishnah 3

בועל נדה – It is written concerning them (Leviticus 15:24): “[And if a man lies with her,] her menstrual impurity is communicated to him/ותהי נדתה עליו; [he shall be impure seven days, and any bedding on which he lies shall become impure],” we learned that he, like a menstruating woman, defiles surfaces designated for lying and sitting, and it is written after this (Leviticus 15:24): “and any bedding on which he lies shall become impure/כל משכב אשר-ישכב עליו יטמא,” but it is not necessary to state this, but rather it comes to explain, “her menstrual impurity is communicated to him,” of the first clause [of the Mishnah], and this is what he said: this [phrase], “her menstrual impurity is communicated to him,” that I stated to you, I did not say other than in regard to the matter that he would be a primary source of ritual impurity like a menstruating woman, that just as she defiles a person and an earthenware vessel, even he defiles a person and an earthenware vessel, but [also] to make a surface designated for lying and sitting [impure], that “and any bedding on which he lies shall become impure,” but that he does not defile a person and vessels like the bedding of a menstruant woman who defiles a person and vessels/utensils, but he has the first degree of defilement that he defiles food and liquids alone.
משכב תחתון כעליון (the lower surface upon which one lies is like the upper one)– that is to say, the lower surface upon which the man who has intercourse with a menstruating woman is like the upper one of a person with gonorrhea, that just as the upper surface of a person with gonorrhea, and that is vessels that are above the person with gonorrhea, such as ten couches one on top of the other and all of them are on top of the person with gonorrhea, whether the person with gonorrhea was in contact with them or not are ritually impure and they defile food and liquids but not humans nor vessels, so also the lower surface of a person who has intercourse with a menstruating woman, that is, the couches that are under him defile food and liquids but not humans and utensils/vessels. Whereas the lower surface below a person with gonorrhea or a woman with a flux or a menstruating woman or a woman after childbirth, even ten couches one on top of the other, and one of these defiled [couches] are above, all of them that are below/the lower surface are impure and defile humans and utensils/vessels.
למעלה מהן זובו של זב כו' – because these that are important and move defile I ay amount through contact and lifting, but a person having sexual intercourse with a menstruating woman does not defile until he raises [her] entirely, because of this it is taught [in the Mishnah], “above them/למעלה מהן,” meaning to say that these are considered are above/more important than someone who has intercourse with a menstruating woman because they defile with any amount, what is not the case with someone who has sexual intercourse with a menstruating woman.
שהם מטמאים במגע ובמשא – that their contact is equivalent to their lifting, that whether through contact or through lifting, they defile humans to defile clothing and vessels other than a person and vessels.
מרכב (riding) – the piece of wood fastened to a saddle, which is grasped on mounting of the saddle is called מרכב/riding – that the saddle itself that a person rides upon is impure because of sitting, and its piece of wood fastened to the saddle, which is grasped on mounting of the saddle is impure because of מרכב/riding.
שהוא מטמא תחת אבן מסמא (that it defiles underneath a stone used for closing a pit – that the corpse was put on a closing – immovable-stone – under which there is a cavity- see Tractate Niddah 69b) – a large and heavy stone, as it is written (Daniel 6:18): “A rock was brought and placed over the mouth of the den; [the king sealed it with his signet and with the signet of the nobles, so that nothing might be altered concerning Daniel].” But if there was a large stone on top of the piece of wood fastened to a saddle, which is grasped on mounting of the riding and a person with gonorrhea grabs hold of it, even though the weight of the person with gonorrhea is not recognized on the riding seat, the piece of wood fastened to the saddle that is under the stone is defiled because of the riding seat.
למעלה מן המרכב משכב – for the stone used for closing a pit that the corpse was put on a closing (immovable) stone defiles lying as it does riding. And more stringent than this is that its coming in contact/touching is equivalent to carrying it to defile a person which defiles his clothing. His coming in contact/touching is explicitly written (Leviticus 15:5): “Anyone who touches his bedding shall wash his clothes, [bathe in water, and remain impure until evening].” And his carrying, that after Scripture mentioned the law of touching by lying and the law of touching by riding it states (Leviticus 15:9-10): “[Any means for riding that one with a discharge has mounted shall be impure; whoever touches anything that was under him shall be impure until evening;] and whoever carries such things shall wash his clothes, [bathe in water, and remain impure until evening],” so we see that regarding lying, whether through contact/touching – whether through carrying, requires the washing of clothing, but concerning riding, Scripture divides between coming in contact with/touching and carrying as it is written (Leviticus 15:9): “Any means for riding that one with a discharge has mounted shall be impure,” whereas that he should wash his clothes, is not written.
ואין משכב עושה משכב – as it is written (Leviticus 15:4): “Any bedding on which the one with a discharge lies shall be impure,” the man with a discharge/gonorrhea makes the bedding [impure] but the bedding does not make the bedding [impure]. Therefore, if the bedding of person with gonorrhea touched/came in contact with vessels/utensils, they are not other than first degree of ritual defilement. It is found that the man with gonorrhea is [on a] higher [level of impurity] than that of bedding.

Mishnah 4

שהיא מטמאה את בועלה – seven [days] of uncleanness. For regarding a menstruating woman, it is written (Leviticus 15:24): “[And if a man lies with her,] her menstrual impurity is communicated to him and he shall be impure seen days” and it is also written regarding a woman with flux (Leviticus 15:25): “she shall be impure, as though at the time of her menstrual impurity, as long as her discharge lasts,” and we expound upon "תהיה טמאה היא"/she shall be impure – to include the man who had sexual intercourse with her. [The word] "היא"/she – that she defiles the man who had sexual intercourse with her but the person with gonorrhea does not defile whomever he has had sexual intercourse with for [a period of] seven [days], but only the defilement of contact/touching and carrying.
למעלה מן הזבה מצורע – a leper [defiles] by lying and sitting like a woman with a flux. But more stringent than her, he defiles through entering [a place]. When he comes to the house, everything that is in the house is impure, even though he did not touch it/come in contact with it, as it is written (Leviticus 13:46): “[He shall be impure as long as the disease is upon him. Being impure, he shall dwell apart;] his dwelling shall be outside the camp,” which teaches that is dwelling is impure. From here, they (i.e., the Rabbis) stated that a leper that sits underneath the tree and a pure person passes by, the pure person is defiled. But if a pure person sits underneath the tree and a leper passes by, the pure person is not defiled. And similarly leprous clothing and with a leprous stone. And especially concerning a leper during the days of his receiving final judgment following probationary enclosure, but during the days of his counting, that is, after shaving/cutting off all of his hair and [the offering of] the birds, he does not defile by entering and he does not defile by lying and sitting.
למעלה מן המצורע עצם כשעורה שהוא מטמא טומאת שבעה – as it is written (Numbers 31:24): “On the seventh day you shall wash your clothes and be pure, [and after that you may enter the camp],” all defilements that you become defiled through [contact with] the dead will not be less than seven [days]. But even though that the leper is more stringent than a bone the size of a barley corn, for the leper defiles everything that is in the tent when he comes to the tent, but the bone the size of barley corn does not defile in the tent, nevertheless, on this level, however, the bone the size of a barley corn is more stringent as it defiles an uncleanness of seven[days]. And similarly, all of these are of [increasingly] higher levels that are considered not for every matter it is stated that the second is more stringent than the first, for many of them have a stringency in the first [mentioned] that is not [found] in the second, but for that [higher] level that he counts alone it is stated that the second is more stringent.
חמור מכולם מת – there are those of them [listed] that are more stringent than a corpse, for a man with gonorrhea and a woman with flux makes [defilement] through lying and sitting and defile with the very heavy stone, but a corpse does not [defile] through lying and sitting and doesn’t defile with a very heavy stone. But nevertheless, on this [higher] level, a corpse is more stringent than all of them, as it defiles by overshadowing. For just as a leper causes defilement through entrance, his defilement is not like the defilement of overshadowing, for if he brought his hand into a leprous house, it is pure, and even if he completely entered except for his nose, he is pure, for partial entering is not called entering. And even a partition saves in a house where the leper is, as is taught in the Mishnah of [Tractate] Negaim at the end of the thirteenth chapter [Mishnah 12]: “If he entered the synagogue, they make a partition for him ten handbreadths high [by four cubits wide]. He enters first and leaves last.” And all in a similar manner concerning a corpse that defiles in a tent. Alternatively, there is a division between a sitting leper and a passing leper, as I have explained above, what is not the case regarding a corpse.

Mishnah 5

עשר טמאות פורשות מן האדם – there are ten levels/degrees of uncleanness one above the other that emanate from the human.
מחוסר כפורים (lacking atonement) – as for example the confirmed leper (whom must grow his hair long and rend his garments), and the male with gonorrhea who has had three appearances of flux, and the woman with flux and the woman following childbirth, who immersed in the ritual bath and when their [seventh day’s] suns have set, they are prohibited to eat Holy Things until they bring their atonement. And then [if they are Kohanim or married to them] are permitted to eat heave-offering/Terumah.
חזר להיות טבול יום – an impure person who has immersed in the ritual bath/Mikveh but his sunset has not come.
אסור בקודש ובתרומה – and he disqualifies/invalidates them if he comes in contact with/touches them.
חזר להיות בעל קרי – that effusion of semen came out from him and he didn’t immerse in a Mikveh.
חזר להיות בועל נדה – but surely that it (i.e., the Mishnah) did not teach that he became unclean through contact with a corpse which is more severe than someone who experienced a seminal emission, for a person who comes in contact with a corpse is a primary source of ritual impurity, but someone who experienced a seminal emission is only a first-degree of ritual impurity, and it (i.e., the Mishnah) returns to teach that he returned to become someone who had sexual intercourse with a menstruating woman which is more severe than someone who became unclean through contact with a corpse that he defiles the lower surface upon which he lies which is like the upper one. And because these ten defilements emanate from the human being, this is defilement through contact.
משכב תחתון כעליון (the lower surface upon which one lies is like the upper one) – the bedding underneath the man who engages in sexual intercourse with a menstruating woman is like the upper one of a man with gonorrhea/flux. Just as what is above a man with gonorrhea is unclean to defile food and liquids but not a person nor vessels, even what is below the man who has sexual intercourse with a menstruating woman is impure to defile food and liquids, but not humans or vessels/utensils.
שראה שתי ראיות מטמא משכב ומושב (renders unclean the couch and the chair he sits upon) – and he needs to count seven clean [days]. For this is taught in the Mishnah in the first chapter of [Tractate] Megillah (Mishnah 7): “There is no difference between a person with gonorrhea/Zab who suffers two appearances of flux and one who suffers three except the requirement of a sacrifice/offering [for the latter].
וצריך ביאת מים חיים – as it is written concerning a man with gonorrhea/flux (Leviticus 15:13): “[When one with a discharge becomes purified of his discharge, he shall count off seven days for his purification, wash his clothes, [and bathe his body in fresh water/מים חיים; [then he shall be pure],” but the rest of all of those who are impure, the waters of the Mikveh are sufficient for them.
חייב קרבן – that is stated in the Torah portion of Metzora regarding a man with gonorrhea/flux (Leviticus 15:14-15). And all the time that he didn’t bring a sacrifice, he is lacking atonement.
מצורע מוסגר (quarantined leper) – that the Kohen quarantines him for seven days to see if he will produce signs/symptoms of defilement.
מטמא בביאה – if he comes into the house, everything that is in the house is defiled.
ופטור מן הפריעה ומן הפרימה (and he is exempt from letting the hair grow and rending his garments) – for the Torah did not say that his clothing should be rent/torn and that [the hair on] his head will be neglected (i.e., allowed to grow wildly).
ומן התגלחת ומן הצפורים – that a confirmed [leper] that healed brings birds and shaves all of his hair off but a quarantined [leper] does not [do these things].
שאין עליו בשר כראוי – as is explained in the concluding clause [of the Mishnah] in order to produce new flesh/skin on a healing wound.
מטמא במגע ובמשא ואינו מטמא באוהל – that regarding contact/touching, it is written (Numbers 19:18): “[and on] him who touched the bones [or the person who was killed or died naturally or the grave],”implying, whether he has appropriate flesh or whether he lacks appropriate flesh. And regarding the defilement in a tent, it is written (Numbers 19:16): “or human bone, or a grave, [shall be impure seven days],” and human bone implies until there will be upon him flesh and sinews and bones.
במקום אחד כדי להקיפו בחוט ערב (in one place enough [flesh] to surround the member with [the thickness] of the thread of the woof) – if he would cut the flesh that is on the limb to thread that have in their thickness like the thread of the woof, which is thicker by double than the thread of the warp, and there will be in them enough to surround the member, while knowing that through this, it is producing new flesh/skin on a healing wound. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 6

עשר קדושות הן – since we speak about the degrees/ of defilement – one above the other, it (i.e., the Mishnah) also teaches the degrees/ascents of holiness, one above from the other.
שמביאין ממנה העומר – as it is written (Leviticus 23:10): “[When you enter the land that I am giving to you] and you reap its harvest, you shall bring the first sheaf [of your harvest to the priest],” reaping the harvest [in the land of Israel] but not the harvest outside the Land.
והבכורים – as it is written (Deuteronomy 26:2): “You shall take some of every first fruit of the soil, which you harvest from the land [that the LORD your God is giving you].”
ושתי הלחם – as it is written (Leviticus 23:17): “You shall bring from your settlements two loaves of bread [as an elevation offering].” (Also see Tractate Kiddushin, Chapter 1, Mishnah 7: “Every commandment that is dependent upon/tied to the land [of Israel] is not observed other than in the Land [of Israel.].”

Mishnah 7

עיירות המוקפות חומה –[cities surrounded by a wall] from the days of Joshua son of Nun. That regarding a leper it is written (Leviticus 13:46): “[He shall be impure as long as the disease is on him. Being impure, he shall dwell apart;] his dwelling shall be outside the camp,” outside of the camp of Israel. But when Joshua conquered the Land, he sanctified the cities/towns that were surround by a wall in his days that they would be like the camp of Israel to send off from there the lepers.
ומסבבים לתוכן מת – it is permitted to carry it (i.e., the corpse) in the city from place to place until the place that the representatives of the town wish to bury him there.
יצא – if the corpse [left] the city.
אין מחזירים אותו – [they don’t bring him back] into the city to bury him there and even if the representatives of the town wished it. For since the defilement departed from the city, we don’t bring it back inside [the city].

Mishnah 8

לפנים מן החומה – from the wall of Jerusalem.
שאוכלים שם קדשים קלים ומעשר שני – as it is written (Deuteronomy 12:5-6): “[But only to the site that the LORD your God will choose amidst all your tribes as His habitation, to establish His name there.] There you are to go, and there you are to bring [your burnt-offerings and other sacrifices], and it is written (Deuteronomy 12:17): “You may not partake in your settlements [of the tithes of your new grain or wine or oil].” (see also Tractate Makkot, Chapter 3, Mishnah 3).
הר הבית – it was five-hundred cubits by five-hundred cubits, and in it the Temple was built, and from there begins the Levitical camp and its measurement [is] until the Nicanor Gate, from the Nicanor Gate inward is the camp of God’s presence, and from the Temple Mount towards the outside until the wall of Jerusalem is the camp of Israel (see also Tractate Middot, Chapter 2, Mishnah 12).
שאין זבים וזבות נדות ויולדות נכנסים לשם – as it is written (Numbers 5:2): “[Instruct the Israelites] to remove from camp anyone with an eruption or a discharge and anyone defiled by a corpse,” I hear that all three (i.e., a man with gonorrhea/a woman with a flux, menstruating women and women after childbirth) go out to one place, the inference teaches us regarding a leper (Leviticus 13:46): “[He shall be impure as long as the disease is on him. Being impure,] he shall dwell apart,” so we see that he is not sent to the place that the man with gonorrhea/flux and someone defiled to a corpse are sent, and just as a leper whose defilement is more severe, his banishment from the banishment of his fellow as it is written (Leviticus 13:46): “his dwelling shall be outside the camp,” therefore he is exiled outside of Jerusalem, even those men with gonorrhea or women with flux, menstruating women and women following childbirth whose defilement is graver than the defilement of coming in contact with a corpse, that make [defilement by] lying and sitting and the very heavy stone (leading to that which is beneath it becoming ritually impure) which is not the case for someone defiled through contact with a corpse, their exile is greater than the exile of their fellows. It is found that one states, that a leper is exiled outside of Jerusalem which is opposite the camp of Israel. Men with gonorrhea/flux and women with a flux and menstruating women and women after childbirth are exiled from the Temple Mount. That this is the camp of the Levites, but they are permitted in Jerusalem. A person defiled by contact with a corpse and even the corpse itself are permitted on the Temple Mount and is exiled from Nicanor Gate and within, which is the camp of the Divine Presence/Shekhina.
החיל (the rampart – a low wall surrounding the Temple courtyard and he buildings within it) – inside from the Temple Mount wall was a wall ten handbreadths high and it is called סורג/one of the approaches of the Temple fortification (see Tractate Middot, Chapter 2, Mishnah 3), and ten cubits inside from this is the rampart/חיל.
שאין נכרים וטמאי מתים נכנסים לשם – even though that the Rabbis decreed regarding the heathens that they will be like people with gonorrhea/flux for all their things, for the matter of exile from the camps, they did not decree anything upon them other than that they are like those who have been defiled through contact with a corpse. And this – that those who have been defiled through contact with a corpse they do not enter from the rampart/חיל and [further] inside, that is from the Rabbis. But according to the Torah-law, even in the Women’s Courtyard/עזרת נשים (which was the largest in the Temple, demarcated from the Israelite’s courtyard by the Gate of Nicanor – which was square: 135 cubits by 135 cubits. Men and women stood there and its sanctity was greater than that of the rampart and the Temple Mount). For all this was the Levite’s Camp until the Israelite courtyard where the Gate of Nicanor was.
עזרת נשים – inside from the rampart/חיל it was 135 cubits by 135 cubits.
שאין טבול יום נכנס לשם – Jehoshaphat and his legal court decreed (see Tractate Yevamot 7a and Tractate Pesahim 92a) on the one who immersed that day/טבול יום (but a Kohen who had just immersed following a period of impurity cannot partake of heave-offering/Terumah until after nightfall; see Tractate Berakhot, Chapter 1, Mishnah 1) that he/she should not enter into the Women’s Courtyard. As it is written (II Chronicles 20:5): “Jehoshaphat stood in the congregation of Judah and Jerusalem in the House of the LORD at the front of the new court.” And they stated in the Gemara (see above): “What is the new court?” That they renewed things in it and stated, that a person who has just immersed following a period of impurity/טבול יום cannot enter into the Levite camp, but not in all of the Levite camp, but rather only [not] in the Women’s Court alone. And they decreed on the person who has just immersed following a period of impurity but did not make a decree on someone lacking atonement/מחוסר כפורים, because a person who has just immersed following a period of impurity is prohibited to [partake of] heave-offering/Terumah, but someone lacking atonement (i.e., a sacrifice) is permitted to [partake of] heave-offering/Terumah (if that individual is a Kohen or married to one). And all whose defilement is more serious than that of his fellow, his banishment/exile is more severe than that of his fellow.
עזרת ישראל – it was inside from the Women’s Courtyard, its length was one-hundred and thirty-five by a width of eleven [cubits]. And similarly, the Courtyard of the Priests had a length of one-hundred and thirty-five by a width of eleven [cubits], and the cut and polished stone block/mosaic would divide between the Israelite courtyard and the Courtyard of the Priests.
שאין מחוסר כפורים נכנס לשם – and the same law applies that it (i.e., the Mishnah) is able to teach that a ritually pure person is not able to enter there until he immerses [in a Mikveh], for this is taught [in the Mishnah] in the chapter "אמר להם הממונה"/The supervisor said to them [Tractate Yoma, Chapter 3, Mishnah 3]: “No pure person enters the Temple courtyard until he immerses [in a Mikveh” [Talmud Yoma 30a].
וחייבים עליה חטאת – the impure who entered there inadvertently.
לסמיכה – to press his hand on the head of his sacrifice (to indicate ownership) and that is impossible other than its owners, as it is written (Leviticus 3:8): “and lay his hand [upon the head of his offering], and not the hand of his agent.
לשחיטה – that slaughter can be done by a foreigner (i.e., non-Kohen), and even though that it is possible for Kohanim [to perform the slaughter], it is also possible for a “foreigner” to slaughter in the Israelite courtyard, nevertheless they did not prohibit an Israelite to enter into the Priest’s Courtyard to slaughter the sacrifice.
ולתנופה – that the Kohen places his hand under the hand of the owners and waves it.

Mishnah 9

בין אולם ולמזבח מקודש ממנו שאין פרועי ראש ובעלי מומין נכנסים לשם – In the Gemara (Tractate Menahot, Chapter 3, 27b proves that all of these gradations that are taught here, as for example, a person who enters the Priest’s Courtyard without need and similarly, those [Kohanim] with physical defects/בעלי מומין and those [Kohanim] with overgrown hair/פרועי ראש that entered between the entrance hall/אולם and the altar. All of them are the gradations of the Rabbis. And such is what I received from my Rabbis/teaches. But Maimonides holds that all of them are from the Torah, those [Kohanim]with physical defects/deformities, as it is written (Leviticus 21:21): “No man among the offspring of Aaron the priest who has a defect [he shall not be qualified to offer the food of his God],” (but the way that the Bartenura commentary quotes this verse: "כי כל איש אשר בו מום לא יקרב" – the last two words – “that he shall not offer it” are NOT found in this verse – though the words, "לא יקרב" are found in verse 16). And [priests] with overgrown hair, as the All-Merciful states to Aaron and his sons who were in the Tabernacle (Leviticus 10:8): “[And Moses said to Aaron and to his sons Eleazar and Ithamar:] ‘Do not bare your heads/dishevel your hair’ [and do not rend your clothes, lest you die and anger strike the whole community].” But even though the language of the Tosefta (Tractate Kelim Bava Kamma, Chapter 1, Halakha 11) supports the words of Maimonides, the tradition of my Rabbis appears to me to be essential, and that the first Tanna/teacher [of the Mishnah] does not consider those [Kohanim] who are intoxicated with wine and who had not washed their hands and feet together with those with physical defects and those [Kohanim] whose hair is overgrown as Rabbi Yossi considers them in the concluding clause [of the Mishnah] because those [Kohanim] with physical defects and overgrown hair, their invalidation is in their bodies, therefore, their exile is severe, but those [Kohanim] who are intoxicated with wine and those who have not washed their hands and their feet , their invalidation is on account of another matter, therefore, he was not strict regarding their exile so much.
אלא כהן גדול ביום הכפורים – as it is written (Leviticus 16:2-3): “[Tell your brother Aaron] that he is ot to come at will into the Shrine behind the curtain [in front of the cover that is upon the ark, lest he die; for I appear in the cloud over the cover.] Thus only shall Aaron enter the Shrine.”
בשעת עבודה – for times, he (i.e., the High Priest) enters there, 1): to offer up incense; 2) to sprinkle from the blood of the bullock; 3) to sprinkle from the blood of the goat; 4) to remove the spoon and the coal-pan, but if he enters into it five times, he is liable for death (see Tosefta Kelim Bava Kamma, Chapter 1, Halakha 7).
ופורשים בין האולם ולמזבח בשעת הקטרה (and they keep distant [from the area] between the porch and the altar at the time of [offering up] the incense – whether at the time that they offer up the incense on the Golden Altar that is in the Sanctuary, or at the time that the High Priest offers up incense In the innermost part of the Temple precincts (i.e., the Holy of Holies) , all of the people keep distant from between the porch and the altar and one does not need to mention, from the Sanctuary. But the first Tanna/teacher disputes on that of Rabbi Yossi and holds that at the time that they offer up incense in the Sanctuary is only when they keep distant and not been the porch and the Altar. And the Halakha is according to the first Tanna/teacher. And the ten Holy [locations] that are taught in our Mishnah, these are [actually] eleven, the Gaonim that the Land of Israel is not from the number of Holy Places, because in the remainder of the Holy Places, there is within them honor to the place that prevents from them some of the defilements or prevents from some of the people from entering to it. And this holiness is not found merely within the Land of Israel. But the bringing of First Fruits, and the Omer and the two loaves and the shewbread are not like these Holy Things. But there are those who explain that the first Tanna/teacher that considers ten Holy Things is Rabbi Yossi, and he holds that between the porch and the Altar is equivalent to the Sanctuary in five matters, and for him, they are there weren’t any other than ten.

Chapter 2



Mishnah 1

כלי עץ כלי עור כלי עצם – in the Torah portion of n , it is written (Numbers 31:20): “You shall also purify every cloth, every article of skin, everything made of goats’ hair and every object of wood,” and we extend the scope from, “everything made of goats’ hair”/וכל מעשה עזים to include anything that comes from the goats – from the horns and from the hoofs, that is the vessels of bone and it is juxtaposed to vessels of leather and vessels of wood. And in the Torah portion of Shemini, there is juxtaposition of vessels of leather and vessels of wood to a sack (see Leviticus 11:32: “[And anything on which one of them falls when dead shall be impure:] be it any article of wood, or a cloth, or a skin, or a sack [-any such article that can be put to use shall be dipped in water, and it shall remain impure until evening; then it shall be pure].” Therefore, their flat vessels are pure, that we require something similar to a sack that is carried full and/or empty. But an earthenware vessel, even though when flat are pure, it cannot be taught together with these, because all of these are pure when they don’t have a receptacle even though they have an inside, as for example, a wood jug which does not a rim at the bottom and is perforated from side to side is pure, but an earthenware vessel in the same manner is impure because the All-Merciful made it dependent upon its inside and behold it has an inside even though it does not have a receptacle. But their flat surfaces are pure as it is taught in the Mishnah here, that is, according to the Torah, but the Sages decreed impurity upon all flat wooden vessels and leather and bone as is proven in the Gemara of Bava Batra [66a]. But according to the Torah also, they are not pure other than from defilement through contact with a corpse or defilement by a reptile, but they are defiled through the defilement of lying and sitting if they are appropriate for lying and sitting.
וכלי זכוכית – the Rabbis decreed defilement upon them (i.e., glass utensils) since the beginning of their creation/formation is from the sand then they are earthenware vessels, and they are [more] stringent than earthenware utensils that are not susceptible to receive defilement from what is upon it, but glass utensils/vessels are defiled from what is upon them, since their inside appears like their outside. But the flat surfaces of glass vessels are pure, even according to the Rabbis, for the Rabbis made a distinction (a somewhat different law) regarding glassware (see Tractate Shabbat 16a) for just as they don’t burn upon them heave offering and Holy Things.
מקבלין טומאה מכאן ולהבא – but they don’t return to their old defilement, for the Rabbis did not decree that if he made from them [new] vessels they return to their old defilement, but rather only a metal utensils/vessel.
כלי נתר (vessels made from alum crystals)– vessels that are made from earth that they dig from it alum crystals. ALUMI in the foreign language.
מיטמאין ומטמאין באויר (they are both unclean and convey uncleanness through their contained airspace) – it the defilement is suspended in the airspace of the vessel, the vessel is unclean. If he went back and suspended food in their airspace, he defiles the food, even though they did not touch, as it is written (Leviticus 11:33): “[And if any of those falls into an earthen vessel,] everything inside it shall be pure [and – the vessel – itself you shall break].” And even the size of a mustard seed that does not touch the walls of the vessel.
ומיטמאין מאחוריהן (they impart uncleanness from their outer sides) – vessels that hollowed out/shaped a receptacle from their place of sitting in the manner that they make for silver cups, and sometimes they turn them upside down on their mouths and use their receptacles from their outer side. If it came in contact with defilement with that receptacle, the earthenware utensil is defiled. But if they did not mix them and repeat it they are defiled and defile from their airspace an from their outer sides, we learn from it that they are defiled from the airspace from the outer side, for we don’t consider the inside that is on the outer side as a complete inside of the Torah, to be defiled from its airspace, but it is defiled if it the defilement came in contact with the same hollowing out that is on its outer side.
ואין מיטמאין מגביהן – as it is written (Leviticus 11:33): “Any if any of those falls into an earthen vessel (i.e., an article of wood, a cloth, a skin, or a sack), [everything inside it shall be impure and – the vessel- itself you shall break],” from inside it becomes defiles but it does become defiled from outside it. But all of the other vessels excluding an earthenware vessel and a vessel of alum crystal are not defiled from their airspace until the defilement touches/comes in contact with the essence of the vessel, but when the defilement touches the essence of the vessel, whether from the outside or from the inside, it is impure, as is taught in the Mishnah in the first chapter of [Tractate] Hullin (Chapter 1, Mishnah 6): “What is clean (insusceptible to uncleanness[ in the case of earthenware vessels is unclean [susceptible in the case of all [other] vessels. What is clean in the case of all [other utensils] is unclean in the case of the earthenware utensils.”
ושבירתן היא טהרתן = all of vessels/utensils, breaking them is their purification, but earthenware vessels and vessels of alum crystal breaking them alone purifies them, but they have no purification through ritual immersion other than through breaking [them] alone.

Mishnah 2

הדקין שבכלי חרס – thin and small earthenware vessels, whether they themselves cannot support/hold other than only up the anointing of a small [finger of a child] or whether they were broken and their rimmed bottom remained, an explanation: like their rimmed bottoms of a vessel, that is the rim that is towards the ground, or their walls/sides which remained and alone are able to sit without supports, are still vessels. And if they hold enough oil to anoint a small thing, that is to say, the anointing of a small finger of a day-old baby, they are impure. And this is explained in the Tractate Shabbat [77b] (and also Tractate Eduyot, Chapter 4, Mishnah 6 – as explained by Tosefot Yom Tov), the anointing of a minor, one small limb of a minor of the age of one-day old.
עד לוג – this measurement of the anointing of a minor, for the shards of a vessel that had not been from its outset other than a LOG (i.e., a LOG is the equivalent of the liquid displaced by six eggs). But if there was from the outset more than a LOG, we need a larger measure for the shards, more than in order to anoint [the small limb of] a minor [who is one day-old].
מלוג ועד סאה – a vessel that would at its outset hold from a LOG and more than a LOG until a SESAH, the measure of its shards is one-quarter of a LOG. And for more than a SEAH until two SEAH, the measurement of its shards is one-half a LOG and similarly for all of them.
אני איני נותן בהם מדה – according to the largeness of the vessel or its smallness, but according to the places where it is customarily done and according to the structure/form of the utensils.
אלא הדקין שבכלי חרס וכו' – that they don’t have the form of pots and they. But when the reach to be like the form of small pots, their measure is one-quarter of a LOG.
חביות לודיות – jugs that are made in Lod/Lydda.
לחמיות – [jugs] that are made in Bethlehem. But they are larger than the ones that are made in Lod/Lydda.
חצבים גדולים (stone pitchers/earthen jugs) – large pitchers all that is possible.
הפכים הגלילים (flasks/jars with a narrow neck) – that are made in the land of the Galilee.
והחביונות (small vessel, flask with flat sides) – small jugs, and these are thin ones of earthenware vessels.
ואין להן דפנות – that specifically their rims are impure if there remains in them the amount of oil to anoint the small finger of a child, but their sides are pure And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Akiva.

Mishnah 3

הטהורים שבכלי חרס – flat earthenware vessels (without a receptacle) which are pure, as it is written concerning them (Leviticus 11:33): “And if any of those (i.e., an article of wood, or a cloth, or a skin, or a sack – see previous verse) falls into [an earthen vessel, everything inside it shall be impure and -the vessel – itself you shall break],” that which has an inside is impure; that which lacks an inside is pure.
טבלא שאין לו לזבז (a tray without a rim/edge) – a smooth board that lacks a rim around it.
ומחתה (a coal-pan) – that they take coals out with a pan.
פרוצה (the rims of are broken off) – that it does not have sides/walls.
אבוב של קלאים (an iron tube for roasting grain) – earthenware vessel that they roast pulse/peas over a fire. And it is flat/plain without a receptacle and is perforated like a basket used as a sieve on its rims in order that the heat [of the fire] can have power over it. 
[The word] קלאים/parched ears is parched by fire.
סילונות – tubes/spouts.
אף על פי כפופין – even though they are bent from their two sides. And this is which they did not shape a receptacle surrounding them.
כבכב (an arched round vessel) – a vessel in which they cover bread baskets (but not as a receptacle). And there are those who have the reading of כפכף – that they cover it on top of the basket. But even if it has a receptacle, it is [ritually] pure for all who use something bent with an earthenware vessel is [ritually] pure.
והטפי (vessel with a narrow neck – made with intention of using it for grapes) – it is an earthenware vessel that has a receptacle and is susceptible to receive defilement, and this is proven further on in the other chapter (Tractate Kelim, Chapter 3, Mishnah 2). But this is [ritually] pure here, because they (i.e., the Rabbis) prepared it as a cover for grapes and they made a change in it, which proves that they require it for covering graves and it was not made for reception.
חבית של שייטין (swimmers’ bottle used for practicing) – like a hallowed out jug, and it is closed and doesn’t have a mouth (i.e., opening), in order that It would not sink in the water. And they lean upon it and learn to swim by it. But it even though it has a receptacle, it is not designed for receiving anything And anything which is not made for receiving anything even though it has a receptacle is not susceptible to receiving defilement.
וחבית דפונה בשולי המחץ (an attachment in the shape of a jar fitted into the projecting rims of a vessel – to serve as a handle) – a ladle for filling vessels out of the well or wine or oil-pit which is a large earthenware vessel and it is a kind of jar made at its rim that a person can place his hand into it when he wants to lift the ladle, and because of this, the jar was not made for reception, and is not susceptible to receive defilement.
דפונה – fitted into.
המטה והכסא והספסל – all of these are not designed for reception.
והספינה – and even though it was made for reception and even though it is earthenware, it is pure. And in the Tractate Shabbat 9b, we derive it, as it is written (Proverbs 30:19): “[How an eagle makes its way over the sky; How a snake makes its way over a rock;] How a ship makes its way through the high seas; [How a man has his way with a maiden],” and it is obvious that a ship is on the high seas, but rather to inform you that just as the high seas are [ritually] pure, so also the ship is [ritually] pure.
כל שאין לו תוך בכלי חרס אין לו אחוריים – And the Sages decreed on [ritually] impure liquids that defile vessels, and even though the liquids were not defiled other than on account of an unclean reptile, for now they are first-degree of ritual impurity, they defile vessels/utensils from the words of the Scribes, and if they came in contact with/touched the back of the vessel, its outside is defiled, but the inside is not defiled. But now we hold that the defilement of the outside does not take effect other than with an earthenware vessel that has an inside. But all that lacks an inside, there is no defilement of the outside, שsand if impure liquids came in contact with it from the outside, they did not defile the outside of the vessel.

Mishnah 4

פנס – a kind of earthenware lantern that is perforated in its walls/sides that from them the light goes out, and we place the candle inside it so that wind does not extinguish it.
שאין בו – a receptacle for oil. Even though it has a receptacle for a candle.
טהור – for a receptacle for a lantern has no inside other than the candle/lantern that is laid upon it.
מגופת היוצרים (potter’s mould) – it is similar to stones of earthenware that the potters make the vessels upon them.
את שהוא פוחת בה (begins to shape the clay) – meaning to say, the mould that the potter casts upon it the plaster and engraves upon it with his hands the form of the vessel.
טהורה – because it lacks a rim/border around it and there is no inside here.
ושהוא גומר בה – and the stopper that he places upon the vessel after its form has been completed has an “inside,” and therefore, it is impure. But my Rabbis/teachers explained, that that there is a vessel/utensil for potters that is called a מגופה/stopper or bung and some of them have narrow openings and some have wide openings; that which he opens it by, meaning to say, that he will eventually widen its opening, is pure, that its work has not yet been completed, and it is like the lump/shapeless earthenware vessel. But when he completes it, that he places as such at the narrow opening, it is impure. But our Mishnah is according to Rabbi Meir who stated (Tractate Betza 32a and Tosefta Kelim Bava Kamma, Chapter 3, Halakha 13) : When do earthenware vessels become susceptible to receiving impurity? From the time when their manufacture is complete.” But not according to the Rabbis who state (Tractate Kelim, Chapter 4, Mishnah 4): “from when they are fired in the furnace.” And the first explanation appears to me to be essential.
משפך – a vessel/utensil that we place on the mouth of a jug or on the mouth of a leather bottle/skin when we want to fill it with wine or oil.
ושל רוכלין – which is small and made to bring in oil to small flasks. And it holds a LOG or two LOGS and the peddler places his finger from underneath it corresponding to the hole/perforation and measures with it the oil, and removes his finger and the oil descends to the vessels of the purchaser. And it is made for reception and is susceptible to receive impurity.
רבי עקיבא אומר מפני שמטהו על צדו – that is to say even if it is not of a measure, the funnel of a peddler always is defiled because he turns it on its side to receive in it a bit in order that the purchase can smell from it m and it is found that it is made to [be susceptible to] receive defilement. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Akiva.

Mishnah 5

כיסוי כדי יין וכו' – and all who use the covering with earthenware vessels, is pure, for it is written (Leviticus 11:33): “And anything on which one of them (i.e., an article of wood, or a cloth, or a skin or a sack) falls into/תוכו an earthenware vessel, everything inside it shall be unclean,” but this is not inside it.
וכיסוי חביות נייריות (and covers of a papyrus jars) – for the sake of their place, and for something remarkable it was taken, because it was for a covering of their jars a receptacle, and there are those who have the reading "והניירות"/and for the papyrus, that is to say, the papyrus that they bring into them the mouth of the flask (i.e., bottle with a wide belly and a narrow neck).
הלפס – like a tightly-covered stew-pot/אלפס. A large pan that they cook meat and vegetables in it. And they use it as a covering for earthenware. But when it is perforated, it is not appropriate for anything, and even when it is not perforated, but it (i.e., the lid) has a pointed knob (which prevents the use of it separately as a receptacle) it is not able to sit because of the pointed knob, but when it is not perforated, even if it doesn’t have a pointed knob, it is impure, for it is appropriate to turn it over and to cause it to stand, and a woman places into it vegetables to filter/drain it and to drain the water from it.
הרונקי (contents of a pot upturned and emptied – on a flat vessel to cool off) – the vegetables after they have been cooked and attached to each other and they have become one body, are called רונקי, and it is a Greek word.

Mishnah 6

גסטרא (a defective vessel – handles broken off or cracked) – fragments/broken earthenware vessels. And the thing divided into two, it is called גיסטרא /defective vessel (see Tractate Kelim, Chapter 4, Mishnah 3 for a definition: כל שנטלו אזניה/when its handles are split/broken off. And the language of גיסטרא is divided into two.
שנמצאת בכבשן – and we don’t know if it was broken prior to its being baked in the kiln/furnace and at the time when its manufacture was complete it did not have the status of a utensil/vessel upon it and not further on, it does defile because it is a defective vessel, or afterwards it was broken and defiles. But how do we verify the matter? We see if its shards are equivalent and its inside grows red, it is known that its manufacture was completed [first] and afterwards it became broken, and it defiles, for it was made to be a receptacle, for it is the manner to place a defective vessel underneath the jug/arched, pouched vessel to receive the liquid that drips from it.
טיטרוס (a perforated vessel, strainer, sprinkler) – a vessel which is perforated from below with many thin holes like the size of the hole of a needle and from above one hole like the size of a reed, that is a spindle that the women spin on, and when they fill it with water and a person places his finger in the hole from above so that the wind will not reach it no drop of water goes out from the small holes from below, but when he removes his finger, the water comes out.
ר' אלעזר בר צדוק מטהר – because it is perforated where the liquid enters.
ורבי יוסי מטמא – for this is the manner of how it is used, and it is considered a receptacle since the waters stand through the placing of the finger, but even without the placing of the finger, the water doesn’t leave other than like removing coins little by little, drop after drop., and because of this, it is not considered perforated like when brings in liquid to be purified through this And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 7

טבלא שיש לה לזבז ומחתה שלימה (a tray which has a rim and a complete firepan) – that it has sides/walls, they are impure, that they have a receptacle. But from the first clause [of the Mishnah] that the pure things are in an earthenware vessel, we would learn that these are impure, but it is the manner that they taught it as such, as is taught [in the Mishnah] in the Chapter “These are the Terefah [carcasses] among Cattle”/אלו טרפות (Chapter 3 in Tractate Hullin) [43a] and there are many in the Mishnah.
טבלא – of earthenware.
מלאה קערות (which is full of plates) – that is made of plate after plate, and the plates/dishes are from its body and are attached to (i.e., the tray).
ואם יש לה לזבז עודף (overhanging rim) – if the rim of the tray surrounding the overhang and rises up beyond the lip of the plates/dishes.
נטמאת אחת מהן נטמאו כולן – that when the unclean reptile/creeping thing enters into the lip of the dish, it has already entered the airspace of the overhanging rim all around, and all of the tray is defiled, for earthenware vessels are defiled from its airspace, and when the entire tray is defiled, all of the plates which are part of it are defiled.
בית התבלין (spice pot) – earthenware vessel made squarely, to give in each square one species of spaces so that they will not become combined with each other.
קלמרים המתואמות (the double inkstand) – a vessel that is made to place in it the ink and the reed/writing utensil and the utensils that the scribe needs. And it is also made as a double square, and in our lands, there are many of them, and we call them KALMARI in the foreign tongue.
בית תבלין של עץ – that is also made squarely, but it does not have an overhanging rim.
שנטמא אחד מהן במשקה – for the Rabbis decreed on liquids that come on account of a creeping thing/unclean reptile to defile vessels as a decree because of the liquid of the man and/or woman with a flux, who defile vessels according to the Torah. And especially when it was defiled with liquids, its fellow is not defiled, for when a vessel that its outsides/backsides were defiled by liquids, its inside is not defiled, therefore when one of them with liquids, there is a wall/side of impurity on its backside of its neighbor but its neighbor is not defiled. But with the regarding the defilement of a creeping thing/unclean reptile according to the Torah, wherever it came in contact with/touched the vessel whether from its backside or whether from its inside, all of it is defiled, if one of them is defiled, its neighbor/fellow is defiled, for the defilement touches it from its outside/backside. But an earthenware vessel is not susceptible to receive defilement from its outside, but only from its inside, even with the defilement of a creeping thing/unclean reptile, if one of them was defiled, its neighbor is not defiled, for the inside of this one becomes the backside/outside of its neighbor for earthenware vessels are not defiled from its outside but not regarding the defilement of liquids that all of it is defiled.
חולקין את עוביו (they divide its thickness) – a thick and wide wall that is between two squares, we cast half to this side and half to that side with the defilement of liquids according to the Rabbis, but the half of the thickness of the wall that is from the side that is pure is pure. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri.

Mishnah 8

הלפיד – it is similar to a dish of earthenware sharpened at the bottom and they insert pointed projections/prongs at the top of a pole and it enlightens from afar, but because it is sharpened/pointed and is not able to stand on its own, you might think I would say that it is not defiled. It comes to tell us that since it is a prepared and designated place for sitting to place at the top of the pole, this would be defiled.
ובית שקעו של נר (reservoir of the lamp) – an earthenware vessel made to be the torch is sitting and sunk within it.
מטמא באויר – that it is considered like the inside to defile by airspace, even though the entire torch is not sunk within it other than only a small amount of it.
מסרק של צרצור (comb of the water cooler – if an unclean object touches the comb of a cooler) – an earthenware vessel that they make at its mouth a net-work/mat like a kind of netting/lattice-work and one who empties from it pours the water from many places. But most of the vessels that they drink water from in the Islamic countries are made like this, and surrounding that net-work/mat protrudes teeth like the teeth of a comb, that they make them for beauty. And if an unclean creature/reptile was suspended in the airspace of those teeth, Rabbi Yossi and the Sages dispute if it is considered the inside of an earthenware vessel or not. But the Halakha is according to the Sages that they consider it as an inside [of the vessel] and that it defiles.

Chapter 3



Mishnah 1

שיעור כלי חרס ליטהר (the measure – of the perforation/hole in an earthenware vessel to render it clean) – that it further not be susceptible to receive defilement. And if it was impure, it was purified as if it was broken entirely, that further it is not appropriate/fit for its matter and its inside is not considered. Even if it was an arched, pouched vessel/jug for dried figs and/or nuts and it was perforated when removing olives, it is pure, all the while that he did not go back and designate it afterwards to receive in it pomegranates and things like them. But if he went back and designated it to receive in it pomegranates, it is impure until a perforation is made when removing a pomegranate, and from when it was perforated while removing a pomegranate, it no longer becomes susceptible to receiving [ritual] impurity.
שיעורו במשקין – the hole/perforation that when they place the vessel over the liquids, the liquids enter through that hole into the vessel, and it is a larger hole from that which releases liquids.
לכך ולכך – such as a pot that they cook meat in, even though they don’t place in it food without liquid, for the liquid is not recognized for it was perforated for the entrance of liquid, even so, we follow the stringent position, that it is not [ritually] pure until it will be perforated for the removal of olives.

Mishnah 2

חבית שיעורה בגרוגרות – it was the regular practice that they would place dried figs in a jar.
רבי מאיר אומר בזיתים – like the anonymous Mishnah of above (i.e., Tractate Kelim, Chapter 3, Mishnah 1). And this is anonymous Mishnah followed by a dispute (i.e., between Rabbis Shimon, Yehuda and Meir) but the Halakha is not according to the anonymous [Mishnah]. But the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehuda (i.e., the measurement is with nuts).
הלפס והקדרה (the stew-pot/tightly covered pot and cooking pot) – to be stringent, as is explained above (see Mishnah 1 of this chapter).
הפך והטפי (oil cruise and the vessel with a narrow neck/dripper) – they are utensils for oil, but the mouth of the ewer/dripper is very narrow, for this [reason], it is called a טפי/dripper for it (i.e., the oil) only descends from it drop by drop and the טפי/dripper as it is taught in the Mishnah in the chapter above (see Tractate Kelim, Chapter 2, Mishnah 3) is [ritually] pure, that is, that they (i.e., the Sages), ordained to cover with it a basket of grapes as we explained above (see Tractate Kelim, Chapter 2, Mishnah 3).
בשמן – that is the would bring in the liquid of oil [of olives]. But its measurement is not equivalent to that of water, for that which is of oil is thin, for the vessel that holds water or wine does not hold oil.
הצרצור (stone vessel containing a strainer and having an indented – comb-like- rim/a sort of cooler) – a vessel made to drink water from it and through its mouth, is a matting/net-work so that nothing bad can enter into it and soil the liquids.
שלשתן – the oil cruise and the dripper and the comb-like cooler, their measure is with a hole that lets out seeds, like beans. For Rabbi Shimon holds that they are also made for seeds, and they are like that which is made for this and that, like above (see Chapter 3, Mishnah 1), they subject it for the more stringent rule. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.
נר שיעורו בשמן – when one brings in liquid of [olive] oil. For a mere lamp is designed for oil.
רבי שמעון אומר בפרוטה קטנה – that he held that it was made to place in it פרוטות/drops (see Mishnah 6 of this chapter) and they pour it for its stringency. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.
נר שנטל פיו – the designation of lamp is nullified.
ושל אדמה – it is not susceptible to receive defilement all the while that it is not smelt in a kiln. But even though that the nozzle of the lamp is burned by the wick, this is not considered as if it was smelt in a kiln, and it is pure.

Mishnah 3

חבת שניקבה – when it releases olive [oil]. And it is pure, and when it was repaired with pitch, it becomes susceptible to receive defilement from here onwards.
חזרה ונשברה – into many pieces. That shard which has in it pitch holding one-quarter [of a LOG] and it sits without being supported/propped up is impure. But are dealing with a jar that holds from a LOG to a SEAH [the uncleanness will persist if the remnant will hold] a quarter of a LOG as is taught in the Mishnah in the previous Chapter (Tractate Kelim, Chapter 2, Mishnah 2). But even though the closing up (through repair with pitch) has no effect on the hole that comes after breakage, this closing up is different because it was done prior to having nullifying the designation of a vessel from it, for a jug that was perforated, its designation as a jug is upon it even though it is pure, but earthenware that departs from the jug, nullifies the designation of the name of a vessel from it even though it is not perforated. Therefore, closing up its hole has no benefit.

Mishnah 4

חבית שנתרועעה – like a broken/shattered wall. That is earthenware did not fall out, but it is so cracked that if he carried it and one-half of a KAB of dried figs that are in it would break completely. And it is [ritually] pure as we state in the other (i.e., next) chapter (i.e., Tractate Kelim, Chapter 4) [Mishnah 2].
וטפלה (to paste/plaster) – that he plastered its facing.
בגללים – in order that the potter’s clay would not fall off.
נשברה – that the earthenware fell off and he glued the shards with the glue that scribes use (to paste together strips of papyrus – see Tractate Pesahim, Chapter 3, Mishnah 1). Or that he brought potter’s clay from another place and glued them and afterwards plastered them over with dung, it is pure, and the same law applies when he plastered them with clay/mud, all the while that he did not go back and smelt it in a kiln.
חרס מחזיק רביעית – and such as that the earthenware comes from a jar [that is susceptible to become impure] that holds from a LOG until a SEAH, that its measurement is with a quarter-of-a-LOG as was explained above (see Tractate Kelim, Chapter 2, Mishnah 2).
כולן מטמאין במגע – and all of them are made into a handle for that potsherd and defile because of that handle. And [the part] opposite it only defiles through its airspace, for there is no airspace to the handle of an earthenware vessel.

Mishnah 5

כלי חרס הבריא – that is not shattered or broken.
מטמאין – if the vessel is defiled from its airspace, food and liquids that came in contact with its plaster are impure, because it is considered like the vessel itself (according to Rabbi Shimon and Rabbi Meir).
הטופל את הבריא טהור – that specifically the vessel that is shattered that needs that plastering, that one (i.e., the vessel) is where the plastering is like the vessel and the foods that came in contact with it are defiled when the vessel is impure. But the plastering of a healthy/whole vessel is not considered like a vessel. And the Halakha is according to the Rabbis.
וכן בחידוק קרויה (the lining of a pumpkin that has been hollowed out – to be used as a drawing vessel – i.e., the earthen vessel or clay that has been fitted as a protection) – just as Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Shimon disputed with the Sages with the plastering of a whole vessel, so they disputed with regard to the lining of a pumpkin that has been hollowed out, and this is a dry and hollow gourd that they draw water with, and they regularly fasten around it in a circle of wood or of iron in order that it would not break if it is corked with a stone. For Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Shimon who make unclean the plastering of a whole [earthenware vessel] (i.e., unbroken or unshattered) also make unclean even this, and even if it was a pure pumpkin-shell used as a drawing vessel.  But the Sages state that if it was a pure pumpkin-shell used as a drawing vessel and it doesn’t have a need for this hoop, this hoop is not like the body of the pure pumpkin-shell used as a drawing vessel, and if the pure pumpkin-shell became defiled, the hoop did not become defiled.

Mishnah 6

יבלית (a pulp made of Cynodon leaves and used for lining large water vessels) – a kind/species of grass that its name is יבלא/a species of grass (Cynodon. And they regularly plaster with it the large jugs so that the wine will not escape when it drips.
פטסין (large cylindrical vessel, cash or tub of earthen material) – large jugs, like those (the first to leave the lecture room) who are owners of tubs of wine that is in Tractate Betzah 15b.

Mishnah 7

מיחם – a vessel that they heat water in (i.e., a boiler).
בחומר- thick plaster.
חרסית (potter’s clay) – thin like earthenware. But there are those who explain/interpret it as crushing/pounding of earthenware.
הנוגע בחומר טמא – because it Is joined and attached to the kettle and is considered like the essence of the vessel. Therefore, if the boiler is defiled, the thick plaster surrounding it is defiled like it, and those eating who touch the thick plaster are impure.
ובחרסית טהור – for the potter’s clay is not joined but is scraped/peeled and falls off, and is not considered like the essence of the vessel.
קומקום (kettle) – it is larger than a boiler, and in the foreign language, they call it a KUMKUMO.
שאינו יכול לקבל את החמין – for the pitch is smelted and melts/dissolves in hot water, and even though it is able to hold the cold water, it is not considered as a vessel and is pure.
וכן היה אומר בכלי זפת – vessels that are made from pitch itself, which are pure, since they are not able to hold the hot like they can the cold. But my Rabbis explained, regarding vessels lined with pitch, in pitch vessels of pitch, and it explains further on [in this Mishnah], how so? Vessels of copper that were lined with pitch are pure. If the vessels were impure and a person or foods or liquids touched/came in contact with pitch, they are pure, for the pitch does not combine and is not considered like the essence of the vessel.
ואם ליין – if he lined them with pitch from the outset to place in them wine and it was not his intention to use them for hot liquids at all.
טמאין – for the vessel requires pitch and the pitch is attached/joined.

Mishnah 8

יותר מצרכה – corresponding to the hole/perforation it needs it, and what is not corresponding to the hole/perforation is more than its needs, and it is not considered an attachment/joining, since it is not needed for the jar. But Maimonides explained that more that is its need as for example that he made the closure most thick until one would be able to remove from it and it would remain closed, and even if everything is corresponding to the hole/perforation.
זפת שנטפה על החבית (pitch which dripped on the jar) – that is not perforated.
הנוגע בה – with the drop of pitch.
טהור – even though the jar is impure. For the pitch is not in a connection/attachment to the jar, since the jar does not require it.
שפקקן בזפת – he closed up the mouth of the hole/perforation of the funnel that is made to bring wine from it into the jar.
רבי אלעזר בן עזריה מטמא – because it (i.e., the pitch) is considered for it as a closure, whether of wood or whether of earthenware.
ר"ע מטמא בשל עץ – because the pitch is of its [same] species/kind, for the pitch comes out from the tree.
ומטהר בשל חרס – which is not its kind/species and is not considered an attachment. And the closing of the mouth of a funnel is not similar to the closing of the perforation of a jug which is considered an attachment, because the perforation in the mouth of the funnel that was made by the artisan from the outset was smooth and the pitch was peeled from it and does not endure, but the jug that was perforated after it was heated in a kiln, it is impossible to perforate to be smooth and even, and the pitch is not peeled from it, or alternatively, the perforation that is at the mouth of the funnel, its function is to remove its covering/closure when he wants to pour wine from the jug. Therefore, it is not considered a closing other than with a wooden funnel because it is its kind/species, but a jug that is perforated, its function is not to remove the closure.
רבי יוסי מטהר בשניהם – for the closing of the mouth of the funnel is not considered a closure, and it is as if it was not closed and lacks a receptacle. But the Halakha is according to Rabbi Akiva.

Chapter 4



Mishnah 1

החרס שאינו יכול לעמוד – such as a shard that separates from the jug or from the pot in the place of the ear/handle, and it is not able to stand without support because of the weight of the ear/handle that makes it heavy and outweighs it, or because it had in it a pointed knob which is sharp at its bottom and it cannot sit [straight] without being supported.
נטלה האוזן טהור – for an earthenware vessel that is pure for one hour, it furthermore will not ever have defilement.
ור' יהודה מטמא – for he doesn’t hold this reasoning.
או שנחלקה –[or that was split] lengthwise like two troughs, and is unable to sit on its bottom other than on its sides.
רבי יהודה מטהר – for Rabbi Yehuda holds that as it is taught in the Mishnah (Tractate Kelim, Chapter 2, Mishnah 2): “The smallest/thinnest of earthenware vessels that sits without supports are impure, that is from the rims and not from the sides, that there needs to be a shard of the of the vessel sitting on its rim in the manner that it sits when it is whole.
וחכמים מטמאין – for they hold that vessels that are made to set them on their sides periodically.

Mishnah 2

ואינה יכולה להטלטל בחצי קב גרוגרות – because it is cracked/broken, and the dried figs weigh down upon the broken parts completely while being carried. And therefore, its measure is one-half-of-a-Kab, which is the measure of one meal. For a Kab of dried figs is the measure for two meals as it is proven at the end of the Tractate Peah (Chapter 8, Mishnah 5): “[When dispensing poor man’s tithe], they may give to the por at the threshing floor no less than…one Kab of dried figs.” But everything that is not worthy to carry in it the measure of one meal is like something that is broken.
גיסטרא (see Tractate Kelim, Chapter 2, Mishnah 6 – something defective/broken) – an earthenware vessel that is split into two, and it becomes two sides.
שאין שיריים לשיריים – we have compassion upon a complete vessel and because of a small crack, we don’t pour into it [liquids] and we bring the remnants of the vessel, that is the shards of a vessel and place them underneath it. But the shards of a vessel when it is cracked it releases liquid we throw it out, for we don’t say: bring a shard of one vessel to place underneath the shard of this vessel.

Mishnah 3

כל שנטלו אזניה – [when its handles have been removed] – it is considered defective/broken, fo since it lacks handles to carry it from place to place, and if it was cracked, its measure is like as it releases liquid.
היו בה חדודים (if there were prongs projecting from the bottom of the misshaped vessel) – a mere earthenware [vessel] that was broken, there projects from [its bottom] prongs, as [it states in] (Job 41:22): “His underpart is jagged shards; [It spreads a threshing sledge on the mud].”
כל המקבל עמה בזיתים – if an olive does not protrude between each prong, it is considered as “inside” like the גיסטרא/defective receptacle itself and defiles even the airspace, but if the olive does not protrude from between them, it does not defile airspace, but it does defile through contact by reason of the hand.
היתה מוטה על צדה – that it was split by length like a kind of trough and doesn’t sit other than upon its sides/walls and it has prongs projecting.
כל המקבל עמה בזיתים – in the manner that it defiles when it is sitting on its rim, so also it defiles while sitting on its side. But our anonymous Mishnah is according to the Sages of above (see Tractate Kelim, Chapter 4, Mishnah 1) that defiles regarding a jar that was split like two troughs.
קתדרא – a seat of women that walk on the wagon (see Tractate Kelim, Chapter 24, Mishnah 2).
קורפיות – on account of their place. But they are sharp vessels that they do not sit upon without support.
וקוסימן – the language of )Numbers 4:7): “[Over the table of display they shall spread a blue cloth; they shall place upon it the bowls, the ladles, the jars,] and the libation jugs.” But in [Tractate] Sanhedrin [Chapter 9, Mishnah 8] “a person who steals the vessel for libation,” and this is the name for the sacred vessels, and קוסים/rough-edged cups are kinds of vessels that their bottoms are sharp and when they cook in them, they place them on an iron vessel that they call TRIPIDI in the foreign language, and when hey lower them, they support them in he ashes of the portable stove on feet.
הצידונין – that are made in Sidon.

Mishnah 4

שפאיות – from the language of שפה/rim, border. That it has three rims for its mouth and airspace in-between them. Between each rim.
הפנימית עודפת הכל טהור (if the inner one is largest – in height) – everything that is outside from it is considered like the back of the utensil/vessel and an earthenware vessel cannot be made impure from its outside. But what is within on the inside is impure.
החיצונה עודפת הכל אמא – for that which is outside it is like on the back of the utensil/vessel, and what is in front of it is considered the inside. And similarly, if the middle [rim] is highest, from it and outward is considered on top of and what is inward is considered inside, for the vessel is filled until is highest part.
היו שוות – that none of the rims is larger than its neighbor.
וחכמים אומרים הכל טהור – the rim that the defilement fell upon in its airspace alone is impure, but the remainder is all pure. And this is the Halakha.
משיצרפם בכבשן – but prior to smelting it is a vessel of earth and does not become defiled.
והוא גמר מלאכה – but even though that after smelting the furnace, it requires repair for washing, to smooth them and to even out their borders, nevertheless, from when they are fired in the furnace, it is considered that their manufacture has been completed and they can become defiled.

Chapter 5



Mishnah 1

תנור תחלתו ארבע – an undefined oven is made like a larger pot which lacks a rim at the bottom of the vessel, and they fasten it with plaster on the ground, and the floor of the ground is the bottom of the oven. But even though that of itself it lacks a receptacle, it is nevertheless impure, for the All-Merciful assigned it by its insides, and behold it has an inside.
תחלתו ארבעה – the height of the oven is not less than four handbreadths.
ושייריו – if it was large and it became defiled and afterwards was broken, it would not be purified until there would not be in its remnants four [handbreadths].
במה דברים אמורים – that its beginning and its remnants would be four [handbreadths].
בגדול – that is made to bake and to roast with it in the manner of overs.
אבל בקטן – that is made for young children to play in.
תחלתו כל שהוא – but not exactly any small amount, for less than a handbreadth is not anything (see Talmud Hullin 124a).
ושייריו ברובו – In the Gemara in the chapter: “The Hide and the Grease”/העור והרוטב [Chapter 9 of Tractate Hullin 124a] it raises a question on our Mishnah that is here, that less than a handbreadth, of what is it worth? And it (i.e., the Gemara) answers, that the “remnant” that is referred to is the majority of the large [oven], and it is not about the small over. And We raise the objection, that with a large [oven]. And we raise the objection, regarding a large [oven], surely it states “and its remnants” are four [handbreadths], for it surely teaches: “Under what circumstances?” with a large [oven], implying that the Sages did not dispute with the first Tanna/teacher (i.e., Rabbi Meir) regarding a large [oven] at all. And it answers: This one is speaking about an oven of seven [handbreadths] and that one is [speaking of] an oven of nine [handbreadths], that is to say, something of seven [handbreadths] whose remnants are the majority/larger part, and even though there aren’t four [handbreadths] and there is no oven with less than four [handbreadths], for since, from its outset, it was an important vessel which used its remnants, even though they were not so worthy, and with an oven of nine [handbreadths] where its majority/larger part is a large measure, it defiles with its remnants with four [handbreadths] at its outset.
משתגמר מלאכתו – it refers to the beginning of the oven. From when does the oven become defiled? From when its manufacture is complete.
משיסיקנו (from when he will heat it – sufficiently] – even though that with the rest of earthenware vessels, it is sufficient for them with the smelting of the kiln (as seen at the conclusion of Chapter 4, Mishnah 4 of Tractate Kelim) an oven that requires to attach/glue it with plaster to be interwoven in order to contain its heat, its manufacture is not complete until it can heat sufficiently. But however, it doesn’t require large heating in order to bake bread in it, but rather in order to bake cakes made of spongy dough, dough that its mixture is soft that is made like a sponge and only a small amount of heating is sufficient for it.
משיסיק את החדש כדי לאפות בישן – that the new [oven] in order to bae in it cakes made of spongy dough requires greater heating from the old [oven]. But if the new [oven] was heated with a lesser/smaller heating, that with a heating like this, the old [oven] would be appropriate to bake in it the cakes made of spongy dough, that is when its manufacture is complete. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 2

כירה (a portable stove on feet with caves for two pots) – a place of placing over the fire two pots. But sometimes they place the pots to cook within it and sometimes on top of it.
תחלתה שלש – its height is no less than three fingers-breadth.
משתיגמר מלאכתה- from when it become defiled initially, from when its manufacture is complete.
ביצה קלה – the egg of a chicken. But why do they call it a light (easily boiling) egg? That this is easier to cook more than all the eggs.
טרופה – that it is beaten and broken in a bowl (i.e., scrambled).
ונתונה באלפס (and placed in a tightly-covered pot) – that was already warmed, for it is boiled quickly.
הכופח – the measurement of the placing over the fire of one pot, and its heat is greater than the heat of the portable stove with caves for two pots, and sometimes they bake bread in it.
שיעורו כתנור – in order to bake cakes made of spongy dough (i.e., four handbreadths).
שיעורו ככירה – to make a light boiled egg.
האבן היוצא – they are used to attaching a stone to the oven that projects outward from it in order that it will be for it a handle, and it is compared to an oven. But if the oven is defiled, the stone is [also] defiled, and the bread that came in contact with it is defiled because it is a handle for the oven, as it is written (Leviticus 11:35): “[Everything on which the carcass of any of them falls shall be impure:] an oven or stove shall be smashed. They are impure and impure they shall remain for you,” for everything that is in your needs, to include the handles which are needed for the vessel.
לא אמרו – that more than a handbreadth for an oven and from three fingers-breadth for a portable stove on feet with caves for two pots is not considered an attachment, other than when the stone is between the stove and the wall. Because it hinders it for one cannot bring the oven near to the wall and it presses the house, therefore, more than a handbreadth stands to be taken. But at the side of the house, even larger than the handle is to the oven. But the Halakah is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.
והשאר טהור – as it is taught in the Sifra/Torat Kohanim (i.e., the Halakhic Midrash on the Book of Leviticus), it is possible that I earn more than that of its measure, as the inference teaches us, “they are impure” (Leviticus 11:35).

Mishnah 3

עטרת כירה – round building made on the top of the portable stove on feet with caves for two pots/כירה in order to preserve its heat.
טהורה – but if the portable stone on feet with caves for two pots became impure, the crown did not become impure, for the crown is not considered as attached to the portable stove with caves for two pots.
טירת התנור (the surrounding of an oven/brick-work/fender) – the courtyard of the oven, it is the language of (Genesis 25:16): “[These are the sons of Ishmael and these are their names] by their villages and their encampments: [twelve chieftains of as many tribes].” It is ap lace in front of the oven that is surrounded by partitions where they place in it the bread when they detach/ shovel out bread from [where it sticks to] the oven.
בזמן שהוא גבוהה ארבעה – as the measure of the height of the oven (which is four handbreadths) at its outset.
אפילו על שלש אבנים – that its attachment/connection was not done well but rather, it is lying only on three stones and is glued the oven, it is considered an attachment.
בית הפך (socket/cruse) – a place that is made on the sides of the portable stove on feet with caves for two pots that they place upon it a cruse of oil to make tepid/cool.
בית תבלין – a place where they place in it the spices.
בית הנר – a place where they place in it the lamp.
מיטמאין במגע – if an unclean reptile came in contact within the portable stove on feet with caves for two pots, these places became unclean through the defilement of the portable stove on feet with caves for two pots. And similarly, if one of these places became defiled through contact with the unclean reptile, the portable stove on feet with caves for two pots became impure with them, for they are considered like the portable stove on feet with caves for two pots and they are one thing regarding the matter of defilement through physical contact.
ואין מיטמאין באויר – if an unclean reptile was suspended in the airspace of the portable stove on feet with caves for two pots but did not come in contact with it, even though it is defiled, for an earthenware vessel becomes defiled through airspace, they are [ritually] pure, for they are not attached to it other than through the matter of physical contact. Because from the Torah, they are not attached to it, but the Rabbis decreed upon them defilement, as the Rabbis made an indication/sign not to defile it by airspace, in order that they not burn upon them heave-offering and Holy Things.
ור' שמעון מטהר – [Rabb Shimon declares it pure] even through physical contact. Every place where defilement did not come in contact with it for each and every vessel is separate/independent. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Meir.

Mishnah 4

תנור שהוסק מאחוריו – that the oven does not become susceptible to receive defilement until it is heated, and if it is not heated from the inside, but rather from the outside, it is considered heating.
או הוסק שלא לדעתו – [even from the inside].
או שהוסק בבית האומן – prior to the completion of the manufacture of its being made.
טמא – we have the reading. But there are books that we have the reading, that it is pure, and this is a blunder/confusion.

Mishnah 5

מוסף התנור (chimney-piece of the oven) – the addition of the oven that they at its top in order to preserve its heat.
מפני שהוא סומך עליו את השפוד (because it supports the roasting-spit on it) – of meat, for they regularly roast meat on it, and it is a thing that is necessary for the oven. And the All-Merciful states (Leviticus 11:35): “and unclean they shall remain for you,” to everything that are your needs, as we expounded above [in Mishnah 2 of Chapter 5 of Tractate Kelim].
מפני שהוא אופה בו כשהוא נדחק – when he has many forced laborers and he the need for a great deal of bread. But for Rabbi Yohanan [HaSandlar], the reason of the first Tanna/teacher is not sufficient for him because he rests the roasting-spin upon it, and he holds that we require that the additional usage would like the usage of the body of the oven.
מוסף היורה של שולקי זיתים (rim around a boiler in the ground of olive seethers) – it is the manner of those who seethe/thoroughly boil olives and dyers that have large boilers and they make for them a rim of plaster on the border that water will rise upon it at the time of their foaming. But the seething of olives is unclean/impure, because addition/rim Is needed for the vessel and we use it.
ושל צבעים טהור – for they don’t use it in order that they don’t use its dye. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yohanan HaSandlar.

Mishnah 6

מעפר ולמטן מיטמא במגע – if the unclean reptile touched/came in contact with the oven from within above from the dirt, what is below from the dirt is defile. But if the unclean reptile was suspended in the airspace and did not touch the walls of the oven from inside it, it did not defile anything other than what is above from the dirt [-line].
בור (cistern) – a pit below the earth.
דות (cellar) – it is made like a cistern, but it is a building that is above from the ground.
ונתן שם אבן – between the pit and the wall of the oven, to support the oven that it should not fall into the pit/cistern.
אם מסיק מלמטה – if when he kindles the flame from below within the cistern, the oven is heated from its insides from above through its rims, it is impure. But if not, that it is not heated from the heating of the flame that is below within the cistern, it Is pure. But the disagreement of Rabbi Yehuda and the Rabbis is specifically through the first heating which is the completion of the construction of the oven and through that heating, it is susceptible to receiving defilement, Rabbi Yehuda holds that the oven should be attached to the ground with the first heating, as it is written (Leviticus 11:35): “[And if any of those falls into an earthen vessel,] everything inside it shall be unclean and – the vessel – itself you shall break,” but the language of נתיצה/breaking up (as in Leviticus 11:35 – תנור וכירים יותץ /and [the vessel] itself you shall break) other than that which is attached to the round, for when something falls that is carried, it is the language of שבירה/breaking but not the language of נתיצה/cutting out or breaking up, therefore, if the oven is heated through its rim from the heating that is within the cistern, it is considered as attached to the cistern and we call it יותץ/broken up/cut out, but if it is not heated from the heating of the cistern, it is chipped off and standing and it is impossible to apply to it further יותץ/broken up/cut out.
וחכמים אומרים הואיל וניסוק מכל מקום טמא (since it is heated from any place, it is unclean) – as it stated in Scripture (Leviticus 11:35): “and unclean they shall remain for you/וטמאים יהיו לכם,” nevertheless, but even if he heated it when it is suspended upon the neck of a camel, it is heated, and its construction has been completed with that. But everyone admits that with the second heating after its construction has been completed, that it is defiled even on the neck of the camel. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 7

תנור שנטמא – an oven that is made like large pot that lacks rims and is carried, when one comes to affix it, one attaches it to the ground and affixes plaster from the outside and makes it thick in order that it will preserve its heat/warmth, and we call it plastering that he plasters it and attaches it.
כיצד מטהרים אותו – how much should be its breaking so that it purifies it.
חולקו לשלשה – to the vessel itself from the inside. For if it is into two parts, the larger part is impure, for it is the majority.
וגורר את הטפילה – [he scrapes off the plaster] that is glued to it, for it is also attaches it.
עד שיהא בארץ – meaning to say, he lowers it down until the ground. Alternatively, it refers to dividing it, and it is not sufficient when dividing it until its majority, but dividing until it reaches the ground.
ולא עד שיהא בארץ – but not to divide it until below it is near the ground.
אלא ממעטו מבפנים – unitl there should not remain four handbreadths which is the measure of the beginning of the oven. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Meir.
צריך להסיעו – even though he divided it, he did not purify it until he separates the parts from each other. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.
הגדול טמא- because there is the majority of the oven.

Mishnah 8

חתכו חוליות לרחבו (if he burned clay of an oven into tiles breadthwise) – like he cuts the tube of a reed.
פחות מארבעה טפחים – if there is in the burned clay less than for handbreadths and it comes from a large oven where there isn’t a majority. But if there is four handbreadths, it is impure, even though it is a minority.
מרחו בטיט (if he smeared plaster over it) – it requires heating like a new oven.
הרחיק ממנו את הטפלה (if he removed from it the plaster) – paste of plaster that he made, and he did not attach it to the oven, but rather, removed [the plaster] from it.
שנתן חול או צרור –[and he placed sand or stones] between the plaster and the oven, and through this the oven preserves its warmth and one we bake in it.
הנדה והטהורה אופות בו – for the plastering is not considered an attachment to the oven, since it is distanced from it.
והוא טהור – and it is not susceptible to receive [ritual] impurity .

Mishnah 9

תנור שבא מחותך – that the artisan made it board/plank by board/plank in order to attach them together through rims, and they are crowns/wreaths that they call TZIRKELAAH, like the kind that we make for jugs when we place in them wine. And for those crowns/wreaths and rims – the Tanna/teacher calls למודין/frames.
ונתנן עליו והוא טהור נטמא – after he placed upon it the frame and the oven was pure from the outset because it was a series of boards/planks and there was no attachment. It returned to be susceptible to receive defilement through these frames when they attach them.
סילק את למודיו – and the boards/planks were taken apart one from the other, there is no greater breaking up/cutting out than this, and the oven becomes pure, even though he restored the frames a second time, they do not receive [ritual] impurity for the frames do not bring defilement other than only the first time when it comes in pieces from the house of the artisan.
מרחו בטיט [he plastered it with plaster] – for this oven for the frames do not bring him the defilement, but it defiles through the plastering with plaster.
ואין צריך להסיקו – [he doesn’t need to heat it] like all the other ovens, for it doesn’t become susceptible to receive defilement until he heats them, because it was already heated the first time when it comes in pieces from the house of the artisan.

Mishnah 10

חתכו חוליות – when he cut it for the oven breadthwise into pieces, and placed one tile on top of another tile.
ונתן חול בסין חוליא לחוליא – and plastered it with plaster and made it plaster in the manner that they that make for ovens.
ר' אליעזר מטהר – for since there is sand between the fissures, it is like it is broken.
וחכמים מטמאין – for the plaster makes all of it one and connects/attaches all of the fissures, and even though there is sand between each tile.
וזהו תנורו של עכנאי – therefore it is called “The Oven of Akhnai,” that they encircled it with Halakhot like this snake and defiled it (see Tractate Berakhot 19a and Tractate Bava Metzia 59b). עכנא is a snake, that its custom is to make itself like a circle and to have its tail enter into its mouth, such is how they surrounded with responses and proofs of Rabbi Eliezer and the Sages each with the other, on this oven. And at the end, because Rabbi Eliezer was an individual [opinion] against the majority (i.e., the Sages), the law was decided like the Sages and not according to Rabbi Eliezer. And they brought all of the pure things that Rabbi Eliezer declared pure and burned them in fire and the decided to excommunicate him, because he encouraged dispute against the majority view.
יורות הערביין (cauldrons/improvised fire places of the Arabs/a cavity in the ground laid out with clay) – they are made to break bread, as will be explained further on.
של בן דינאי – My Rabbis explained the name of a person who would make these ovens (see Tractate Sotah, Chapter 9, Mishnah 9). And I heard that is on account of the fact that they judged many laws.

Mishnah 11

של אבן ושל מתכת טהור – [an oven] that is of stone is completely pure, and that of metal is pure from the law of an earthenware vessel, which does not defile from its airspace, and it has purity.
וטמא משום כלי מתכות – that it becomes susceptible to receive defilement from its outside and becomes a primary source of ritual impurity. But if it is attached to the ground, it does not defile, for all that is attached to the ground, behold it is like the ground, except for an oven and a portable stove on feet with caves for two pots which are of earthenware, as it is written concerning them (Leviticus 11:35): “[Everything on which the carcass of any of them falls shall be unclean:] an oven or stove shall be smashed,” that which has breaking up/cutting out.
ניקב נפגם נסדק – and he made a treatment of plaster to close up the perforation or the damage or the crack. Or he made at its mouth a supplement of plaster, it is impure, like the law of an earthenware oven.
וכן בכירה – and similarly, the measurement of a perforation of a portable stove on feet with caves for two pots, in order that the flame can exude through it, like the measurement of the earthenware oven.
ועשה לה פטפוטין (if he made legs for the stove – so that it no longer rests immediately on the ground) – here it does not teach: “that he made for it plaster/paste” [because] they don’t make plaster/paste for a portable stove on feet with caves for two pots that was perforated, damaged or cracked like they do for an oven, but rather, when it was perforated or damaged, the portable stove on feet with caves for two pots is in the place of the perforation to make legs for the stove, they are the legs of the portable stove on feet with caves for two pots, like TRIPID in the foreign language, that the portable stove on feet with caves for two pots sits on these legs for the stove.
מרחה בטיט – [if he spread plaster over it] it is pure, for the spreading/smearing of plaster on it, has no effect other than with an oven that they bread read inside it, but not with a portable stove on feet with caves for two pots, because they don’t bake or cook within this portable stove on feet with caves for two pots itself, but they leave it it within it or on top of the pot. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Chapter 6



Mishnah 1

העושה שלשה פטפוטים – three legs/,pins that sit/rest on the land.
וחיברן בטיט – above their head, like a kind of iron vessel that they call TRIPID.
קבע שלשה מסמרים – that he inserted them into the ground.
טהורות – for metal vessels that are attached to the ground are like the ground itself, and they are not susceptible to receive [ritual] defilement.
וחיברם בטיט טמאה – it is like a portable stove on feet with caves for two pots/כירה of earthenware, that the plaster/clay on their head makes it the designation of earthenware.
עד שיעשה שלישית – similar to three clay pins forming a sort of tripod for the support of a pot.
או עד שיסמוך לכותל – that the wall will sort the pot from one side.
אחת בטיט – one is fastened/attached to its neighbor with plaster/clay at its top.
ואחת שלא בטיט – that the third one is not attached/fastened. And this is [the opinion of] Rabbi Yehuda, but the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 2

האבן שהיה שופת עליה ועל התנור (the stone that he was placing the cooking pot over/by the fire as well as on the oven) – land the stone was attached with plaster/clay.
עליה ועל האבן – that is one that is [affixed] with plaster and one that is not [affixed] with plaster.
ועל הסלע – that is attached from the Six Days of Creation.
טהורה – as it is written (Leviticus 11:35): “[an oven or stove] shall be smashed. They are impure [and impure they shall remain for you],” that which has a breaking up/cutting out has [ritual] defilement; that which does not have breaking up/cutting out does not have [ritual] defilement. From here, they (i.e., the Rabbis) stated that a stone that he was placing the cooking pot over and on the oven, or on it and on the portable stove on feet with caves for two pots , or on it and on the small stove with room for only one pot, are impure, because they have a breaking up/cutting out; [but] upon it and on the stone, upon it and upon a rock, upon it and upon the wall, it is [ritually] pure, because they don’t have breaking up/cutting out.
כירת הנזירים – to cook the peace offerings of a Nazir that the Kohen takes from them the cooked shoulder (see Deuteronomy 18:3 and Tractate Hullin, Chapter 10, Mishnah 1).
כירת טבחים – that they sell to the masses and they arrange many stones one after another and places the upon them many pots, where there is found one stone for two pots, but when one [of the stones] is defiled, the others are pure, this is a matter that is like the double inkstand that is taught in the Mishnah above in Chapter 2 [Mishnah 7], that if one of them is defiled, the other rest of them are not defiled.

Mishnah 3

שלש אבנים שעשאן שתין כירים – and the middle stone services both this one (i.e., the portable stove with caves for two pots) and that one (i.e., the other portable stove with caves for two pots).
האמצעית המשמשת את הטמאה – half of the middle one (i.e., stove) that services the outer one which is [ritually] impure is impure. But the half that services the outer one that is pure is pure.
נחלטה האמצעית לטמאה – and all of it (i.e., all three stones) are impure.
לשפות עליהן – [to set upon] the two outer ones (i.e., stones).
החזירה – [if he restored] the middle one (i.e., stone)
טהורה – for the first portable stove on feet with caves for two pots/כירה is abolished and it is as if he placed on it the large pot of the cauldron/kettle.
מקבלת טומאה משיסיקנה – for it (if plastered) requires heating like a new portable stove on feet with caves for two pots.

Mishnah 4

סמך לזו אבן אחת מכאן ולו אבן אחת מכאן – and they were found now three portable stoves with caves for two pots, the middle one is [ritually] impure and the outer ones are pure. Therefore, the two middle stones – half of this one and half of that one [of the pure side] is pure and he uses the pure [sections].
ניטלו החיצונות הטהורות – the middle ones return to their impurity as at the beginning, and all of them are impure, for behold there isn’t here any used for purity.

Chapter 7



Mishnah 1

הקלתות של בעלי בתים (the fire-place under a portable stove of householders) – a stand that is made for a portable stove with caves for two pots and the place of its sitting, which is called a קלת/fire-place.
שנפחתה (that was diminished) – its bottom. And the depth of the cavity was less than three handbreadths, the portable stove with caves for two pots/כירה receives defilement, for if he would heat with less from the bottom, the pot that is on the portable stove with caves for two pots would boil from above.
יתר מכאן – if the cavity was deeper than three handbreadths.
טהורה – for the fire is further from the pot that is on the portable stove with caves for two pots and does not boil.
נתן אבן או צרור – on the place of the cavity in order that the depth of the cavity would not be three handbreadths, it is pure, because it is not considered from the bottom of the portable stove with caves for two pots.
מרחה (if he plastered it) – to this stone with clay/plaster.
מקבלת טומאה – the portable stove with caves for two pots [is susceptible to receive defilement] from now on. For this stone is considered as from the bottom of the portable stove with caves for two pots, hence the depth of the cavity is not three handbreadths.
וזו היא תשובת רבי יהודה – when Rabbi Yehuda and the Sages disputed above in the Chapter “The Oven” (Chapter 5, Mishnah 6) that its beginning is four handbreadths.
בתנור שנתנו על פי הבור ועל פי הדות – from here, Rabbi Yehuda brought proof for his words. For just as that we require here that he heats from below and the pot cooks from above, so also we require it there (see Tractate Kelim, Chapter 5, Mishnah 6).

Mishnah 2

דכון (elevated spot in the kitchen for vessels/a stand fixed to the stove or portable oven) – it is the language of a place/stand, like “in a certain place/בדוך פלן” [Berakhot 18b]. And this is a place that projects/protrudes from the portable oven with caves for two pots/כירה, that when they remove the pot from the portable oven with caves for two pots, they set it down on this projection/protrusion but sometimes it has a receptacle for two or three pots.
טהור משום כירה – that if the portable oven with caves for two pots became [ritually] impure, it (i.e., the pot) did not become impure [on account of the portable oven]; alternatively, it does not defile what is attached like a portable oven with caves for two pots.
הצדדים שלו – the walls of the stand fixed to the stove or portable oven that are not part of the portable oven.
הרחב שלו (its wide side) – this is the wall of the portable stove with caves for two pots itself to the side of the receptacle of the stand fixed to the stove/portable oven. But because the stand fixed to the stove/portable oven continually widens to the side of the portable oven, it is called רחב/its wide side.
רבי מאיר מטהר – for it is not considered like the portable oven with caves for two pots (see Tractate Kelim, Chapter 6, Mishnah 3).
ורבי יהודה מטמא – that it is considered like the portable oven with caves for two pots. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehuda.
וכן הכופה את הסל – and built the portable stove with caves for two pots on its back/on top of it (i.e., the basket), and it protrudes beyond the portable stove. But the basket is what defiles because it is a wooden utensil, but when he built upon it the portable stove and the width of the basket protrudes beyond the walls of the portable stove and they place the pots on that protrusion, the law is like the stand fixed to the stove/portable oven.

Mishnah 3

כירה שנחלקה לארכה טהורה – a portable stove with caves for two pots that opened for two pots. But when it is divided lengthwise, the two placings on/over the fire were eliminated, but if it was divided widthwise, the two placings over the fire remain, this one alone and that one alone.
כופח – a place where there is an opening for one pot. But whether it is cracked lengthwise or whether it is cracked widthwise, all of the place where the pot is placed on/over the fire is eliminated.
חצר הכירה – like a kind of large, earthenware pan [without a lid] and the portable oven with caves for two pots sits in the middle attached to the courtyard.
שלש אצבעות – that the walls of the courtyard are three fingers high. For just as the measure of the portable stove with caves for two pots, is three fingers at the outset, as is it is taught above in the Mishnah (Tractate Kelim, Chapter 5, Mishnah 2) in the Chapter “The Oven.” So as well is the measurement of the courtyard of the double stove, its height is not less than three fingers, but less than three [fingers], its airspace is not considered important. However, according to the Rabbis it defiles through contact. Alternatively, because there is something like a handle for the double stove, and the handle has contact, but not airspace.
כיצד משערין אותה – because a portable stove with caves for two pots is a great deal higher than the courtyard and we must measure what is considered the airspace of the courtyard.
נותן את השפוד – one end on the lowest wall of the courtyard and the other end on the highest wall of the double stove, and everything that is below from the spit, if one suspended there an unclean reptile, even though it is a above from the walls of the courtyard as if it is suspended below, for all of this is considered the airspace of the courtyard.
לא נטמאת הכירה – for the court [of the stove] is subsidiary to the portable stove with caves for two pots, but the portable double stove is not subsidiary to the court [of the stove]. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov.

Mishnah 4

היתה מופרשת – that the artisan did not build from the outset the court/fender[of the stove] and the portable stove with caves for two pots being attached together, but rather, the one is on its own and the other is on its own.
חלקה (smooth) – without a receptacle at all. It is taught this, but you don’t have to mention that.
פטפוטי כירה (clay pins forming a sort of tripod for the double stove) – the feet of the portable stove with caves for two pots, which are three feet, and they are three fingers high, and they are considered like the double stove, and become susceptible to [ritual] defilement through contact and through airspace like the double stove itself. And all the more so if they are less than three fingers, they are judged like the portable stove with caves for two pots/כירה.
ואפילו הן ארבעה – [four] feet. They are judged lie the portable stove with caves for two pots.

Mishnah 5

נטל אחד מהן – there were three [legs/props] and one of them was taken from them, they still appear partially able to place the cooking vessel over or by the fire and it is considered as chipped off/torn down and [also] not as chipped off/torn down. Therefore, it becomes susceptible to being defiled through contact does it does not become defiled through airspace.
ורבי שמעון מטהר – for Rabbi Shimon would state that all of the pins forming a sort of tripod for the support of a portable stove with caves for two pots that are not susceptible to being defiled through airspace are not made unclean through contact. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.
עשה שנים – the artisan from the outset made the portable stove with caves for two stoves with two legs/pins.
מיטמאים במגע ובאויר – that they are like two stones that were made into a portable stove with caves for two pots, as it is taught in the Mishnah above (see Tractate Kelim, Chapter 6, Mishnah 1), that it is impure.
היו גבוהים – the legs/pins.
ור' שמעון מטהר – that surplus above the three fingers and above, whether through contact or – thorough airspace. For every leg/pin that is above three fingers [in height] is not considered like a portable stove with caves for two pots.
היו משוכים מן שפה (if they were withdrawn from the lip/rim) – like projections made in the body of the portable stove with caves for two pots. And from those projections, their legs/pins are stretched/conducted which are the feet of the portable stove with caves for two pots, and no, the legs/pins are found outside from the rim, but what there is of them that are within three [fingers] of the rim are considered like the portable stove with caves for two pots itself and become defiled through contact and through airspaces, but what there is of them outside of/beyond the three [fingers] is what Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Shimon dispute. And in all of them, the Halakha is according to Rabbi Meir.

Mishnah 6

כיצד משערין אותם – because the legs/pins are far from each other, and when an unclean reptile is found between them, we are not able to know if it is within the three [fingers] to the rim/lip and impure, or beyond the three [fingers] to the rim and pure for airspace for Rabbi Meir and for Rabbi Shimon, whether for contact and/or for airspace, therefore, one measures to this leg/pin three fingers from the rim/lip and similarly to the second and placer the cubit and draw [tracing] lines of the boundaries between them from one to the other, and this is called a כנה/putting a ruler between, measuring a straight line (or putting the base of the stone between them) and he draws lines, and from the tracing lines and inward is impure, that is, the place of the straight/ruled line, and from the tracing lines and outward is pure.

Chapter 8



Mishnah 1

התנור שחצצו (the oven that was divided [by hangings/boards]) – that he made a partition in its mid-section and divided it until above from its top-most layer.
הכל טמא – even foods that are in the second side of the partition.
כוורת פחותה ופקוקה בקש (a defective bee-hive, which was repaired with stuffing of straw) – for this purpose, it (i.e., the Mishnah) took [the term] פחותה/defective, for it is not a vessel, for if were complete/full it would protect over the foods that are within it, for even a vessel that drips protects/saves, but here not it is not a vessel, it is a mere partition, and [the term] פקוקה בקש/stopped up with stuffing of straw – is taken [by the Mishnah] to add something new, for even though its defectiveness is stuffed with straw, it is not a vessel, and doesn’t protect the foods that are within it.
ומשולשת – hanging.
אם הצילה במת החמור – for a defective bee-hive that is repaired with the stuffing of straw divides in the face of defilement that is in the tent of a corpse, but even though its defilement is more grave than the defilement to a person or to vessels for a seven day defilement [period].
לא תציל בכלי חרס הקל – which does not defile other than foods and liquids.
שכן חולקים אהלים – for it is the manner for people to divide tents with partitions; therefore, the bee-hive is like a partition that saves/protects the tent of a corpse from defilement.
שאין חולקים כלי חרס – for there is no way to divide an earthenware vessel with a partition. Another explanation and essential: that we do divide tents for the dividing of tents with a partition has effect, for it is taught in the Mishnah in the Tractate Ohalot, in the Chapter סגוס עבה/A Thick Cloak (Chapter 15, Mishnah 4): “A house that was divided with boards or curtains, from the sides or from the roof beams – uncleanness is in the house; utensils that are within the partitioned-off area are clean.” But the division of the partition has no effect with earthenware vessels, for it is taught [in the Mishnah] regarding an oven here that was divided with boards or curtains, if an unclean reptile is found in one part, everything is impure. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer.

Mishnah 2

היתה שלימה – the bee-hive.
התנור טהור – as it is written (Leviticus 11:33): “And if any of those (i.e., any article of wood, or a cloth or a skin, or a sack) falls into an earthen vessel, [everything inside it shall be impure and – the vessel – itself you shall break],” but not אל תוך תוכו/to what is inside of it [already], and we are speaking of when its mouth/topmost layer is above from the oven, for if all of it is sunk in the oven, it is like one thing within it.
אוכלים שתוכה טהורין – as it is written (Leviticus 11:33): “everything inside it shall be impure,” and not שבתוך תוכו/what is already inside it.
ניקבו – the perforation that purifies them from their impurities, furthermore they no longer have the status of a vessel and they don’t divide/separate whether it is an oven or whether what is inside of it, and how much is the perforation that purifies them from their defilements.
העשוי לאוכלים – its measurement is like bringing forth/removing olives.
העשוי לכך ולכך – for food and liquids.
מטילין אותו לחומרו (they subject it to its more stringent [measure]) – but if he made the incision according to the measurement of liquids which is less than the measurement that is made for foods, he further is not able to save it because of the defilement.
בכונס משקה (with the capacity to admit liquid) – when they place the vessel from the side of the perforation, the water enters through the perforation into the vessel, and it is larger than that which liquid leaves/is removed.

Mishnah 3

סרידא (stuffed matting used for stoppers of stones, bag) – a kind of small kneading trough that the baker uses to knead in it and it lacks a receptacle. But Maimonides states that it is a board of perforated earthenware thar is made like a kind of net-work/mat, a netting, which we translate in Aramaic as עובד סרדתא/a person who works in netting.
גפיים – rims and handles.
שאין מצילים מיד כלי חרס (do not save from the power of earthenware vessels/utensils – lacking an inner part) – from being susceptible to defilement from the airspace of an earthenware vessel.
אלא כלים – and this, for since it does not have handles, it is not considered a vessel.
נחושתו של תנור (from the copper rim of the stove) – its bottom and lowest point. And similar to it is found in Ezekiel (16:36): “Because of your brazen effrontery/יען השפך נחשתך, [offering your nakedness to your lovers for harlotry – just like the blood of your children, which you gave to all your abominable fetishes].”
החבית והמשקין טהורים – that they did not enter into its (i.e., the unclean reptile’s) airspace, for they stand below the copper rim of the stove, and even if the jar is open and enters from the airspace of the oven at its mouth, the wine is not defiled through this, for the airspace of an earthenware vessel does not defile neither above nor below other than within.
היתה כפויה – the jug [was turned upside down] on its lip and placed on the lip of the oven which has an unclean reptile in it, and on the rim of the jar the moisture of wine that is in it, moist enough in order to moisten other objects, this moisture is not defiled on account of the airspace of the oven that enters into the jar, because the moisture of the wine was not within the oven.

Mishnah 4

הקדרה טהורה – and it is case where the unclean reptile did not see the airspace of the pot when it fell into the oven.
נטמא – the liquid [is defiled if dripping liquid was in the pot] and it returned and defiled the pot, according to the law that all liquids are impure when they defile vessels.
מטמאיך לא טמאוני (those things which made you unclean did not make me unclean) – the pot says to the liquids, the airspace of the earthenware vessel that you received the defilement from it did not defile me, for an earthenware vessel becomes defiled from the airspace of an earthenware vessel.
ואתה טמאתני – that he pot was defiled on account of the impure liquids.

Mishnah 5

ונפל אויר התנור טהור – all the time that the chicken is alive, the defilement was absorbed and does not defile.
ואם מת טמא – and it (i.e., the unclean reptile/insect) did not tarry in order to be consumed from the time it was swallowed until it (i.e., the chicken) died. And the measurement in order for it to be consumed (i.e., fully digested) in fowl, is from the time of twenty-four astronomical hours.
הפת שבתוכו שניה – that we don’t view the oven like one that is filled with defilement and it is as if the unclean reptile came in contact with the bread, but rather, the oven is first degree, for the unclean reptile is a primary source of ritual defilement fell into inside and made it first-degree of ritual impurity. And the oven which is first degree, in turn, defiled the bread and made it second-degree of ritual impurity.

Mishnah 6

בית שאור המוקף צמיד פתיל (a clay leaven pot with an airtight lid) – we ae dealing with an earthenware vessel, that saves in the airspace of the oven with an airtight lid in the manner that it saves in the tent of a corpse (as only the space within an earthenware vessel can contract ritual impurity – and everything within it remains ritually pure), as it is written (Leviticus 11:34): “As to any food that may be eaten, [it shall become impure if it came in contact with water; as to any liquid that may be drunk, it shall become impure if it was inside any vessel,” but not all of the food, excluding that which is surrounded with an airtight lid on an earthenware vessel and placed inside the oven that does not become defiled from the airspace of the oven. But a vessel that requires only rinsing to be restored to Levitical cleanness (see Tractate Hullin 25a; Tractate Zevakhim 3b) does not save with an airtight lid on the foods that are within it, as this is taught in the Halakhic Midrash (Sifra) to the Book of Leviticus, [All] the food, including that which is surrounded by an airtight lid with a vessel that requires only rinsing to be restored to Levitical cleanness and placed within the oven, that it does not save it from the hand of an earthenware vessel [and makes it impure].
השאור והשרץ בתוכו והקרץ בינתים – as for example, that this vessel has two receptacles, and the partition that divides between receptacle and its fellow is called a קרץ/[squeezed-in] partition; it is the language of (Job 33:6): "מחמר קרצתי גם-אני"/[You and I are the same before God;] I too was nipped from clay,” and the partition reaches until its rim, and the leaven from one side and the unclean reptile/insect from the other and the partition is the divider that separates between them, but if the entire vessel is surrounded with an airtight lid, that it is found that the leaven and the unclean insect are surrounded by an airtight lid.
התנור טמא – on account of the unclean insect/reptile that is within the airtight lid. For the airtight lid saves/protects those pure things that are within from becoming susceptible to receiving ritual impurity, but it doesn’t save those unclean things found within from defiling other things.
והשאור טהור – for it is surrounded by an airtight lid by itself.
ואם היה שם פותח טפח – that the partition that was between the leaven and an olive’s bulk from a corpse was beached with an opening of a square handbreadth [in length, breadth and height].
הכל טמא – that a handbreadth by a handbreadth that is open brings in the defilement.

Mishnah 7

בעין של תנור – it is a hole similar to an eye that one makes in the oven to remove the smoke, and when they bring the bread into the oven, they stop up/close it so that they heat does not escape, and it is not considered as the inside of the oven.
אם היה באויר – in an uncovered place that was not underneath the tent, even an olive’s bulk from the corpse is placed in the eye/vent/outlet, the oven is ritually pure, for the defilement does not enter into it since the eye/outlet/vent is not open a [square] handbreadth [in length, breadth and height].
ואם יש בו פותח טפח – that the thickness of the rim of the outer eye/vent protrudes and overshadows on an olive’s bulk from the corpse by a square handbreadth.
הכל טמא – the eye/vent/outlet and the oven [are impure] for a square handbreadth of the tent brings in the defilement.

Mishnah 8

נמצא מקום הנחת העצים – the insect/unclean reptile is found in the place where they place in it the fire and the wood/logs in the portable stove with caves for two pots/כירה, and it is the place which they throw from it the fire from the lowest point of the hearth.
מן השפה החיצונים ולפנים טמא – that the thickness of the walls of the portable stove with caves for two pots is considered as it is inside and as if it is within the double stove.
וחכמים אומרים – the thickness of the walls of the portable stove with caves for two pots is not considered other than like the outside, and it is not like the inside of the portable stove with caves for two pots. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
מכנגד שפיתת הקדרה (from the place where the pot is placed and inside – towards the fire) – from the place where one begins to close up the airspace of the portable stove with caves for two pots.
נמצא – the insect/unclean reptile.
מקום ישיבת הבלן – in the place where the person who heats up the water for the bathhouse (i.e., the bathhouse attendant).
אין טמא אלא מן הסתימה ולפנים – from the stopped-up part of the pot which has water in it or the dyer or the olive seethers. But in the Tosefta (Tractate Kelim Bava Kamma 6:15) it is proven that it is not impure other than from the stopped-up part and inside, as it states here, that is, when the insect/impure reptile is suspended in the airspace but doesn’t make contact, but with the defilement of contact, it defiles, even from the stopped-up part and outwards.

Mishnah 9

בור שיש בו בית שפיתה (a smelting pot which has a bottom or foot on which it can rest – a hole in the ground with an arrangement for putting a pot over fire) – a person who digs in the ground and plasters over the spot over with clay/mud and the plaster can stand (or form a vessel) on its own, such as the oven the son of Dinai, as is taught in the Mishnah above in the chapter “A Baking Oven, its Beginning/"תנור תחלתו" (see Tractate Kelim, Chapter 5, Mishnah 10 at the conclusion- who, according to Bartenura, states that he was a robber and would bake his bread in an oven like this and make these kinds of ovens, or a place where trials took place frequently; see also Tractate Sotah, Chapter 9, Mishnah 9, where this name also appears). But there are those who have the reading of כור/smelting pot with the letter כ'/Kaf (and not the ב'./Bet – as found in our editions of the Mishnah) – and it is a utensil/vessel in which they smelt in it gold and the silver and metals, he language of an iron furnace/כור ברזל. But to me, it appears that it is an oven of a blacksmith.
פורנה (a stationary large baking oven) – a large earthenware oven and its opening is at its side like our eye. But it is pure, because it is used with the ground, as is taught in the Tosefta (Tractate Kelim Bava Kamma, Chapter 6, Halakha 17).
לזבז – a thick rim.
אסטגיות (rims, moldings around a stove) – perforations similar to those that they make for ovens.
שפיות – a thin rim. But the Halakha is according to the first Tanna/teacher. But my Rabbis explained that a לזבז/thick rim and אסאגיות/rims, moldings around a stove and שפיות/thin rims are all one [thing]. But they do not disagree other than that each one was different according to the language that he heard from his master, and a person is obligated to state [something] according to the language of his teacher (see also Tractate Eduyot, Chapter 1, Mishnah 3).

Mishnah 10

מגע טמא מת – a person who came in contact with something defiled by the dead and becomes first [degree of ritual impurity], that the person defiled through contact with the dead is a primary source of ritual impurity and makes the individual who has contact first [degree of ritual impurity], and liquids and foods that are in his mouth defile the oven when they entered into its airspace. But even though he himself does not defile them, for a vessel does not become susceptible to receive ritual impurity other than from a primary source of ritual impurity. Behold this person states: “what rendered you unclean did not defile me, but you defiled me,”(see also Tractate Kelim 8:4)) as it is taught in the Mishnah in Tractate Parah ]Chapter 8, Mishnayot 2-7], that the Rabbis decreed regarding liquids that they would defile vessels, as a degree because the משקה זב וזבהliquid of a person with gonorrhea/זב and woman suffering from a flux/זבה as was stated in the Tractate Shabbat (which I could not locate. But using the Bar Ilan Responsa Project 25 plus, I was able to locate one mention of a passage with the words"משקה זב וזבה"are found only in Tractate Bekhorot 38a. I stand to be corrected). But the [word] “foods” that is taken here, it (i.e., the Mishnah) refers to it just by the way, without specific reason, for food does not defile a vessel, but only liquids defile vessels. But the closing of his lips does not save [from contracting defilement] for an airtight lid does not save/protect from the defilement that is within from defiling others as is taught in the Mishnah above (see Tractate Kelim, Chapter 8, Mishnah 6), and outside from the law , that which is taught in the Tosefta of Tractate Kelim [Bava Kamma, Chapter 6, Halakha 5]: “Everything affords protection from the power of a clay utensil, even a utensil made of dung or a utensil made of stones or a utensil made of dirt – except for man” (see The Tosefta, Jacob Neusner, Volume 2). Therefore, something pure that food and liquids were inside of its mouth and he brought his head into the airspace of the oven which is [ritually] impure, were defiled. But a man cannot save with an airtight lid from the earthenware vessel/utensil.
בידים מסואבות – hands which are second-degree of ritual impurity and which invalidate the heave-offering/Terumah.
הכניס ידו לתוך פיו – to take the pit that is in his mouth or everything.
ר' מאיר מטמא – the cake of ground figs. For since his hands are unclean/repulsive, the spittle was defiled to become first [degree of ritual impurity] because it is liquid, and the spittle defiled the cake of ground figs, for something that is first-degree [of ritual impurity] makes something else second in non-holy things.
ור' יהודה מטהר – he holds that all the while that the spittle did not leave from the mouth, it is not considered liquid.
ור' יוסי מטמא – that he turned over the cake of ground figs from this side to the other side within his mouth, that the spittle was uprooted. And it purifies without turning it over [in his mouth], whenever it is not uprooted, it is not considered liquid. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 11

האשה שנטף חלב מדדיה – and she is [ritually] impure, and the milk that drips from her breasts is like liquid that came in contact with her and became first-degree [of ritual impurity] (See also Tractate Tevul Yom, Chapter 2, Mishnah 1).
שהמשקה מטמא לרצון ושלא ברצון – but even though that the milk that drips from her breasts it was not by her intent/desire, for it is not satisfactory to her, nevertheless, the oven is defiled. But with regard to the fitness of seats we especially require that is satisfactory to him, but not to defile.
היתה גורפתו – that she was sweeping the impure oven out to remove its ashes.
והכה קוץ ויצא ממנה דם – and the blood of the wound is considered liquid.
ונתנה אצבעה תוך פיה – in the manner that those who are burned in their fingers that they place their fingers in their mouths.
נטמא – we have as a reading. Meaning to say, the oven is defiled on account of the spittle and the blood.

Chapter 9



Mishnah 1

מחט או טבעת – an impure/unclean [needle or ring] (from corpse uncleanness).
שנמצאו בנחושתו של תנור (that were found in the copper rim of the oven) – on the floor of the ground that the oven is attached to.
נראין – in the oven.
אבל לא יוצאין – in the airspace of the oven. As for example, that they are absorbed in the thickness of the floor of the ground and appear in the airspace of the oven but do not project/protrude into it.
אם אופה הוא את הבצק – if at the time that he fastens the bread into it, the dough comes in contact with the needle or the ring, it is considered like the airspace of the oven and it defiles it. But if not, it is a pure, for the All-Merciful wrote "תוכו" (Leviticus 11:33 – “And if any of those fall into/תוכו an earthen vessel, everything inside it shall be unclean and – the vessel – itself you shall break), and this is not “inside it”/תוכו. As for example, that they were absorbed there in the floor prior to attaching the oven there, for if they brought them in through the mouth of the oven, when they entered into its airspace, the oven was defiled.
בבצק הבינוני – not that its mixture is soft, that it descended below to the cracks. But not that its mixture was hard, that it does not affixed/attached.
בטפילת התנור (in the plaster of the oven) – it is the plaster of clay/mud that they place around the oven to thicken it so that it can hold/contain its heat.
מוקף צמיד פתיל – and it is placed in the tent of the corpse.
בטמא – if the oven is unclean/impure.
טמאים – the needle and the ring that are found in the plaster of the oven.
ובטהור טהורים – for since the oven is surrounded by an airtight lid and is saved/protected, these also are protected with it, for in regard to the plaster, they are neutralized.
נמצאו במגופת החבית (if they are found in the bung/stopper of the jar) – in the plaster that they regularly make for it as a cover over the mouth of the jar.
מצדיה – of the jar.
טמאים – for the sides of the jar do not need the plaster.
מכנגד פיה – if the needle and the ring are drawn opposite its mouth.
טהורין – provided/as long as that they will be within the plaster of the bung/stopper and not be brought into the airspace of the jar. But even though they appear from its inside, since they don’t enter into its airspace, they are clean/pure.
שוקעים בתוכה ותחתיהן כקליפת השום (if they sink into it and under them is [plaster] about as much as a garlic peel) – if there was between the needle and/or the ring and between the airspace of the jar a thin divider like the garlic peel, that it is found that they protrude into the bung/stopper, but it does not enter into the airspace of the jar at all, the are pure, for they are nullified concerning the bung/stopper. But if they enter within the jar, they are impure/unclean, for the airtight lid does not save/protect in the tent of a corpse other than in an earthenware vessel for food and liquids, things that have no purification in a Mikveh/ritual bath. But on metal vessels, such as a needle and/or a ring, they have purification in a Mikveh, the airtight lid does not protect them, therefore if they enter into the airspace of the jar, the are not nullified regarding the bung/stopper and are not protected/saved by the airtight lid. Such appears in my eyes the explanation of this Mishnah. But my Teachers/Rabbis did not explain it thusly. But their explanation I did not know how to justify/maintain it and therefore I did not write it.

Mishnah 2

ומניקת בתוכה (and a syphon/tube is in it) – like a kind of hollow reed made from metal, that they place one head in the perforation of the jar and he sucks/drains with his mouth from the other head, and all of the liquids that are in the jar go out through this syphon/tube.
החבית והמשקין טהורים והמניקת טמאה – the earthenware jar, but the syphon/tube that is within it is of metal. Therefore, the jar and the liquids that have no purification if the Mikveh, but if it purifies them and they belong to a commoner/uneducated person [who is not careful in the observance of laws of ritual purity], a Haver/member of a group dedicated to the punctilious observance of the commandments should not come to use them, for they are separated from their contact and if it is not, it would be so that all of its food is impure, the Rabbis did not make a decree concerning this, and they are protected/saved by an airtight lid, but a metal syphon/tube that has purification in a Mikveh/ritual bath, if one would purify it, a Haver/member of a group dedicated to the punctilious observance of the commandments would come to use it and he would borrow it from a common/uneducated person [who is not careful in the observance of the laws of ritual purity and immerse it [in a Mikveh] and when its sun had set (i.e., a sunset had passed for this object), he would use it, thinking that there is nothing in it other than because of contact with something impure, but he did not know that it had been in the tent of a corpse and it requires sprinkling [of a mixture of the ashes of the red heifer with waters of purification on the third and seventh days to purify it from the impurity imparted by a corpse, but even though it was in an earthenware vessel that is covered with an airtight lid, the airtight lid of vessels of a commoner/uneducated person [who is not careful in the observance of the laws of ritual purity] save/protect it from the defilement with a Haver, for all of the vessels of a commoner/uneducated person are under the presumption of defilement concerning a Haver, and an impure vessel does not protect/save with an airtight lid, for an airtight lid only protects/saves for a pure earthenware vessel alone. But whereas the Sages came to make a decree that the no earthenware vessel belonging to a common/uneducated person [who is not careful in the observance of the laws of ritual purity] does not protect [even] with an airtight lid, the people of the lands would not accept it from them. Because they would hold that they are expert and preserve their vessels/utensils in purity. Therefore regarding earthenware vessels and food and liquids which do not attain purity in a ritual bath/Mikveh, when they were within an airtight lid of a utensil belonging to a common/uneducated person, they say to them that they are pure and they would use them for they hold their vessels/utensils to be under the presumption of ritual purity, they should not be concerned lest the Haver should borrow from them, for they are, concerning him, in the presumption of being ritually impure and they don’t have purity ever, but a vessel that requires only rinsing in order to be restored to Levitical cleanness where there is a concern that perhaps the Haver will borrow it from them and he will immerse them [in a ritual bath] and use them without sprinkling [of a mixture of the ashes of the red heifer with waters of purification] on the third and seventh days [to purify it from the impurity imparted by a corpse], they made the law equivalent for all and stated that a vessel requiring only rinsing in order to be restored to Levitical cleanness is protected/saved by an airtight lid.
ובית הלל אומרים אף מניקת טהורה – prior to their having heard the reasoning of the School of Shammai they did not know for what reason foods and liquids that are within an airtight lid are pure and metal vessels are impure, but after they heard their reasoning as we have explained, they (i.e., the School of Hillel) retracted to teach according to the words of the School of Shammai.

Mishnah 3

למטה מנחושתו של תנור – the block pavement that they place the oven on, for the oven is made like a kind of large pot that lacks rims, and they prepare for it a block pavement on the ground and place it there, and that block pavement is the ground of the oven.
חי נפל – [it fell while alive] but the oven was not defiled, for if it had fallen when dead, the oven would have been defiled in its airspace when it fell through the mouth of the oven. For this we don’t leave in doubt lest it was there prior that they placed the oven there, because sometimes, the unclean reptile is found moist and it is recognized that it just died and the oven has many days that they placed it there, but now it is impossible to say that the unclean reptile preceded the oven there, for if so, from the heat of the fire, it (i.e., the unclean reptile) would have been burned up and would have come ashes, but we leave in doubt that perhaps it fell while living, for it is the manner of unclean reptiles to make pits in the ground to be hidden/preserved there therefore it is found below the copper bottom or rim of the stove.
שם היו עד שלא בא התנור – prior to their placing it (i.e., the oven) there and it did not see the airspace of the oven.
באפר מקלה (calcined ashes/wood ashes) – in the ashes that are made on account of the burning of the fire. But this is above in the cavity of the oven. For because we find dust that we call ashes, and here it is the ashes of burning that is referred to, because of this, it (i.e., the Mishnah) teaches the wood ashes/calcined ashes which is the language of קלוי באש/roasted in fire (see Leviticus 2:14: “[If you bring a grain offering of first fruits to the LORD, you shall bring new ears] parched with fire, [grits of the fresh grain, as your grain offering of first fruits].”

Mishnah 4

ונפל לאויר התנור טמא – for impure liquids defile a vessel. But even though the liquids are absorbed within the sponge, they are like they are discharged/escaped, because the sponge is made to bring in and to release/expunge [the water] through it.
וכן חתיכה של לפת ושל גמי – they are like a sponge. Because through the reed grass we examine through it the wine and it too is made to bring in and to release/expunge like a sponge. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon [who permits the turnip and the reed grass].

Mishnah 5

חרסים שנשתמש בהן משקין טמאים (potsherds that had been used with unclean liquids) – as for example, a large vessel for the collection of urine (for manufacturing purposes) of a man who has gonorrhea or a woman with a flux that was broken and its potsherds absorbed their urine. But we are speaking about, for example that they rinsed them in water three times in order that there should not remain in them unclean liquid. For if he did not rinse them, the oven is defiled on account of the liquids that are attached to their walls as if they are visible to the eye.
שסוף משקה לצאת – that is to say, it is the manner of liquid to exit through heating of the potsherds, and since that these potsherds were in the oven at the time of heating, the liquids left them and defiled the oven from its airspace.
גפת – the refuse of olives (i.e., peat) after they removed their oils.
חדשה – within twelve months.
ישנה – after twelve months, that all of the liquid that was in them left on their own.

Mishnah 6

והלכו עליהם טמאים – ritually impure people [walked on them].
טהורים – they were not defiled through their treading/walking [on them], since they were not ever called/referred to as defiled.
כוש (reed used as a spindle) – a spindle that a woman spins on it and there is a curved/winding iron tool at its head and its name is צנורא /hook and sometimes the iron tool is sunk within the wood and all it is covered by the wood.
מלמד (ox-goad/handle – in which the iron point was driven in so that nothing could be seen of it) – a long staff and at its head is something similar to a thin nail/pin, and they direct with it the cow to its furrow/ridge, therefore, it is called מלמד בקר/it trains the cattle. But the nail/pin that is at its head is called a goad/the iron point on the staff, like (Ecclesiastes 12:11): “The sayings of the wise are like goads.”
ולבנה שבלעה את הטבעת (the clay brick which swallowed up the ring) – that the ring was kneaded in the plaster of the brick and smelted with it in the furnace/kiln.
נכנסו לאוהל המת – when they are absorbed and hidden within the reed or within the ox-goad or within the brick.
נטמאו – for the tent of a corpse does not protect/save them and similarly from the hand of an earthenware vessel but rather a vessel that has an inside. But this is not similar other than a bone like the size of a barley corn that is wrapped in fibrous substance (i.e., bast of a palm tree).
הסיטן הזב (if the man with gonorrhea shook/shifted – to move it from its place) – even though he did not come in contact with them but that he overbalanced/outweighed them.
נטמאו – for the person with gonorrhea defiles through shaking an object so as to move it from place to place. Even that which is surrounded by an airtight lid defiles through shaking, all the more so this.
נגע בהן ככר של תרומה – when they are absorbed.
טהור – the loaf [is pure]. But even though it is of heave-offering and something of second-degree [of ritual uncleanness] defiles it, and even the iron that is absorbed/swallowed which is the primary source of ritual impurity we don’t say that we make the wood that covers it first [degree of ritual uncleanness] or second [degree of ritual uncleanness] and the loaf will be third [degree of ritual uncleanness] and be defiled, but it defiles the oven, and even though they are absorbed/swallowed, because the oven is defiled through its airspace and even if the defiling object did not come in contact with it, and the defilement that is absorbed from its defilement is as we explained in our chapter above (see Tractate Kelim, Chapter 8, Mishnah 5).

Mishnah 7

סרידה (stuffed matting/ slightly hollow perforated tile used for stoppers of stoves, bags/colander) – like a kind of small kneading trough that the baker uses, and it is stretched and is not susceptible to receive defilement.
שהיא נתונה על פי התנור – and it is crushed in plaster in order to surround it with an airtight lid and the oven will not become defiled in the tent of a corpse.
נסדק מן תנור לסרידה (was cracked from the oven to the colander) – that is, the shaping was cracked.
מלוא פי מרדע שלא נכנס (its measure is the tip of an ox-goad that cannot enter) – the ox-goad is that trains the cattle, and there is in its circumference a handbreadth, and its thickness is three handbreadths, for all that is of one-handbreadth in its thickness, there is in its circumference three handbreadths, and the measure of the crack when the smearing is cracked, according to the Rabbis, its measure is the tip of an ox-goad is equivalent, and even though the incision is not large when the tip of an ox enters, for since the crack is equivalent to the tip of an ox-goad, there isn’t here an airtight lid, but according to Rabbi Yehuda, there always is an airtight lid until the crack will be large enough that the tip of an ox-goad can enter.
נסדקה סרידה עצמה – according to the Rabbis, an enclosure/compartment once the pile of plaster is cracked , but according to Rabbi Yehuda, an enclosure/compartment that when the pile of plaster is cracked, from when the small kneading trough is itself cracked. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 8

שנקב מעינו – the eye of the oven, this is the perforation/incision that one makes in it in order that the smoke can go out, and they seal the eye with plaster and close it up and make a perforation afterwards in the place of the plastering.
נכנס ויוצא דולק – that the perforation is wide and the spindle staff enters and goes out in a wide space.
ניקב מצדו – of the wood.
וכן היה אומר במגופת החבית – and so would Rabbi Shimon say with all of these, that their law is that from the middle one enters, but from the side one does not enter. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.
מלא מיצה שניה של שיפון (is the thickness of the second joint of a stem of oats) – this thickness of the second knot of the reed of oats, that the second is thinner than the first but more thick than the third, that the reed is thick from the bottom and becomes thinner as one ascends. שיפון is VIINEH in the foreign tongue.
לשאר משקין – as for example, oil, honey and milk.
אפילו כל שהן טמאים – even the slightest perforation does not protect with an airtight lid and they are defiled.
שלא נעשו בידי אדם – that they were not perforated with intention, but that it happened on its own.
ניקבו העשוי לאוכלים שיעורו בזיתים – now we are speaking of when the utensil itself was hollowed out/broken through and perforated. And all of these measurements that are above is when the closure/cover was hollowed out in its opening.
שיעורן בזיתים – if it was hollowed out when they remove the olive, it requires plastering/leveling, but less than this, it does not require plastering. And in the Gemara in Tractate Shabbat [96a] it proves that when a large vessel that was perforated when they remove the pomegranate and a small vessel that was hallowed out in its majority, the plastering and closing it up have no effect, and furthermore, it does not protect with an airtight lid since it it no longer has the status of a vessel. But if they plastered it, it becomes like foodstuffs that were kneaded with plaster that the plaster does not protect/save them.
שיעורן במשקין – when one brings in liquids.
העשוי לכך ולכך – for liquids and for foods.
מטילין אותו לחומרו – but if he perforated at the place where the liquids enter, he does not save/protect it with an airtight lid until it is plastered over.

Chapter 10



Mishnah 1

אלו כלים. כלי גללים – of the dung of cattle.
כלי אבנים וכלי אדמה – for all of these they lack defilement whether from the words of the Torah or from the words of the Scribes/סופרים, and therefore they protect/save [from defilement in the airspace of a tent with a corpse] with an airtight lid. But even though that every open vessel (see Numbers 19:15), Scripture is speaking of an earthenware vessel, in a vessel that the defilement precedes its opening that is an earthenware vessel that becomes defiled from its airspace, nevertheless, we include the rest of the utensils that protect/save, as it is written (Numbers 19:15): "וכל כלי פתוח"/”And every open vessel, [with no lid fastened down, shall be impure].”
ועצמות הדג – if he made a vessel/utensil from the bones of creatures that are in the sea, they save/protect. Since they are not susceptible to receive defilement, as it is taught in the Mishnah of [Tractate Kelim] Chapter 17 [Mishnah 13]: “Everything that is in the sea is pure”/כל שבים טהור. And vessels [made] from the bones of fowl are pure, as it is written (Numbers 31:20): “[You shall also purify every cloth, every article of skin,] everything made of goats’ hair/וכל מעשה עזים, [and every object of wood],” excluding fowl.
כלי עץ הטהורים – as for example large vessels that come in a measure that contains forty Seah in liquid measure which is equal to two KOR in dry measure (see Tractate Kelim, Chapter 15, Mishnah 1), that are not susceptible to receive defilement, for we require something similar to a sackcloth that can be carried full and/or empty, and since they are so large, they are not carried full, and they protect/save with an airtight lid.
מפיהן – that the airtight lid is in their mouth/at their opening.
מצדיהן – if they were perforated at their sides and were surrounded with an airtight lid.
ר' אליעזר מטמא – for he holds that something that is turned upside down does not save/protect, and even it was smoothed into an even pile below the ground, as it states (Numbers 19:15): “[with no] lid fastened down,” and with no airtight lid on top of it. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.
על הכל מצילין – all of these utensils that are taught in our Mishnah, they save/protect on everything that is within them, whether there were in them vessels only requiring rinsing in order to be restored to Levitical cleanness or whether earthenware vessels or whether clothes or whether foods or liquids.
חוץ מכלי חרס – that they don’t protect/save other than on foods and liquids and earthenware vessels that are within them, things that have no purification in a Mikveh/ritual bath, and not on metal utensils and clothing, which have purification in a Mikveh. And the reason I explained in the chapter above (see Tractate Kelim, Chapter 9, Mishnah 2). But this Mishnah is after the School of Hillel retracted to teach according to the words of the School of Shammai.

Mishnah 2

במה מקיפים – with what do they stop up the mouth of a vessel or seal up the covering upon the mouth of the vessel that it be considered an airtight lid?
גפסים (gypsum) – is a kind of plaster/lime, but it is more white than plaster and is burned in an oven like the plaster.
חרסית (potter’s clay/clay-ground) – the crushing/pounding of potter’s clay and they knead it in water.
בעץ (tin) – it is making a separation/partition, that which separates. We translate it in Aramaic as that which is tin. And the Aramaic translation in the Jerusalem Talmud is בעצא – tin.
שהוא פתיל ואינו צמיד (because it is a covering [i.e., the neck of the vessel] but it is not airtight [i.e., the lid]) – meaning to say that it is a covering, but it is not attached and glued well to the mouth of the vessel.
לא בדבילה שמינה ולא בבצק שנלוש במי פירות – even though they protect/save for they were not susceptible to receive defilement, nevertheless they don’t stop them up with them, as a decree lest they become susceptible that liquids fall upon them that make them susceptible , for nothing that is impure can protect/save.
ואם הקיף – and water does not come upon them or one of the liquids that make them susceptible [for Levitical uncleanness], they save/protect.

Mishnah 3

המחלחלת (the stopper of a jar/keg which can be moved round, without, however, falling out of itself) – that moves about in different directions and shakes, the language of (Esther 4:4): “the queen was greatly agitated.”
רבי יהודה אומר מצלת – that he considers it an airtight lid, since it does not go out.
וחכמים אומרים אינה מצלת – for since it moves in different directions/shakes , it is not an airtight lid. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
היה בית אצבע (if its finger hold/stall) – of the stopper was sunk and entered into the jug, it is considered that the unclean insect that is within it is as if it is within the jug. And the finger-hold is the place from the stopper that a person places his finger into it.
אוכלים שבתוכה – that are within the finger-hold/stall that sunk and entered into the jar.
טמאים – for the stopper of the jar is like the jar itself.

Mishnah 4

הכדור – in the foreign tongue PALUTA.
הפקעת של גמי (coil of rope made of reed grass) – moist [and] long that they wrap it one with the other and make it round like coils of weaving (in the longitudinal direction/warp). GLUMURSH in the foreign language.
עד שימרח (until he plasters) – from below the ball or of the coil and above, in order that it would cover anything, because it is hollow.
וכן מטלית של בגד (and similarly a patch of cloth/woven stuff) – for all of these are hollow, and all of them do not protect other than when they don’t have the measure to receive defilement.
וקשרה במשיחה (and tied it with a cord) – with a thin thread like they do when they cover the mouth of the skin/leather bottle in a cloth or in a piece of paper when they tie it, and added on to the tie requires also plastering from the sides.

Mishnah 5

חבית שנתקלפה (an earthen jug which is peeled off – crumbled away – the pitch lining standing by itself) – a jug that is lined with pitch from the inside and the earthenware was taken from it from the outside and the pitch stands opposite it from the inside.
קבותים (pots of pickle which are lined with pitch up to the rim – so that the lid does not touch the body of the vessel itself) – cans of earthenware in which they place in them brine/pickle [containing fish-hash] are called קבותים/pots of pickle [lined with pitch up to the rim].
שגפסן (that they paste them [with gypsum to make them airtight]) – that he covers them with a a kind of plaster that they call plaster that they call גפסים/gypsum as is taught in the Mishnah above that they the surround it.
עם השפה – below from the lip of the vessel, that is found that airtight lid from the inside and the lip is revealed from the outside.
ר' יהודה אומר אין מצילין – for he holds that that it is written (Numbers 19:15): “a lid fastened down”/"צמיד פתיל עליו", but not a lid fastened from within. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 6

וסתמוה שמרים הצילוה (and the wine-lees have stopped up) – the anonymous teaching is like the [teaching of] the Sages that there is an airtight lid from the inside.
עד שימרח – around the vine-shoot from the sides. But on the vine-shoot itself, it doesn’t require plastering.
נסר (boards) – it is plain, flat pieces of wood.
סינים – that he placed between each board thin husks of clay.
או בשגמין (or with hinges/joints) – thin husks of joints/hinges (Maimonides says with bamboo). But those shells/peelings he placed between each board in order to attach them.

Mishnah 7

תנור ישן – that was heated in order to bake in it cakes made of spongy dough (i.e., a sort of crackers) that this is its completion of work to be considered a vessel susceptible to receive ritual impurity.
חדש – that was not heated and is not susceptible to receive ritual impurity.
וסרידא על פי הישן (and a colander is over the mouth of the old) – but it is not spread with plaster, and there is no airtight lid here.
ניטל הישן וסרידא נופלת – that it is not adjoined on the mouth of the new oven.
הכל טמא – for the old (i.e., oven) one that the colander is upon is considered a vessel and it does not protect other than with an airtight lid, and behold, there isn’t an airtight lid here. But the new (i.e., oven) one that is not a vessel would interpose in the face of the defilement because of the tent if the colander was adjoined upon it, for all that protects/saves because of a tent formed does not require an airtight lid. But at the time when the colander is not adjoined upon it, there isn’t a tent here, therefore everything is impure.
אם אין בין חדש לסדירא פותח טפח – if it is not one handbreadth high between the covering that is on the old (i.e., oven) one to the mouth of the new oven, the covering that is upon the old one is considered as if it is in the mouth of he news, and the new becomes a tent which protrudes before the defilement and all that is within it is ritually pure (see also Tractate Ohalot, Chapter 3, Mishnah 7 and Chapter 12, Mishnah1).

Mishnah 8

לפסין (tightly covered pot/stew-pot) – like אלפסין/tightly covered pots. Large iron pans – that they cook in them.
ושפתותיהן שוות – that one rim from them is no higher than its neighbor.
בעליונה – this is the inner one for the outer one is underneath it.
היא טמאה – if the unclean reptile/insect is in the upper [saucepan], foods that are in the lower one are clean/pure, for the All-Merciful stated (Leviticus 11:33): “And if any of those falls into an earthen vessel/כל אשר יפול אל תוכו” and not "אל תוך תוכו"/within that which it is into, but the unclean insect/reptile that is in the upper [saucepan] is within that which it is into – of the lower [saucepan]. But if the unclean insect in the lower [saucepan], the foods that are in the upper [saucepan] are not are not made impure, for the All-Merciful stated (Leviticus 11:33): "כל אשר בתוכו/everything inside it [shall be impure and -the vessel -itself you shall break],” but not that which is within it.
היו בכונס משקה ([if] they were [so damaged] that liquids could penetrate) – meaning to say, perforated so that liquids could penetrate that is, in order [to preserve] their ritual purity, for tightly covered pots are made for liquids and food-stuff, and we place upon them for stringency when liquids penetrate.
השרץ בעליונה – that is, the inner [saucepan].
כולן טמאות – for we see the unclean insect as if it is each one [of the pans], since they are perforated where the liquids penetrate.
בתחתונה – which is the outer [saucepan].
היא טמאה וכולן טהורות – for the defilement does not enter through its rims. But however, if there were food and liquids in the inner [saucepan], they were defiled, since the incision was not plastered over as is it is proven above in Chapter 8 [Mishnah 2]. And this is the reason, because he made a perforation in order [to preserve] its ritual purity, it is considered like the airspace of the outer vessel, and food-stuffs and liquids are made ritually impure from the airspace of an earthenware vessel, and neither people nor vessels are defiled from the airspace of earthenware vessels.
השרץ בעליונה – now we are speaking about complete stew-pots.
היא והתחתנה טמאה – since it is like as if it is placed within it since it (i.e., the bottom saucepan) exceeds [the others in height], but the middle one is ritually pure, for a utensil does not become defiled through the airspace of an earthenware vessel.
כל שיש בו משקה טופח טמא (each one in which here is moist liquid is unclean) – the moist liquid that is within the middle vessel is defiled from the airspace of the earthenware vessel, and the liquid returned and defiled the utensils. For the Rabbis decreed on liquids that it would defile a utensil, as a decree because of the liquid of a man with gonorrhea and a woman with a flux . And the same law applies where one is able to inform us of this novel [concept] of moist liquid in the first clause [of the Mishnah] that the unclean insect in the upper and lower [saucepans] exceeds [the others] and there is moist liquid in the middle [pan].

Chapter 11



Mishnah 1

כלי מתכות פשוטיהן טמאים (metal vessels: their flat parts are impure) – for there is no analogy to a sack (see Leviticus 11:32; “And anything on which one of them falls when dead shall be impure: be it any article of wood, or a cloth, or a skin or a sack – any such article that can be put to use shall be dipped in water and it shall remain impure until evening; then it shall be pure; also see Tractate Kelim, Chapter 2, Mishnah 1: “Vessels of wood, and vessels of leather, and vessels of bone and vessels of glass: when they are flat, they are clean, and when they form receptacles, they are [susceptible of becoming] unclean.”).
חזרו לטומאתן הישנה – The Sages made a decree regarding metal vessels that he melted them and made from them new vessels, that they return to their former defilement/uncleanness. This is a decree lest they say that the breaking of these utensils purifies them and their immersion [in a Mikveh] purifies them. Just as their breakage does not require the coming of sunset, for behold, we use them the entire day that they were defiled and he broke them and he returned and made of hem new [vessels], so [also] their being immersed does not require the coming of sunset, and it comes to make the heave offering and Holy Things in vessels that their sunset had not as yet arrived (see Talmud Shabbat 16b – this is the ordinance of Shimon ben Shetach).
לא לכל טומאה אלא לטומאת נפש – Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel holds that the reason that they (i.e., the Rabbis) decreed regarding metal vessels that they return to the former uncleanness is not other than a decree lest the law of the waters of purification be forgotten from the vessels, for there isn’t a person that waits seven days but rather he breaks them immediately and makes from them (i.e., the vessels) anew, therefore, they didn’t decree other than regarding defilement from a corpse alone that requires sprinkling [of a mixture of ashes of the red heifer with special water] on the third and seventh days (see Numbers 19:12: “He shall purify himself with it on the third day and on the seventh day, and then be pure.”). But the Halakha is not according to Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel.

Mishnah 2

שיש לו שם בפני עצמו – that is known and recognized and unique with its name.
טמא – whether it has a receptacle or it doesn’t have a receptacle [it is impure].
הנגר (door-bolt, pin fitting into sockets top and bottom) – an iron peg whose one head one wedges into the ground and the other head in back of the door. Alternatively, it is similar to a pillar that closes and bolts the door from one end to the other.
מנעול – anything that locks and closes the door is called מנעול /a lock. And its example in Scripture is in the Song of Songs (5:5): “על כפות המנעול”/”Upon the handles of the bolt.”
פותה (socket of the door-pin/the hole under the hinge) – it is similar to small cup of iron that they affix in the ground and the hinge of the door surrounds it in order that it is easy to open and to close. And an example of this in Scripture (I Kings 7:50): “and the hinge sockets for the doors on the innermost part of the House”/".והפותות לדלתות הבית הפנימית"
והצינור (door-socket/pivot) – KANALI in the foreign tongue.
שנעשו לקרקע – to use the ground. For everything that is attached to the ground is like the ground and is not susceptible to receive ritual impurity.

Mishnah 3

העשת (wrought metal) –a piece of iron when they remove it from the quarry/mine.
חררה (a ball of iron ore before it is smelted) – after they smelt the iron they make of it a round mold/loaf like a cake.
סובב על גלגל (the iron hoop of a wheel) – the wheel of a wagon of wood, they make around it a foil or other plating material of iron that won’t break on the stony/rugged ground or rocks.
טסין (foil, plate) –(Exodus 39:3): “They hammered out sheets of gold,” which we translate into Aramaic: “And they beat out/hammer foils of gold.”
כני כלים – the bases of utensils. The language of "את כנו" /”and its stand” (Exodus 30:28), which we translate into Aramaic, “and its stand.”
הוגני כלים (basin/אוגני of vessels) – like a necklace/chain that surrounds the rim of the vessels.
אזני כלים – handle that they grab hold of the vessel.
השחלת (metal filings/shavings) – what remains from the vessel after it is made. The language of כמשחל בניתא מחלבא/(One’s death is like) drawing out hair from milk – /in Berakhot 8a and we translate [into Aramaic the passage](Exodus 2:10): “I drew him (Moses) out of the water,” I drew out the lion from the water.
גרודות – that is scraped from the utensil at the time that it is made. The language is stated from Job 2:8): "[ויקח-לו חרש] להתגרר בו [ישב התוך-האפר]."/”[He took a potsherd] to scratch himself [as he sat in ashes].”
טהורים – for we are not concerned in all of these that perhaps they came from an impure vessel and he returned and made from them [another] vessel, they returned to their earlier defilement, for all of these did not appear to be able to receive defilement ever, because they are unfinished vessels [lacking a receptacle], and unfinished metal vessels are not susceptible to receive defilement. And this is taught in the Tosefta (see Tosafot Yom Tov on this entry which referred me to Kelim Bava Metzia 2:17: “And what are the unfinished wooden objects which are unclean? Whatever one is destined to smooth, to scrape, to hollow out or to plane. [If] they lacked a cup, a border, an ear, or a hand, they are unclean. [If] they lacked hollowing, they are clean” (see also Tractate Kelim, Chapter 12, Mishnah 8). And which are those unfinished metal vessels? That which are destined to smooth, to adorn with designs, to scrape/plane, to make a rim by hollowing out the center/rounding off, and to beat with a mallet, that which is missing a chain surrounding the rim of the vessel or a handle is pure.
אף מן הקצוצות (even from the cut metal, strip, wire) – if he cut the vessels in pieces, the vessels that are made from those pieces did not return to their earlier defilement. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri.
גרוטאות – vessels that were broken because of their usage and were made into small pieces after their aging are called גרוטות /fragments of vessels. But they are smaller than shards of vessels/shattered iron.
ומן המסמרות שידוע שנעשו מכלים (and from nails known to have been made from other vessels) – even though we don’t know if they came from pure vessels or from the impure ones.
טמאין – the vessels made from them are impure, for we are concerned that perhaps they came from impure vessels and returned to their former state of impurity.
מן המסמרות – undefined. That we don’t know if they were made from utensils or from the wrought iron.
בית שמאי מטמאין – that they decreed that these are on account of those.
ובית הלל מטהרין – that they didn’t decree.

Mishnah 4

ברזל טמא – that came from shards of vessels.
שבללו – that he mixed/scraped with each other and smelt them and made from both of them a vessel.
ברזל טהור – that came from the wrought iron or from the ball of iron ore, etc.
אם רוב מן הטמא טמא – that it returns to its original impurity.
חלמא (a sort of cement used for making vessels) – plaster that cleaves like the white of an egg.
ומן הגללים – that he combined the plaster with the excrement of cattle and made from them vessels and smelt them in a furnace/kiln. If a majority are from a sort of cement used for making vessels. For utensils of excrement are not susceptible to receive defilement.
קלוסטרא (fastening, lock/bar) – the door-bolt/pin of the door. And it is a peg that they lock the door with as was explained above, it is customary to make at its head like a kind of apple/door-bolt and it is called a גלוסטרא. But if it was made from iron, it is impure, as it returns to its original state of impurity, because it is appropriate to crush the garlic in the mortar.
מצפה טהורה (plated wood with metal) – if it was from pure iron and covered with impure metal, it is pure, for we follow after that which is essential but not after the covering that is of impure metal.
הפין והפורנא (pivots and the skeleton-key /clutch and cross-piece) – the fixed teeth in the lock (i.e., socket and pivot) and the pivot goes into the lock.
שומטה מפתח זה ותולה בחבירו – through dragging alone, for it is carrying from the side. But complete carrying is not [permitted]. But Rabbi Tarfon permits even complete carrying like his guest, but perhaps the Tanna comes to teach us that here, with the impure lock that is taught in the first clause of the Mishnah, is not the opinion of all but rather the dispute between Rabbi Yehoshua and Rabbi Tarfon, for according to Rabbi Yehoshua it is pure, for in order that he does not compare it [to a vessel] with regard to the Sabbath, so here too, he does not compare it [to a vessel] with regard to defilement.

Mishnah 5

עקרב של פרומביא (bit of the halter/bridle) – reins and the bridle and the halter are one thing. And the iron that enters in the mouth of the animal is called the עקרב/bit.
ולחיים (the cheeks) – that are attached to the bit like two embroidered foils, one from here and one from there on the cheeks of the animal that are made for beauty. And they are pure when they are on their own, for they are the decorations of the animal, and the decorations of the animal are not susceptible to receive defilement.

Mishnah 6

פיקה (whorl/spindle knob) – like a small ball that is perforated in the middle that women place at the top of the spindle when they spin with it in order that it becomes heavy.
רבי עקיבא מטמא – for it is a metal vessel that has a designation/name of its own, and it is ritually impure, as it is taught in the Mishnah at the beginning of the chapter (Tractate Kelim, Chapter 11, Mishnah 2).
וחכמים מטהרין – that it doesn’t have a designation/name of its own but rather an epithet, a spindle knob of reed used as a spindle, or a spindle knob of a that same thing that it uses. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
ומצפה (and if it is overlaid) – if it was of wood and it is overlaid with metal, it is ritually impure.
טהורה – that after the essence we follow, but not after the covering/overlaying which is of metal which is ritually impure.
כוש – a spindle that the women spin on.
והמקל (and the staff) – of metal which is rituall impure, for since a person chastises the animal with it, it is considered like a vessel that is made for the use by a person.
סמפוניא (a wind instrument) – a kind of musical instrument, as it is written in Daniel (3:5): "פסנתרין סומפניה [וכל הני זמרא]"/”psaltery, bagpipe, [and all other types of instruments].”
וחליל – even it is a kind of musical instrument, and it is hollowed out and its sound is heard from a [great] distance.
ומצופין אהורים – if it is of wood and is overlaid with ritually impure copper, it is [considered] ritually pure. For we follow after the essence of the vessel which is of wood. And if it has a receptacle, it is not considered, even though it is hollow, since it is not made for the receptacle. ‘
אם יש לה בית קיבול כפנים (if it has a receptacle for the wings [= bags of the bagpipe]) – small thin vessels in the image of wings, which we put into the wind instrument (i.e., bagpipe), that assist in projecting the sound of the music, if they made it within the place of the receptacle of these wings (i.e., the bags of the bagpipe), it is considered a receptacle.
ובין כך ובין כך – whether it is overlaid or whether it is not overlaid, it is ritually impure.

Mishnah 7

קרן עגולה וקרן פשוטה (a round metal horn and a plain, straight horn) – a trumpet from the horns of cattle that are made attached section by section, but rather that one of them is made round and the other is [made] straight. But the connection of the sections of the round metal horns is hard and requires an artisan more than the connection of the sections of the plain, straight horn, and because of this, they (i.e., the Sages) said that a person who returns a round metal horn on the Sabbath is liable for sin-offering, which is not the case with a plain, straight horn.
קרן עגולה טמאה – that it has a receptacle. But the plain, straight horn is ritually pure, for it lacks a receptacle. And the horns have the law of the boney utensils, for their flat, level surfaces are ritually pure like flat wooden implements.
מצופות (overlaid mouthpiece of a musical instrument) – the place where the mouth is placed, and it is the narrow part of it. It is from the language of "עומדים צפופים" /standing crowded together (see Tractate Avot, Chapter 5, Mishnah 5).
טמאה – for we consider it as a metal vessel, and even though it is plain/straight, it is susceptible to receiving ritual impurity.
הקב שלה (the cavity, the lower part of the trumpet/horn) – the wide side that is on it, if it is made of metal.
ר' טרפון מטמא וחכים מטהרים – But the Halakha is according to the Sages.
קני מנורה טהורים – that they lack a name a name of their own, and it is taught in the Mishnah at the beginning of this chapter (see Tractate Kelim, Chapter 11, Mishnah 2), that metal vessels that have a name of its own is ritually impure.
הפרח – the place where the candle sits that is at the top of the candelabrum, is called by the name of פרח/calyx (an ornament in the shape of a flower).
בסיס – the feet of the candelabrum/Menorah that it sits on them (i.e., the base).

Mishnah 8

קסדא – the bronze hat that the men of war place on their heads.
ולחיים – tin foil or other plating material of bronze that they place on their cheeks.
ואם יש בהן בית קיבול מים – that they drink water in them during war.
כידון (light spear/javelin) – a small spear that is in the hands of the officers and the kings.
ניקון (iron point of a javelin) – like a canon. It is the language of (II Samuel 21:16): “[And Ishbi-benob tried to kill David – He was a descendant of the Rapha (a race of ghosts)]; his bronze spear [weighed three hundred shekels and he wore new armor].” And it is the bronze that is within the spear.
מגפיים (metal leggings, greaves) – bronze upper part of the leg that men of war carry [into battle].
תכשיטי נשים – even though they are not made for work but rather for beauty/ornamentation, we derive from Scripture as it is written (Numbers 31:23): “and anything that cannot withstand fire you must pass through water.”
עיר של זהב – like a diadem/tiara that women place on their heads in the shape of Jerusalem.
קטליות (necklace – a chain the links of which are of metal and strung on a linen or woolen thread) – golden threads that they (i.e., the women) place around the neck. But because the woman chokes herself with them in order that she should appear with much flesh, therefore, we call them קטליות (that act as something that kills).
ונזמים – there are those of them that are nose rings and there are those of them that are earrings.
בחוט של פשתן – that the links of which are perforated and they filled from them the thread.
החוליות טמאות – each one of them is considered on its own as a working vessel.
של אבנים – that there were jewels/pearls and stones perforated and they filed from them the thread.
טמא – the thread, since it is of metal.
כמלוא צואר קטנה – encompass the neck of a small girl.

Mishnah 9

כקדרה מלמטה (like a pot-shape from the bottom) – wide from below and it has a receptacle.
וכעדשה מלמעלה – on the top of the earring from the above, it has a globule/kernel of gold or of silver made like a lentil.
ונפרק (dislocated) – the lentil from the pot.
הקדירה טמאה – for it has a receptacle. But not because it is women’s ornaments, for it is not worthy of being an ornament as it is.

צינורא (hook of a detached earring) – the top of the earring that enters into the incision in the ear or the incision of the nose. And because it is made like a fork, it is called a צנורא. The Aramaic translation of מזלגותיו (see Exodus 27:3)/flesh hooks is צנורייתיה/its hooks.
טהורה – because it does not have a name of its own.
העשוי כמין אשכול – an earring made like four or five globules/kernels one on top of another like a kind of cluster.
ונפרק טהור – because each globule/kernel does not have a name of its own and it is not worthy of use from when it became detached.

Chapter 12



Mishnah 1

טבעת אדם – as for example the ring of a finger. But the ring that they established to gird his loins and to and to tie it between his shoulders is ritually pure, and that is a ring of vessels. And the reason is because Scripture did not include anything other than ornaments of a man, but not the ornaments of an animal and vessels.
קורת החצים (beam of arrows) – there are those who interpret the dung heap that the arrows are placed upon. And there are those who interpret the target of the arrow.
ושל אסירין (and that of prisoners) – that they make like a kind of notch in the beam to bring into it the foot of a man [and they place a long piece of wood on top of it] and one is not able to go out/escape. And in the language of Scripture, they call it a סד/stocks (Job 13:27 – though the verse is slightly misquoted by Bartenura who writes: וישם בסד רגלי – while the Biblical text writes): "ותשם בסד רגלי"/”that You put my feet in the stocks [and watch all my ways].” But the beams of arrows and of prisoners that are mentioned here are of metal and not of wood.
קולר (prisoner’s chain/collar around the neck) – that they place on the neck of prisons. [And it closes]. The Aramaic translation of "ויתנהו בסוגר" (Ezekiel 19:9)/”With hooks he was put in a cage, [They carried him off to the king of Babylon and confined him in a fortress],” with the prisoner’s chain/collar around the neck, and because the prisoner’s collar was made that he would carry with him in every place that he goes, it is considered a usable vessel more than the beam of prisoners which does not move with it from its place. Therefore, the prisoner’s collar/chain is ritually impure.
שיש בה בית נעילה – they make for the chain a lock-piece [and place them on the foot of the horses, and close them with a key, and it is considered a vessel.
לכפיתה (for binding, color-band for animals) – chains that they bind with them the money and the cubs/young animals of small dogs. And they are made for the adornment/beauty and they are an ornament of animals and do not ritually defile.
סיטונות (wholesale provision dealers – of wheat) – large merchants who sell in big measure. And they have a chain that they affix at one end of the measure, a Seah or a dry measure of three Kabs/Tarkab, and its second end they place in a ring that is I the door or in the beam and close it with a key in order that the measure not be stolen.
ושל בעלי בתים טהורים – for it is merely made for adornment/beauty and it is an ornament for the vessel.
מפתח אחד – from one link. People don’t make use of a chain in one link, and it is not a vessel.
או שקשר חלזון בראשה – like the image of snail which is a fish in the see that from its blood they dye the Tekhelet [for the ritual fringes of the Tallit]– he ties it by its head which is made of iron, and it is like a vessel.

Mishnah 2

קנה מאזנים של סרוקות (the beam of the balance of wool combers/dealers in hatchelled wool) – those who hatchel wool or flax, and sell it a number of liters/measures of capacity, when they want to weigh, they have a long wooden rod and it is suspended at its head like a ring from above., and hooks of iron are suspended from below in a chain, made like hooks and their heads are bent from above. And there is for that rod another ring that goes over the face of the rod and one is not able to go out from it, and it is like a polished block/bar of iron or of thick and heavy copper suspended in that ring, and when he comes to weigh a bag of wool or of yarn, e inserts the hook in the sack and holds the ring that corresponds to it above and raises it in the air, and the ring that has the bar/polished block of iron is suspended removed from the ring that holds it, and it weighs down on the beam until it comes straight and does not bend to any side more, and because the distance of the ring that contains bar/polished block of iron, he knows the number/accounting of the weight, which has symbols on a rod, until here is one Liter, until there, ten, until there – one hundred, and this is called in the language of Scripture פלס , as it is written (Isaiah 40:12): “And weighed the mountains with a scale [and the hills with a balance],” [and] (Proverbs 16:11): “Honest scales and weights are the LORD’s; [All the weights in the bag are His work].”
ושל בעלי בתים – they don’t regularly place in it hooks which are the hooks that they insert in a sake to raise it, but without hooks, they tie it with a rope and suspend it on a pole. We have the reading אונקליות but we don’t have the reading אונקיות.
אונקלי של כתפין (hooks of porters/carriers) – a long piece of wood like a kind of balancing pole/staff that the porter places on his shoulder and suspends on it two bags – one in front of him and another behind him with two iron hooks that are inserted in the balancing pole/staff on its two sides.
של רוכלין – those who sell spices and women’s perfumes.
טמאה – because it has a receptacle.
שלפניו טמאה – because he uses it.
ושלאחריו טהורה – that he doesn’t use it other than for protection, so that the burden will not fall from behind him, but the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.
דרגש (footstool in front of a high bed/state bed with its footstool) – a small bed of leather and they suspend straps at the rim of the leather around and there are iron hooks along the length of the bed and when they wish to stretch it they intertwine/fasten by means of a loop with those hooks.
נקליטין (poles of the bedstead, connected by a cross-pole over which a net is spread to form a slanting cover/curtain frame) – two pillars/posts that they place in the middle of the walls of the bed, one from its head and the other from its feet, and it is forked/split at their head, and they place a beam from this side to that and spread over it a sheet. But sometimes the pillars are not forked/split, but it is like two hooks that they place at the top of the poles of the bedstead/curtain frame, and these are hooks.
שידה – a small chest.
אקון (reed basket) – a chest that hunters make to hunt fish with.
כל המחובר לטמא – a hook that is attached to a vessel that is susceptible to receive ritual impurity is impure.
לטהור – as for example, a wooden candelabrum which is ritually pure is pure.
אחת אחת בפני עצמה – every hook that is separated from tis vessel.
טהורה – because it doesn’t have a name of its own.

Mishnah 3

טני (metal cover of a box) – it is a metal vessel that holds three Kab. And it is from the language of "ושמת בטנא" (Deuteronomy 26:2): “put it in a basket.” And owners of homes use it when they place there the rubbish of fragments/shards from metal vessels.
רבן גמליאל מטמא – for he holds that thee cover is considered a vessel since it has a receptacle.
וחכמים מטהרין – for they hold that a cover is not considered a vessel. But the Halakha is according to the Sages.
ושל רופאים טמא – according to everyone. This is because doctors place drugs in them.
מגדל – a storehouse of wood. In the foreign language ARMARIO. And in Arabic ALMENSAR.
ושל רופאים טמאה – because they place upon it a compress/rag and suspends on it the scissors.
יתוכין – tongs that they take the vessel with them when he cast/poured on it the silver to empty it into another vessel.
הפריכין (the bars of a grate through which poking is done) – in the Tosefta (see Tosefta Kelim Bava Metzia 2:10) it explains what are the bars of a grate through which the poking is done? That are established as iron tools for crowding olives into the vat. But my teachers did not explain it to me.
עקרב בית הבד(the iron-shod part of the pressbeam) – curved iron that is similar to a scorpion, that is affixed in the beam of the olive press when they press the olives.
אונקלי שבכתלים – iron hooks that are affixed in the walls to suspend vessels on them.
טהורים – for their use is only with the ground.

Mishnah 4

מסמר הגרע (the nail of the bloodletter) – the cutting tool/surgeon’s knife of an artisan who lets blood flow (i.e., old-time, low-class doctors), and he is called a blood letter because he diminishes the blood. But there are those who interpret the nail of blacksmiths for they had a nail affixed on the block, when they remove a piece of iron from the fire and they want to cut from it, they place it on a nail and beat it with a mallet and it is reduced.
אבן השעות (sundial) – a rock/stone that has upon it lines and inscriptions upon them of the names of the hours, and nails are inserted I it and through them, they determine the hours.
מסמר הגרדים (weaver’s nail/pin) – a long nail that the weaver brings into a thin reed and attaches yarn on the reed.
ארון של גרוסות (ark of the grist dealer) – those who make pounded beans in their millstones, they have a kind of wooden ark/chest.
רבי צדוק מטמא – that ark/chest, for it has the law of a vessel upon it.
וחכמים מטהרין – for a wooden vessel is made for pleasure and is not made to be carried. But Rabbi Tzadok holds, sometimes, hey carry it to repair it. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Tzadok.
היתה עגלה – that the ark was placed upon it, of metal.
טמאה – for it is made for usage.

Mishnah 5

שהתקינו – that its head is curved or that he sharpened it in order that he would open and close it.
העשוי לשמירה – as a sign to see if a person enters there or not, for if they don’t find it like he placed it, it is known that a person came there.
עד שיצרפנו (until he smelted/forged it anew) – in fire for this purpose/need. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
מסמר השלחני – a nail that is establish on a pillar that is in front of the moneychanger to set up the shutters of the store, and when they remove the shutters, the nail remains there. But the Rabbis declare it ritually pure because its use is with the ground. And the Halakha is according to the Sages (note: this is already taught in Tractate Eduyot, Chapter 3, Mishnah 8).

Mishnah 6

ותלוי המגרדות (hanger of a strigil) – in bathhouses, they hang metal strigils and those who enter there each take a strigil and rubs with it his feet.
וגולמי כלי מתכות (unfinished metal vessels) – vessels that one needs to rub, to comb and to beat with a mallet, or if he is missing a rim of a vessel or a handle, they are not ritually impure according to the words of the Sages until their work is completed.
וטבלא שנחלקה לשנים – an earthenware tray that has a vertical rims/edges (by which a flat utensil is made into a vessel-like receptacle) and is made into two equal pieces. For not one of them is bigger than its neighbor. In this, Rabban Gamaliel and the Sages dispute. But the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 7

דינר שנפסל – that the kingdom defiled it or the country, or that it was lacking [its appropriate weight].
והתקינו – that he pierced it in order that he could suspend it on the neck or his son or his daughter.
סלע – four Denarim.
והתקינה להיות שוקל בה – silver or gold. For these are a thing that is joined/affixed as for example meat and/or wine, for behold it is taught in a Baraita in the Chapter “He who sells a boat” (Tractate Bava Batra, Chapter 5) [folio 89b]: “They don’t make weights of metal to weigh on them a thing that is attached/affixed.”
עד שני דינרים – which is one Shekel. And it is one-half of a Selah.
פחות מכאן יקוץ – so that people will not be deceived with it that they will think that it is a Shekel. And similarly, if it is more than a Shekel, it should also be cut up so that they don’t error with it and purchase it for a Selah.

Mishnah 8

האולר (a penknife) – like a kind of metal scissors that they prepare with it the writing pen/reed.
והקולמוס – of bronze and iron or of silver.
מטוטלת (plumb-line) – iron and lead that is hanging from a rope that the builder holds in his hand to see that the wall will not come to be curved.
והמשקלות – a liter or a half-liter.
והכירון (iron tool for crowding olives into the vat) – an iron vessel in which they insert the olives in an adze that they stop them in it. – 
והכן והכנא (measuring rod/ruler and measuring table) – the cubit that they draw lines/rule on books/scrolls, and the table that is underneath it. So the Arukh explained.
גולמי כלי עץ (unfinished wooden utensils) – that their work [in forming them] was not completed. As for example that they are missing a rim or a handle, or their base when they sit upon it, or that tone needs to divide them and to compare them, they are called גולמים/unfinished.
חוץ משל אשכרוע (except for the ones made from boxwood/ebony) – We have this reading. And it is a kind of cedar, תאשור which we translate into Aramaic as boxwood/ebony. And unfinished vessels that were made from this wood, are pure, because its husk/skin is thick and hard, but they are not considered vessels until their husks are removed and the work [in creating/forming them] is completed. But the reading of the Tosefta is: חוץ משל פירשע/except for ebony or box wood (see Tosefta Kelim Bava Metzia 2:19), because they are lacking boiling [before they can be used]. And פירשע/ebony or boxwood is a resinous wood. But vessels made from it – their work is not [considered to be] completed other than through boiling, that we bring them into the fire and we remove seething, overboiled matter and furthermore, they are not fearful that perhaps they will split.
גרופית של זית (a vessel made out of a piece of an olive tree) – a branch of an olive is called a גרופית/a vessel made out of a piece of it, like that of a fig which is called a young shoot [of a fig tree]. But if they made a vessel from a piece of an olive tree, it is an unfinished product and it does not become accessible to receive ritual impurity.
עד שישלק – until we bring them into the fire that will remove their seething/overboiled matter. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Chapter 13



Mishnah 1

הסיף והסכין והפגיון – a knife that has two mouths is called a dagger.
מגל יד (an implement combining a knife and saw) – a smooth implement made to break bones and to cut wood.
מגל קציר (sickle/scythe – a implement with indentations) – filled with notches and ridges.
השחור (hair-pinchers or razor) – they are small scissors that one shaves with them. And they are called שחור because they remove the hair, that removing and blackening is one thing, and so we state in the chapter "משילין פירות"/ They let down pieces of produce (Tractate Betzah 35b) that the one who taught “you may let fruit slide down [through an aperture in the roof}/משחילין is not erroneous (see also Tractate Bekhorot, Chapter 6, Mishnah 7). But there are those who interpret השחור is a razor.
והזוג של ספרים – larger scissors than the hair-pincher [or] razor.
שנחלקו – that they are of links and they take them apart from each other. And similarly, the razor has those whose handle is not attached and they remove it.
הסמוך ליד – that it is appropriate for work more, but near the head, he fears lest it wound his hand. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.
מספורת שנחלקה (shears which are divided [into two]) – they are women’s scissors, and when they are divided, each one is fit for cutting.
וחכמים מטהרין – since it was broken. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 2

קוליגריפון (name of a batter’s tool resembling the stylus with one pointed end to pick up the bread called, “the tooth” and one flat and broad end to scrape the ashes out) – a utensil that at its one head is like teeth that we insert in bread or in meat when we remove it from the oven, And with the other head, we scrape out the coals and ashes from the oven.
ניטלה כפה (that has lost is palm – the flat and broad end – is susceptible to uncleanness on account of its tooth) – the wide side that is made like a spoon that that we scrape the ashes out with it.
טמאה – because the second head that has in it teeth that are appropriate for their use.
מכחול (a painting staff the spoon-shaped side of which is broken off) – its one head is pointed/sharp like a kind of thin and pointed side of a double tool to paint the eye with, and the other head is wide to clean the ear with it.
מכתב (stylus/writing tool) – one head is pointed/sharp to write on a notebook of wax and the other head is thick and smooth to erase/rub out the writing that is engraved in the way and to smoothen it, in order that it would appropriate to return and to write once again on it.
זומלסטרא (soup-ladle – with a spoon on one side and a fork on the other) – one head is a spoon, made to receive the filth/smell from the pot and to remove it and the other head is a kind of fork to bring out the meat.
וכן השן של מעדר (the tooth of the mattock/share of the plough) – at its one head they turn over the soil and at the other head the attach the vessel of the plough one with the other.
שיעור כולן – if the one head was removed that it is necessary that there would remain of the second head in order to be the measurement of the handle that it would be appropriate to do the work.

Mishnah 3

חרחור (coulter, inserted into the horizontal pole/מרדע in front of the ploughshare/דרבן ) – a vessel made like a hoe that we dig up the ground, and its iron is more pointed/sharp to sever the roots so that it will not detain the plough.
שינטל רובו – most of the iron or most of the steel-coating of the cutting tools/steel-edge.
מקופו (the eye of the coulter for the insertion of the horizontal pole) – a hole in which they insert the handle/helve like [Talmud Berakhot 55b]: “the hole of the needle.”
טהור – for further it is not appropriate for work since one is not able to bring in a handle.
קרדום (hatchet) – that is pointed/sharp and cuts from its two sides. The one side is wide and carpenters use it and it is called its cutting edge. The Aramaic translation of the strigil is called its cutting edge. But the second side is short and it is called that part of the spade (or shovel) that is used for chopping, because it is on that side that homeowners cut/split wood. And in the Gemara in Tractate Betza [folio 31b] it calls the wide side its broadside of a double tool. But the short side is called the thin and pointed side of the double tool [of the hatchet used for splitting].

Mishnah 4

מגריפה (ladle/shovel) – made to remove the ashes from the double-stove and from the oven, but when its blade was removed, its handle remained which is made in the form of a mallet of blacksmiths. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Meir.
מגירה (saw) – it is a fattened ox (see Psalms 69:32 and many other examples throughout Scripture) in the language of Scripture, SIGA in the foreign tongue.
אחת מבינתיים טהורה – if he removed from one tooth from all that have two teeth, it is impossible to anymore to drag any further, therefore it is is ritually pure and is not appropriate for use.
נשתייר בה – from the complete teeth the measurement of a סיט/the distance between the tip of the thumb and the index finger when held apart in one place.
טמאה – the saw [is ritually impure]. For with that full extent of the distance between the tip of the thumb and the index finger when held apart which is complete is appropriate for dragging. And the measurement of the full extent of the distance between the tip of the thumb and the index finger when held apart, all what is possible for a person to distance between the finger and the forearm.
מעצד (adze)– an iron vessel that the carpenter planes the boards.. DOLDORA in the foreign language.
איזמל – a small razor that one circumcises a baby with. The Aramaic translation of חרבות צורים/flint knives (see Joshua 5:2-3) which is “sharp knives.”
והמפסלת (plane/sculptor’s chisel) – sharp/pointed iron that is fixed within wood and they take it and bring it over the board and smooth it out. It is the [Scriptural] language of (Exodus 34:1): “"פסל לך/”Carve for yourself.”
מקדח (borer – used by carpenters) – a vessel/utensil that they make holes/perforate boards.
שנפגמו (which have been damaged) – that were split/broken apart.
ניטל חיסומן (if their steel-edge is worn off) – in the mouth of the sword and in the mouth of the knife and in the mouth of a hatchet/mattock and in the thin part of the borer they place good and considered iron, ATZALAV in the foreign tongue, and they muzzle their mouths with it in order that it will be sharp/pointed to cut/sever well, and this is called, חיסומן/their steel-edge.
והרוקני (the plane [the wooden body] by itself) – the wood that the sculptor’s chisel/plane is fixed in it is called רוקני. But if the iron was worn off that makes ritually impure and smoothens, and the wood remains alone without iron, it is ritually pure.

Mishnah 5

חרירה (the eye-needle) – like its hole. The hole that one threads/brings the thread through (see also Tractate Shabbat 52b for a similar expression).
עוקצה (whose point is broken off) – the sharp head that they bring into the clothing when they sew. Like the peduncle of a fig (that is attached to the tree when it is cut off).
אם המתינה למתוח (if he made it into a stretching pin) – it is the manner of weavers that take a broken needle and place it into the rim of the cloth in order to stretch its rims.
מחט של סקאים (sack-maker’s needle) – a large needle that they sew with it the sacks that are made from the hair of goats and similar animals from the thick clothing.
שהוא כותב בה – on a tablet of wax.
של מתוח – if he prepared to stretch with it the rim of the cloth in the manner that the weavers do.
בין כך ובין כך טמאה – for it is appropriate for stretching without its point and without its eye [of the needle].
אם מעכבת את התפירה – that he is unable to sew with it because of the rust. But there are those who interpret, all the while that the rust makes a known impression in the cloth, that is the delaying of sewing, and it is ritually pure, and this is implied in the Chapter [Five of Tractate Shabbat], “With what does a beast [go out on the Sabbath – folio 52b].”
צנורא – a curved small fork at its head and it is customary to turn over the meat with it over the coals, but some of them are small that they trim the wicks with them and cleanse/wipe off the candles. But when it is straightened/flattened it is like a needle whose needle-eye or point is removed and it is ritually pure.

Mishnah 6

הפין (bit of a key) – the teeth of a key with which they open the door. And this form of this key is known in the Egyptian kingdom and throughout the land of Israel.
אפילו אחת טמאה – and even though that the teeth on their own without a lock are ritually pure, they (i.e., the Sages) established it that with a lock they are ritually impure , nevertheless the teeth are considered as essential and the lock serves [the teeth].
אלמוג (coral- a species of cedar tree) – KORALI in the foreign language, and it grows in the depth of the sea. And its beginning is soft prior to the air making it float/become thick and they open with it something sealed. And in Scripture, it is עצי אלמוגים (I Kings 10:11): “[Moreover, Hiram’s fleet, which carried gold from Ophir, brought in from Ophir a huge quanity] of almog wood/sandalwood [and precious stones].”
השן שבטס (the key-ward fastened to a thin plate) – it is not similar to the bit of a key of that which opens for the tooth is used on its own, what is not the case with the bit of the key. Therefore, it is ritually impure on its own.

Mishnah 7

הכדומין (a sort of lever with which a pitcher is fished out of the wall/grappling iron) – a big long piece of wood and hooks come out from it here and there and they suspend on those hooks flasks of water in the air in order to cool them off. But Maimonides explained, that is a kind of seed-pot with hooks all around them and on it they raise the utensils that fell into the pit.
האשקלונין – that are made in Ashkelon.
המעבר והמזרה ומגוב (pitchfork – for the first stage of winnowing – passing the grain from one side to the other; winnowing fan; rake – an agricultural implement with many teeth, forming a sort of sieve to separate the grain from the chaff) – utensils that are made to clean the grain from the straw and to transfer the straw from place ot place. The pitchfork/המעבר has teeth and it is similar to the hand of humans, and with it, they transfer the straw from place to place. And the winnowing fan they winnow the wheat in the granary/threshing floor , therefore it is called a מזרה/winnowing fan, and its teeth are greater in umber than the teeth of the pitchfork. And the מגוב/rake has even more teeth than that of the winnowing fan, and with it, they separate/sift the grain after they winnowed it with the winnowing fan.
דבר חדש חידשו סופרים – they were appropriate to be ritually pure, for they are straight/flat wooden vessels, but because of one metal tooth, they were not put down as defiled.
ואין לי מה להשיב – for what reason did they say this [to the critics].

Mishnah 8

מסרק של פשתן – it has multiple teeth like long needles that are inserted in wood, and through it, they comb the flax.
ונשתייר בו שתים טמא – if there did not remain on it anything other than two teeth alone, the comb is ritually impure, for it is still worthy for their work.
אחת אחת בפני עצמו טמאות – each and every tooth on its own that had been removed from the comb is ritually impure, for it is worthy to write with it in a wax tablet.
ושל צמר – a wool comb.
אחת מבינתיים – from every three adjacent [teeth], the middle one was removed, it furthermore is not worthy [for use].
היה החיצונה אחת מהן טהור – the outer tooth of the comb is wide and is not appropriate to comb with it, for it is like the outer [tooth] that is on the head of our com, therefore, if the outer [tooth] is one from the three that remained, the comb is ritualluy pure, for it is not appropriate to comb with it for there are only two teeth here.
ועשאן למלקטת (he makes use of them as pinchers) – to gather the hair in them.
והתקינה לנר – to remove the wick and/or to cleanse the lamp through it.
ולמיתוח (stretching pin) – We have the reading [מיתוח], that is to stretch the rim of he cloth in the manner of the weavers who [insert] a needle in the rim of the cloth in order that they can stretch its rims.

Chapter 14



Mishnah 1

כלי מתכות – that became defective/cracked or broken.
כמה הוא שיעורן – how much will be the measurement of the break/fracture that remains from them and that he can call it that it is doing of the nature of its labor and will be considered as vessels to be [susceptible to be] made impure.
מיחם (usually, a vessel for heating water – but here used for keeping coins in it – see Tosefta Bava Metziah 4:1) – that they warm up water in it. But it is larger than a kettle.
כדי לקבל סלעים – for each Selah is four denarim.
הלבס (a cauldron) – And there those who have the reading הלפס . And it is a larger copper vessel that they boil water in it and place in it small ladles to rinse them in it.
כולן בפרוטות – in all of them they estimate if they have in their crack/broken part enough to receive coins. But the Halakha did not according to Rabbi Eliezer.
המחוסר הגפה טמא (missing the fragment of a vessel in order to be used/trimming) – Rabbi Akiva is speaking of the beginning of the formation of the vessels, and is speaking of, that vessels lacking their coverings are ritually impure, for they are called as having been completed for their usage. [The word] הגפה from the language (Nehemiah 7:3): “let the doors be closed and barred.” And there are many in the Mishnah [where this word appears – specifically in Tractate Avodah Zarah, Chapter 5, Mishnayot 3, 4 and 5]: “[time sufficient] to open [the jar] and stop it up and for the clay to dry.” Even if he corked them, he didn’t acquire them, that is in Tractate Maaser Sheni [Chapter 3, Mishnah 12], it explains, that he covered them with a bung/cork.
ומחוסר לטישה טהור – that it is considered unfinished metal vessels that are not susceptible to receive ritual impurity. [The word] לטישה/hammering, furbishing, is the language of (Genesis 4:22): “who forged all implements of copper and iron.”

Mishnah 2

חזינא (a cane with a metal knob) – it is the practice to make at the top of a staff [something] like a ball of iron and it is called a חזינא.  And all the servants of the king of Egypt today carry in their hands these staffs. And we call them ALDBOM in Arabic. But sometimes when they stick in them nails, in order that they would strike with them a hard and mighty blow.
שלשה סדרים – [three rows] of nails, and then it is considered a vessel. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.
שעשאן לנוי (which one affixed for ornament) – as for example, that he made it with thin, sculpted nails in order to make the staff beautiful.
טהור – it is metal that serves the wood, as it is taught above [Tractate Kelim, Chapter 13, Mishnah 6: “metal that serves the wood] is pure.” But when he made them to beat and/or to strike, this is wood that serves the metal, and it is ritually impure.
מניקת (metal siphon) – like a kind of metal tube and inserted the staff in it.
וכן בדלת – under the door in order that it not eat into the ground.
היתה כלי – that this tube was a vessel on its own, and he attached it to the staff and after that it was attached, it is appropriate to use it as a vessel.
[טמאה – it is susceptible to receive ritual impurity, and it is impure as it was].
מאימתי היא טהרתה – the metal siphon that was defiled, from when does it become pure and leaves its [state of] defilement.
משיחבל (from the moment he batters – the tube, for fitting it into the top of the staff) – from when he ruins it and lessens its form/shape.
משיחבר – from when he attaches it to the door or to a staff and affixes it with nails, that it will no longer be used on the vessel, it has already cancelled the name of a vessel from it, and it has left its [state of] spiritual uncleanness.

Mishnah 3

הקנטר של בנאי (te builder’s pronged tool, bit or auger) – they explained it that it is a iron rod or staff that the builders cut the wall with.
הדקור (the chisel of carpenters) – peg. Like “he would dig with a pronged tool/mattock and covers it up [i.e., the blood] as it is taught in the Mishnah in the first chapter of [Tractate] Betzah [Mishnah 2 – expressed by the School of Shammai].
חרש – carpenter.
יתדות אוהלים – they wedge-in iron pegs in the ground and extend/stretch tents and tie cords with pegs. But this is not usage via the ground, for it is for movables that hey are using it.
ויתדות המשוחות (pegs of land measurers/surveyors) – measurers of the ground for the division for the brothers, they wedge-in pegs in the ground and tie a rope to them and measure.
שלשלת של משוחות טמאה (surveyors’ measuring chains) – since through the measuring of a cord there is perversion/fault. Sometimes that it stretches to this side more than to that, therefore, they regularly make a chain to measure it.
עשויה לעצים – to tie with it a bundle of wood, or to measure wood with it, for there are places where they sell wood with the measurement of as much as cord. But the special chain for this is ritually pure, for it is metal that serves the wood.
ארבעה טפחים – but more than this is not considered a handle.
חמור של נפחים (the smiths’ ass –on which the smith sits while using its head as an anvil) – the wood smithy rides upon is called a חמור. That is how my Rabbis explained it. But in another place I found that it is an iron vessel like the form of a donkey, and the artisan rides upon one end and beats/strikes the other end, and they do this when they want to strike all the large vessels whose rims are tall and very large.
מגרה (saw) – a tool with rough edges or teeth that they plane/saw boards with, that became defiled, and they put its teeth into the hole of the door, it did not leave its state of ritual impurity, for it is impure as it was, until they affix the door with a nail. And this is how it is explained in the Tosefta )Tractate Kelim Bava Metzia 4:10).
עשאה מלמטה למעלה – that he revised it and placed it upside-down in the hole of the door.
טהורה – even though he did not affix it with a nail.
כל הכיסויין טהורין – because the coverings do not have their own name.
חוץ משל מיחם – and all those similar to it, that have a name of their own, and we use them on their own, like the covering of the physician’s medicine box as is taught above in [Tractate Kelim] Chapter 12 [Mishnah 3] “The Ring of the Man” which is ritually impure according to everyone, because it leaves dyes/artist’s materials.

Mishnah 4

העול של מתכת טמא – that flat metal vessels are susceptible to receive ritual impurity.
קטרב (a cross-piece in front of yoked animals or the pin fastening the ropes of the yokes to the poles) – there are two pieces of wood – from this side from the yoke and from that side from the yoke, and they are perforated, and they bring into that perforation a piece of wood which is called a קטרב, and they tie it so that they cattle will not be detached/loosened. But Maimonides explained, that a קטרב is wood hat that is stretched on the two sides of the animals, and the yoke is in the middle.
והכנפיים (wings/side pieces that hold up the straps) – they are two ends of a קטרב. From the language of על כנפי בגדיהם/”on the corners of heir garments”(Numbers 15:38) and they are of iron.
המקבלות את הרצועות – that is to say, if the ends of the קרטב were made to receive the straps, they are ritually impure, for they are considered a vessel. But if they were made for adornment, they are ritually pure, because it is metal that is servicing the wood.
והברזל שתחת צוארי בהמה – they tie iron on the necks of the animals in order that they should not choke with the cord that they tie upon it the קטרב.
הסומך (the pin for attaching the pole to the wagon – or the ring suspended from the yoke and pulled over the front end of the pole) – in the middle of the yoke there is a kind of large ring, and through it enters the head of the plough/strigil and the head of the wagon, and that ring is called a סומך.
מחגר (the rope around the neck of the animal tied to the wagon – or the prin fastening the yoke to the pole to prevent the wagon from vacillating) – a cord that they tie underneath the neck of the ox. And there are those who have the reading והמסגר (enclosure), and it is a peg that they place at the end of the yoke in order that the wagon not deteriorate/be perverted because of the length of the yoke.
תמחויות (the partitions in a wagon for freight or baggage; a cavity in the yoke) – like a kind of small dishes of the yoke and they are called תמחויות.
ענבל (clapper of a bell) – it is the iron that strikes within the body of the bell/clapper.
צנורא (hook, pin) – a hook that they insert in a load that is on the wagon so that it doesn’t fall.
ומסמר המחבר את כולם – that is to say, every nail that is made to attach the sections/links of the wagon one to the other. This excludes the nails that are not made to attach, but are only for adornment. For those do not defile.

Mishnah 5

העול המצופה – [the yoke that is plated] with iron. It is ritually pure, because it is metal that services the wood.
ושפופרות – like a kind of tube of a hollow reed that they customarily make from metal to produce sound.
והאבר – lead that they place on the side of the neck of animals for adornment.
והסובב של גלגל (the iron hoop of a wheel) – the wooden wheel of a wagon that they make surround it with iron so that it doesn’t break on crags and on rocks.
טסין – small boards. Golden plates and we translate it in Aramaic as golden plates.
סנדל בהמה של מתכות טמאין – because they are made to have the fighting men drink from them during war.
שעם (bamboo) – a kind of reed-grass/bulrushes.
הסייף מאימתי מקבל טומאה – we are speaking of a sword that was brought up rust/mold, which is ritually pure, but when is it susceptible to receive ritual defilement?
משישופנו (from when one polished it) – the goldsmith/smelter and those metal artisans who have vessels that are called הצורפים/smelters, goldsmiths in the language of Scripture, and its Aramaic translation is שופינא and they smelt and smooth the vessels that had rust come upon them to remove their rust.
משישחיזנו (from when he whetted it) – with his whetting implement of stone or wood to remove its rust.

Mishnah 6

כיסוי של טני של מתכת (covering of a metal basket) – of house owners, is ritually pure, according to the words of Sages who dispute on that of Rabban Gamaliel above in Chapter 12 [Mishnah 6] (of Tractate Kelim). But if he cleansed it and polished it and made from it a mirror, ר' יהודה מטהר – for he holds that a mirror is not worth to him anything.
וחכמים מטמאין – for a mirror is worth to him something. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 7

כלי מתכות מיטמאין ומהרין שבורים – metal utensils/vessels that were defiled through [contact with] a corpse and were broken, and he returned and made [new] utensils/vessels on that selfsame day, that they returned to their former [status of] ritual impurity, since he sprinkled [on the third and seventh days ashes from the red heifer mixed in water] upon them while they were whole and they became broken, one does not have to wait until the second sprinkling until the seventh [day], but rather even on one day, he sprinkles twice, one prior to breaking [them] and one after breaking [them] and they are ritually pure immediately. For Rabbi Eliezer holds like Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel, who said above in Chapter 11 [Mishnah 1] that they didn’t say that the returned to their former [status of] ritual impurity, but rather, only [those] vessels that were defiled through the uncleanness of the soul alone, and the reason for this decree is because of the fence of the waters of the sin-offering as was explained above, therefore, they were not concerned other than that there would be here two [ritual] sprinklings [of the mixture of the water and ashes of the red heifer]. But however, while they are still broken, [ritual] sprinkling is not effective, for sprinkling is not connected with broken [utensils]. But it also requires that the breaking interrupts between each [ritual] sprinkling, because here is an interruption of days between the sprinkling of the third [day] and the sprinkling of the seventh [day]. But they did not want to be stringent in the return of the former ritual defilement which is according to the Rabbis, and they were lenient so that the sprinkling would be effective even that both sprinklings occurred on one day.
ר' יהושע אומר אין הזאה פחות משלישי ושביעי – for they established it like that of the Torah [legislation]. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehoshua.

Mishnah 8

מפתח של ארכובה (a key with a joint – broken at the joint) – that is scraped/cut at the knee/joint with the leg, that is made like our bent [letter] Nun. And most of the keys that are in the Land of Israel are like this.
רבי יהודה מטמא – But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.
ושל גם – like the Greek [letter] gamma which is like the inverted [letter] Nun.
היו בו חפין (if it had teeth – of the bit) – when it was broken within its junction, if there remained in it teeth of the bit and gaps/holes, the חפין are the teeth, the gaps/holes are what the teeth of the lock enter into, that sometimes the key has teeth and they enter into the gaps of the lock and open up [the door], and sometimes there are holes in the key and he brings those gaps/holes into the teeth of the lock and opens up [the door].
או שפרצו זה לתוך זה (or merged one into the other) – that the teeth were not removed and the gaps/holes were not blocked, but rather that they merged, as for example, when the teeth were curved or the gaps/holes widened and they touched each other.
מסננת של חרדל (mustard mixture in the strainer – see also Tractate Shabbat, Chapter 20, Mishnah 2) – a kind of metal winnow that the mustard is placed in it and it strains and collects the refuse.
מלמטן – in the rim of the strainer from when three holes merged and all three of them became one hole/gap, more than this, it is not appropriate to filter/strain in it.
אפרכס (clepsydra) – a vessel of the millstone that is wide from above and gradually narrows from below, and we place it wheat in it and it issues them bit by bit in the millstone.

Chapter 15



Mishnah 1

כלי עץ – this Mishnah is taught above in Chapter 2 [of Tractate Kelim, Mishnah 1], and it teaches it once again here because of the law of wooden vessels/utensils and leather vessels/utensils that is necessary to teach about them in this chapter.
השידה (chest/strong box) – like an ark/chest.
והתיבה – the chest of the money-changers.
והמגדל (and the tower/turret/cupboard) – a wooden treasure/store house, ARMREEOV in the foreign language and ALMNSAR in Arabic.
כוורת הקש (receptacle made of straw or weeds) – it is considered like a wooden vessel, because it is made from the tails of ears of grain which are hard.
ובור ספינה אלכסנדרית (tank of sweet water in Alexandrian merchantmen) – a large ship that sets sail on the Mediterranean Sea which is called the Alexandrian ship, because one does not set sail on the sea from the land of Israel to Alexandria other than in a large ship. But because the waters are salty, and are not appropriate for drinking, they make a kind of wooden tank on large ships and fill it with sweet water that is appropriate for drinking.
שיש להם שולים – that their bottoms are not sharp from the bottom, but rather wide and sits on the ground.
כורים – sixty Seah.
ביבש – as for example grain and rows of plants in one bed/seeds and produce.
טהורין – and there is an analogy made [based upon being in close proximity in the same verse – see Leviticus 11:32) regarding wooden vessels and leather vessels, to a sack that is carried full or empty, and this is not carried full, because it is too large, for if it were carried full, it would break.
בין מקבלים בין שאינן מקבלים – whether they hold more than forty Seah, whether they don’t hold other than less [than forty Seah].carry
דרדור עגלה (a water tank on wheels) – a round wooden barrel that is made in tablets, like those that they make in the land of Rome. But even though it is large, since it is for a wagon, it is carried full or empty, for this Tanna/teacher (i.e., Rabbi Yehuda) holds that carrying by bulls/oxen is called carrying.
וקסטות המלכים (the provision boxes of kings) – like a kind of wooden turret/chest made into various rooms, and they place in it kinds of foods and drinking vessels. And the kings bring it on the wagon tat they travel in.
ועריבת העבדנים (trough used by tanners) – a wooden trough that the tanners soak in it their skins.
אע"פ שמקבלין טמאים – that is to say, even though it holds forty Seah or more.
טמאין, they are ritually impure. As it explains the reason that they do not carry other than what is within them, when they are full, it is their custom to be carried.
עריבת בעל הבית – according to Rabbi Meir it is ritually impure, for it is considered ritually pure, to state that these are specifically pure, but the rest are ritually impure. According to Rabbi Yehuda, they are ritually pure, for Rabbi Yehuda considers them impure, to say that these specifically are impure, but the rest are ritually pure. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 2

ארובות של נחתומים (long ranging boards used by the bakers) – boards that the bakers arrange the bread upon. And there are books that have the reading עריבות/troughs.
טמאות – because they are made in the shape of a vessel, and even though they are flat wooden vessels, they are ritually impure from the words of the Scribes.
ושל בעלי בתים טהורות – that they don’t have the shape of a vessel.
סרקן (painted/colored them red) – beautify them with red paint, and it is ששר/red paint, vermillion in the language of Scripture, and "משוח בששר"/painted with vermillion (Jeremiah 22:14). In Arabic it is ZANGPOR and in the foreign language it is MINIV.
כרכמן – colored them saffron.
דף של נחתונים (baker’s board) – a metal board, for if it were a wooden board, plain wooden boards are not susceptible to receive ritual impurity. But even though they are impure according to the Rabbis, when it is affixed on the wall, it is ritually pure according to the words of all.
ר' אליעזר מטהר – but the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer.
סרוד (frame) it is סרידה/the coarse web or matting/stuffed matting used for stoppers of stoves as is taught in the Mishnah above (see Tractate Kelim, Chapter 8, Mishnah 3, Chapter 9, Mishnah 7 and Chapter 10, Mishnah 7) in several places, and it is a small trough that the bakers use, as it we translate in Aramaic for "את בגדי השרד" /”the service/plaited vestments”(Exodus 31:10) ית לבושי שימושא/the clothing that is used in service/ministration.
גיפפו (to attach a rim) – he made for him a rim around it. It is the Aramaic translation of ויחבק וגפיף/to embrace/surround.
אם התקינו – for the frame of house-owners.
להיות קורץ עליו – that is to say, to make an incision of the dough on it. It is the language of (Job 33:6): “I too was nipped from clay.”
טמא – for Rabbi Shimon holds because just as the frame of the baker is ritually impure that they nip upon it the dough and cast upon it from that which is nipped to the oven, also of those belonging to house-owners, if they arranged it so that he would be separating upon it the dough and to carry up on it from that which is nipped to the oven, it would be ritually impure. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.

Mishnah 3

ים נפה (receiver of flour at sifting or in the mill) – a woven curtain from the gate to remove the clean fine flour from the bran flour. But because there is surrounding the curtain a crown of a tall board, it is called a ים/a receiver of flour at sifting, like there is dry land surrounding the sea.
של סלתים – they sift the fine flour.
גודלת (sieve-like receptacle of the hair-dresser) – the woman who dresses and ties the women’s hair.
מפני שהבנות – the young women who have their heads dressed they place them within the receiver of flour at sifting or in the mill, to receive what might fall from their heads from the sandy matter in grain and the tangles and scabs of the head formed through uncleanliness. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 4

כל התלויין – that are made for a utensil/vessel to hang upon it. כברת גרנות
טמאין – because they are an attachment to the vessel.
כברת גרנות (large sieve of the threshing floor) – that is made to remove the wheat and to retain the chaff, and they place the sieve on two pieces of wood and sift it, and when they are tired, they put their hands on its hanger and sift, which is what it teaches [in the Mishnah] that they assist at the time of work.
מקל הבלשין (the commissioner’s pointed staff) – that he searches within the vessels to see if there is something appropriate to give from it as a taxes to the king. The Aramaic translation of “and he searches” is ובלש/and he searches, examines [for concealed goods].
שהם מסייעים בשעת מלאכה – they bring their hands in on something hanging when they want to use a vessel, and they support with it to perform their work. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 5

רחת (shovel) – that they winnow the grain and beans with. In Arabic it is ALRAKHA, and in the foreign tongue PALA.
הגרוסות (grist-grinders) – that make pounded beans.
טמאה – because it has a receptacle and is made to be entered into millstone.
ושל אוצרות (and of storerooms) – made to collect in it the wheat which is from the sides from here and there, and to cleanse it when it settles in the storeroom.
ושל גיתית (and of winepresses) – to cast off the shells of grapes and the pomace of grapes outside of the winepress.
לכינוס (for gathering) – from the place of their scattering, but not to receive into it.

Mishnah 6

נבלי השירה – harps that they sing with them. The language of lyre and harp (i.e., secular music).
טמאין – that the lyres and harps are profane and are perforated to the side of the strings in order to produce the sound of the melody. And it is the manner of those of play to leave within them the money that they collect from people who come to listen. And it is carried both full and empty.
נבלי בני לוי – who play on the platform [of the Temple].
טהורין – they are not made to place money in them, and they are not made to receive anything.
כל המשקין טמאין – each one of the seven liquids which are water, wine, oil, honey, milk, blood [and] dew, are susceptible to receive ritual defilement, and make fit the seeds to receive ritual defilement.
ומשקה בית מטבחיא – the water and the blood that are in the slaughterhouse that is in the Temple courtyard.

כל הספרים מטמאין את הידים – because at the outset, they would hide the food of the heave-offering with the Torah scrolls, for they said: “this is holy, and that is holy,” since they saw that these Scrolls came to a loss, that the mice that would be found near the foods would cause loss to them, they (i.e., the Sages) decreed that all Scrolls of all Holy Writings defile the heave-offering through their contact, they decreed further that the hands that touch the Scrolls would be second-level of ritual defilement and would invalidate the heave-offering [for the Kohanim].
מספר העזרה – The Torah scroll that the High Priest reads from in the Women’s Court on Yom Kippur, for one should not be concerned lest they place food-stuffs of heave-offering near it, because of his fear and its importance.
מרכוף (name of a musical instrument made stationary) – a wooden horse that the jesters/scoffers make to ride upon to make fun of.
הבטנון (a sort of bagpipe, cittern fastened around the body; workingman’s pinafore, lute) – a large musical instrument, that the player rests on his stomach. And they call it TZITRA in the foreign language.
הנקטמון – a kind of musical instrument made in the form of a leg of wood that a person makes whose leg was cut/severed.
הארוס (drum) – made like a kind of sieve whose walls are round and they stretch thin leather over its mouth and strike it with a mallet and it produces a clear sound. TAMBOROV in the foreign tongue (i.e., tambourine).
טמא מושב – if a person with gonorrhea or a woman with a flux, a menstruating woman or a woman who gave birth to a child sat upon it, it becomes a primary form of Levitical impurity to ritually defile people [and] to ritually defile clothing. For it is a vessel that is special for sitting.
שהאלית – that is to say those [women] who sing dirges and howl sit upon it, for they would regularly eulogize and sing dirges through the melody of that instrument. And such is the custom today in the countries of the Ishmaelites.
אלית (the female wailer) – it is the language of (Joel 1:8): “Lament – like a maiden girt with sackcloth [for the husband of her youth!]"אלי כבתולה חגרת-שק [על-בעל נעוריה]". But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.
מצודת החולדה טמאה – because it has upon it the form of a vessel, which is not the case regarding the trap of the mouse.

Chapter 16



Mishnah 1

כל כלי עץ. שלחן הכפול – it is made by links/segment of earth cut out in digging a pit and piled up on its border or sections, and after they remove it, they fold the segments or sections one top of the other, and each segment is a vessel on its own.
תמחוי המזנון (a plate with many partitions – each of which, if separated, may be a receptacle) – a very large dish and within it are small dishes, and they place on each of the smaller dishes a course of cooked food. And because there is within it many different kinds, it is called תמחוי המזנון/a plate with many partitions. And in Aramaic translation it is called למינו לזנוהי.
אפיפורין (saddle cloth – protuberance/shape of the human buttock) – the seat of limbs.
המגס (tray, plate, dish) – the Aramaic translation of קערה מגיסתא/a dish from a tray.
קוד הבבלי (wooden Babylonian bowl – fragments of which may be used as a receptacle) – like a kind of wooden dish. And it is the language of the Sages, as it is explained, of a מקדה בזויה/fragment of a degraded vessel used for carrying fire. And all of these vessels, even though they were divided, remained in each section of them the form of a vessel. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.
משישופם בעור הדג (from when he rubs them with fish skin) – to remove the chips that are in them. For prior to this, they are not appropriate for the work, that they wound the skin. But if they are not lacking anything other than the rubbing of glistening and scouring/washing, we hold [see Tractate Hullin 25a]: “unfinished wood vessels that is to be adorned with designs and polished are ritually impure.”
גמר שלא לשוף – he determined in his heart to use them even though he will not polish/rub them any further.
שלשה בתים – when they make a partition by means of net-work/like lattices to the bed with ropes, between each rope it is called a בית/row. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Meir.

Mishnah 2

הסלים של עץ – from when is the completion of their manufacture?
משיחסום (to form the rim of basketwork or of a leather bag) – when a person makes a large vessel or a basket and completes the rim/peels them, this is החסימה/forming of the rim of a basket.
ויקנב (trimmed them – pinched off the projecting pricks) – after he completes the rim, when there remained the chips at the head of the protruding skin-like, scaly envelope of reed, he cuts and lops them off. And this is קניבה/trimming
תמרה – baskets made from dried branches/twigs of palm-trees.
שכן מקיימין – without trimming.
כלכלה (basket – containing chosen fruits-designated for use) – a basket made of bulrushes.

בית הלגינים (case of wickerwork for flasks) – a vessel in which they place flasks for preservation.
בית הכוסות – a vessel that they hide cups In it

Mishnah 3

הקנונין – a reed basket that they select in it pulse. And it is made from the twigs of palm trees.
קלתות (vase-shaped basket/woman’s work basket) – small vessels.
סוגים – large vessels [with partitions].
שני דורים לרוחב שלהן (two wreaths on their width) – after they wove the rims of the vessel, they weave around it circles according to what they want to be the width of the walls in its height, and those round/circular bands/walls are called דורים/wreaths.
וכן של מאזנים – the base on which they place upon it the balance.
דור אחד – from when he lifts up the rim by one circular band.
שתי צפירות (two circuits/circles) – two goings-around.
והערק (a long and flat vessel made of rush/bamboo) – that its rim is not as tall as the rim of the large vessel.
משיעשה צפירה אחת טמא – and the long and flat vessel made of bamboo and its length is greater than its width, the writing of shoe-makers/saddlers is called ערק/long and flat vessel made of bamboo. It is the Aramaic translation of (Genesis 14:23): “[I will not take] so much as a thread or a sandal strap [of what is yours]” until the sandal strap. But because it is a bulrush and shoe, they have the law of a wooden vessel, therefore, we teach them together with wooden vessels.

Mishnah 4

תורמל ([leather] bag) – a large leather pouch/bag that the shepherd places food and all things. And it is similar to it, but not the shepherd with his sack/bag.
קיחותיו (shepherd’s bag) – its rims, like kinds of small ears/handles surrounding the leather bag, and he puts into those handles ropes that they close it with.
סקורטיא (leather coat, apron, table cover) – leather that the tanners wear at the time of their work.
ציציתה (show-fringe) – like a kind of ritual fringes/Tzitzit of a Tallit/prayer shawl. So, we make the threads on its corners to tie attach them. But Maimonides explained, that סקורטיא, is leather that we eat upon, and its show-fringes is in the middle of the leather that we place upon it a foil/plate of metal for adornment, the language of the golden front plate (ציץ הזהב), which is a foil/plate of gold.
טבעותיה – a copper or iron ring that they place on the edge of the leather coat.
קטבליא (leather curtain, spread, cover – hide spread over the bed frame) – leather that they spread over the bed. And they call it NATAH in Arabic. And flat leather vessels are susceptible to receive ritual defilement from the Rabbis alone, like flat wooden utensils, and their law is similar in that they are not susceptible to receive ritual defilement from Torah, but rather from the Rabbis in all of the rest of the defilements except for the uncleanness caused by an unclean person lying o an object and the uncleanness caused by an unclean person’s sitting (i.e., the unclean seat) which ae made uncleanness by lying and uncleanness by sitting from the Torah when they are designated for this.
הכר והכסת – a mattress is smaller than a cushion, and is made to place under their heads. But the cushion [is made to be placed] underneath all of his body.
פחות מחמשה טפחים – they leave over/reserve because of the opening to bring in from there the hackled wool/lint/soft spongy substance to fill the mattress and the cushion.

Mishnah 5

פטיליא (wicker work – a sort of bale for packing dates, figs, etc.) – a basket made from species of trough, and they store in it dried figs.
וחסינה (a wicker work used for purposes of storage) – like a kind of basket made from thorns, and they place plaster/clay upon it.
סוגניות (loosely woven mats made of leaves [for covering up fruit]) – it is the language of סוגה בשושנים/”hedged about with lilies (Song of Songs 7:3). They make a kind of small basket of osier from the leaves and they cover fruits with it, but it is not other than a temporary construction.
נצרים (sprouts, shoots) – from the band made of palm-bark (i.e., wicker).
חותל (a bale which you can add to or take from – without cutting it open/wrapper of reed-matting) – a vessel that we make from the dried branches of the palm, and we place in it moist palm and they ripen in it.
נותן לתוכו ונוטל מתוכו – but if he is not able to remove the date-palms unless he tears it or loosens his dried palm branches, it is pure, for since he tears it or loosens it/unties it, he casts it into the dunghill/trash for it is of temporary use.

Mishnah 6

קסייא (a sort of glove for laborers) – a leather glove.
של זורי גרנות והולכי דרכים ושל עושי פשתן טמאה – for since it is made in order to hold the thing in his hand well so that it not become detached from him, or in order that a thorn not become inserted/stuck in his hand, it is called made for reception, for since the thing that he is holding on to lies on the glove and receives it.
של גרוסות (of grist-makers) – that make pounded beans in the millstone.
מפני הזיעה – to absorb the perspiration in order to cool off his skin that he not perspire. Alternatively, the sweat of his hands will soil the thing that he is holding on to.
טהור – for it is considered temporary usage.

Mishnah 7

מלקוט (the bag – for receiving the excrements of working cattle) – leather that they place in the eyes of the cow in order that it should turn around and thresh.
החסום (muzzle) – like a kind of small net/trap of ropes that muzzle the in it the mouth of the cow in order that it cannot eat.
מדף של דבורים (vessel used for smoking the bees out) – a vessel that they place in it fire and the dung of cattle and they fumigate in order that the swarms of bees from the beehive will flee and he will take the honey. [This is] from the language of (Psalms 1:4): “[they are like the chaff] that wind blows away/אשר-תדפנו רוח.”
והמנפה (and the fan) – a vessel/utensil that they wave on the hot days to bring the wind.
קופסא (the lid of a box) – a kind of small box/chest that the woman places in it her ornaments and places upon it a cover from above.
קמטרא – a chest that they protect clothing in it. We translate in Aramaic [the Biblical phrase] (2 Kings 10:22): “[He said to the man in charge] of the wardrobe, [‘Bring out the vestments for all the worshipers of Baal]” as on the chest protecting the clothing.
והמכבש (the carpenter’s vise – for straightening wood) – [every wood carpenter/artisan] has, according his trade a place that he stores and gathers the wood that is crooked and curved until he straightens it out.
והקמרון (arched lid) – the cover that is upon the chest that is made like a kind of arched compartment.
אנליגין (reading desk/pulpit) – a leather case that they make for a Scroll and they place it inside of it.
בית הנגר (door-bolt socket) – a leather case that the carpenter puts inside of it, which is the peg that they place on the back of the door.
ובית המנעול (lock-socket)– the leather case that they place in it the lock that locks the door.
ובית המזוזה – the metal beam that they place the Mezuzah in.
והאמום של גודלי מצנפות (the block of the cap-makers) – a frame like a kind of head of a person that they prepare for him the priest’s turban.
והמרכוף (name of a musical instrument for he accompaniment of songs) – it is like a kind of wooden horse that the jesters/scoffers play with. But there are those who interpret/explain this, a wooden utensil of cedar that is made for music.
ורביעית של אליית (wailer’s musical instrument) – and “with sistrums and cymbals,”(see II Samuel 6:5) that we translate in the Aramaic: “a sistra and cymbals.”
של אליית – of the female wailers. Like (Joel 1:8): “Lament – like a maiden girt with sackcloth [for the husband of her youth!].”

וסמוכות המטה (supports/pillars of the bed) – beams that support the bed that it would not fall.
טפוס של תפילין (block on which the case of the Tefillin is shaped) – like the frame of the Tefillin.
אמום של עושי סאגוס (model/frame of dressmakers) – frame of those who make chains. That they make them on top of a model/frame, that is [on top of] a block. But Maimonides has the reading, עושי סותות/those who make dresses. It is the language of (Genesis 49:11): “His robe in blood of grapes.” And it is a wooden frame that one sews clothing upon it.
משמשי משמשיו של אדם (all accessory items of essential equipment) – as for example, the coverings of utensils/vessels and the cases of vessels, which are made to serve the utensils that human beings use.
בשעת מלאכה ושלא בשעת מלאכה – at the time when the covering services the vessel to protect what is within it, which is at the time of its service. But when there is nothing inside the vessel, that it doesn’t require a covering, it is called, not at the time of its service. But there are vessels that they always place the covering upon them whether it is full or whether it is empty, even though the covering is not attached to it, since it us generally always upon it. And this general principle of Rabbi Yossi refers to flat wooden vessels that service the vessels, but receptacles defile in every matter. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 8

הפגיון (dagger) – a knife that has wo mouths.
תיק מכוחל (a chest containing a staff used for painting the eye) – the case of a utensil that they paint the eye with it.
ובית הכחול (case for the eye paint) – the vessel that protects the eye-paint that is in it.
מכתב (stylus, writing tool) – a bronze and iron writing pen/reed.
תרונתיק (trident, fork used in writing – probably for leveling the paper) – two cases. And it is one vessel and inside are many divided cases/sheaths, for reeds, knives and scissors. And the doctors of the associations/communities use this vessel a great deal. And in the foreign language, PINAROL.
פגושות (catapult) – wide arrows and they wound those who receive them and we translate it in Aramaic ומחת פגושוהי/and he wounds with a battering projectile.
מצדו טהור – that all that one he brings into it from the side is not considered a case but rather a mere covering.
סמפוניא – a [molten] metal musical instrument.
האלה (wrapping of a lance] – a copper staff and at its top is a circle like a ball, and pegs that are similar to almonds come out from it. In Arabi they call is DVUS.
העשוי לחיפוי – for covering. It is the Aramaic translation of cover/roofing.
טהור – as it is taught in a Baraita, it is possible that I increase the covering of vessels for impurity, as the inference teaches us (Leviticus 11:32): “[And anything on which one of them falls when dead shall be impure: be it any article of wood, or a cloth or a skin, or a sack – ] any such article that can be put to use [shall be dipped in water, and it shall remain impure until evening; then it shall be pure].”

Chapter 17



Mishnah 1

כל כלי בעלי בתים שיעורן ברמונים – if they made an incision while removing a pomegranate, they are ritually pure.
ר' אליעזר אומר במה שהן – all the vessel, their measure is when they are not appropriate to use them in the form the usage that they would initially use them. As for example, vessels that are designated for figs, their measure is when they remove a fig, and those which are designated for olives, their measure is when one removes an olive. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer.
קופות הגננים – baskets that those who own the gardens that they are used to place vegetables in them.
שיעורן במוציא אגודות ירק  and in this, the first Tanna/teacher agrees with Rabbi Eliezer that their measure is not when removing a pomegranate.
בתבן – when removing straw.
גבבא – thin straw mixed in manure. It is the Aramaic translation of (Exodus 5:12): “[Then the people scattered throughout the land of Egypt] to gather stubble for straw,” raking stubble/straw [that is rounded]. But the bathing attendants, that is, the owners of the bathhouses burn it in the bathhouses.
כולן ברמונים – whether they are of those who own homes or those who are gardeners. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehoshua.

Mishnah 2

פקעיות של שתי (measured by ordinary size of warp/longitudinal clews) – the yarn of the warp/longitudinal clews is thinner than that of the latitudinal ones, as is found in [Tractate] Ketubot 64b, in Chapter [Five]"אף על פי" /Even though. And the longitudinal/warp clews are smaller than the latitudinal/woof clews. And the explanation of פקעיות is GLOMARI in the foreign tongue. Alternatively, MATASI in the foreign tongue.
אע"פ שמקבלת של ערב טמאה – this is what he said: But even though it does not receive warp clews, if it receives woof clews, it is ritually unclean. That its measure is the removal of the woof, which is larger than removing the warp. And similarly, even though it holds trays, it is ritually impure, that is to say, even though the incision is large and it doesn’t hold/receive the dishes, if it holds/receives the trays which are larger than the dishes, it is still called worthy of its first usage and is ritually impure.
אע"פ שמקבל את הרעי – even though it (i.e., a night chamber/chamber pot) [which is too defective] does not receive/retain the liquids, if it retains solid excrement, like the chamber pot/night chamber, it is ritually impure. The digestive organ, like the night chamber/chamber pot. A vessel that one eases oneself in and it has excrement and urine in it.
מפני שאין מקיימין אותו – is our reading (“because they do not keep it”). But there are those who have the reading of “because they keep it.” But it refers to the matter of the first Tanna/teacher, who stated, that if it keeps the woof and the trays and the digestive organ is ritually impure, because they keep it and protect it, since it is appropriate for this. But the Halakha is not according to Rabban Gamaliel.

Mishnah 3

שיעורן בככרות של פת – the measure of their breakage through the removal of loaves of bread.
אפיפיירות (frames for hangings – to which reeds were fastened from the bottom upwards – crosswise – for support) – a woven utensil made from reeds or vine-shoots.
שעשה לה קנים מלמטה למעלה – that their borders/rims were opened and they brought in reeds from the bottom to the top to strength the rims at the bottom of the vessel.
גפים (handles) – that they attached as a rim. [It is] the Aramaic translation of ויחבק/and he embraced and throw arms around. Another explanation: arms/handles – that he made for them handles.
אם אינה יכולה לינטל גפים – that when he holds the handles, the vessel does not go up with him (and it is not susceptible to receiving ritual defilement).

Mishnah 4

הרמונים שאמרו – that which is taught at the beginning of our chapter, “All Utensils of householders – their measure [is] with pomegranates” (Chapter 17, Mishnah 1), when there would be three pomegranates fastened with each other, and one came out through the path of an incision, this is the measure of someone removing a pomegranate.
כדי שיטול ויהלך (sufficient in order that one may take and shake) – that through the waving/shaking of taking it and shaking it – the pomegranate speedily leaves through the incision.
ובקופה כדי שיפשיל לאחוריו – that through hanging it behind him, he quickens the [pomegranate’s] leaving.
שאינן יכולים לקבל רמונים – that they are small.
כגון הרובע – a quarter of a Kab.
שיעורן ברובן – since the majority was reduced/lowered, it is ritually pure.
נפרצו (if they were broken through) they were lessened and missing.
נגממו (if they are worn off – i.e., the sides of the vessel after becoming too thin) – at theirat their borders/rims.
שיעורן כמה שהן – if there remains In them to receive/retain any amount, they are ritually impure. But the Halakha is according to Rabbi Shimon.

Mishnah 5

הרמון שאמרו – that a vessel that is perforated with the removal of a pomegranate is ritually pure.
ולמה הוזכרו רמוני בדאן – because we don’t estimate through them, other than through an intermediate-sized pomegranate.
שיהו מקדשים בהם – that if one of the pomegranates of Baddan are Orlah/fruit that grows during the first three years after a tree was planted or of food crops in a vineyard (i.e., it is forbidden to plant or maintain other crops in a vineyard – rendering the entire vineyard forbidden) that is mixed up/combined with one-thousand pomegranates that are permitted, all of them are sanctified/dedicated and forbidden, which is not the case with the pomegranates of other places. 
Baddan is the name of a place.
לשער בו את הכלים (to measure utensils with them) – for he holds that a person who removes a pomegranate of vessels, the pomegranates of Baddan measure them.
אמר ר' יהודה לא הוזכרו רמוני בדאין וכו' – but in regard to sanctification, there is no distinction between the pomegranates of Baddan and the rest of the pomegranates, for all are sanctified. For Rabbi Yehuda holds that everything whose manner is to be counted is sanctified. In the Chapter of the Mixtures (Chapter 8 of Tractate Zevakhim), and at the beginning of the Tractate Betzah (3a).
בדאן וגבע – two places of Cutheans, and the pomegranates and leeks of these places [from Rimon and Hatzir] of the rest of the places. But the Cutheans definitely do not tithe what they sell to others, and they are not anxious regarding [the Biblical verse in Leviticus 19:16): “place a stumbling block before the blind,” for even though for themselves they tithe, therefore, they definitely tithe in every place (previously certainly untithed).
חצירי – leeks are called PURUSH in the foreign tongue, like (Numbers 11:5): “the leeks and the onions.”

Mishnah 6

בביצה שאמרו – regarding the ritual impurity of food, that they do not defile with less than an egg’s bulk.
ונותן לתוך מים – he fills a cup of water, and places into the largest of the large ones and the smallest of the small ones (i.e., eggs), and divides the volume of the water coming out into two parts and the one part is the measurement of an egg.
וכי מי מודיעני – that is to say, that when a person takes the largest of the large ones, perhaps there is one larger than [even] that one. And similarly, the smallest of the small, perhaps thee is something smaller than it.
הכל לפי דעתו של רואה – according to the estimate of his mind, which is the intermediate according to his eyesight. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 7

כגרוגרת שאמרו – for the removal [of foodstuffs] on Shabbat and to the merging of alleyways. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda (see also Tractate Shabbat, Chapter Seven, Mishnah Four and Tractate Eruvin, Chapter 7, Mishnah 8).

Mishnah 8

כזית שאמרו – as for example, like an olive’s bulk from the dead or from the carrion that ritually defiles, and most of the measurements that are in the Torah are like an olive’s bulk.
אגורי (fit for storage, of good quality) – whose oil is stored within it (see Tractate Berakhot 39a).
כשעורה שאמרו – a bone like a barleycorn (see also Tractate Negaim, Chapter Four, Mishnah Six).
כעדשה שאמרו – a creeping thing defiles like that of a lentil, and is sustenance like that of a lentil.
מביאין טומאה – upon a person who carries them.
בעובי המרדע (like the thickness of an ox goad) – that is from the study of cattle, and its thickness is one finger and a third-of a finger in size, which are two fingers in smallness. And the handbreadth is four fingers in size, which are six small fingers. And it is found that its circumference is a handbreadth. For everything that is its width of a handbreadth there is in its circumference three handbreadths, but they (i.e., the Rabbis) decreed on that which has a circumference of a handbreadth, on account of that whose thickness is a handbreadth, that he brings the ritual defilement from the Torah.

Mishnah 9

האמה שאמרו – to the matters of Shabbat and Eruvin and Sukkah and the measurements [of the Temple] and Kilayim/mixed seeds.
באמה בינונית – this cubit is six handbreadths long. For there is a cubit that is five [handbreadths] [that is smaller than it]. And there is larger cubit that is six [handbreadths] and a finger in length. But the cubit that is six [handbreadths] is the medium-sized one.
שתי אמות – two measurements that with them they measure the cubits, and each one of them is a cubit.
בשושן הבירה – one room is built on the eastern gate of the courtyard, and upon it, the capital city of Shushan is painted on it, in order that the fear of the kingdom be upon them.
על של משה – on the cubit that is six handbreadths long.
שהאומנין נוטלים בקטנה – that the treasurer/manager would make a condition with the artisans – such-and-such cubits they would make in the building for the keeping of the Temple in repair, from the cubits of Moses, such and such a costs, and they would return to him by a finger (see Tractate Menahot 98a) the measurement of the longer cubit upon it, in order that they would add from their own on their condition, lest they make it less, and it is found that they come to commit a religious sacrilege that they benefited from that which was dedicated to the Temple. And why two? One for silver and gold, that when they make a condition with those who smelt gold and silver to make a tablet of four or five cubits in the cubit of Moses, they restore to the extra measure of it a half-finger, not for the additional measurement upon it of a finger, since the artistry is costly and they don’t cause them to lose so much.

Mishnah 10

כל האמות היו בינונית – which a cubit that is six handbreadths in length.
חוץ ממזבח הזהב – that was a cubit by a cubit.
והקרן – of the bronze altar. For it had on its four corners four stones of a cubit in height and a cubit by a cubit in thickness. And that cubit was with the cubit that was five [handbreadths in length].
והסובב והיסוד – of the bronze altar. And in the third chapter of [Tractate] Middot, they are explained (see Tractate Middot, Chapter three, Mishnah one).
אמת בנין – such as the wall of the Temple and the altar of the burnt-offering.
אמת כלים – such as the Ark, and the table and the Golden Altar. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Meir.

Mishnah 11

במדה דקה (a smaller measure) – of the wilderness, it is called the smaller measure, because there is the Jerusalem wilderness and the Tzipori/Sepphoris [measurement] (in the Upper Galilee), but the wilderness one is smaller than all of them.
מדות הלח – a Hin (i.e., twelve LOG or 72 egg bulks) and one-half of a Hin.
והיבש – the Issaron (i.e., one-tenth of an Ephah) and the half-Issaron.
באיטלקי in the Italian measurement of Greece, and this is the wilderness one that existed at the time of Moses.
כפי מה שהוא אדם – whether small or large [as in the size of the person].
קומץ המנחה (the handful of the meal-offering) – as it is written (Leviticus 2:2): “[The priest] shall scoop out of it a handful [of its choice flour and oil, as well as all of its frankincense].”
וחפני קטורת (and he takes both hands full of incense) – of Yom Kippur, as it is written (Leviticus 16:12): “and two handfuls of finely ground aromatic incense.”
כמלוא לוגמיו ([and drinks] a mouthful ) – if he drank a mouthful on Yom Kippur, he is liable. And according to the mouthful of the person who drinks we measure/estimate.
כמזון שתי סעודות ולעירוב – the joining of borders is not with less than food for two meals.
מזונו לחול – like the food for two meals of a weekday when he eats a little bit, but not like the food for two meals on Shabbat that he eats more because of the sweetness of his cooking, it is found that for delicacies there is always room.
לשבת אבל לא לחול – for on the contrary, two meals of the Sabbath day are less than two meals of the weekday, because a person eats three meals on Shabbat and he doesn’t increase his eating at each meal.
ואלו ואלו מתכוונים להקל (these and those intend to give the more lenient ruling) – each one of them intendents to lessen the loaf of the Eruv.
משתי ידות לככר משלש לקב ([it should consist] of two-thirds of a loaf [of a size] three to the Kab)-it is enough for an Eruv with two-thirds of loaf of [a size] three loaves to the Kab. It is found that a complete loaf is one-third of a Kab, and its two-thirds of a loaf is a loaf of the Eruv.
מככר בפונדיון – a loaf that is purchased with a Pundiyon/Dupondium (a Roman coin equal to two I ssar/16 Perutot) from the baker when four Seah of what are worth one Sela. And four Seah are twenty-four Kab that each Seah is six Kabim. And the Sela is four Denarim and the Denar is worth six Ma’ah, and he Ma’ah is worth two Pundiyonim, therefore, the loaf that is sold for Pundiyon is one-half of Kab. But because the shopkeeper wishes to make a profit, and the costs of baking and grinding , the loaf will not be sold for a Pundiyon when they are sold four Seah for a Sela, but rather one-quarter of a Kab, and the other one-quarter goes to the profit of the shopkeeper and the expenses of baking and grinding. Therefore, a loaf that is purchased for a Pundiyon is one-quarter of a Kab, which is six eggs, and it is the measurement of two meals, which is the loaf of the Eruv. And this is the Halakha (according to Rabbi Yohanan ben Beroka).

Mishnah 12

מלא תרווד רקב (a ladleful of corpse mold) – see also – Tractate Nazir, Chapter 7, Mishnah 2 (a spoonful of Rakab) – he filled a spoon of sandy-matter of grain from the corpse after all the moistness has been depleted.
מלא תרווד גדול של רופאים (filled a large spoon of the physicians – two handfuls) – which is larger than all the ladles, and its measure is two handfuls.
כגריס הקלקי (like the Cilician split bean) – it is a bean that comes from a place whose name is Kilki, and the beans there are larger than all other beans. And the measure of the place of the Cilician split bean is nine lentils, three-by-three square. And the place of the lentil, is four hairs, and it is found that the place of split bean is thirty-six hairs.
כותבת הגסה (a large date of a certain species) – larger than other date-palms, and its measure is a bit less than that of an egg.
כמוה וכגרעינתה (the like of it together with its kernel of the stone fruit) – that one must crush its open space.
ונודות יין ושמן (and bags of wine and oil) – of leather that were perforated, the measure of their perforation.
כפיקה גדולה (like a large coil or tuft used as a stopper) – that they place in the spindle that women spin with.
ומאור – it is a kind of window from which the light enters into the house.
שלא נעשה בידי אדם – as for example a cavity/hole that water or reptiles make, or that the dirt fell on its own and a perforation was made there. But if he did not think of it for use or for as a source of light, its measure to bring the defilement from the tent of the corpse to the house through the path of the incision.
באגרופו של בן אבטיח – that is a man known among them and Ben Batiach is his name, that he had a large fist.
ושנעשה בידן אדם – or that a person made it to bring in the light.
נירונית (Neronian) – a coin of Nero Caesar.
כמלוא נקב בשעול (the hole in a yoke) – like [the hole made by] the larger carpenters’ borer kept in the Temple cell. And the Italian Pundiyon and the Neronian stone, and the hole in a yoke, all of them is one measurement. But there are places where they knew about one of them, but not the other, Therefore, we teach all of them.

Mishnah 13

כל שבים טהור – all the creatures that are I the sea, if he made vessels from their skin, they do not receive defilement, as it is written (Leviticus 11:32): “[And anything on which one of them falls when dead shall be impure: be it any article of wood,] or a cloth, or a skin, or a sack –[any such article that can be put to use shall be dipped in water, and it shall remain impure until evening, then it shall be pure],” just as cloth is from something that grows from the earth, even too the skin that that which grows in the earth.
חוץ מכלב המים – because all the rest of the creatures of the sea – not one of them flees to the dry land when [hunters] come to hunt them, other than the sea dog alone, therefore, it is included within the skins of the dry land, and if he made a vessel from its skin, it is susceptible to receive defilement. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Akiva.
אפילו חוט אפילו משיחה (even a thread or a cord) – and as long as he connects them for himself on the road that if both of them were from what grows on the land are attached with a connection like this, the one would become defiled when its partner was defiled.

Mishnah 14

יש במה שנברא יום הראשון טומאה – this is what he said: There are things that were created on the First Day [of the Creation of the world], that one who makes vessels from them, they have ritual defilement, such as the land which was created on the first day, and earthenware vessels that are made from it are ritually defiled.
בשני אין בו טומאה – for on it, the firmament was created and it lacks ritual defilement.
בשלישי – [on the third day] trees were created, and wood vessels made from them are susceptible to receive ritual defilement.
ברביעי – the heavenly lights were suspended [in the sky], and they lack ritual defilement.
בחמישי – [on the Fifth day] birds and fish [were created], and if he made vessels from them, they are not susceptible to receive ritual defilement.
חוץ מכנף העוז (except for the wing of the black eagle) – the wing of the black eagle, for the Rabbis decreed ritual defilement with vessels made from her, for one can come to switch it with other vessels.
וביצת הנעמית המצופה (the glazed shell of an ostrich egg) – we translate into Aramaic the בת היענה (see Leviticus 11:16) – the egg of an ostrich is called נעמיתא/an ostrich egg. But the Rabbis decreed ritual defilement on its egg when it is a glazed shell, since without he covering, it also stands, but the rest of the eggs, even with a glazed shell, they did not make a decree, since it is not covered, it doesn’t exist at all.
כל שנברא ביום הששי טמא – beasts and animals and reptiles and mankind [were created on the Sixth day of Creation], if one made vessels from their bones or from their skins, they are susceptible to receive ritual defilement.

Mishnah 15

העושה כלי קבול מכל מקום – and even if he did not make it, it is worthy to receive [ritual defilement] other than something.
משכב ומושב (surface designated for lying and sitting) – for sitting a little bit, as for example, that he was leaning or suspended upon it.
מעור המצה (from an untanned hide) – that it was not pickled nor its hides dressed with flour, nor tanned [with gall-nut].
ומן הנייר – that is made from grasses.
דיש להן מעשה – since they hollowed them out [to shape a vessel].
ואין להם מחשבה (they lack the capacity to effect intention) – if they thought to fashion the dirt as it fashioned on is own, but they didn’t do any work, their intention does not bring them to ritual defilement.

Mishnah 16

קנה המאזנים (the beam of the balance) – The deceivers make it hollowed out and place in the hallowed out section, pure silver, and when they weigh it, it diverts/perverts the beam a bit and the live silver goes to the side of the thing that is being weighted and makes it heavy and overwhelms it.
והמחוק (an instrument for levelling a measure of grain/a strike) – that blots out the measurement when it is heaped up. But if they make it of gourds/cucumbers and similar things like it from the light things which lighten it and are bad for the seller, but if one makes of metal which makes it heavy and bad for the purchaser. But one makes it of olives and nuts and of box-tree/ebony tree. But the deceiver makes the instrument for levelling a measure of grain of olive and of hallowed out nuts, and when he sells it, he brings in metal in order that it would be made heavy, but when he purchases, he removes it.
והאסל (a carrying yoke – in which there is a hidden receptacle for money) – a balancing pole/staff that they carry it on the shoulder. But when there are many workers, after he has received his payment/compensation, he places the compensation in the receptacle that is in the balancing pole/staff, and states to the house owner (i.e., the boss), “You did not give me my compensation,” and when they search him, they don’t give attention to search there [in the carrying pole].
קנה של עני שיש בו בית קבול מים – and he drinks from them, and when they ask him if he tasted anything, he states, “I am fasting today.” But My Rabbis explained, a receptacle for water is a receptacle for liquids, and when he is busy [with his work] with the owner/the boss in the olive press, he steals from the oil there.
מקל שיש לו בית קיבול מזוזה ומרגליות – and they use them as such in order to steal in it the taxes/tolls.
אוי לי אם אומר – perhaps/lest that people learn from me to deceive [others].
אוי לי אם לא אומר – perhaps/lest the deceivers will say that the Sages are not experts in the work of our hands, and through this they will come to deceive even more. And why did he say [these things]? Because it is written (Hosea 14:10): “For the paths of the LORD are smooth; The righteous can walk on them, while sinners stumble on them.”

Mishnah 17

תחתית הצורפים (the goldsmith’s anvil) – those who smelter gold and silver, their bottoms/base are a vessel which is called a frame in which an anvil is set. And it is made to place within it silver and/or gold rubbish/broken ware. But that of a smith is not made to receive, and it is not made explicitly also for sitting.
משחזת (whetting implement of stone or wood) – of wood that they sharpen/whet the knives. And they make for it a receptacle for oil that they smear [the implements] with oil to sharpen them.
פנקס של שעוה – that the storekeeper has and the money changer that he writes upon it with a stylus/engraving tool.
קש – the tails of the ears of grain, and make mats out of them.
ושפופרת הקש – which is hollow and it has a receptacle.
רבי עקיבא מטמא – and even though its receptacle is small, for it is taught in the Mishnah above (see Tractate Kelim, Chapter 17, Mishnah 15), “that a person who makes a receptacle of any sort – it is ritually defiled.” And there is a difference of opinion if it is thing that is standing or not, for there is nothing unclean/defiled other than if it stands on its own. But Rabbi Akiva considers something that is standing, whereas Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri does not consider for himself something that is standing. But the Halakha is according to Rabbi Akiva.
פקועות (bitter-apple/a gourd) – a desert gourd. But there are those who say, small, bitter melons. And their reed is hollow like the tube of straw.
חלף (rush/shoot) – it is a kind of grass and they make from it shoots/rush and mats. And they call it CHALFA in Arabic.
טהורה – from the ritual defilement of a reptile, but not from laying and sitting, for according to the Torah, if it is not made for overhanging boughs or twigs.
קנה שחתכו לקבלה – to place in it powder for painting the eye-lids/stibium.
הככי (pith/a web-like reed pith that has substance) – the white marrow that is withing the reed. But prior to this, the reed does no have susceptibility to receive defilement, and even according to the words of the Scribes.

Chapter 18



Mishnah 1

השידה. נמדדת מבפנים – as it is taught in the Mishnah above (Tractate Kelim, Chapter 15, Mishnah 1), all wooden utensils that hold forty Seah in something moist, which are iron tools for crowding olives into the vat when dry, is ritually pure, that is a cubit by a cubit by a height of three cubits. And here there is a matter of dispute – how does one measure it? According to the School of Shammai, they measure the hollow that is within, and not the thickness of the walls and rims. But according to the School of Hillel, they measure except from the thickness of the legs and the vertical rim/edge (by which a flat vessel is made into a vessel-like receptacle) which he pressed/molded on the rim. And according to Rabi Yossi, hey measure the thickness of the legs of the chest and the vertical rim. But according to Rabbi Shimon, if its legs are not a handbreadth high, they measure even the airspace that is between each leg. But the Halakha is according to the School of Hillel in accordance with the first Tanna/teacher.

Mishnah 2

המוכני (the machine for lifting weights, wheel-work) – it is a wheel, like a sort of wheels of a wagon, and since the chest is carried upon it, it is called a מוכני/wheel-work. It is the language of (Exodus 30:28): “and the laver and its stand.”
בזמן שהיא נשמטת(at the time when it may slipped off) – that a person may remove it from the wheel.
אינה חבור לה (and it is not connected to it) – and it is considered a vessel to itself. But if is a chest with a receptacle, it is a defilement that does not hold forty Seah, and the chest is defiled, but the wheel-work is not defiled, but if it is not a receptacle, it is defilement, and the defilement came in contact with the wheel-work, the wheel-work is ritually impure, because it is not considered from the chest, and it is carried full and empty and there is a receptacle.
ואינה נמדדת עמה – in the accounting of a cubit by a cubit at the height of three cubits, for it is considered like the thickness of the legs, and even according to Rabbi Yossi, it is not measured with it.
ואינה מצלת עמה באוהל המת (and does not offer protection with it in the tent of the corpse) – for if the chest is in the cemetery, it protects over the vessels that are within it, since it supports/strengthens forty Seah. But if vessels protrude from it corresponding [to the height] of the wheel-work from above, the wheel-work does not protect it, for a wheel-work is susceptible to receive defilement and does not interpose before the defilement.
בזמן שבתוכה מעות – it is a vessel of is own accord, and is the base for a prohibited thing, but it is permitted if it is not detached, for after that they were not within the chest which is the essence of the vessel.
קמרון (arched lid) – like a kind of arched compartment over the chest.
נמדד עמה – to complete the forty Seah.
מודדים אותו – when it is fixed.
ראש תור (how is an arched top-piece measured? By drawing an equilateral triangle circumscribing the curve) – a diagonal line. For this arched lid does not correspond to the entire chest, but rather it covers over part of the empty space, and he comes to measure the airspace, we view it as if a chord is placed in the diagonal line from the wall of the chest until the top of the arch, and the empty space that is below it is measured.
אם אינה יכולה לעמוד בפני עצמה – the chest without the arched lid that is fixed in it.
טהורה – even though it does not hold forty Seah. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 3

אע"פ שמקבלים (even though they contain/retain) – that is to say, even though they did not make an incision while taking the legs, and they have a receptacle as at the outset.
טהורין – that since he took one of their legs off, they were no longer regarded as a vessel, because they do not receive/retain in their manner, but rather lean to one side and are like they are broken.
ר' יוסי מטמא – since no incision had been made in them with the removal of one of their legs. But the Halakah is not according to Rabbi Yossi. But Maimonides had a different reading:"ושאינן מקבלים כדרכן ר' יוסי מטמא." (i.e., instead of saying: “even though that they do not contain something according to their usual fashion. Rabbi Yossi declares ritually impure/unclean,” Maimonides’ version of the text states, “they do not contain something according to their usual fashion.”). But it is something for itself, and this is how he understood it. A chest, a box and a turret which do not contain forty Seah when they sit in the prescribed manner, if one tilts them/causes them to lean, they contain forty Seah, Rabbi Yossi declares them unclean/impure since they don’t contain according to their usual fashion, but the Sages state for since that they do contain/retain, nevertheless, they are considered and containing forty Seah and are pure.
נקליטי המטה (poles of the bed) – two pillars, one from about the head of the bed and one at its foot and they place a staff from one to the other and cast a sheet over it and it becomes a tent.
וחמור (a stand on which the bedstead is placed) – under the frame of the bed, they place a hallow piece of wood that he frame is lying upon, and it is called a חמור/a stand.
וחפוי (a covering) – as for example, a covering that cover the bed and its poles.
טהורים – that is metal which serves the wood.
מלבן (frame) – hollow tablets made to be placed under the legs of the bed so that they do not rot from the moistness of the ground, and they are carried with the bed, therefore they are ritually impure, for they are similar to the bed.
ומלבני בני לוי טהורין – because they would regularly go to Jerusalem and would go from city to city and they don’t bring the beds with them but they do bring the frames, therefore, even though they are fixed in the bottoms of the bed, for since they will ultimately be taken up, they are not considered like the bed.

Mishnah 4

מלבן שנתנו על לשונות – wood made like a longue that the bed frame is lying upon.
ר' מאיר ור' יהודה מטמאין – that even this is carried with the bed like the frame.
ר' יוסי ור' שמעון מטהרין – that it is not carried with the bed all that much. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yossi and Rabbi Shimon.
שמלבני בני לוי טהורין – for even though that they are fixed in the legs of the bed, since that ultimately they are taken off, they are ritually pure, these tongues are also sometimes removed from the frames of the bed, and are not considered like the bed.

Mishnah 5

מטה שהיתה טמאה מדרס (a bed that was ritually impure through treading) – that a person with gonorrhea who lay on it or was suspending from it or leaning on it.
קצרה (the short board, the board at the head and at the foot of the bed) – those pieces of wood that are at the width of the bed to the side from its head or from its feet.
ארוכה – those pieces of wood that are at the length of the bed from the right or from the left, and they are called ארוכות המטה/long board, long side of the bedstead.
טהורה – for they further are not proper and they are like shards of vessels that are ritually pure.
ר' נחמיה מטמא – But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Nehemiah.
גדר – he severed and broke off (i.e., cut) like cut down a tree.
שתי לשונות לוכסן (two tongues diagonally – two pieces of wood that are made like a tongue, that the frames of the bed are placed upon them, he cuts them with crosswise/diagonally, one that is in the southeastern corner and one that is in the northwest corner, are ritually pure, for they are not appropriate. And similarly if he cut two legs a handbreadth by a handbreadth diagonally, from the leg that is in the southeast corner he cut a handbreadth, and from the leg in the northwest corner he cut a handbreadth, it is like it is broken.
או מיעטה מטפח (or he diminished it by a handbreadth) – that he cut its legs and there is no handbreadth from the bed to the ground, it is not considered [of value, and hence is pure].

Mishnah 6

ותיקנה טמאה מדרס – it still stands in its defilement/impurity, since the second side exists.
טהורה מן המדרס – even though the first was repaired prior to the second side being broken. Nevertheless, it is ritually pure/clean, for new faces had appeared here, for after it went down through the defilement of treading/Midras, these faces renewed themselves and this is not the first, for after it had been ruined enough in order that it be voided.
אבל טמאה מגע מדרס – because the long side of the bedstead was first when it was broken and fixed and he brought a new long side in place of the broken one and attached it below, it became defiled through contact via treading/Midras, for it (the person with gonorrhea) had touched the bed who was impure through treading, and when the second [board] was broken, that it sprouting from it the defilement of treading, there remained in it the defilement of contact, for the entire bed is connected to the first board when it was fixed.
עד שנשברה שניה טהורה ([if one did not have the time to repair the first] before the second was broken – it – the bed is pure) – for since the two long bedsteads were broken, they are no longer fit for use. And it is not similar to where it was taken apart and all of it exists, for there, it will be eventually be put back together with its fellow parts.

Mishnah 7

כרע – [leg] of a bed which was impure with defilement by treading. That the person with gonorrhea tread on the bed leg when he was on its own and it was not connected to the med.
כולה טמאה מדרס – for attachment was done to it, as if it is all one body.
היתה טמאה טומאת שבעה – such as, for example, that it came in contact with a corpse.
טומאת ערב – that it came in contact with someone who was defiled through contact with a corpse.
והמטה טהורה – that it (8.e. the bed) was not defiled through contact of the leg [of the bed]. For it was first [degree of ritual impurity], and a person nor vessels are susceptible to defilement other than from a primary source of defilement.
מעדר (mattock, share of the plough/pitchfork for the first stage of winnowing – passing the grain from one side to the other) – a wooden vessel/utensil that has teeth that turn over the straw, and its teeth are metal. And because the teeth are of joints inserted therein, its law is like that of a bed which is of links. And this and similar to it, it is referring to the defilement for seven days, for the share of the plough does not defile through treading.

Mishnah 8

תפלה – it is speaking of the Tefillin of the head that came in contact with a corpse, for it has four compartments, and every compartment is called a קציצה/capsule, compartment.
התיר קציצה (he untied/loosened the compartment) – he removed one compartment and brought another in its place.
טמאה טמא מת – that their connection/attachment makes them one body.
וכן שניה וכן שלישית – all the time that the fourth [compartment] exists. On account that it is attached to the fourth [compartment]. But when he removed also the fourth and exchanged it for another, the defilement from [contact with] the dead flies out from it, and there remains in the three compartments/capsules [of the Tefillin of the head] the defilement from contact with something which had been defiled through contact with a corpse, for it came in contact with the fourth [capsule/compartment] when they attached them and it still exists. But the Fourth [capsule/compartment], when it was switched out, there is no defilement in its body at all, for if it was because it come in contact with the three [other] compartments, contact [uncleanness] does not cause contact uncleanness, since the first three [compartments] are new, that came in contact with someone who had been in contact with a corpse, the new forth [compartment] does not receive defilement from them, and there is no defilement in the new fourth [compartment] other than on account that is attached to the three which are defiled through contact. Therefore, when he return and switched out the three [compartments] a second time, all of them are pure, and there is no contact [with defilement] in them.

Mishnah 9

טהורה – and even where there is a longboard/bedside and two legs, but it is not their intention to restore, and where they benefit, is specifically in a place that everything belongs to one person.
מקבלת טומאה מכאן ולהבא – but not retroactively, for when they (i.e., the brothers or joint owners) divided it half, the defilement flew off from it.
מיטמאה חבילה (becomes unclean only when combined) – if the leg [of the bed] was removed from the longboard/beside and stands with the short board/the board at the head and at the foot of the bed, it is combined/connected, but if the leg is defiled, the longboard is defiled. For just as when it is complete/whole, if one of its pieces is defiled, all of it is defiled, so also when they remove the leg from the longboard and it stands with the shortboard, and when the leg is defiled, the shortboard is defiled as well.
ומטהרת חבילה – and if he immersed the leg [of the bed] in a Mikveh/ritual bath with the shortboard of the bed, the shortboard does not interpose upon it, for just as it does not interpose upon it when we immerse it (i.e., the bed) when it is whole/complete.
וחכמים אומרים מטמא איברים – and not when combined, that if the leg [of the bed] had become defiled, it [alone] is defiled and not the shortboard [of the bed], for it is not combined like something whole/complete.
ומטהרת אברים – when he comes to immerse it [in a Mikveh/ritual bath], the leg is by itself, and not the combination with the short board [of the bed] for the short board interposes upon it. That which is not connected is like a whole [bed], for when one immerses a whole bed [in the Mikveh] it is ritually pure even though he did not break it apart, but now that it separated the leg from the long board, it is not combined with the shortboard, and it is necessary to immerse it [in a Mikveh] on its own. The Halakha is according to the Sages. So it appeared that the explanation of this Mishnah is from the Tosefta (Tractate Kelim Bava Metzia, Chapter 8, Halakha 8), such is how my teachers/Rabbis explained it.

Chapter 19



Mishnah 1

המפרק את המטה להטבילה – even though it had become defiled while it was whole/complete, sometimes, on occasion when it is large and is unable to enter the Mikveh [whole], and one needs to take it apart.
והנוגע בחבלים – this is our reading. Meaning to say, whether one takes it (i.e., the bed) apart or one touches the ropes, one is ritually pure. But we are speaking about a bed that was defiled through contact with a corpse or though a person with gonorrhea lying on it, and as for example, that is no on the bed a long board and two legs, even though, it is necessary to immerse it [in a Mikveh], in order that it not return to its defilement when it is connected. But the person who touches the ropes is ritually pure, for since he took it (i.e., the bed) apart, the ropes are no longer connected.
החבל מאימתי חיבור – at the outset when a person makes a partition by means of net-work/makes a zig-zag completely and girds it with three [rows of] meshes with it, and the rope still remains very long. If the bed became defiled, the rope is defiled. And a person who touches the rope, is impure. For it is all connected/attached, for ultimately, one is making a partition by means of net-work.
מן הקשר ולפנים – if he tied another rope to this rope that he is making a lattice-work with, the other rope is not attached from the knot and outward.
נימי הקשר (fringes of a knot) – when they tie in a knot two ropes with one another, they leave a bit from the heads of the ropes from this side and from that side they exit beyond the knot, and they are called the “fringes of a knot.”
הנוגע בצורכו – for since there is a need to tie them in a knot, that if the knot at the actual top of the of the rope was an extra knot, it is found that these fringes establish the knot an they are like the knot itself.
רבי יהודה אומר שלש אצבעות – is an attachment/connection, and he requires the knot, but not more.

Mishnah 2

החבל היוצא מן המטה – what remains from it [hangs over the bed] after he completed the plaiting.
עד חמשה טפחים טהור – for it is not appropriate for the needs of the bed, and it is not considered a handle.
מחמשה ועד עשרה טמא – for it is appropriate to knot with it the Passover sacrifices. For they would regularly tie up the Passover sacrifices with a rope that is on the leg of the bed in order that it be ready for them. And it was appropriate also to let it down [over the side of the bed] , that is to say, to lower it from the attic to the roof. Alternatively, to lower it to the ritual bath to immerse it when it became defiled.
מעשרה ולחוץ טהור – for what there is on a rope more than ten [handbreadths] he does not use at all for the purposes of the bed.

Mishnah 3

המיזרן (girth, hanging from the bed – a strap of cloth which is wound over the bed to keep the covering in position) – a kind of girdle or woven belt that they tie around the bed in order to attach its joints/links. But sometimes it is too large and it drags and extends beyond the bed.
היוצא מן המטה – and the bed is impure from treading.
כל שהוא – even if it extends outward a few cubits beyond the bed, everything is impure.
ר' יוסי אומר עד עשרה טפחים – it is impure through the defilement of the bed. From ten [handbreadths] and beyond it is pure. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yossi.
שיירי מיזרן – a girth that was worn out or torn, whatever that will remain from it, and it will be ritually impure.
שבעה טפחים – for less than this, it is not appropriate for anything and it is not considered a vessel.
חבק (a band with which the saddle or housing of an animal is fastened around its belly) – there are those who explain/interpret , a thick and hard piece of cloth that they place on the donkey when it comes from the road and it is sweating, , in order that it not catch cold when they remove the saddle from it. And there are those who explain, that they place it on the burden of the donkey in order that it not be lost if rains fell upon it.

Mishnah 4

נישא הזב על המטה ועל המיזרן (if the person with gonorrhea was carried on the bed and on the girth) – not exactly carried on the bed girth, but rather that the person with gonorrhea was carried on the bed that the girth is tied around it and extends from it.
מטמא שנים ופוסל אחד דברי ר' מאיר – Rabbi Meir according to his reason that he stated above (see previous Mishnah, Tractate Kelim, Chapter 19, Mishnah 3), that even if the bed birth extends from the bed a little bit, and even more, it is attached/connected to the bed, and the two are made impure and renders [the heave-offering] unit, like the bed itself. For all that the person with gonorrhea is carried upon and acts of lying and sitting are performed by the person with gonorrhea, which is a primary category of ritual impurity, and the person who touches is first degree [level of ritual impurity], and something that is first-degree [level of ritual impurity] makes something else second [degree level of ritual impurity] , and something that is second degree [level of ritual impurity] makes something third [degree level of ritual impurity] to invalidate the heave-offering/priest’s due alone, but not to make it impure. And this is where he defiles two degrees, which are first [degree of ritual impurity] and second [degree of ritual impurity] and he invalidates one and it is third [degree level of impurity] and it is invalid for heave offering alone. And the bed girth all the while that it was not removed from the bed is considered like a primary source of ritual impurity, and it defiles two and invalidates one, but after he removes it, it is nothing other than a derivative of the defilement which defiles one and invalidates one, according to the law of a person who touches that which the person with gonorrhea lies upon.
ר' יוסי אומר = Rabbi Yossi according to his reasoning, who stated above (in Tractate Kelim, Chapter 19, Mishnah 3) ten handbreadths and not further. Therefore, that which is within ten [handbreadths] is considered a connection/attachment to lying [by a person with gonorrhea], and it defiles two and invalidates one all the while that he did not remove it. But what is beyond ten [handbreadths] is not considered an attachment to the lying [by a person with gonorrhea], and its law is as it was explained, that it defiles one and invalidates one.
נישא על המזרן מעשרה ולפנים טמאה – this is our reading (i.e., טמאה). But we don’t have the reading of טמא/impure. And this is an explanation: if the person with gonorrhea was carried on the bed girth that extends from the bed, if he was carried from ten [handbreadths] and within to the side of the bed, the bed is impure through treading/Midras, for since all ten [handbreadths] are considered an attachment to the bed, but from ten [handbreadths] and beyond it is not an attachment/connection to the bed, and the bed is pure and its not defiled [with the defilement] of the bed girth. Such it appears in my eyes an explanation/commentary on this Mishnah. And the reading of my Teachers/Rabbis who have the [textual] reading "טמא וטהור" /impure and pure and their explanation, but it was not acceptable to me. And similarly the words of Maimonides who wrote in his commentary to this Mishnah did not enter my eyes are all. And I investigated afterwards in his work (i.e., the Mishneh Torah) in the Laws of Kelim/Vessels, Chapter 21 [Halakha 9] – it appears to me that there he retracted and explained this Mishnah as I explained it here.

Mishnah 5

כולה טמאה מדרס – ;and all the time that he did not remove the bed girth from the bed, it is like the bed itself, as I have explained.
והמזרן מגע מדרס – and it defiles one and invalids one, like the law of all who touch/come in contact with a primary category of ritual impurity.

Mishnah 6

ונגע בהן המת – when they are wrapped together.
טמאים טומאת שבעה – in this, Rabbi Yossi does not dispute. For especially in the defilement of treading/Midras it is stated, up until ten handbreadths it is impure; from ten [handbreadths] and beyond it is ritually pure. But concerning the rest of the defilements, even one hundred cubits all together is an attachment, such as the bed girth which is wrapped on a bed and the bed enters into the tent of a corpse or that it touched a reptile, and similarly if a piece from the bed girth enters into the tent of a corpse or touched a reptile, if the bed is defiled, the bed girth is defiled; if the bed girth is defiled, the bed is defiled, and even if the bed birth extends from the bed for one-hundred cubits.
פירשו טמאים טומאת שבעה – and they are not like vessels that were broken, since each one of them is a vessel in its own right. Even though that regarding the matter of acquiring defilement they are considered like one vessel, and when defilement touched one of them, the other was defiled [as well].
שניטלו שתי ארוכות – its [two long pieces], and they did not beak. And they are appropriate to be restored to their places, therefore, the bed was not purified from its defilement with the taking of the long pieces.
נשתברו חדשות טמאה – for since the old ones and the sockets/perforations were not changed, and when he removed each part of the bedstead and all of its bedsteads are whole. But when the old ones were broken, they are pure, because the old ones were on the bed when it became defiled, and when they were broken, the bed is a broken vessel, for it is not appropriate without the long pieces.

Mishnah 7

תיבה שנפחתה מלמעלן )a box which was damaged from above) – its covering.
טמאה אמא מת – because its rim/bottom still exists, it is worthy for use. And specifically, defilement through contact with the dead, but not defilement by treading, for it is not appropriate for sitting.
נפחתה מלמטן – at its rims/bottoms, its receptacle was annulled and it is completely pure.
מגורות שלה (its drawers [in a chest]) – the treasures/storehouse within, that is the rooms that are in it that were not damaged with it, are impure.

Mishnah 8

התורמל (bag – the inside pocket of which has become defective) -a large leather pocket that the shepherd puts his belongings into, and within the bag, there are small pockets like the drawers in a box.
חמת (bottle – of a skin of a he-goat/wether) – leather skin or bottle.
שהביצים שלה מקבלות עמה when they flay/shed the skin of the male rams and wethers/he-goats, there remains the leather that is in place of the genitals/testicles, like a small pocket, but if they were damaged, they are ritually pure, for their receptacle has been nullified.

Mishnah 9

שפתחה מצדה (that was damaged from its side) – When it was damaged from above, it was not impure by treading, for if he sat upon it and comes to use it, they say to him: “Stand and let us do our work.” But when it was damaged from the side, it is possible to use it even though he sits upon it.
בזמן שאינה גבוהה עשרה טפחים – when it is ten [handbreadths] high, it is not appropriate for sitting all that much.
או שאין לה לזבז (or when it does not have a vertical rim/edge – buy which a flat vessel is made into a vessel-like receptacle) – when it has a vertical rim which damages the person who sits upon it.
נפתחה מלמטן – at its rim/bottom. It is not appropriate for use, but is appropriate for sitting.
מפני שבטל העקר (because the primary purpose was annulled) – the primary purpose of the box is that its made to support its rim what one places within it, and through that, it is called a vessel. But because its rim was damaged and it was nullified, also its walls from above are nullified and it no longer receives any form of defilement. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 10

משפלת (a wicker basket carried on a pole over the shoulder) – a large basket that they carry the manure and the trash.
שנפחתה מלקבל רמונים – for this is its measure to become purified, when an incision is made when removing pomegranates.
ר' מאיר מטמא – even though it is more pure than all of the other defilement things, it is impure from treading, which is appropriate for sitting.
וחכמים מטהרין – And the Halakha is according to the Sages [for when the primary purpose is annulled, the secondary purpose is annulled].

Chapter 20



Mishnah 1

הכרים (mattresses) – made to be filled with wool or feathers/down, a a person places them underneath his head.
והכסתות (cushions) – they ae like mattresses, but they are long and large, and the entire body of a person lies on them.
מרצופין (packing bags, leather bags, sacks – adapted for ship-loads) – like a species of large leather sacks that they place in them goods that they take on ships.
הרי אלו טמאים מדרס – fo all of these are used also for lying.
קלוסטור (basket – fodder basked used instead of a muzzle) – a kind of folded basket that they suspend in the mouth of an animal, and they put in it fodder and barley-corn and the animal eats when it is walking.
תורמל – a large leather pocket that the shepherd places there all of his belongings.
כריתית (a leather bag containing one Se’ah) – a small leather bag.
רבצל (small bag for perfumes, spices) – small leather bag that they place spices in.
מזודה (traveling bag containing provisions) – a vessel that they place in it food/provisions for travel. The Aramaic translation of "צידה" – is "זוודין" – travel bag.
הרי אלו טמאים מדרס – all of these that are taught in the Mishnah, if each of them has the measurement that is explained with them or more, they defile through treading/Midras, and they are used for lying with their work/task. But not with less than the defined measure [of the Mishnah].
נפחתו טהורין – for all of these are made to receive/hold things, that the receptacle prepares them and designates them to be fit for lying and sitting, and when it becomes damaged/worn out, the primary purpose which is reception is annulled , and for that purpose it was called a vessel.
ובטלה הטפלה – which is defilement by treading.

Mishnah 2

חמת חלילין (bagpipe) – a bag that is full of wind and they place the flutes in he mouth of the bag and the wind exits through the incisions/holes and produces from the flutes a sound of song.
טהורה מן המדרס – for it is not fit for lying.
עריבת פיסונות (a trough for mixing mortar) – a trough that they bring into it small stones and clods of earth in order to provide a mold filled with earth or rubble of ethe building. And [the word] פיפוסנות is the language of “he took up a lump [of brittle stone] and threw it at it (the idolatrous statue)” as we state in the Gemara in [Tractate] Sanhedrin 64a concerning Mercurius (name of the Roman divinity, identified with the Grecian Hermes).
בית שמאי אומרים מדרס – for they hold that they use it for lying with their work. But the School of Hillel holds that they don’t use it.
שנסדקה טמאה מדרס (which was split is impure through treading) – but if it was not split, it not impure through treading, for we say to him: “Stand and let us do our work.” But when it was split and liquids come out, it is not worthy other than for lying. But less than two LOG or more than nine Kab, is not ritually impure through treading and even if it was split.
ונתפחה (and it swelled up) – on account of the rains the wood swells and the split is closed up.
טמאה טומאת מת – as it was at the outset before it became split, because it has a receptacle. But it is not impure from treading, for it is not designated to lie upon it, for they use it in kneading.
בקדים ונסדקה – after the wood had swelled up and the split had closed up, he placed it in an east wind and it split.
טמאה מדרס – that it returned to being fit for lying but not to knead with it.
זה חומר בשיירי כלי עץ – that at their outset they are not impure through treading, but when they are split, they are impure through treading.
כלי נצרים – baskets made of wickerwork of willows and of similar things.
עד שיתחסמו (until they be sealed/glazed) – when their upper rim/lip is completed.
אע"פ שנשרו שפתותיהן כל שהן – that their lips fell and there doesn’t remain anything of their lips to any degree at all, they are ritually impure.

Mishnah 3

מקל – merely [a wooden] staff that a handle/heft for a hatchet according to the time [of use], but did not fit it [permanently] within it.
חיבור לטומאה בשעת מלאכה (is a connector for uncleanness at the time of its use) – even though that on its own, it is a plain wooden vessel, it does not receive ritual uncleanness; but here it is a sleeve, and handles increased through the Torah of the defilement of the vessel or the food, and if the ax/hatchet became defiled, the handle became defiled, and similarly, if the defilment came in contact with the handle, it is defiled, and the ax/hatchet became defiled with it. And specifically, at the time of work there is a connector/attachment to defilement, but not during the time when not working., for when it is not the time of work, a person generally would throw them among the wood.
דיוסטר (the transverse staff of the upright loom/pole reaching from end to end) – a vessel that one uses for two sides. [The word דיוסטר – is now broken down into its component parts. "דיו" is “two;” "סטר" is “sides,” as we translate in Aramaic, “to one side.” And it is a staff that has two incisions, one from the bottom and the other from the top, and two handles are inserted in them, one from the east to the west and one from the north and the south, and the women roll the yarn that is in the spindle, and we call it NASPA in the foreign language. And sometimes they make these handles from iron and they receive ritual impurity.
קבעו בכלונס (if he inserted the transverse staff of the loom in the beam/yarn winder) – if he inserted the transverse staff of the pole reaching from end to end), that is the staff with its two handles/pegs in the beam, which is a long and large piece of wood that is fastened into the ground.
טמא – the traverse staff of the upright loom reaching from end to end is impure from this side and that, if the defilement came in contact with it, for it is an attached staff to the handles/pegs whether at the time of work or not at the time of work, since it was affixed, a person is not likely to throw it among the wood, but the traverse staff of the loom in the beam, it is not attached to it, and the rest of it whether above or below is ritually pure, for the staff of the loom in the beam is long and large.


כסא – that is made, and it is affixed into the traverse staff of the loom in the beam, the chair is impure through treading, but the traverse staff of the loom in the beam is not attached to it to be made impure through treading like it.
עשה בו כסא –from the traverse staff of the loom in the beam, he made a chair.
אין טמא אלא במקומו – that is, the need of the sitting. But the rest of the traverse staff of the loom in the beam is pure.
קבע הכסא בקורת בית הבד (if he affixed the chair onto a beam in the olive press) – that gathers/stores away the il from the olives, the chair is ritually impure through treading, but the beam is not attached and is a pure. But if from the wood of the beam itself the chair is made at one end, even the chair is pure, for we say to him: “Stand and let us do our work.” And it is taught in a Baraitha in Torat Kohanim [i.e., the Sifra, the Halakhic Midrash on the Book of Leviticus): “[Any bedding on which the one with the discharge lies shall be unclean, and every object] on which he sits shall be unclean” (Leviticus 15:4) – “it includes even one who sat on a stone or on the beam, the inference teaches us, a vessel, but not a stone nor a beam, and I will not exclude the vessels of stone, the vessels of excrement or vessels of earth, the inference teaches us the vessel, the vessel that is designated to receive impurity, but these vessels do not receive defilement ever (see Sifra Metzora, Parshat Zahav, portion 4, beginning of the seventh chapter, letter 10). I lack all other than a chair or a bench or a chair with a back/soft seat that is designated for sitting , from where is the chest of the bath attendant, a chest that opened from its side, a trough from two LOG until nine Kab that was chipped, he is unable to wash his foot in it, the inference teaches us, “and all the vessel,” which is an extension. It is possible even if he covered a Seah and sat upon it, a field requiring three Kab of seed and he sat upon it, the inference teaches us, “on which he sits” (Leviticus 15:4), that which is designated for sitting, we don’t say to him: “Stand up, and let us do our work” (see Talmud Shabbat 59a).

Mishnah 4

עד שיקצע (until he smooths/cuts off/trims the rough parts) – that he would cut it off and establish it for sitting. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
אע"פ שקבעה בכותל טמאה – through defilement through a corpse or a reptile. But it is not annulled from being a vessel, and we don’t say a vessel that is attached to the ground is like the ground itself, but rather only when it was attached/connected to the ground at its outset, or that it was made in order to serve the ground.

Mishnah 5

כופת (a stool/a block with a concave top to sit upon) – a vessel designated for sitting. And it is of date-palm.
שקבעו בנדבך (that was fixed into a course of the wall, course of bricks/stones) – in the row of the building.
בנה עליו ולא קבעו (built upon it but did not fix it) – in the manner that the artisans do when building an arch/doorway over the boards and afterwards sawing them.
טמא – if he person with gonorrhea sat on the building that he is upon, the stool/block with a concave top to sit on that is under the building is defiled. For the person with gonorrhea defiles that which he sits upon and that which he lies upon that is under the stone used for closing a pit (which may be over a corpse). And similarly, they fixed it but did not build upon it and the person with gonorrhea sat upon it when it is fixed, it is ritually impure, but it is not nullified in this. But when he fixed it and built upon it, it is nullified in regard to the wall, and it is like a wall.
מפץ (a mat of reeds, bark, the poor man’s mattress) – like the species of matting made from reeds or from bulrushes/reed-grass.
על גבי הקורות – of the attic.
מעזיבה (a concrete of stone chippings, clay) – plaster and pebbles of stones that one places on the room. And all the while that one did not fix the mat of reeds in the walls and the person with gonorrhea sat on the concrete of stone chippings, the mat is defiled that is below it, but it is not annulled from the laws of a vessels, for if he wanted, he could take it. And similarly, if he fixed it but did not place upon it the concrete of stones and the person with gonorrhea sat upon it, it is impure from sitting. But it is not annulled until he fixes it and places the concrete of stone chippings upon it.
כדרך קבלתה – its rims below.
כדרך שלא קבלתה – its rims above.

Mishnah 6

סדין שהוא טמא מדרס – and it is appropriate to be defiled through treading, as it states, but it is not actually defiled through treading. For if so, as it is taught in the concluding section ‘of the Mishnah] “that is susceptible to uncleanness from corpse uncleanness,” let it be taught “but it is impure through contact with treading, as it is taught in the third chapter of Tractate Menahot (הקומץ רבה) [see also Tosefta Tractate Kelim Bava Metzia, Chapter 11, Halakha 9].
ועשאו וילון – a curtain for the opening, or a curtain for a ship. And specifically, when he made it through a change in action, but thought [alone] does not remove it from defilement that it was appropriate for it.
אבל טמא טמא מת – because the sun warms it (see Talmud Betzah 14a) it (i.e., the sheet) is wrapped in its rims periodically, therefore, it is not annulled from the laws of a vessel.
מאימתי טהרתו – that the law of treading is annulled from it.
משיתפר – In the Tosefta it is proven that the School of Shammai (see above, Tractate Kelim Bava Metzia 11:6) requires when it is torn and one fixes it to the measure of the opening, and one sews on it loops/couplings to hang it on a curtain or on a ship. But the School of Hillel states: “when he ties it up” and it doesn’t require tearing. But rather, one he ties on it the loops/couplings in order to suspend them upon them. And there are books that have the reading: “The School of Shammai states from when it is broken,” and that this is the reading, meaning to say, that when he breaks it and tears it in order to sew it to the measure of the opening.
ר' עקיבא אומר משיקבע – from the time that he will hang it on the opening or on the ship. And the Halakha is according to the School of Hillel.

Mishnah 7

לארכה טהורה – the length of the reed corresponding to the length of the matting [of straw], is pure, but it is not appropriate for lying, for the reeds damage the person lying down, but they are not appropriate for anything other than interlacing.
כמין כי – the Greek [letter]. That is akin to the reverse of our [letter] "כ". Meaning to say, it is always impure util he pulss the reeds from three sides. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
עשאם לרחבה – the length of the reed to the width of the matting.
ד' טפחים – when there is between each reed four handbreadths, it is appropriate to lie upon between the two reeds.
נחלקה לרחבה – and its reeds were broken in-half.
רבי יהודה מטהר – for it is not appropriate for lying. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.
המתיר ראשי מעדנים (he who loosens the tops of reed matting) – it is custom of those who make matting that when they complete the mat, there remains a kind of border/hem. And they raise it in all two handbreadths a twisted thread and tie it so that the web will not be destroyed. For if it remains, it stands to be destroyed and would be annulled from the notion of being a vessel, and is pure. 
Reed matting, ties, like (I Samuel 15:32): “Agag approached him (i.e., Samuel) with faltering steps,” meaning to say, it is tied in the manner that forbidden things are tied, and similarly (Job 38:31): “Cast you tie cords to Pleiades.”
שהם של ששה טפחים – two handbreadths between each reed matting, and a handbreadth from here and a handbreadth from there.
משתקנב (when it will have been trimmed) – that he will sever/cut and lop off the heads of the protruding membrane, and this is cutting/trimming.

Chapter 21



Mishnah 1

הנוגע בכובד העליון (he who touches the upper beam from which the warp depends) –the weaver has two round pieces of wood, the first that the warp (i.e., longitudinal) thread is wrapped around, and the second that is in front of it that all the while that he continues to weave, he wraps the woven curtain. And because they are heavy, they are called כובד.  And the upper beam from which the warp depends is what is in front of him, and the lower beam (כובד התחתון – the roller on which the web is wound as it advances) is distant one from him for all the warp (longitudinal thread) is wrapped on it.
הנירין (the cross-beam of the loom – the leashes or thrums to which the threads of the warp are attached) – they are the woven threads on the reed, and for them, they raise slightly the threads and make a path that the weaving of the thread goes.
קירום (the row of slips or thrums in the loom to which the threads of the warp are attached) – comb/strigil that one strikes on the weaving and fastens the threads
בחוט שהעבירו על גבי ארגמן – after the embroidered garment is made, they place threads on it that it should not become soiled, and those threads were not attached to the cloth.
ובעירא (white substance, undyed wool or cotton – this is the "אירא" /undyed wool or cotton that is mentioned in the first chapter of [Tractate] Shabbat [11b]: "ולא גדרי באירא שבאזנו"/nor a common weaver with undyed wool in his ear. And this is a small piece, from wool or flax or from wool of the vine that they weave within the wraps for beauty, and he throws it into the warp/longitudinal direction of the latitudinal direction/woof that is wrapped within it, and there are some of them that are black and red, and if it will not be eventually restored, such as for example that it is red and now he wants to bring in undyed black wool, and even those it has not split the cloth, there was no attachment/combination.
בנפש המסכת (the woof) – the threads of the woof/latitudinal direction that go within the warp/longitudinal direction within the body [of the garment], and every thing that the weaver places within the woof to repair his weaving is called "נפש" /the soul of the woof, and when he comes in contact with them it is coming into contact with the clothes – which is attachment.
שתי העומד (the warp of the standing loom) – that he needs still for the clothing and stands to be woven.
וככפול שהעבירו על גבי ארגמן (the double/folded over thread which one passed over fine purple) – a piece of the cloth that they sew on the purple so that it doesn’t become soiled, it is like it is attached to the cloth.
עירא שעתיד להחזירה (the spool which is going to be returned [to the web]) – as I have explained above.
בצמר שעל האימה (with the wool that is on the distaff) – there are those who have the reading [of the word אימה as] עימה with an "ע" and it is all the same. And it is a long staff or a reed that the women tie up the wool and spin.
באשוויא (the staff around the which the wool is put, spool) – the wool that is on the spool, and the distaff and/or the spool both of them are made for spilling, but each is different from the other in their shape/form.
טהור – for it is not attached.
פיקה (whorl, spinner) – a kind of small round piece of metal that has an incision, that the women put into the top of the spindle/distaff to make it heavy, and they call it a POSROLAV in the foreign language.
עד שלא פירעה (until they didn’t lay it bare) – before releasing it.
משפירעה – once he released it.

Mishnah 2

קטרב (cross-piece in front of yoked animals; the pin fastening the ropes of the yoke to the pole) – it is explained above in Chapter “Metal Vessels” (Tractate Kelim, Chapter 14, Mishnah 4) which are two pieces of wood from two sides of the yoke in which incisions have been made , and they bring into this incision a piece of wood called a קטרג /cross-piece in front of yoked animals/the pin fastening the ropes of the yoke to the pole, and tie it so that the cattle will not become detached/slip away.
בעין (ring-shaped pad around the animal’s neck – a halter of soft material) – a woolen or leather pad or sack that they tie on the neck of the animal and the yoke is upon it.
עבות (chain or rope for fastening the yoke of the animal to the plough – the pole tied to the yoke by means of a knotted rope) – a long and thick piece of wood tha tis in the plough, that enters into the yoke.
החרב (the sword-shaped handle of a plough) – a piece of wood made in the shape of a sword that catches in the wild-growing bushes.
והכורך (part of a plough containing a receptacle out of which the seed falls during the ploughing) – a curved piece of wood similar to a saddle/handle of a saddle and it is sunk in the ground at the time of the ploughing.
ביצול (in the cross-piece or handle of the plough) – a piece of wood that the person who ploughs holds in his hand, and he strikes the plough on each side when he wants. The explanation of – [the word] "יצול" – is a staff [as in] (Deuteronomy 16:19): “you shall not judge unfairly,” which we translate into Aramaic, “you shall not pervert the law.”
עין של מתכת – the metal ring.
לחיים (cheek pieces/plough guides) – two pieces of wood that are in the incisions of the yoke.
עריים (iron-tipped ploughshare) – made like a kind of vessel of chiseling stones and with it breaks up clods of dirt. And it is called עריים from the language of (Jeremiah 51:58): “[Babylon’s broad wall] shall be knocked down,” (Psalms 137:7): “Strip her, Strip her to her very foundations!” But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda who declares the cheek pieces/plough guides to be pure [used to increase the soil].

Mishnah 3

מגרה (saw) – iron filled with notches that we saw with it the tablets and boards. And in the foreign language it is SIGA. And the saw has two pieces of wood, one from this side and another from the other side, and through them the carpenter/artisan captures wood and at the time that he saws the tablets, and these pieces of wood are a handle for the saw. But if the saw became defiled, a person who comes in contact with/touches them is impure, for they are handles to it.
בחוט ובמשיחה (the string and the rope of the saw) – at the top of these pieces of wood which are handles, they tie a string or a rope or a rope’s length that goes over the length of the saw and attaches between its teeth and preserves it.
באמה (crosspiece) – a long piece of wood that is the middle of these two pieces of wood and goes throughout the length of the saw is called an אמה".”
בסניפין (the side-pieces of the saw which hold the blade, and the wedge with which the cord is twisted) – a small piece of wood that is placed from the string and the rope of the saw until the crosspiece, and upon it, it twists and makes a fringe of the string and the rope of the saw, and one head is within the thread and the other is within the crosspiece, and sometimes he would put two there.
מכבש (carpenter’s vise for straightening wood) – it is a place that the carpenter has for wood that he presses and detains the curved pieces of wood and the curved tablets/boards and the crooked pieces in order to straighten them, and similarly, he detains there the wood and the boards that they should not move this way or that until he repairs them for his work.
קשטנית (bow=shaped handle of a borer, “bow-drill”) – like a kind of small bow of wood that they insert in it the iron of a borer when he wants to bore/penetrate into it, but when a person holds the bow and rolls the iron in it, but if the iron is impure, the bow is not defiled, for it is not considered an attachment, for it was their practice to not attach the bow to the iron.
מסר הגדול – large saw that is made to saw beams, and they make it like a kind of square from thin pieces of wood and the saw is in the middle and that square is called a frame.
טהור – the part that is impure is only that of the place of the holding of the handle alone. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.
יתר (bow-string) – the cord of the bow. It is the language of (Psalms 11:2): “they set their arrow on the string.”
אע"פ שהיא מתחוה (even though it is stretched out) – even though the arrow in the bow-string and in the bow is stretched to shoot it, and the arrow is is defiled, the bow and the bow-string are not defiled, for the arrow is not connected/attached to the bow and the bow-string.
אישות (mole) – it is a creature that has no eyes. And the owl, we translate into Aramaic as moles, and we hunt it because it destroys the fields.
טהורה – that it is not considered a vessel.
כל זמן שהיא מתוחה – and an iron arrow is in it. If the arrow is defiled, the [mole] trap is defiled. Ut the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Chapter 22



Mishnah 1

השלחן והדלפק (the table and the delphica/a three-legged table used as a toilet table or a waiter) – a wooden vessel that they place upon it flasks and jugs and food and liquids, and from it, they take and place it on the table.
ושייר בהן מקום הנחת כוסות – which was not damaged or that was not covered [with marble], for if all it were covered with marble, it would be pure like a stone vessel, for we follow after its covering.
מקום הנחת חתיכות – of [pieces of] bread and meat. For if there was no place on the table for the placing of pieces [of bread and meat], it is not a table and it is not a delphica/three-legged table used as a waiter. But the Halakha Is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 2

שניטלה אחת מרגליו טהור – for it is not fit as a table, for it is not appropriate to eat upon it.
ניטלה שלישית טמא – for it is appropriate to eat upon it like on top of a board. And it is something that he would consider to eat upon.
אינו צריך מחשבה – for since it is appropriate to eat upon it, it is susceptible to receive defilement.
וכן הדולפקי (and similarly the delphica) – its law is like that of the table. And just as there was disagreement regarding a table, so there was disagreement regarding the delphica. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 3

ספסל – a wide and long board/plank, its one end/head/ is fastened with a a high board/plank and similarly its second head/end, in order to left it up from the group that it would be appropriate to sit upon.
ניטל השני טהור – for it is not similar to a table that if the removed three legs it is impure, for a bench whose two ends/heads were broken is not appropriate for sitting, for a person who sits upon it is like sitting on the ground.
אם יש בו גובה טפח אמא – that the board/plank is a handbreadth thick it is appropriate for sitting.
שרפרף (a sort of camp stool/footstool) – a bench for the footstool of a person.
הכסא שלפני קתדרא (stool that is before the throne/chair with a back) – its law is like that of a footstool.

Mishnah 4

שניטלו חפויט (that its seat boards/coverings were removed) – it is the language of covering that opens, like a kind of teeth that extend outward from all sides of the chair of the bride, and are made in order to support them.
בית שמאי מטמאין – for they are still fit for sitting.
ובית הלל מטהרין – for they are not fit for the bride, for it is like it is broken.
אף מלבן הכסא טמא – meaning to say, that even the frame of the chair on its own, without the seat and without its cover is impure, all the more so that he chair without its covering is impure. The frame, is the form of square brick they make on the chair and they sit upon it.
כסא שקבעו בעריבה (a chair that one affixed to a trough) – they brought a chair from another place and affixed it in a trough in the manner of his sitting. But the trough is not impure through treading. For it is appropriate for kneading.
בית שמאי מטמאין – for it did not annul the seat concerning the trough.
ובית הלל מטהרין – [makes it pure] from [impurity through] treading, for the seat is nullified concerning the trough. But concerning a seat made in the trough itself, the School of Shammai agrees with the School of Hillel that it is pure.
ושמאי אומר – even the sea that is made inside the trough itself is impure through treading.

Mishnah 5

כסא שלא היו חפויו יוצאין – that the boards/planks do not protrude outside of the chair. That the chair is made from four [pieces of] wood and planks fixed from three directions of the chair stands high under the wood that is fastened with each other, and from above the wood, tablets are made to sit upon them. But if the tablets are broken that are made for sitting, one can tip the chair to each side that one wishes and to sit upon those boards that are affixed from the three sides of the chair, but when they protrude outward, he is not able to tip it on its side. And the covers/seat boards mentioned here are not like the covers/seat boards mentioned in the first part of the Mishnah, for they are like protruding teeth, but rather for the boards that cover the wood are called חפויו/upholstered seat.

Mishnah 6

שניטל חפויו האמצעי – that the middle board/tablet was removed and there remains a board from here and a board from there.
טמא – for it is appropriate for sitting.
אם היה רחב טפח – it would be appropriate for sitting, but if is not, it is not [appropriate for sitting].

Mishnah 7

שנים מחפויו – from the tablets that are made for sitting.
רבי עקיבא מטמא – But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Akiba.
ונשתייר בו בית קבלה – that is slightly hollow and appropriate to receive pomegranates is pure, and we don’t defile it because it has a receptacle.
מפני שבטל העקיר – for is made for the primary purpose of sitting and not as a receptacle , for since the primary purpose was nullified, and on whose account it was considered a vessel, the secondary purpose was annulled, but it was not nullified for the reason that it has a receptacle. And this is the Halakha. And this is taught above in the chapter “Who takes apart/loosens” (Tractate Kelim, Chapter 19, Mishnah 10) and in the chapter “Mattresses and Pillows” (Tractate Kelim, Chapter 20, Mishnah 2).

Mishnah 8

שידה (chest, strong box) – made like a kind of ark. And we are speaking of a chest that does not hold forty Se’ah, which is susceptible to receive ritual impurity.
שניטל העליון – the covering that is over it.
התחתון – its rim.
ניטל העליון והתחתון – but the planks that are on the sides remained.
וחכמים מטהרין – And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
הסתת (stone-cutter, chiseler) – who cuts/chisels stones. And he prepares for him a place to sit on one end of the stone when he is cutting/chiseling the other end.

Mishnah 9

כופת (a block with a concave top to sit upon/bolster, stool) – a thick and wide piece of wood, and this is implied in his explanation in the Tosefta (see Tosefta Demai, Chapter 1, Halakha 11 and see also Tosefta Kelim Bava Batra, Chapter 2, Halakha 1).
סרקו – which was painted.
וכרכמו (which was varnished) – which was colored with crocus/saffron.
ועשאו פנים (or was polished) – he invalidated it with an adze and made it smooth with a tool for planning wood, that it should have a nice appearance.
רבי עקיבא מטמא – for it is for sitting.
וחכמים מטהרין – for it is considered like a plain piece of wood.
עד שיחק בו (until he will make a hollow on it) – until he hollows out a place of sitting.
התקינו לישיבה – from impurity through treading/Midras, because they are not made for sitting and knowledge of it was abolished among all people.
סרגן בגמי (if he plaited them over with reed-grass) – on their openings, in the manner that they plait the beds.
טמאין – that the straw and the hackled wool/a soft spongy substance won’t be able to fall, and they are appropriate for sitting.

Mishnah 10

האסלא (privy/toilet; iron frame of a privy-stool covered with leather) – place of sitting of iron which is covered with leather, and they sit upon it in the toilet.
פירשה (if it was separated) – the leather from the iron.
העור טמא מדרס – that the leather by itself is appropriate for sitting, but the iron without the leather is not appropriate for sitting, but it is appropriate for other usages.
טרסקל (basket) – a small basket made from peeled willows, and they eat bread upon it.
והטרסקל טהור מכלום (a chair on three legs, a camp-chair is clean of all) – that because of its being small, it is not appropriate for sitting , and neither for the rest of the usages, for it has no walls.
ספסלים שבמרחץ – they are of marble.
ששתי רגליו של עץ טמא – if the person with gonorrhea sat upon it, the legs of wood are unclean because of uncleanness through sitting. But the bench itself is ritually pure, for the stone vessels have no defilement at all, neither from the words of the Torah nor from the words of the Scribes.
ואחת של אבן טהור – for it is as if the bench is completely made from stone.
ששיגמן (which one planed; or that one joined with bamboo) – that had become unfit and were repaired with a tool to plane wood/a chisel.
שיהו המים הולכים תחתיהן – but they are not made for sitting, but people sit there in order that they not be soiled from the water of bath-houses that come out. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
קנקילין (perforated vessel for fumigation) – a vessel that they place fire and sulfur underneath them in order to fumigate the clothing that is upon it.
שיש לה בית קבלה כסות – that it has a receptacle to receive the clothing that is upon it.
ככוורת – that it is perforated from its two sides.

Chapter 23



Mishnah 1

הכדור – PLOTA in the foreign language.
והאימום (model, shoe-maker’s last) – frame of a shoe. And all of these their outer sections are leather and they filled from the inside with hair or hackled wool/a spongy substance.
והקמיע והתפילין (the [parchment] amulet and the phylactery) – there is within the housing of leather [Biblical] portions written on parchment.
ובמה שבתוכן טהור – if one of these was defiled through [contact with] a corpse and afterwards was torn, and a person came in contact with what is within them, he is ritually pure, because there isn’t any attachment with what is within them, and there isn’t anything that is within them that is ritually impure like them.
הכאוף – like אוכף/saddle.
הנוגע במה שבתוכו טמא – if the saddle was defiled through [contact with] a corpse, just as what touches it is ritually impure, so the person who coms in contact with what is within it is also ritually impure.
מפני שהתפר מחברו (because the stitching connects it – the covering to the stuffing) – and makes it one, that which is within with the outer part.

Mishnah 2

זריז האשקלוני (the Ashkelonian saddle) – a wide belt in which harness/saddle the cattle. It is the Aramaic translation of (Genesis 22:3): “And he (i.e., Abraham) saddled his ass,” and he saddled it. And in Ashkelon they make it of wood, and it is called the Ashkelonian saddle on account of their place.
מדוכה המדית (a Median mortar – on the protruding handles of which the pounders ride when at work) – a mortar that is made in Median. They take a large, thick, and long piece of wood, and they hollow it out/shape a receptacle in its middle, and ride upon it from here and from there and pound it/crush it. Therefore, it has upon it the law of מרכב/riding upon it.
עביט של גמל (the cushion on the camel’s back) – It is the Aramaic translation of the camel bearing for the first time, the cushion on the camel’s back (Genesis 31:34): “[Rachel, meanwhile, יhad taken the idols and placed them] In the camel cushion [and sat on them].”
טפיטן של סוס (horse-cloth, housing) – the saddle that is upon the horse in the language of eh Mishnah it is called טפיטן/horse-cloth, housing, and for a camel, its name is a cushion/עביט, and of a נאקה/camel it is called a saddle, each one has its name upon it. And all of them are for riding, but there are from them that sometimes they are made to sit upon them.
טפיטן של סוס טמא משום מושב – but it is not ritually impure through riding other than which is designated for riding through spreading of the feet, but it is not made for sitting at all.
בקונפון (plain for exercise and amusement – because soldiers and sports stand upon it) – a field that the kings play there, and they regularly sit on the horse-cloth/housing of the horse to see the playing of the king, therefore it is impure through sitting. קונפון is a field, KANPO in the foreign tongue. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.
אבל אוכף של נאקה טמא – Maimonides explained, that it is impure through sitting. And the first Tanna/teacher said it, for he argues concerning the horse-cloth of a horse, but agrees regarding the saddle of a camel that it is ritually impure through sitting. But my teachers/Rabbis explained, but a saddle of a camel is impure through riding. But Rabbi Yossi stated that, for he agrees with the first Tanna/teacher regarding the saddle of a camel that it is not designated other than for riding.

Mishnah 3

חלק מגעו ממשאו (distinguished touching it from carrying it) – for a person who carries [something] defiles clothing but the one who touches it does not defile clothing.
תפית של חמור (saddle of a sumpter-ass – consisting of wooden frames) wood that we place on top of the donkey to attach and to tie upon them the load, but they are not appropriate either for riding nor for sitting.
שינה אתת הנקבים (if one changed the width between the spaces) – that through the change of their incisions/spaces, one gives place for a person to sit there.
או פרצן (or broke them into one another) – that he removed them from their places and put them one at the side of the other. And there are those who interpret: the saddle of a sumpter-ass is pure because there isn’t a handbreadth of width, and all where there isn’t a handbreadth of width is not appropriate for sitting, and when he changed the width between the spaces, that is, that he widened the place for sitting or that he broken them into one another, and it became a place of sitting that was a handbreadth wide, it is ritually impure.

Mishnah 4

המטה והכר והכסת (the bed and the mattress and the cushion) – even though that the corpse does not defile through treading, and these are made for a corpse but not to sit upon, even so, they defile through treading, because the women sit upon them [and bewail their dead] (see Tosefta Kelim Bava Batra, Chapter 2, Halakha 8).
ומשבר של חיה (the travailing chair of the midwife) – the sitting place of the woman who is giving birth. We translate into Aramaic that of (Exodus 1:16): “[When you deliver the Hebrew women, look] at the birthstool: on the travailing chair/על מתברא.
שהוא כורם עליו (upon which he piles the clothes – to press them) – we have this reading. Meaning to say, that he folds and repairs there the clothing.
אמר ר' יוסי אין בהן משום מושב – and our Mishnah of the chapter that is above (Tractate Kelim, Chapter 22, Mishnah 7) where it is taught: "כסא של כלה שנטלו חפויו"/”Also a chair of the bride whose seat boards have been removed” which implies that if the seat boards had not been removed it is ritually impure. This is in conflict with Rabbi Yossi. But the Halakha is not in accordance with Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 5

החרם (the fish net) – it is the language of (Ecclesiastes 7:26): “[Now, I find woman more bitter than death;] she is all traps, [her hands are fetters and her heart is snares].” A net is made from threads that are tied one to the other, and in it are many incisions, but that there is a bit at the bottom of the net that is woven like clothing which is called זוטו/a catch, a bag-like receptacle for catch in the fisher’s net;/the solid web of the net-work (being a receptacle of solid web). And the entire net is susceptible to receiving defilement because of the webbing like clothing that is at its bottom.
הרשתות והמכמרות (the nets and the traps) – kinds of traps that they hunt wild beasts, and birds and fish.
מדף (clap-board, trap for birds) – the hunters that hunt birds bring a board of wood and place underneath the board [pieces of] wheat or broken pieces [of barley] , and the bird comes to eat them and the board falls upon it and it is captured.
פלצור (a kind of snare, press) – a kind of wooden trap.
הסכרין (the skeins of the fisherman/water-locks for fishing purposes) – that close up and dam in/bar the water, it is the language of (Genesis 8:2): “The fountains of the deep [and the floodgates of the sky] were stopped up.”
טמאים – they are susceptible to receive defilement if the came in contact with a corpse or a reptile.
אקון (reed basket used as a fisher’s cauf) – a basket that they hunt in it fish.
רטוב (basket made of green twigs, used as a bird’s trap) – a basket that they hunt birds with.
כלוב (shed, coop, twisted together) – it is made from wicker of a folded willow or from reed-grass, and there is a cavity in the center, or less between each wicker, and they place birds there. And we call it GEVIAH in the foreign tongue. And in Scripture (Jeremiah 5:27): “As a cage is full of birds, [so their houses are full of guile;].”

Chapter 24



Mishnah 1

שלשה תריסין הן – there are three laws divided/disputed from each other regarding shields, which are protecting.
תריס הכפוף (bent shield) – which is found with us, that surround a person from three directions.
טמא מדרס – that is made for lying, that we lie upon it during war, and all the more so, that it defiles through that which is impure through contact with a corpse, that we hold that all who are impure through treading are defiled through contact with a corpse.
שמשחקין בו בקומפון (with which they play in the field/plain for exercise and amusement) – in the field of the king’s valley, two come, each one with his sword in his hand sand a small round shield that is not bent in his left hand, and each of them learn to defend with his shield so that his fellow doesn’t strike him. And we call it ASHGARIMER in the foreign language.
טמא טמא מת –and the same law applies when he is defiled from the defilement of a reptile or from a carrion and the rest of the defilements together, except for treading, which is not made one of the original causes of Levitical uncleanness if a person with gonorrhea lay on it or sat upon it, but rather first degree [of Levitical uncleanness] like when having contact with someone with gonorrhea.
ודיצת הערביין (a shield used at Arabian sports) – the smallest shield that the Arabs use for dancing/rejoicing and for joy and sport, but it is not a vessel of use [and is clean of all uncleanness].

Mishnah 2

בקתדרא (of a throne) – which is short and surrounded from three sides.
טמאה מדרס – that it is designated for sitting.
כמטה – which is long and designated for placing on it wares/goods. And a person who lies on it, we say to him, “Stand up and let us do our work.”
ושל אבנים – that is made to carry stones on it.
טהורה מכלום – because it is breached from its bottom with large incisions like one that produces a pomegranate.

Mishnah 3

שנסדקה טמאה מדרס – for since it became chipped off/cut into and is not appropriate for kneading, we designate it for sitting.
טמאה טמא מת – for it is a vessel of usage.
הבאה במדה (holds prescribed measure) – that it holds forty Se’ah in moist which are two Kor dry.
טהורה מכלום – that because of its heaviness and size it doesn’t carry full, but we require something similar to a sack that carries full and empty.

Mishnah 4

תיבה שפתחה מצדה – it is used for sitting with its work/task, that we are able to use I when he is sitting, at the time when its opening is on its side. Which is not the case when its opening is from above. And [the words]: "הבאה במדה"/ that which holds the prescribed measure that are taught in our Mishnah that it is clean of all, refers to that it is not designated for Midras/treading uncleanness, for that which is unclean through treading – is even when it holds the prescribed measure, it is always impure.

Mishnah 5

תרבוסים (dressers/counters) – leather vessels similar to chests.
ספרים – who engage in blood letting.
טמא מדרס – it is large and appropriate for sitting or to mix wine upon it.וש
שאוכלים עליו – it is a vessel of usage.
ושל זיתים – to press on it the olives. It is not considered a vessel for human usage.

Mishnah 6

בסיסאות (stands) – (Exodus 30:28) “and its stand” which we translate into Aramaic as "וית בסיסיה"/and its stand.
ושל דלפקי (delphica – a three-legged table used as a waiter or toilet table) – a wooden vessel that one places upon it flasks/bottles with a wide belly and a narrow neck and jugs and food and drinks, and from it, we take and place on the table. But the base that is in front of it is not for sitting, but it has the status of a vessel.
ושל מגדל (turret, cupboard) – a wooden storehouse. ARMRIAV in the foreign language.
טהור מכלום – it is not a vessel and its shape proves it.

Mishnah 7

שלש פנקסיות הן (three kinds of writing tablets) – that are made to write uppn them, like the shopkeeper on his writing tablet.
אפיפורין (papyrus) (see Tractate Kelim, Chapter 16, Mishnah 1) – a board that they place upon it the powder of the dust and they write upon it purchases. And it is large and appropriate for sitting.
שיש לה בית קבלו שעוה – a board that the grind its face in wax and mark on the wax with a chisel.
וחלקה (smooth one) – that has no wax on it, and they write upon it with ink, and it has no receptacle.

Mishnah 8

של זגגים (frame of the glass-makers used to put their wares on) – they place upon it glass vessels.
סרגין (frame of the netmakers) – those who make harnesses/riding seats. In Arabic they call מרכב/riding seat a SIREG. And there are those who interpret/explain that they strap (in zig-zag)/girth the lattice-work/mesh, and it is pure from everything, because it is not from what a person uses.

Mishnah 9

משפלות (wicker baskets carried on a pole over the shoulder – see also Tractate Kelim, chapter 19, Mishnah 10) – baskets made to bring out manure to the fields.
של זבל טמאה מדרס – for It is appropriate for sitting.
והפוחלץ (a bale made of a net of ropes with wide meshes , containing the freight of camels) – it is made similar to sieve made of netting and its incisions are wider than that of wicker baskets of straw , and it is not fit for even to receive straw, since its incisions are so wide, and it is also not fit for sitting , for its ropes are hard and they are not fit for sitting upon the, therefore they are pure from everything.

Mishnah 10

מפצים (mat of reeds/poor man’s mattress) – like a kind of matting made from a species of rush (so named from its sharp edges) and from fibrous substance and reed and bulrush/papyrus and similar kinds of things.
ושל צבעים (and of dyers) – that the dyers put them upon them clothing.
טמא טמא מת – that they are not designated for sitting , but they have the status of a vessel.
ושל גתות (and of winepresses) – that are made to cover grapes and olives with them.

Mishnah 11

חמתות (goatskins drawn off the body without opening the belly and sewed up and pitched at the ends where the legs and the tail were cut off) – leather skins.
תורמלין (three kinds of bags – with regard to Levitical uncleanness) – large leather pouches that the shepherd places his belongings into (see also Tractate Kelim, Chapter 20, Mishnah 1).
המקבלים כשעור (those that hold the prescribed quantity) – That is explained above at the beginning of the Chapter כרים/Mattresses (Chapter 20 of Tractate Kelim, Mishnah 1). The goatskin of seven Kab, and the shepherd’s bag of five Kab. And all the more so, if it holds more, it can be used for sitting with its work, but not with less than this.
ושל עור הדג טהורים מכלום – for all that comes from live creatures that are in the ocean is pure.

Mishnah 12

לשטיח (rug) – to stretch/spread on the ground to sit upon it.
לתכריך הכלים (as a wrapper for vessels/utensils) – to wrap up the utensils,, as for example, knives and scissors and needles in order to preserve them.
ושל רצועות ושל סנדלים – leather that stands to cut from it straps and sandals, is ritually pure from everything, for it is not used for work. But straps that are already prepared, are ritually impure, as is explained in Tractate Negaim, Chapter 11.

Mishnah 13

לוילון טמא טמא מת (that is used for a curtain – is susceptible to corpse uncleanness) – that is made for a curtain/screen in front of the opening is ritually impure, because the attendant wraps himself up in its rims on occasion and warms himself in it.
של צורות (for shapes, images) – clothing that is in the hand of the embroiderer, and there are many images in it in order to see it to make something like it in another cloth.

Mishnah 14

של ידים טמאה נדרס – because that sometimes they place it (i.e., the napkin) on the cushion and he sits upon it.
ושל תכריך נבלי בני לוי – that the Levites would wrap their musical instruments in bands/wrappers. And it was the manner of the rest of the people to do so with a leather casing, and even they are ritually pure.

Mishnah 15

פרקלינין (greaves/leggings) – in the form of a hand made of leather that they carry the hunted birds when they catch the bid in their hands, that they call ASHTOR and ASHPAROIR. And with it they go out to hunt wild animals or birds.
טמא מדרס – because he leans upon it.
ושל חגבים (and that of locust catchers) – those who go to hunt locusts and place them in it.
ושל קוצים – to collect thorns. But there those who have the reading of “summer fruit,” that the summer fruit had dried, such as those who make dried figs and raisons in the field.

Mishnah 16

סבכות (head-nets) – a cap that women carry on their heads, made similar to a netting that has in it thin incisions.
של ילדה – that is appropriate for sitting, and therefore is ritually impure through treading.
ושל זקנה – her actions prove upon her that it is not fit for sitting. But in the Tosefta (Tractate Kelim Bava Batra, Chapaer 2, Halakha 10 – which teaches the reverse) it is taught that of an old woman it is susceptible for uncleanness from treading (as opposed to uncleanness from contact with a corpse), that she does not strict/particular about it and sometimes she sits upon it. But that of a young girl who is strict/particular about her vessels, does not sit upon it, and therefore it is susceptible to the impurity of contact with corpse uncleanness.
ושל יוצאות החוץ (that of a whore) – a kerchief that women put on their heads when they go outside. But thee are those who explain/interpret "יוצאות חוץ"/as a whole. It is the Aramaic translation of a whore, a female prostitute, meaning to say, the head-dress of whores.
טהורות – because they are not considered a vessel. Another explanation. Head-dresses that were torn and most of the hair of woman extends outward, for they do not hold the majority of the hair of woman’s head.

Mishnah 17

מהוהה (threadbare shred) – an old and worn-out cloth.
שטלייה (that is patched) – like that is patched. From the language of patch upon patch (see Tractate Berakhot 43b), that is to say, that he placed the old shred/patch on the new one.
הולכים אחר הבריאה (they follow – the status in respect of uncleanness – of the sound one) – we judge it according to the law/status of the healthy one/sound one. If [that one] is impure, it is impure, but if it is pure, it is pure.
קטנה על גדולה – whether they are both threadbare shreds or both of them are sound.
הולכין אחר הגדולה – and if the larger one is perforated, like that of one which removes/emits pomegranates that that is breaking like this is purified, also the small one that is attached to it is pure, even though it is whole/complete. But if the larger one is complete, and behold it is susceptible to receive Levitical uncleanness, even the small one (i.e., patch) attached with it is impure, even though it is perforated like that which emits a pomegranate.
הולכים אחר הפנימית – if the inner one is ritually impure, the outer one is ritually impure, and if the inner one is ritually pure, the outer one is also ritually pure.
ר' שמעון אומר כף מאזים (Rabbi Shimon says: The cup of the balance) – it comes to explain [the words] of the first Tanna/teacher, and it is speaking of the cup of a metal balance that is ritually impure, for if one patched on the bottom of the vessel for heating water from the inside, the vessel for heating water is impure. But if he patched from the outside, the vessel for heating water is ritually pure.
טלייה על צידה (if he patched it on its side) – that he attached the patch on ethe walls of the vessel for heating water, not on its bottom, whether from the outside or whether from the inside, it is ritually pure. But the upshot/final result of the entire chapter and the reason that everything is ritually impure through treading or ritually impure through contact with a corpse or pure from everything that are mentioned here, is that it and everything thing that is fit for lying, or that will be made for lying for or sitting or for sitting or for leaning upon is ritually impure through treading. Excepting if it is an earthenware vessel that does not defile by treading, and this we derive from Scripture, as it is written (Leviticus 15:5): “Anyone who touches his bedding [shall wash his clothes, bathe in water, and remain impure until evening],” [The Rabbis] make an analogy between “his bedding” and himself, just as he has purity in a ritual bath/Mikveh, even his bedding has purification in a ritual bath, excluding an earthenware vessel which does not have purity in a ritual bath. But the mat of reeds/poor-man’s mattress which is made for lying, even though it doesn’t have ritual purity in a Mikveh, from what is written (Leviticus 11:32): “any such article that can be put to use shall be dipped in water,” but this is not a utensil/article, nevertheless it is impure through treading as we expand upon from Scripture as it is written (Leviticus 15:4): “Any bedding [on which the one with the discharge lies shall be impure],” [the word] “Any” includes the mat of reeds/poor-man’s mattress , but it ha no ritual purity/cleanliness until it is cut/severed and there remains from it less than six [handbreadths] by six [handbreadths]. But stone vessels and vessels of baked ordure and vessels of earth, are pure from everything. And similarly, everything that comes from the ocean is pure. And wooden vessels that hold the prescribed measurements, that contain forty Se’ah moist which are two Kor in dry, are also pure from everything, because they are not carried full. And similarly, anything which does not have the designation of a vessel, or that is the designation of a vessel but is not from things used by human beings, but are used by those who serve his users, is pure, such as the dresser in which olives are spread and the matting of winepresses and the sheet of frames, that we stated in our Mishnah that they are pure from everything, for they are not considered vessels that are attendant upon humans.

Chapter 25



Mishnah 1

כל הכלים יש להם אחוריים ותוך – vessels that were defiled through impure liquids, if the liquids came in contact from the vessel’s outsides, their outsides where defiled but not their insides, because the defilement of liquids to defile vessels is not from the Torah, the Sages were lenient in their defilement. But if their inside was defiled, as for example, that the impure liquids touched their insides, their outsides are also defied. And this is what is taught [in our Mishnah[“"יש להן אחוריים ותוך/“they have outsides and an inside,” meaning to say that the law of the outsides is separate from the law of the insides.
כגון הכרים והכסתות – and even though that we use their insides and their outsides, and that it is fit to reverse them and to make their insides outsides and their outsides insides, nevertheless, the law of their outsides is separate from the law of their insides.
מרצופין (packing bags, leather bags – adapted for ship-loads) – large leather sacks that they cary in them wares on ships.
כל שיש לו תוברות (all that have loops/hems/hangers) – loops, couplings, like that of undergarments/drawers, that are sewn on the outsides of the clothing.
יש לו אחוריים ותוך – for since it has loops/couplings, it is not fit to turn inside out, and its inside is separate from its outside, but when they don’t have loops/couplings/hems, it is fit to turn them inside out, for its inside is not separate from its outside, but rather, when impure liquids came in contact with it whether from its outside or whether from its inside, everything is ritually impure/unclean. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehuda.
השלחן והדלפקי – For Rabbi Yehuda holds, since its walls are slanted and separate, their insides are judged as insides. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 2

מרדע (handle of the plough-having on one end a broad iron blade/חרחור and on the other a spud/דרבן) – It is a long, round staff that is a third of a handbreadth thick. And at its one end, is a wide piece of sharpened iron to sever/cut the roots, and its name is חרחור/broad iron blade, and its other end is a piece of iron like an awl/borer, whose name is דרבן /spud/point, through which leads the heifer to its furrow/ridge.
משבעה לחרחור מארבעה לדרבן – if impure liquids fell upon the broad iron blade, it is not impure from the handle of the plough other than seven handbreadths, but if they fell on the spud/point, it is not impure other than four-handbreadths. But Maimonides explained/expounded, that if if impure liquids fell on the handle of the plough seven handbreadths outside from the broad iron blade or outside four handbreadths from the spuds, it is like a vessel whose outsides had been defiled, but its inside was not defiled, and those seven handbreadths that are next to the broad iron blade and the four [handbreadths] that are next to the spud were not defiled.
אלא לשיריים – when the Sages gave measurements for the broad iron blade of seven [handbreadths] and for the spud four [handbreadths], it was not given other than regarding this matter that if the handle of the plough was broken and there remained next to/adjacent to the broad iron blade seven handbreadths, or adjacent to the spud four [handbreadths, it is impure, because it is appropriate to do some kind of its work. Less than this, it is like the shards of a vessel and is pure. But the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 3

זומא ליסארא (soup-ladle, with a spoon on one side and a fork on the other) – a vessel that on one head is a spoon and the other head is a fork; with the spoon one raises the soup from the bowl, and with the fork one lifts with it the meat.
ר' יהודה אומר אין להם – an outside and inside. The reasoning of Rabbi Yehuda, because that all of these vessels have on their outsides engraved a receptacle similar to what they do for a silver vessel, and sometimes, that they bend it on its opening and use the hollowed out area on the backside.
ר' שמעון אומר יש להם – regarding the matter of what is inside the vessel, they have the law of outside and inside, for if its outsides were defiled, what was inside the vessel was not defiled But reading the matter of the vessel itself, there is no separation of the law of its outside from the law of its inside, for if the outsides had been defiled, one must immerse all of it [In a Mikveh] as if the inside was defiled. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 4

הרובע וחצי רוצע – as for example, a piece of wood that is thick and long, and it has two measurements engraved one next to the other, one holds a quarter and the other holds half-a quarter, and there is a wall that separates between this one and that one.
כלי שנטמא תוכו – in astonishment! For if a vessel whose inside was defiled, its outsides were not defiled., but why does it teach in the Mishnah that one-half of the quarter was not defiled? For isn’t its outside the quarter?
[שלות] קודמין היא (is this the class of those that takes precedence?) – each one of them, takes precedence over its partner, meaning to say, that none has precedence over the other. And just as you say that one-half of a quarter of its backsides to a quarter, so you should say that the quarter is backsides to one-half of quarter. And when the quarter is defiled, its backside of the one-half quarter is defiled but not its insides. But the reading of my teachers/Rabbis is that each group/band takes precedence, because the groups of the students would sit before him (i.e., the teacher) in rows, he asked to them this question already which was asked of me by the group of students that sits in the first row, and such is how I responded them, or perhaps [the quarter’s backside to the half-quarter], etc.

Mishnah 5

הרובע ואחוריו טמאים – the quarter – that is the inside. And the backsides are the walls that surround the quarter from outside. But the wall that forms a partition between both of them, is included in the inside of the half-quarter, and it is pure to the side that is towards the one-half quarter. And similarly, when the one-half quarter is defiled, the half-quarter and its outsides are impure. The half-quarter is the insides, and the outsides are the walls that surround that half-quarter from the outside, but the wall that forms a partition, the side that is towards the quarter is included with the inside of the quarter.
נטמאו אחורי הרובע – that is, the walls that surround from the outside.
אין חולקין את הגביים (they do not divide the hind parts/outside parts [of the utensil] – that is the outside parts, for all the outside parts are impure when one of the outside parts became impure.
מטביל את כולו – the quarter and one-half of the quarter. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Meir. And the law of the middle wall is explained above at the end of Chapter Two (Tractate Kelim, Chapter 2, Mishnah 7) for “Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri says: They divide its thickness.  The [half that] serves the unclean [portion] is unclean; the [half that] serves the clean [part] is clean.”

Mishnah 6

כני הכלים – the bases of the vessels. The phrase (Exodus 30:28): “and its stand,” we translate into Aramaic, “and its base.”
והוגניהן – just likeואוגניהן /its border, that is to say, its rim.
ואזניהן (its hangers) – the place where they insert a handle in it.
המקבלין – that have an inside.
מנגבן והן טהורין – and these are not considered attached to bring the defilement of liquids for a vessel that has a receptacle. And drying is enough. But for a vessel that does not have an inside, it requires ritual immersion.
ואזניו וידיו טהורין – The Rabbis made this for recognition, for just as/in order that it won’t burn upon them heave-offering [for the Kohanim] and Holy Things, especially, it was made as a recognition for Terumah/heave-offering, but not for Holy Things, as is taught in the Mishnah further on in our chapter (see Mishnah 9).

Mishnah 7

בית הצביטה (that part of the vessel by which it is seized, handle, neck, cavity for the fingers) – We have the reading [בית הצביטה ] )whereas the Mishnah has the reading of "בית הצביעה"). It is the place where we hold the vessel, when we move it to and fro. It is the language of (Ruth 2:14): “He (i.e., Boaz) handed her roasted grain, [and she ate her fill and had some left over],” whose meaning is that he handed to her. And there are those who have the reading "בית הצביעה", the place where one holds it with his finger.
ויש להן בית צביטה – if the backsides were defiled, the place of the handle is ritually pure. But if the handle became defiled, its backsides are ritually pure.
לערבה גדולה של עץ [(the distinction in the outer parts applies] only in a large wooden trough) – it has a part of the vessel by which it is seized. But not with the rest of the vessels. That the large trough has a separation between the place where it is seized and its backsides, that if there are liquids on the backsides of the trough and his hands are impure, he holds on to the part of the vessel by which it is seized, and he doesn’t worry lest he come in contact with the liquids on its backside, and once again defile the trough.
ר' עקיבא אומר לכוסות – even for cups they have a place where he grabs hold of the vessel.
לידים הטמאות והטהורות – there is a distinction between the place where one grabs hold of the vessel and its backsides, for impure hands, as has been explained. But for pure hands, it is as it explains further on how so (see the next Mishnah). But Rabbi Yossi holds that for pure hands alone we should not be concerned, but for impure hands, we should be concerned. And the Halakha is according to the first Tanna/teacher, as Rabbi Yossi explains.

Mishnah 8

היו ידיו טהורות – and upon them was dripping liquid.
אינו חושש שמא נטמאו – that liquid that was on his hands [were defiled] on the outside of the cup and will return and defile the hands.

Mishnah 9

אין להם אחוריים ותוך – that a person who comes in contact with [a Holy Vessel] is like one who comes in contact with all of it. And they do have an outside and an inside as is taught in the Mishnah above (see Mishnah 7 of this chapter), and especially for heave-offering [for the Kohanim].
ואין מטבילין כלים לתוך כלים – when both of them are ritually impure, because of the heaviness of an interposing vessel. And they were worried/concerned about Holy Things more than with the heave-offering.
יורדים לידי טומאתן במחשבה (see also Tractate Kelim, Chapter 12, Mishnah 1) as for example, the ring of an animal is not susceptible to receive ritual defilement, if he thought to place it on the finger of a person, it receives ritual defilement from here onwards by this thought. But, the ring of a person that he thought about to give it to an animal, it always is susceptible to receive ritual defilement, until he performs a change of action to change its form.
ומחשבה אינה מבטלת לא מיד מעשה ולא מיד מחשבה – if after he thought about the ring of an animal to make it for a person that it is susceptible to receive ritual impurity though this thought, he retracted and thought about returning it to the animal, this second thought does not lift it from the status of defilement that it descended to in the first thought.

Chapter 26



Mishnah 1

סנדל עמקי (sandals worn in valleys) – Sandals that are made in a valley village.
כיס של שנצות (a bag which is closed by means of laces) – like a species of straps inserted in loops at the rim of the pouch and we pull them this way and that and the pouch/bag is closed from itself.
כפיפה מצרית (an Egyptian basket made of palm twigs) – a basket made from the bands made of palm-bark. They bring willows and palm-leaves and tear them and make from them threads and make from them a basket of osier and rope.
סנדל לדיקי (a Laodicean sandal) – that the people of Laodicea make.
הרי אלו מיטהרין ומיטמאין שלא באומן – because all of thee have straps and there is no need to tie them, but he stretches them and they are closed from on their own, and similarly, they open from on their own through other straps that pull them. Like the kind that they make for purses in our places. But if those straps were left over, then they are further not appropriate to close and open with, they are pure. But Rabbi Yossi holds that even though they are permitted, they are impure, since a non-specialist can restore them. Except for the basket of osier, for even the artisan is not able to restore them. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 2

שניטלו שנציו (whose laces were removed) – to the Rabbis, we are speaking about that they were not removed completely, but rather that torn loose from the loops, and are still hanging in the bag. But according to Rabbi Yossi, even if they were removed completely, because a non-specialist is able to restore them.
נפשט(when it – the bag – is straightened out – so as to be a plain piece of leather) – the bag and it became like a kind of smooth piece of leather that has no receptacle, it is pure.
טלה עליו את המטלת (if he underlined the bag with a patch on the bottom) – he placed a patch on its rim, that is to say, a small piece of leather that he attached to it from the bottom, for the it is the manner of bags to bring in a small piece of leather between the stitches and when he stretches it out, the the leather remains and it does not annul its receptacle.
לא נטמא חברו – for defilement by liquids to defile vessels is not according to the Torah and is not considered an attachment.
צרור המרגלית (a piece of leather in which jewels are bound up) – they place the pearl within the leather to be protected there and they tie it, and when they remove the pearl, the leather remains like a bag until one goes to the trouble and straightens it out [by stretching it] , on account of that pearl that stood for many days and was tied up.
צרור המעות (a piece of leather in which money is bound up) – like the piece of leather in which jewels are bound up. And the reason that the piece of leather in jewels is bound up defiles more, because it is the manner of the piece of leather in which jewels are bound up to stand more than the piece of leather in which money is bound up, for the piece of leather in which money is bound up is loosened all the time, because it was given for spending. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 3

כף לוקטי קוצים (glove of thorn pickers) – like a kind of leather hand-glove that thorn pickers catch in their hands, so that they don’t puncture their hands with thorns.
טהורה – that it is not made for receiving.
הזון (girdle, laborer’s apron) – a girdle/belt like a kind of belt. And in the Greek language, we call this belt ZONI.
ברכייר (brick-layer’s cushion – on which he kneels at work; stone-setter’s knee-band) – a leather frame that is placed on the knees, in order that they would be able to stand on their knees.
טמאין – for they are made for reception.
שרוולים (workingman’s leather sleeve/chest protector in hot weather) – like a kind of pressed leather narrow handle that artisans place on their arms, in order that their wide clothing will not fall on their hands and annul them from their work.
פרקמינין (greaves, leggings) – we have the reading [פרקמינין] and it is a thing that wraps up/bandages and ties up his forehead.
בית אצבעות (finger holes) – like a kind of leather hand made to put in his fingers into it.
קייצין – those who pick thorns. Another explanation, those who pick the summer fruit.
האוג (red berry of the Venus’ summachtree) – a red fruit that is found on a tee that grows in the forest on its own. And sometimes when they pick the thorns in the forests, they pick the red berry of the Venus’ summachtree and they place it in the finger-holes, as it is found that it is made for reception.

Mishnah 4

ותקנה טמאה מדרס – it still stands in its defilement, because the second strap/handle exists.
טהור מן המדרס – even though the first one was repaired prior to the second one breaking, nevertheless, it is pure, for new faces came to here, for after it went down into defilement by treading, these faces were renewed, and this is not the first after it already had ben ruined in order to annul it.
אבל טמא מגע מדרס – because the first strap/handle, when it was broken/snapped, and it was repaired, that he brought another strap in place of the broken one and attached it to the sandal, it became defiled through contact with treading, for it touched the sandal that was impure through treading, but when the second strap snapped and their flowered from it the defilement of Midras/treading, there remained in it the defilement of contact, for the entire sandal was attached to the first strap that had been repaired.
עד שנפסקה – the second strap.
טהורה – for since the two straps were broken, it further was not appropriate for anything.
מפסק עקבו (if its heel was torn) – the leather of the sandal that covers the height of the foot that is corresponding to the foreleg from its backside.
חוטמו (toe piece, knotted strapplngs of a shoe) – that goes up corresponding to the toes of the foot from in front of him.
טהור – [pure] from retroactive defilement, but it is susceptible to receive ritual defilement from here and onwards.
סוליים (sole, slipper) – the leather that is underneath the toes of the foot along. That it lacks a heel, and in the foreign language, SOLA.
האמום (shoe-makers last) – the frame of the shoe that is made from leather filled with hair.
ר' אליעזר מטהר – that he holds that the work of the shoe/foot-covering is not completed until it is detached from the shoe maker’s last.
וחכמים מטמאין – for they consider that the work was completed. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
כל חמתות צרורות (all tied up goatskin) – leather skins that were perforated with an incision that removes them from their defilement and ties up the incision.
טהורין – as they were, because he will eventually loosen the knot.
חוץ מקשר של ערביים – which is not easy to untie.
צרור שעה (tied up for a time) – a knot that is made according to the hour and stands to be loosened.
צרור עולם – a knot that is made to exist forever.
כל המתות צרורות טהורות (all tied up goatskins are pure) – whether an eternal knot or a temporary knot, and even of that of the Arabs. But the Halakha is according to the first Tanna/teacher (see also Tractate Eduyot, Chapter 5, Mishnah 1).

Mishnah 5

לשטיח (for a rug) – to stretch/spread on the ground and to sit upon it.
סקורטיא (leather coat, leather apron, table cover) – leather that the tanners wear at the time of their work.
קטבליא (hide spread over the bed-frame – see Tractate Kelim, Chapter 16, Mishnah 4) – leather that they spread over the bed and lie upon it.
עור החמר (hide of an ass driver) – this is our reading But we don’t have the reading of עור החמור/the hide of the ass. That is to say, the leather that the ass-driver places on his clothes when he loads up his ass.
עור הכתן (leather of the flax beater) – the leather that the flax artisans place before them in order that the hatchelled flax doesn’t stick to their clothing.
עור הכתף (the leather of the porter/carrier) – the porter places on his shoulder in order that the load/burden that is on his shoulder not damage him.
עור הרופא – the doctor of the societies places before him leather so that his clothing will not be soiled with the blood of the wounds.
עור העריסה (hide of the crib) – that the place on the crib of a small baby.
עור הלב של קטן – it was customary to gird leather on the loins of a young child opposite his heart , so that the cat will not strike him on his heart and he will die.
עור הכר והכסת – of a bed.
עור הסרוק (leather of the dealer in hatchelled wool) – the leather that the artisans of combers gird on their loins.
עור הסורק – artisans who comb flax.
ר' אליעזר אומר מדרס – and all the more so, someone who came in contact with someone defiled by a corpse. For it taught in the Mishnah in chapter בא סימן/The Sign comes [Tractate] Niddah, (Chapter 6), Folio 49a (Mishnah 3): “Whatever is susceptible to Midras/treading uncleanness is susceptible to corpse uncleanness.”
וחכמים אומרים טמא מת – but not corpse uncleanness, or they are not made to be sat upon. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 6

עב כסות (thick clothing) – felt-cloaks (i.e., thick, fulled or felted stuff made of wool and hair) that one made from them clothing. This is the thick clothing. And similarly, the thick purple, to cloth that is colored purple. This is what my teachers/Rabbis explained. But I heard, “thick clothing” hide that they cover up the clothing. Thick purple – is the hide that they cover up with purple.
תכריך כסות (wrapper for garments) – hide that they wrap up the clothing.
תכריך ארגמן (wrapper for purple) – hide that they wrap up the purple
חפוי – cover. The Aramaic translation of cover is חופאה/cover.
טהור – and such is taught in a Baraita, it is possible that I increase covering for vessels for defilement, as the inference teaches us (Leviticus 11:32): “any such article that can be put to use [shall be dipped in water,, and it shall remain unclean until evening],” excluding the covering of vessels.
למשקלות – but it is taught in the Mishnah above at the conclusion of the Chapter [16], “Every wooden vessel that has been divided into two is clean” (Mishnah 8): “This is the general rule: [That which is made for a case is unclean.] And that which is made for a cover is clean.” But the cover of weights is different, because it is made for receiving, and the weights itself are not a vessel. But the Halakah is according to the first Tanna/teacher.

Mishnah 7

שיש חסרון מלאכה – that there still is lacking action, but afterwards [the thought] is actualized.
העוצבה (fur trimmed of its ends, robe, cover) – even though it is missing work, the though defiles it, because they are not strict on its missing work. And עוצבה/fur trimmed of its ends, robe, cover is the hide that covers the riding seat/saddle, which doesn’t require trimming the ends of a skin, for since it is made for a cover, we don’t worry about trimming the ends of a skin.

Mishnah 8

של בעל הבית – that are not made to sell them (i.e., the hides), and he makes from them beds and delphicas and tablets [for writing]. He intended for them for something that are appropriate for hm without the loss of work, they are susceptible to receive ritual impurity immediately.
ושל עבדן (that belonging to a tanner) – that is made to sell, intention does not defile them, for he makes and in tends to sell them and the purchaser will make shoes from them, but their work had not yet been completed for this.
של גנב מחשבה מטמאתן – that he acquired them through despair. For he (i.e., the first Tanna) holds that mere theft is despair of the honors, for they do not know from whom to make a claim.
ושל גזלן מחשבה מטמאתן (but of a robber, intention does not make them susceptible to uncleanness) – for even though he thought of them (i.e., the hides) for something where there is no loss of work, for a mere robbery there is no despair of the owners, for since he knew who stole from him, he goes and makes a claim against him in court.
חילוף הדברים – (see also Talmud Bava Kamma 114a) – there is despair for a mere robbery. For according to his viewpoint, he (i.e., the robber) took from and it is fit and proper for he (i.e., the robber) is a strong/violent man and he despairs, but a mere theft, he (i.e., the owner) holds that the item I is found with the thief and he will make a claim against him in court and will not despair. But the Halakha is according to the first Tanna/teacher.

Mishnah 9

עור שהוא טמא מדרס – as for example a rug and things similar to it.
אף העושה מטפחת מן העור – which is impure through treading.
טמאה – the towel/kerchief, for the towel/kerchief is similar to the rug, for sometimes he sits upon it. But if he cut the ritually impure chairs of hide and made of them towels/kerchiefs, since ) (it is something from vessels that were broken. But however, they are susceptible to receive ritual impurity from here onwards, as is taught in the Mishnah about in Chapter 24 [Mishnah 12].

Chapter 27



Mishnah 1

הבגד מיטמא משום חמשה שמות – as it is explained further on: because of receptacle, because of sitting, because of overshadowing [of a tent], because of a web [and] because of three fingerbreadths square. And each one of them, its measurement is different one from the other. How so? A cloth [of wool or linen] that has a receptacle, such as the piece of leather in which jewels are bound up, that is taught In the Mishnah above (Tractate Kelim, Chapter 26, Mishnah 2), or a receptacle of [olive] oil or a receptacle of wax, its measure is with a little bit., [and because of defilement by sitting, if it was defiled] though the treading of a person with gonorrhea, its measure is not less than three handbreadths by three handbreadths square. But if it became a tent of overshadowing for a corpse, as it is written (Numbers 19:18): “[A person who is pure shall take hyssop, dip it in the water,] and sprinkle on the tent [and on all the vessels and people who were there],” there is no defiling with less than a handbreadth by a handbreadth square. But if it is a belt/אבנט or a girdle/חגור, it becomes defiled because of the web, even though it does not have the measurement to be fit to be called a cloth, for it does not have the width of three fingers, even so, it is impure because it is a web. And we derive it from a sack. Just as a sack is spun and woven, even all that is spun and woven. And all of the rest of the defilements, the cloth is not defiled nor does it defile with less than three fingers square, for it is not important neither to the poor nor the rich and is not called a cloth.

משום ארבעה שמות – that it lacks the measurement of three fingerbreadths square.
העור משום שלשה – for it lacks [the measurement] because of three fingerbreadths square and because of a web.
העץ משום שנים – that it lacks the defilement of tents, as it is taught I the Mishnah in [Tractate Shabbat, Chapter 2, Mishnah 3] the Chapter במה מדליקין/With what do we kindle [Shabbat candles]? “No product from a tree can contract “tent” uncleanness [except for flax].” And it also doesn’t have because of a web, and also because of three fingerbreadths square.
החרס משום אחד – because it is a receptacle alone But it doesn’t have all of these that we have mentioned (of the rest of the five). And it also does not have [defilement through] treading, as it is written concerning the treading of a person with gonorrhea (Leviticus 15:5): “Anyone who touches his bedding [shall wash his clothes, bathe in water, and remain impure until evening].” He makes an analogy between “his bedding” to him, just as he who has ritual purity in the ritual bath/Mikveh, even all who have purity in the ritual bath, excluding earthenware that does not have purity in a ritual bath that does not become lying for a person with gonorrhea/a flux.
איל לו אחרויים – that an earthenware vessel is not susceptible to receive ritual impurity from its outside, as it is written (Leviticus 11:33): “And if any of hose fall into an earthen vessel, everything inside shall be impure [and -the vessel – itself you shall break].” If it came in contact with defilement from its outside, it was not defiled at all.
שהוא מיטמא משום אריג – which is not the case with a hide, for even if he cut it into thin straps and wove them, it is not considered a web/weaving.

Mishnah 2

הבגד מימטמא – for becoming defiled through contact with a corpse and for all the rest of the defilements except for that of treading, because of three fingerbreadth square, because it is appropriate for poor people, and it is derived by implication from as is it written (Leviticus 13:47): “[When an eruptive affection occurs in] a cloth, [of wool or linen fabric].” But for uncleanness by treading, we require something that is appropriate for sitting, and with less than three handbreadths by three handbreadths, it is not appropriate for seating.
השק – that is woven from hair or feathers of goats, its measure whether for someone who had been defiled through contact with a corpse or for treading is not less than four handbreadths by four handbreadths.
ושוין – to defile through defilement of treading/Midras and through defilement by contact with a corpse. A sack, or a hide or a mat.
שייריו ארבעה – regarding this matter, it is stated [by Rabbi Meir] that its remnants are four [handbreadths]. When it became worn out and torn and there remained from it a measurement of four handbreadths, but at the beginning of its weaving, it doesn’t become susceptible to receive ritual defilement until it is completely woven. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Meir.

Mishnah 3

היה ושה שנים מן הבגד – two handbreadths.
ואחד מן השק – one handbreadth.
טהור – for that which is inferior does not complete the measurement of that which is important, that the inferior’s measurement is greater. But the more highly regarded completes the measurement of the inferior, for even a little bit of that which is highly regarded is susceptible to receive ritual impurity.
מן החמור (more stringent) – that it is sufficient for it in a small measurement.
מן הקל (from a category more lenient) – that requires a greater measurement. And especially like this arrangement that is written in the Mishnah, they combine to the [more] lenient of them: the cloth and the sack, the sack and the hide, the hide and the matting. But the cloth and the hide or the cloth and the matting, or the sack and matting do not combine, for one who attaches them, has annulled his thinking with regard to every person. But however, to make of them a patch on the pack-saddle/cushion – consisting of patches – of a donkey, all of them combine, that from whichever of them will trim a handbreadth and make it a path on the pack-saddle/cushion of a donkey, they combine, for he is not strict for there, if it is from two species.

Mishnah 4

מכולם – from any of them that he will trim (from the list provided in the first two Mishnayot of this chapter) one handbreadth by one handbreadth, it is appropriate to become defiled through sitting, For those measurements that are taught in the Mishnah above, the cloth is three [handbreadths] by three [handbreadths] square for uncleanness through treading and the sack is four [handbreadths] by four [handbreadths] square, etc., it would not other than with a piece of cloth or sack or hide or matting that was not cut or repaired for sitting. But trimming, that is cutting and repair from one of all of them one-handbreadth by one-handbreadth square in order to sit upon it, is impure through sitting, for occasionally one trims and makes patches from one of them for the pack-saddle/cushion of a donkey and sits upon it, but it will not be other than a handbreadth by a handbreadth.
מכל מקום – and even from the sides. But Rabbi Shimon holds that from the sides is not appropriate for sitting. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon [but according to the Sages – anyone who trims anywhere one-handbreadth by one-handbreadth, it is impure.].

Mishnah 5

נפה וכברה (sifter or a sieve) – they are [made] of [leather] hides. And sometimes we make a sifter from hair, and its law is like the law for a sack. And similarly, sometimes they make a sieve from ropes of parings/shavings used for basket work and of bulrushes/reed-grass, and its law is like that of matting.
עד שיקצע (until one trims it/cuts off rough ends) – that he will cut and repair for sitting (see Tractate Kelim, Chapter 20, Mishnah 4). And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
אע"פ שאין בו גבוה טפח – and even though it is [the seat] of an adult, it does not become susceptible to receive ritual purity until it is less than a handbreadth, as is taught in the Mishnah above in the Chapter “The Table and the Delphica” [Chapter 22, Mishnah 3], a seat for a child is appropriate for sitting even with less than a handbreadth. [Without legs, the seat is unsusceptible.]
עד שיהיו בו כעשיר – if it is from cloth – until it will be three-handbreadths by three-handbreadths square, according to the measurement of the defilement of a cloth for uncleanness through treading.
ונמדד כפול – three [handbreadths] in front of him, and three [handbreadths] in back of him, I is found that when he stretches it out, it is six [handbreadths] in length by three [handbreadths] in width square, and its length is double its width.

Mishnah 6

אלו נמדדים כפולים – that it needs the measurement to be from two sides. Since it is their manner to use them from two sides, if the measurement is from one side, it is not effective. Another explanation, that it is measured double, that a cloth in the place of cut, it is the manner that the threads go out from it and it becomes ruined and is easily torn, and it is the manner of sewers to double a bit around the cut and sew. And this is measured double as it has been taught, for after it is doubled, there needs to be enough in order to its measurement, but if there isn’t enough for its measurement, even though that if one would loosen the stitch and stretch it out, there would be enough for its measurement. It is not effective.
אנפליא (socks) – socks that reach until the knee. Whether they are of cloth or of hide/leather.
פמוליניא (knee breeches/long stockings) – like a kind of large undergarments/trousers that go from the loins until the thighs, and they have straps.
כובע – that is on the head.
וכיס של פונדא (money belt) – a region that is hollow, and it is similar to a pocket that is made for receiving.
מטלית – patch.
שטלייה על השפה – that one sewed on the hem around the neck.
אם פשוטה (if it is flat) – that it is not sewn from both sides but rather either from in front or from behind. And for the second explanation, that it is not doubled from the thread surrounding the seam.

Mishnah 7

הבגד שארג בו שלשה טפחים על שלשה טפחים (the cloth on which one wove three by three square handbreadths) – in close confinement, which is the measurement to be susceptible to uncleanness through treading. But after they were defiled through treading when they are closely confined, he competed upon it the weaving of all of the cloth, and now all of the cloth is impure through treading which is an attachment of three [handbreadths] by three [handbreadths] square that were defiled prior to the weaving of all the cloth.
נטל חוט אחד מתחלתו – from the first three [handbreadths] by three [handbreadths] square that were defiled by treading.
טהור – the entire cloth [is pure] from uncleanness of treading.
אבל טמא מגע מדרס – because it came in contact with the first three [handbreadths] by three [handbreadths] square prior to its measure being reduced/diminished.
נטל חוט אחד מתחילתו ואח"כ השלים עליו את כל הבגד טמא מגע מדרס – and even though it reduced/diminished its measure prior to completing the entire cloth, nevertheless, the entire cloth is impure through contact with Midrash/treading uncleanness. For this Tanna/teacher holds that a cloth of three [handbreadths] by three [handbreadths] square that was divided after it was defiled through treading, is impure through contact with treading, as is found later on in our chapter (see Mishnah 10 of this chapter). Therefore, when it reduced/diminished its measurement of three [handbreadths] by three [handbreadths] square, it remained impure through contact with treading uncleanness, and when he completed the entire cloth, the cloth is attached to impurity through contact of treading, and all that is attached/connected to something impure, is impure like it.

Mishnah 8

וכן בגד שארג בו שלש אצבעות – in close confinement, that this is its measure to be defilement in all of the defilements together except for that of leaning, but with this, it is not defiled in any defilement that is in the world.
שלש על שלש שנתמעט טהור – it is completely [pure], and is not appropriate for anything, neither for the poor nor the rich, therefore, it is pure from all defilements.

Mishnah 9

ועשאו וילון – a curtain that is front of the opening, as for example, that he made something that by means of it is pure from uncleanness through treading, according to the School of Shammai from when it is sewn, but according to the School of Hillel, from when it is tied up. But according to Rabbi Akiba, from when one fixed it, as is taught in the Mishnah above in [Tractate Kelim] the Chapter, “The Mattresses and the Pillows”/"הכרים והכסתות" (Chapter 20) [Mishnah 6[.
טהור מן המדרס – that it is annulled from the law of lying and sitting, but it is appropriate to the defilement of contact, because the attendant warms himself in it and wraps himself in his rims.
וכי באיזה מדרס נגע זה – meaning to say, since it is ritually pure from the defilement of treading when he made it into a curtain, it is completely pure and there doesn’t remain in it any defilement. For anything that were shards of vessels are pure from their defilement completely.
אלא אם כן נגע בו הזב – if the person with gonorrhea/flux came in contact with this curtain, he defiles it with the defilement of the contact of a person with gonorrhea. But from the power of defilement of treading that was in it initially, there is no defilement here at all. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 10

שלשה על שלשה שנחלק – a cloth which has in it three handbreadths by three handbreadths which had been defiled by treading uncleanness of a person with gonorrhea, and afterwards, it was divided, and there isn’t in any one of them by the way of the measurement of defilement by treading, in this, there is a dispute between the first Tanna/teacher and Rabbi Yossi, that the first Tanna/teacher holds that he is impure through contact with treading, but Rabbi Yossi holds that he is pure completely. But the cloth of three [handbreadths] by three [handbreadths] that that was separated from a large cloth that was [defiled] through treading, everyone admits that at the time of their separation from their “father”, it received the defilement from their “father.” And the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 11

בריא וצורר מלח (sound and capable of wrapping up salt) – this is our reading. A cloth that is placed in the trash is voided from the designation/nature of a cloth, unless it has two things: that it is sound and strong and appropriate to wrap in it a quarter Kab of salt. But if it is found in the house, since it wasn’t thrown in the garbage, it is still valuable/regarded but one qualification is enough, either it is sound/firm even though it is not capable of wrapping up salt or it wraps up salt even though it is not sound/firm.
ר' יהודה אומר בדקה – always it does not become defiled until it wraps up a quarter [of a Kab] of fine salt.
וחכמים אומרים – it does not become susceptible to impurity until it wraps up coarse salt.
אלו ואלו מתכוונים להקל – Rabbi Yehuda holds that fine [salt] must be wrapped in a sound and very strong cloth, because of its heaviness, that it is heavier than the coarse salt. Therefore, he estimates until it holds the fine salt, to be lenient regarding it so that it does not become defiled. But the Rabbis hold that coarse salt requires a cloth that is even more sound, because of its pointed projections and horns that protrude. Therefore, they estimate with the coarse salt to be susceptible to be defiled, in order to be lenient on the cloth that holds the thin salt that it should not become defiled.
שוין שלשה על שלשה באשפה לשלש על שלש בבית – just the three [handbreadth] by three [handbreadth cloth] in the house is defiled through corpse uncleanness and are not defiled through treading/Midras uncleanness, so the three [handbreadth] by three [handbreadth cloth] that is in the garbage become defiled through corpse uncleanness and are not defiled through treading. For their importance has been invalidated after he threw it into the trash. And the Halakha is according to the Sages alone.

Mishnah 12

שלשה על שלשה שנקרע – and the tears were not divided from each other (i.e., they were attached).
ובשרו נוגע בכסא – if the tear is so large under that when they place the cloth upon the chair and he sat upon it, his flesh would come in contact/touch the chair.
טהור – that he nullified it from the category of a piece of cloth.
ואם לאו – that the tear is not so great that his skin would come in contact with/touch the chair, it did not void it from the category of a piece of cloth, and he is ritually impure.
שנמהה ממנו (to be tattered/to fall to pieces from it) – that [one thread] wore out from it, and its example of something tattered that was hanging over a healthy piece, as is taught in the Mishnah above at the end of chapter twenty-four (Mishnah 17) "שלשה תריסין הן"/There are three kinds of shields”: “A worn out basket in which one patched to a sound one – they follow the status of the sound one.” And when one thread wore out from a piece of cloth of three [handbreadths] by three-handbreadths squeezed in, the measurement was lessened and it is ritually pure.
או שני חוטין מתאימין (or two threads running alongside) – My teachers/Rabbis explained, that [the word] מתאימין/running alongside/adjoining refers to the knot. And such it is taught, that if there found in it two knots that are adjoining each other or two threads adjoining each other. Because if two threads that are tied one to the other in the cloth, there is no way to leave them, and this what we said in the Gemara in [Tractate Shabbat 74b) in the chapter, “The Great Principle”/כלל גדול, if it happens that there are two knots next to one another, one is loosened and the other is knotted. Two threads that run along one another, for it is the manner of the weaving that the woof enters into the warp, two threads do not enter at the same time, but rather in a place where this one enters and that one leaves, and when both of them are equivalent, the one is thought to be like the one that doesn’t exist.
החזירה – to the house.
טמאה – for he retracted in his intention/thought.
לעולם השלכתה מטהרתה וחזרתה מטמאתה (always does throwing it out purify it and recovering it renders it unclean) – meaning to say in that manner/way, it becomes susceptible for being defiled and becomes purified ten times a day.
ארגמן וזהורית טובה (purple and fine crimson silk) – it is considered but it is not nullified [from the category of cloth]. And the good crimson is colored silk CRAMIZI in the foreign language.
אף מטלית חדשה כיוצא בהן (even a new patch of that stuff) – its law is like the law of purple and fine crimson [silk], and the trash does not invalidate it from the category of a cloth.
כולן טהורין – if it was thrown into the trash, even the purple and the fine crimson [silk].
לא הוזכרו – purple and good crimson [silk] to be separated/divided from the rest of the clothing.
אלא מפני השבת אבידה – that if he found them in the trash, we don’t say that he threw them there knowingly, and they require public announcement for because of their importance, the owner do not despair [of recovering it]. But the rest of the clothing is not important, that if he found them in the garbage/trash, they don’t require public announcement. And the Halakah is according to the first Tanna/teacher.

Chapter 28



Mishnah 1

שלש על שלש שנתנה בכדור – a cloth of three fingerbreadths by three-fingerbreadths that was placed within a ball, PLOTA in the foreign language.
או שעשאה כדור – that he took a cloth and wrapped it up round like a kind of ball, like the young children do, and sewed it.
טהורה – that it became voided when it it was placed in a ball, and all the more so, when he made a ball of it by itself that it became voided through sewing.
אבל שלשה על שלשה (but three – handbreadths—by three – handbreadths) – it was not voiced through its being placed within the ball, because it is preserved there. But if he made of it a ball by itself, it is ritually pure, because the sewing diminishes it, and it is pure from treading/Midras uncleanness. But it is impure in all of the other defilements according to the law of all three-handbreadths by three-handbreadth objects that were diminished.

Mishnah 2

לפוק\ (to fill up a gap) – to stop up holes that are in the bath house so that the heat doesn’t leave.
ולנער בו את הקדרה (to empty out the contents of the pot/dish) – to hold on to the pot in order to pour from it into a dish or into a tray.
בין מוכן בין שאינו מוכן (whether kept in readiness or not) – in the Chapter, “With what [wicks] do we kindle [Sabbath lights]” {Tractate Shabbat folio 29a--b, chapter 2) it proves that when he places it in a box, everyone doesn’t argue about it that it is ritually impure, for it is his intention. But when he throws it into the trash, everyone doesn’t argue about it that it is ritually pure, for he has voided it. Where they argue is where he suspended it upon a frame to spread clothes on, KOYLIYA in the foreign language, or left it behind the door. Rabbi Eliezer holds that whether he left it upon a frame to spread clothes on, that it appears as ready to throw it in the garbage, or whether he left it behind the door, that it appears that is not ready concerning leaving it in a box, it is always impure as long as he didn’t throw it into the garbage. But Rabbi Yehoshua holds that it is always pure all the time that he did not put it in a box. But Rabbi Akiba holds that suspending it upon a fame to spread clothes on, it is [considered] ready and it is as if he placed it in a box and it is impure, but if he left it behind the door, it is [considered] that it is not ready, for it is as if he threw it into the garbage and it is ritually pure. But there (in Tractate Shabbat 29a-b), it concludes that Rabbi Akiba retracted in favor of the opinion of Rabbi Yehoshua. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehoshua.

Mishnah 3

אספלנית (plaster) – a bandage/dressing that they make from milk, and wax and butter and [olive] oil and similar things. And they strike a plaster/rub a salve on the cloth or on the [leather] hide or they place it on the wound and it is repulsive, for the cloth nor the hide are appropriate any longer for sitting or for any other use.
מלוגמא (poultice/plaster) – a bandage/dressing that is made from flour and figs and similar things, that a person chews and places upon the wound. And an explanation [of the word] מלוגמא is a mouthful/quantity of liquid filling one cheek.
בבגד טהור – because the cloth is repulsive and is voided and is further not appropriate for use.
ובעור טמא – because the poultice does not cling on the hide like on the cloth, and the hide is not voided through this.
מפני שהיא ננערת (because it is shaken off) – after it dried up from upon the cloth, it is shaken off and is detached on its own from upon the cloth and all the soiling departs. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon ben Gamaliel.

Mishnah 4

מצויירות טהורות – for their form proves upon them that they are designated for Scrolls alone, and not for the use of a person, and all that is not for usage of a person, is ritually pure.
ואינן מצוירות – designated also for the rest of the usages, therefore they are ritually impure. But the School of Shammai who [states] that they defile, whether they are painted [with figures] or not, because coverings for [Torah] Scrolls are considered for the usage of humans, that they are made to be used by them always.
אלו ואלו טהורות – for since they were designated for [Torah] scrolls, it is further not for human usage. But the Halakha is not according to Rabban Gamaliel.

Mishnah 5

כיפה – a wrap that is on the head of a woman. And it has defilement through treading, for sometimes she sits upon it.
ונתנו על הספר – if he designated it for a Scroll and wrapped it upon it (i.e., the Scroll).
טהור מן המדרס – but it is impure regarding other defilements.
חמת (waterskin) – a bottle made of [leather] hide.
שעשאו שטיח – a hide stretched on the ground to sit upon it. And a waterskin and a rug are both impure through treading/Midras, and even so, since they are different one from the other, and even without the change of action, it is like a vessel that is broken and is pure, but it is susceptible to receive defilement from here onwards.

כסת שעשאו מטפחת ומטפחת שעשאו כסת טהור (a bolster/cushion that one made into a wrap and a wrap that one made into a bolster/cushion is pure) – And we don’t have the reading of טמא/impure [as does the Mishnah]. And this is the reading of my Rabbis/teachers. And similarly, I found in an accurate Mishnah. And this is proved from the Tosefta (see Tosefta Kelim Bava Batra, Chapter 6, Halakha 1), and the reason that in all of them, it is pure, as is taught in the Mishnah close by (our Mishnah): “This is the general principle: Anything which one changed for [something] in its own category is impure, and for [something in] another category is pure./"זה הכלל: כל ששנהו לשמו – טמא, לשם אחר – טהור"’, and it explains in the Tosefta: for something in its own category – from a flat vessel to a flat vessel, as for example, from a rug to a wrap or from a wrap to a rug, and in another category, from a simple vessel to a receptacle or from a receptacle to a simply vessel, and also from one receptacle to another receptacle, everything that is a change that is not in its own category is ritually pure. And if so, the waterskin that was made into a bag that he changed it from one [kind of] receptacle to another kind of receptacle is also ritually pure. But if you raise the question, why didn’t they combine them and teach them [together] a waterskin that was made into a rug and a rug that was made into a waterskin at the same time, since all of them are ritually pure. But it is not difficult, because he needed to go back and teach [waterskin] another time, as it taught the waterskin that was made into a bag, and he would have had to teach a waterskin that was made into a rug or a bag, and he didn’t want to change fro the order of the other things. But most of the books have the reading of "טמא"/impure, and I don’t know how to resolve this “reading” correspondingly.

Mishnah 6

מטלית (a patch) – which is impure through treading, and one batched it onto a basket. But the basket is not something that can become impure by treading, but when he placed the patch on the basket, the basket was defiled, because it came in contact with the patch that is impure through treading, and this is contact of treading. But the patch, when the patching had been completed, the defilement of treading flew off from it, because it was voided concerning the basket and a basket is not suitable for treading uncleanness.
מטמאה אחד ופוסלת אחד (renders unclean at first remove and renders unfit at one) – like the law of vessels that came in contact with treading uncleanness, and they explained, that it is taught in the Mishnah at the end of [Tractate] Zabim (Chapter 5, Mishnah 6): "הנוגע במשכב מטמא שנים ופוסל אחד"/If a person touched a bed (i.e., the uncleanness caused by an unclean person lying on a object) imparts uncleanness at two removes (at one step and this in turn at another)and renders [heave-offering] unfit at one further remove,” he explained imparting uncleanness at two removes and rendering [heave-offering] unit at one remove, that all the while that the vessel touches the [object] that is unclean through treading, we consider it as a primary source of ritual uncleanness regarding foods to make them first and second degree uncleanness for profane things and third-level of uncleanness for heave offering. But when he separated himself, it is like the offspring of uncleanness (i.e., acquired through contact with any primary source of uncleanness or derivative uncleanness of such) which makes it second-degree of ritual uncleanness for profane things and third-level uncleanness for heave offering alone, which is that it defiles by one degree and invalidates by one degree.
הפרישה (if he removed/separated it) – the patch from the basket, the asked is an offspring of uncleanness, like it was prior to his removing it, but the patch is pure, for since he patched it on the basked, it became like the basket, and it is like a piece of the wall that he took from the basket that the piece is ritually pure. But however, if after its removal from the basket he considered it for sitting, it receives impurity from he onwards if had in it like the measure [for impurity].
טלאה על הבגד (if he patched it on to the cloth) – not that it had been voided from the uncleanness of treading, for he defiles the cloth in two counts and invalidates it in one like the law of vessels that touch uncleanness through treading all the while that he did not remove it.
הפרישה מן הבגד – the law of cloth is like that of vessels that came in contact with [defilement] and then separated/removed it. It defiles at one remove and invalidates at one remove, for the patch, it is like it was, that it had never been voided, and defiles at two removes and invalidates at one.
וכן הטולה (and similarly one who patches) – a patch.
על השק או על העור – like patching on the cloth and it is not voided [and remains unclean].
ר' שמעון מטהר – for he holds that the sack and the hide it is voided, for it is not of its kind. But Rabbi Yossi holds, that with a sack that is woven like it is not voided, but on a hide, since it is not woven, is voided. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 7

שלש על שלש שאמרו (three-fingerbreadths by three-fingerbreadths – that they spoke of) – that it is susceptible to corpse defilement and reptile and carrion.
חוץ מן המלל – what the weaver leaves over at the top of he cloth, like the measure of two fingerbreadths, and it is branch/locks of the cloth, which is called מלל/hem. And since it is the warp/longitudinal direction alone and there is no woof/latitudinal direction, it does not combine for weaving. But my Teachers/Rabbis explain [the word] מלל, just as he hems and doubles the stitch in the place of he incision, because it is the manner of the threads to extend where they shouldn’t extend and the sewing is ruined.
מכוונות (exactly)– and the hem is included in all of this.
טלייה על הבגד מרוח אחת – the path is impure through treading and he sewed it on the the cloth in the middle from one direction [only], but from three directions, it is suspending and not attached to the cloth.
אינו חיבור- and the cloth is not impure through treading uncleanness.
משתי רוחות זו כנגד זו (from two directions – one opposite the other) – as for example, that it is sewn from the east and the west, but it is not sewn from the north and south. Or its reverse. This is a connection and the cloth is impure through treading uncleanness.
כמין גאם – that it is sewn east and south, or west and north.
במה דברים אמורים – that it is not a connector other than from two directions/sides, one opposite the other.
בטלית – for it is not the manner of dress/clothing other than that wrapping upon it alone.
אבל בחלוק (but a shirt) – that we wear, is always a connector, unless the upper rim/hem is sewn. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 8

בגדי עניים – which are made from small individual pieces, and there isn’t in all of them one whole piece that has three [fingerbreadths] by three [fingerbreadths].
הרי אלו טמאים מדרס – for since there is in all of the cloth as a whole three handbreadths by three handbreadths or more, the entire cloth is impure with treading uncleanness.;
כיון שנקרע רובה אינו חיבור – but if the one end is defiled, the other end is not defiled.
העבים והרכים – the most thick and huge clothing, such as the thick, full or felted stuff and the large ones. And the most soft and thin, such as that of silk and that which is hatchelled.
אין בהן משום שלש על שלש – and they are not defiled through corpse defilement nor the rest of the defilements until there they will have three-handbreadths or more, because [less than] three [fingerbreadths] by three [fingerbreadths] is not worth anything.

Mishnah 9

כסת הסבלין (the cushion which load-carriers wear on their heads) – that carry loads on their shoulders or on their heads, there is small cushion on their heads or upon their shoulders so that the load doesn’t damage them, and sometimes they sit upon it.
משמרת של יין אין בה משום מושב (the strainer for wine is not susceptible to sitting uncleanness) – for we don’t sit on it because of the sediment.
סבכה של זקנה טמאה מושב (the head-dress/net of an old woman is not susceptible to sitting uncleanness) – because of what is taught in the chapter “Three Shields”/שלשה תריסין (Tractate Kelim, Chapter 24, Mishnah 16), that the head-dress/net of an elderly woman is defiled through corpse uncleanness, that is implies, but not because of seating, it is necessary to explain that there are two kinds of head-dress/nets for elderly women, one that is not appropriate for sitting up and it is defiled through corpse uncleanness, and the other head-dress/net, sometimes she sits upon it, and the Mishnah here comes t to teach that it is susceptible to sitting.
חלוק של יוצאת החוץ – it is the Aramaic translation of a whore – a creature that goes out.
עשוי כדבכה – it has many windows like the making of a net and her skin can be seen outside.
מן החרם (from the net) – from the net-work. And his skin is seen, therefore it is pure.
מן זוטו (from the fishing net/solid web of network) – there is at the bottom of the netting a bit that is woven made in the cloth. And it is called זוטו של רשת /webbing of the net.
וכפלו (and doubled it up) – and he doubled up the netting and sewed it, and his skin is not seen from within it.
טמא – for it is considered a cloth. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov.

Mishnah 10

קורקורקתה (lower border of a web) – the hem and the bottom, like the rimmed bottom of the vessels.
עד שיגמור את פיה (until he completes its hem) – its upper rim/hem, that does not descend into defilement until he completes all of its work.
שביס שלה (the band of the net) – from the language of “the bands and the enclosed places.” It is a painting that one makes on the hairnet for beauty. It stands on her forehead and surrounds it from eat to ear. And it is also considered on its own, that it is made to remove it from there, and to place it in another hairnet.
טמאים משום חיבור – that if the hairnet is defiled, all the stings are defiled with it. For it were strings/threads without the hairnet, it would not be susceptible to receive ritual defilement.
אם אינה מקבלת את רוב השער – of the head, it is pure/clean.

Chapter 29



Mishnah 1

נומי הסדין (threads/fringes of the sheet) –fringes that extend from the sheet. And they are threads that regularly extend from something woven, whether from the sides, whether from above or whether from below. If a reptile touched the fringes, the sheet is defiled. And it should touch within the measurement that is explained in our Mishnah (i.e., six fingerbreadths). And similarly, if a reptile touched a sheet, all of the fringes are defiled up to the point of the explained measurement. But from there and outward, they are pure, for the fringes are not a connector to the entire cloth but rather only up to the point of the measurement that is explained about them.
טרטין – like kinds of hats.
פליון – a sheet that one wraps oneself in entirely.
אפקרסין (underwear) – like his undershirt forms no check (but must likewise be rent) that is the third chapter of [Tractate] Moed Katan אלו מגלחין/Which are those who may shave? [Moed Katan 22b] and it is the underclothing and it is open from its shoulders, and when he wears it, he ties it up.
סגוס (a coarse woolen blanket – often mentioned a s a mattress to sleep on) – a thick cloth of wool and all it is fringes, and they call it ALBORNUS in Aramic.
רדיד (female’s wrap of fine texture, veil) – a thin that woman covers here head. The Aramaic Jerusalem translation of "ותכס בצעיף"/”And she (Tamar) covered her face with a veil” (Genesis 38:14) is רדידא.
גומדין (a veil of a square gomed/a cubit less the hand’s length, the arm) – a cloth that is a cubit by a cubit, and the Arabs cover heir noses and their mouths in the cold weather. And the explanation of a גומד is a cubit, as it is written (Judges 3:16): “[So Ehud made for himself] a two-edged dagger, a GOMED in length, [which he girded on his right side under his cloak].”
קלקין (Cicilian goat hair cloth) – woven of hair and it has fringes.
פונדא (money bag, hollow belt) – there are those who explain it as a hollow and wide girdle/belt. And there are those who explain it as the underwear that one places on one’s flesh to preserve the rest of the clothing so that they will not be soiled through sweat.
מעפורת (apron, any garment for the protection of clothes) – It is the Aramaic translation of (I Kings 20:38): “[Then the prophet,] disguised by a cloth over his eyes, [went and waited for the king by the road],” and it is taught regarding a מעפרא/a cloak with a hood. A kerchief that one wraps one’s head in.
פרגוד – a curtain that one hangs over the entrances of the kings.
כל שהן (any length) – whether great or a little, it is connector. And all of them, the last ones that the measures are explained, like the measurement that is a connection – whatever that remains from that of the measure, is not a connector, neither for defilement nor for sprinkling.

Mishnah 2

שלש כסתות של צמר (three woolen cushions) – that are sewn this one with that one like washers’ materials loosely stitched together (see also Tractate Shabbat 48b). Alternatively, woven together, similar to those who weave napkins whose manner is to leave a separation between each napkin and they are connected with threads of the warp/in the longitudinal direction and it has no woof/latitudinal direction. And all of these are taught in the Mishnah, here each one according to its number or less is a connection, but if defilement came in contact with one of them, all of them are defiled. But if they were impure, and dust was sprinkled from the [Red] Heifer on one of them, all of them are purified. But more than this number, there is no connection, not for defilement nor for sprinkling.
סבריקין (a sort of trousers) – there are those who teach [the word as] ספריקין. There are those who explain it as trousers/undergarments, drawers. And there are those who explain as a kind of gloves made from wool that we dress the hands in them and cover the arms until the joint which touches the rib/elbow.
גלופקרין (woolly bed-covers, blankets) – thick covering of wood that they wear at the time of the cold [weather].
חיבור לטומאה ואינו חיבור להזאה – for a stringency. If defilement came in contact with one them, it is a connection and all of them were defiled. But if one of them was sprinkled, it is not a connection, and he didn’t purify anything other than that one that was sprinkled upon alone.
ר' יוסי אומר אף לא לטומאה – but the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 3

חוט המשקולת (plumb-line) – The builders take hold of a thread/cord In their hands, and at its top is lead and they lower it opposite the wall to see that it should not be curved.
חרשין – carpenters of wood.
ושל בנאים – those who build high and large walls, and a plumb-line [mentioned] in the first clause [of the Mishnah] is aught other than twelve [handbreadths], we are speaking of something designated for small buildings.
יתר מכאן – more than these measurements that the Sages counted for each and every one, even though that he desires their existence, the excess over the measurement is ritually pure and it is not a connector to the vessel.
ושל סיידים (that of plasterers) – who plaster the face of the walls with lime/plaster, and they also require [the use of] a plumb-line, and similarly the painters who paint images on the walls.
כל שהן – whether a lot or a little, it is a connector.

Mishnah 4

חוט המאזנים (cord of the balance) – the chord that holds in it the balance at the time that they weigh them.
ר' יוסי אומר טפח טהור – if the handle of the ax is so large that it extends a handbreadth from the back of his hand, it is not considered a handle, because it damages him while he is working, and every handle is completely pure. This is what my teacher explained. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 5

יד הקרדום מלפניו (the handle of the ax at its front) – the manner that a person grasps hold on the handle of the ax when he wants to sever/cut with it, he doesn’t hold it actually at the top of the handle/helve lest it slip and fall from his hand, but rather he leaves a it of in back of his hand, and the measurement that there is between the hand of a person and the iron he calls from in front of him. But the person who goes out from the back of his hand he calls from in back of him in the other clause [of the Mishnah]. But that it doesn’t explain in this clause , the law of what is in front of him and what is behind him, because here, it considers theses those that their measurement is a handbreadth, but in the other clause [of the Mishnah], those whose measurement is three fingerbreadths.
פרגל (a pair of compasses) – drawing figures in he air/gesturing. CUMPASU in the foreign language. And the artisans need to make round forms with it.
מקבת (stone-cutter’s mallet) – an iron hammer that its one end is sharp and with it they bore/perforate and with it they cut/hew the stones. And on account of this it is called מקבת. And stone-cutter’s mallets and the ax/hatchel are all vessels of iron (First Kings, Chapter 6, Verse 7): “When the House (i.e., the First Temple) was built, only finished stones cut at the quarry were used,] so that no hammer or ax or any iron tool was heard in the House [while it was being built].”
מפתחי אבנים (the shaft of a stonemason’s chisel) – "פתוחי חותם" /”[On the two stones you shall make] seal engravings – [the work of a lapidary”] (Exodus 28:11).

Mishnah 6

של צמרים – those who sell wool, and he reason for these is there measurements of two handbreadths, because he grabs hold of them with two hands, and that is also the reason that all of these handles that are coming up, their measurement is with two handbreadths. And all of those whose measurement was a handbreadth, is because it was his manner to grab hold of them with [only] one hand.
מקור (beak, a tool for whetting millstones) – a sharp mallet/smith’s hammer that they bore/chisel the millstone. And on account of the fact that they bore/chisel with it, it is called a מקור.
יד המעצד של לגיונות (the handle of the adze of the legions) – we have the reading. And it is a vessel from the vessels of the murderers, its head is round and warriors carry them in war. And in Arabic, we call it TAVRIZIN.
של זהבים – they strike on gold to make thin plated objects (i.e., the goldsmith’s hammer)
ושל חרשים – of iron.

Mishnah 7

שיירי הדרבן מלמעלן (the remnants [of the shaft] about the point of the ox goad) – the handle of the plough (called in the Bible a דרבן and/or a מלמד) at one end it has iron similar to an awl/borer that with it leads/teaches the heifer to its furrow, and it called a דרבן/ox goad, and on its second end is a wide piece of sharpened iron to sever the roots, and its name is חרחור/coulter [inserted into the horizontal pole/מרדע in front of the ploughshare/דרבן). And the measurement of the handle of the horizontal pole/מרדע is higher on the side of the דרבן/ox goad four handbreadths and it is considered as a connector, but below, to the side of the coulter/חרחור is seven handbreadths which are adjacent to it is a connector, as we see further on. And what is more than the four [handbreadths] to the side of the ploughshare and seven [handbreadths] to the side of the coulter is not a connector and if impurity/defilement came in contact there, it is not defiled, neither the coulter nor the ox goad.

של נכוש (the ax used for lopping trees) – a hammer that they strike with it on the stones and break them.
בן פטיש (small hammer) – the small hammer is called בן פטיש and the large is called a פטיש/hammer.
של בקוע (that part of the spade used for chopping) – a spade/hatchet that they chop trees with.
ושל עדור (hoeing) – that they dig/hollow out the ground for seeding, like (Isaiah 7:25): “[But the perils of thornbush and thistle shall not spread to any of the hills] that could only be tilled with a hoe; [and here cattle shall be let loose, and sheep and goats shall tramp about].”
של סתתין (stone-cutter’s ax) – hewing stones and those who trim them level them off.

Mishnah 8

מגריפה (ladle – of the household) – that they remove/sweep ashes/coals from the oven and double stove, or the plaster/clay. The Aramaic translation of (Numbers 4:14): “[Upon I they shall place all the vessels that are used in its service: the fire pans, the flesh hooks,] the scrapers/יעים [and the basins – all the vessels of the altar – and over it they shall spread a covering of dolphin skin;]”is מגרופייתא /from ladles.
ושל סיידים (of plasterers) – that they remove the plaster/lime.
יתר מכן – more than these measures that the Sages counted in the hand of the ladle, if he wants this preservation of the extra length.
טמא – if the vessel is defiled, and similarly, if the defilement came in contact with all of this length of the handle, the vessel is defiled with it, for it is a connector to the vessel.
יד משמשי אור (shaft of fire implements) – such as the handle of the spit and the lattice-work of a fire place and the deep and covered plan, and other vessels and their utensils/implements through the fire.

Chapter 30



Mishnah 1

כלי זכוכית – This Mishnah is taught above in Chapter 2 [Mishnah 1] and Chapter 15 [Mishnah 1] and since it was necessary to teach the law of these vessels of glass, he returns and teaches them once again here.
טבלא – table.
אסקוטלא (a salver or a waiter of nearly square form) – in the foreign language, we call a dish SHEKOTILA. But here we are speaking of a flat dish, which does not have a receptacle, but rather that from underneath it, a small receptacle is connected to it that serves when we turn it upside down on its face, similar to what our silver and glass cups have.
יש להן לבזבז (they have a vertical rim/edge – by which a flat vessel is made into a vessel—like receptacle) – a rim all around, the vertical rim makes it a vessel that has a receptacle.
שולי קערה ושולי אסקוטלא (bottoms of a flat dish) – when the place of their usage is broken, there remains a small receptacle and he turns it over and uses it, but nevertheless they are ritually pure, for the rims are not considered a vessel, because the place of the break that injuries the hands when they hold it.
קרטסן או שפן (if he scraped them or filed them) – he repaired them and made them smooth until their were appropriate to be used in the same receptacle, they are impure, for they are no longer the shards of a vessel.
בשופין (with files) – a vessel that that refines and iron artisans remove the rust/mold and smooth/level the vessels. The Aramaic translation of הצריפים/those who smelt, refine is שופינא/file. LIMA in the foreign language.

Mishnah 2

אספקלריא (window-glass) – a glass mirror that a woman sees her face in. And in the foreign language ISPAKLAV. But even if it has a receptacle, it is ritually pure, for it is not used to receive anything, but only to look at the shape/form of the face.
תמחוי – like a kind of large glass tray.
תרוד (spoon – pointed on top and curved at the end) – a glass spoon.
ואם לאו – if when he places it on the table or on a flat surface it rolls to here and there and what is in it spills, because it is sharp underneath and does not stand.
ר' עקיבא מטמא – for since it has a receptacle. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Akiba.

Mishnah 3

כוס – of glass.
שנפגם רובו טהור (that the majority of which is cracked/broken off) – that it is considered a broken vessel/fragment of a vessel.
מפגם בו שלש ברובו – that the three notches/cracks stand in the majority of the cup but not in its minority.

אם מפזר הוא את רוב המים טהור (if it scatters/disperses the majority of the water – it is pure) – but with a minority, it is ritually impure. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.
בבעץ – with tin.
רבי יוסי אומר בבעץ טמא – for everything follows after what restores it/preserves it, and it is considered like a metal vessel. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 4

צלוחית – that is similar to our glass flash that has a long neck.
שניטל פיה – whose neck was removed.
ובגדולה – that is not able to be carried with one hand, but only with two hands is called a large [flask], but that which can be carried with one hand is called a small [flask].
של פלייטון (an ointment or oil prepared from leaves of spikenard) – of balsam oil.

מפני שהיא סורחת את היד (because it lacerates/catches the hand – when you attempt to get the aromatic unguent out) – one who goes to place his hand inside to take from the ointment of spikenard to smell it, his hand is lacerated and scratched and torn, [The word] סורחת like [the word] סורכת with [the letter] "כ" is the language of an adhesion/סרכא.
לגינין (bottle, flask/flagon – smaller than a pitcher but larger than a cup) – like large pitchers.
מתקנין לכבשים (repairs them for use for pickled/preserved things) – when they pickle in them a vegetable in salt and in vinegar and leave the there to be established.
אפרכס (the hopper, grain-receiver on top of the millstone) – a vessel that is made for the millstone, wide from the top and narrow from the bottom at its rims, and they place in it a lot of wheat at one time and they (i.e., the wheat kernels) go down gradually into the millstone and they are ground there. And an example of this we found at the beginning of [Tractate] Hagigah [3a]: “Make your ear like the hopper to receive the teaching,” for one brings in a lot and it produces a little.
אשריך כלים – Tractate Kelim.
שנכנסת בטומאה ויצאת בטהרה – it begins with the primary sources of uncleanness and the glass hopper/grain-receive on top of the receiver concludes in purity.