Resisei Layla
רסיסי לילה
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Resisei_Layla
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org
-Ami Silver, 2020
-http://sefaria.org

Resisei Layla



Chapter 1

In this world, man needs company. It is like they said in Berakhot (6b), "The whole world was only created to accompany this one." We understand from this that he needs the company of the creations. And they, may their memory be blessed, said (Eruvin 54a), "[In the case of] someone walking without accompaniment on the road, let him study Torah." And all of this world is called walking on the road. It is as they, may their memory be blessed, said (Sotah 21a) about the verse, "When you walk, it will lead you" (Proverbs 6:22), "in this world." So when he has no company, he should occupy himself with Torah [study]. For it is the model of the story of creation and of all the creatures, as they said in Bereishit Rabbah 1. So it comes out that he has the company of all the creation and all of the world. And it is because of this that the world is called, "when you walk" - because walking is another way to say preoccupation. It is as they said in Berakhot (11a), "'And when you walk, etc.' (Deuteronomy 6:7), that is preoccupation with a commandment." And all of this world is a preoccupation. That is why, in the Talmud, the day of death is called [when] his soul rests; as one rests from his preoccupation. And that is why they said in the Yerushalmi (Berakhot 2:4, 17b), "In all of my days, I have never concentrated [in my prayers]" - since preoccupation is the opposite of concentration, as it is found in Berakhot there. And hence full concentration is totally impossible in this world. So that is why Shabbat is called similar to the world to come, since it is the day of rest; while this world is a time of preoccupation. (It is like they said in Avodah Zarah 3b,) "Whoever busies himself on the eve of Shabbat, etc."

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12

Prayer is primarily a matter of the heart, as it says in Ta'anit 2a, "The work that is in the heart—this is prayer," and also in Berachot 31a, "One who prays must direct their heart." This is well-established.
In contrast, Torah study seems to be primarily a matter of the mind. However, we pray, "and place in our hearts understanding," as it's known that there is both chochmah (wisdom) and binah (understanding), which correspond to the mind and heart, respectively.
Chochmah refers to the general, explicit teachings of the Torah.
Binah is the ability to deduce one concept from another, applying explicit teachings to make practical judgments and rulings.
We find a similar idea in Sanhedrin 35a, "The heart of people are people," which means that innovation and creativity stem from the heart.
Chochmah and binah are two inseparable companions (Zohar III, 4a). The Torah is only truly called "Torah" when it instructs the heart. This is like the saying in the Jerusalem Talmud (Berachot 1:2), "He who studies without the intention to act, it would be better for him..." and also, "He who says he only has Torah, even his Torah will be..." (as written in Yevamot 109b).
The verse "Why is there a price in the hand of a fool to acquire wisdom, since he has no heart?" (Proverbs 17:16) means that even if a person knows the words of the Torah, they're considered a fool if their heart isn't engaged. The verse says they don't even have wisdom, for true wisdom doesn't reside in the mind alone; it must also be in the heart. This is like what was said about Do'eg (Sanhedrin 106b), that "all his Torah was from his lips outward," meaning it wasn't absorbed into his heart, similar to the verse, "To the wicked, God says... 'for you recite My statutes with your mouth'" (Psalm 50:16), which means it's only in their mouth.
The essence of Torah is that it must be absorbed into the heart. As stated in Vayikra Rabbah (17:1), on the verse "highways in their hearts" (Psalm 84:6), "the paths of Torah are paved in their hearts." In Shocher Tov (Psalm 119), on the verse "I have hidden Your word in my heart," it says that for anyone who has the words of Torah in their heart, the yetzer hara (evil inclination) cannot rule or touch their heart.
This doesn't contradict what is said in Sukkah 52b, on the verse "for He has done a great thing," which applies to Torah scholars more than anyone else. The reason their heart is not ruled is similar to what's said in Chagigah 27a: the fire of Gehinnom (hell) does not rule over them; it doesn't say it doesn't enter. They learned this from the golden altar, where fire burned but didn't consume it. However, in Do'eg's case, he was rejected from the portion of the World to Come, meaning the fire did consume him. This is why it was said of him that his Torah was "from his lips outward."
Nevertheless, the "darshanei reshumot" (expositors of subtle impressions) said... (Sanhedrin 104b). This means that the portion of the World to Come is called binah, which is known to be attained only through the binah of the heart. However, there are also "reshumot" (imprints or impressions), a higher place that is not subject to questioning and is beyond human comprehension, existing only as an imprint. In that realm, even the one whose Torah is "from his lips outward" is not rejected. This is because it is a level higher than the heart. Ultimately, the end of an action is connected to the initial thought. In this world, which is the world of action, the movement of one's lips is an action. Even this has holiness and can serve to bring holiness into the heart. This is the meaning of the verse "and life is in the hand of the tongue" (Proverbs 18:21).

Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29



Chapter 30



Chapter 31



Chapter 32



Chapter 33



Chapter 34



Chapter 35



Chapter 36



Chapter 37



Chapter 38



Chapter 39



Chapter 40



Chapter 41



Chapter 42



Chapter 43



Chapter 44



Chapter 45



Chapter 46



Chapter 47



Chapter 48



Chapter 49



Chapter 50



Chapter 51



Chapter 52



Chapter 53



Chapter 54



Chapter 55



Chapter 56



Chapter 57



3. ... The miracle of Purim was allowed to be written, for it was “the end of all miracles” (Yoma 29a) paralleling the attribute of Yesod-Malchut, which is “the end of the body” (Tikkunei Zohar 17a). And it was the preparatory step for the miracle of Chanukah, which is the only one of the miracles that were not allowed to be written that was [nonetheless] established for all generations. This is because the miracles that were not allowed to be written down have yet to be revealed in their full manifestation, and it is impossible to establish every one of them for all generations. But the miracle of Chanukah is the sum total of all the miracles throughout the period of exile, which cannot be written down, and it was established eternally. And it is only through the light of a candle, which is the light of revealing the holiness of the Yesod [foundation] in the outermost realms, in manifest reality, that also shines its light inward into all manners of confusion. And once this became clear through means other than [written] words of Torah, it continues to be revealed through the specifics of all the myriad forces throughout the entire duration of exile...