Makkot
מכות
Rabbi Mike Feuer, Jerusalem Anthology
https://www.sefaria.org

Makkot



Daf 1a



Daf 1b



Daf 2a



Daf 2b



Daf 3a



Daf 3b



Daf 4a



Daf 4b



Daf 5a



Daf 5b



Daf 6a



Daf 6b



Daf 7a



Daf 7b



Daf 8a



Daf 8b



Daf 9a



Daf 9b



Daf 10a

   

    
   
   
     
   
 
  
   
    
 
   
  
     
   
   
  
 
      
   
R’ Yehoshua ben Levi said:  what does the verse “Our feet were standing within your gates, O Jerusalem,” (Psalms 122:2) mean?  Who helped our feet to stand in battle? The gates of Jerusalem which were occupied with Torah. 
And R’ Yehoshua ben Levi said:  what does the verse “A song of ascents of David. I rejoiced when they said to me, "Let us go to the house of the Lord" (Psalms 122:1) mean?  David said before the Holy One:  Master of the World! I heard people saying –  when will this old man die so that his son Shlomo may come and build the Chosen House and we can ascend there on the festivals, and I rejoiced.  The Holy One replied to him:  “For a day in Your courts is better than a thousand…” (Psalms 84:11) As single day that you are occupied with Torah is preferable to Me than a thousand sacrifices which in the future Shlomo will offer on the altar before me.

Daf 10b



Daf 11a



Daf 11b



Daf 12a



Daf 12b



Daf 13a



Daf 13b



Daf 14a



Daf 14b



Daf 15a



Daf 15b



Daf 16a



Daf 16b



Daf 17a



Daf 17b



Daf 18a



Daf 18b



Daf 19a



Daf 19b



Daf 20a



Daf 20b



Daf 21a



Daf 21b



Daf 22a



Daf 22b



Daf 23a



Daf 23b



Daf 24a



   








 


 
    






 


  
    
  



      
Once R’ Gamliel, R’ Elazar ben Azaryah, R’ Yehoshua and R’ Akiva were walking on the way and they heard the noise of the multitudes of Rome from Pleita, a hundred and twenty miles away. They began to weep, and R’ Akiva laughed.  They said to him:  why are you laughing?  He said to them:  and you, why are you weeping?  They said to him:  these heathen who bow to idols and offer incense to the stars are sitting quiet and secure, while us - the House which is the footstool of our Gd is burnt 

Daf 24b

 with fire, shouldn’t we weep?!  He said to them:  this is exactly why I am laughing. If this is how He treats those that transgress His will, how much more He will do for those who do His will. 
Another time they were going up to Jerusalem, and once they reached Mount Scopus they tore their clothes.  When they reached the Temple Mount they saw a fox come out of the place of the Holy of Holies - they began to weep and R’ Akiva began to laugh.  They said to him:  why are you laughing?  He said to them:  and you, why are you weeping?  They said to him:  the place of which it is said “any outsider who approaches shall be put to death” (Bamidbar 1:51) has become the haunt of foxes, shouldn’t we weep?! 
He said to them:  this is exactly why I laugh. It is written “And I will call to testify for Myself trustworthy witnesses, Uriah the priest and Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah.” (Isaiah 8:2)  What is Uriah doing together with Zechariah?  Uriah was during the First Temple and Zechariah during the Second Temple! Rather, the Scripture linked the prophecy of Zechariah to the prophecy of Uriah. 
In (the prophecy from the days of) Uriah it says “Therefore, because of you, Zion shall be plowed as a field…” (Micah 3:12) and in Zechariah it says “Old men and old women shall once again sit in the broad places of Jerusalem…” (Zechariah 8:4)  So long as Uriah’s prophecy was not fulfilled – I was afraid that Zechariah’s prophecy would not be fulfilled. Now that Uriah’s prophecy was fulfilled – it is certain that Zechariah’s will be fulfilled.  They said to him: Akiva you have comforted us! Akiva you have comforted us!