Tosefta Sukkah (Lieberman)
תוספתא סוכה (ליברמן)
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Tosefta Sukkah (Lieberman)



Chapter 1

A sukkah which is higher than twenty cubits is disqualified; but Rebbi Jehudah qualifies it. “Rebbi Jehudah said, it happened that the sukkah of Helena (in Lydda) was higher than twenty cubits and the Sages were coming and going there and nobody was saying a word. They said to him, because she was a woman, and a woman is not obligated in sukkah. He said to them, is that proof? She had seven sons who were scholar students, And they all slept in it.
A sukkah that has more sun than shade is disqualified. For what case are we talking about? [In the event that the sun falls] from above, but if it falls from the sides, even if it is full of sun, it is qualified. 
 If a man puts a canopy of leaves over a bed, or over a tree that is [at least] ten handsbreadths high, if they afford more sun than shade, it is qualified, if not, disqualified. 
The shepherd's hut or the hut of the fig pickers or a robbed sukkah is disqualified. If it has been covered with cords or tufts of forage, it is disqualified; covered, then it is qualified, even if you have connected them to each other.
If it is covered with flax stalks, then it is qualified. with bundles of flax, then it is disqualified. 
One may roof a sukkah with reeds and spades although he sticks them to each other. Covered with ears of corn, it is qualified if the straw outweighs the grain, but if not, unsuitable. R. Jose son of R. Yehuda says: If one covered with rags of clothing, then it is qualified. 
You can cover with boards, The words of R. Yehuda. But the sages say: Only when between him and to the nearest there is an interval as large as its own extent. R. Yehuda said: There was an occurrence in the hour of danger: We set up ladders and made a roof over them with boards and slept under them. They said to him: The hour of danger is no proof. But the sages agree in this that if a board has four handbreadths wide, it is necessary that between it and the next to it there will be an interval as large as its own extent. If you hang on it nuts and pomegranates and olive cakes and bunches of grapes and wreaths of corn up, then it is [nevertheless] qualified. One shall not eat from them, even on the last day of the festival. But if you have given them the proviso that you want to eat from them during the festival, it is allowed.
A large court that is surrounded by pillars, the pillars are to be regarded as walls [of the sukkah]. Someone may make another a wall that he may eat and drink and sleep [in the sukkah], and not only that, but one may set up a bed and stretch a sheet over it so that the sun does not fall on food or shines on a dead person. But the sages agree with R. Eli'ezer that tents should not be erected on the holiday from the outset, and one does not even have to say: On the Sabbath. (And what are they divided on? About whether you can add to an already existing tent. then R Eli'ezer says: On the holiday one must not add, and one does not even have to say: On the Sabbath;)<sup class="footnote-marker">1</sup><i class="footnote">The part in parentheses, although reproduced in both manuscripts and the editio princeps, should be deleted according to Lieberman, cf. Tosefta KiFshuta ad loc.</i> but the sages say: On the Sabbath one may add, and one does not even have to say: On the holiday.
There was an occurrence with R. Eliezer, as he was reclining at the table in the sukkah of Johanan son of Ilai in Caesarea. The sun reached the sukkah. He said to him: Can you spread a sheet over the sukkah? He replied: You will not find a single tribe from Israel that has not produced a judge. The sun reached half of the sukkah. (he said to him: may one now spread a sheet over the sukkah?). He replied: You will not find a single tribe that has not produced a prophet, The tribe of Judah and the tribe of Benjamin brought forth kings even by the ordinance of prophets. The sun reached the feet of R. Eliezer. So he took a sheet and spread it over the sukkah. R Eliezer turned his feet and walked away.
If one makes his sukkah as a shed [i.e. Indian tent] or that he supported it on a wall, it is disqualified. But R. Eliezer agrees [with the sages] in this, that if their roof has an opening of a handbreadth or if it above the ground even a handbreadth high [perpendicular] runs, is qualified. With a mat of dry reeds or of papyrus, if it is a large one, one may cover with it, and if it is a small one, one may not; and with one made of Haifa grass, if it is large, it may be covered, and if it is braided, one may not cover with it. R. Ischmäel son of R. Jose says on behalf of his father: even a plaited one, one may cover with it, and R. Dosa said it according to his words.
If one puts a canopy of leaves over a chariot ten handbreadths high, R. Jose son of R. Yehuda says on behalf of R. Jose: If one who sleeps under the wagon, it is as if he were sleeping under the bed. 
When he has erected four beams and laid a canopy over them, R. Jacob says: One looks at them as if one had smoothed them out, and they are a handbreadth squared and a handbreadth in the Height, then it is qualified, but if not, it is disqualified.
But the sages say: Two [walls] by regulation, and the third even only a handbreadth high. R. Shimon says: The third by regulation, and the fourth even only a handbreadth high. R. Shimon son of Elazar says in the name of R. Meir: If there are two [walls] by human hands and the other one is a tree, then it is fit and one may climb up to it [to the sukkah] on a holiday.