Zera Kodesh
זרע קודש
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Zera Kodesh

Approbations



On Torah

Bereshit



Noach



Lech Lecha



Vayera



Chayei Sara

"And the life of Sarah was..."  The Zohar Hakadosh states: "He who is big is he who is small and vice versa..."  This statement can be explained as: He who is big considers himself small. We find with Moshe Rabbeinu who was extremely great and yet considered himself smaller than everyone being the most humble person to walk the face of the earth. In the opposite vain the person that is small considers himself great precisely because of his lack of significance.  This concept is illustrated in the Talmud through the adage of a single coin in an otherwise empty vessel making noise where a vessel filled with coins doesn't.  

Toldot



Vayetzei



Vayishlach



Vayeshev



Miketz



Vayigash



Vayechi



Shemot



Vaera



Bo



Beshalach



Yitro





<b>And you</b> shall be a kingdom of priests - that you shall minister to Me, in that you shall crown Me upon you. And that is why the first letters of these words [spell], kingdom (<i>malkhut</i>). And that is the essence of the receiving of the Torah, that we accept His Kingship upon us, may His name be blessed. And with this, that we accepted it, we became a kingdom of priests. And that is the idea of the two crowns that we had when we said, "We will do and we will listen." For we had two ornaments when we accepted His Kingship, may His name be blessed. And that is why afterwards, it is stated (Exodus 33:6), "So the Children of Israel stripped themselves of their ornaments from Mount Sinai on." For they [no longer] had their two ornaments mentioned above. And that is why the essence of everything is the acceptance of His Kingship, may His name be blessed, with a full heart and soul.

Mishpatim



Terumah



Tetzaveh



Zakhor



Ki Tisa



Parah



Vayakhel



Pekudei



Vayikra



HaChodesh



Tzav



Shmini



Tazria



Metzora



Achrei Mot



Kedoshim



Emor



Behar



Bechukotai



Bamidbar



Nasso



Beha'alotcha



Sh'lach



Korach



Chukat



Balak



Pinchas



Matot



Masei



Devarim



Vaetchanan



Eikev



Re'eh



Shoftim



Ki Teitzei



Ki Tavo



Nitzavim



Vayeilech



Ha'Azinu



V'Zot HaBerachah



On Festivals

Rosh Chodesh Nissan



Inaugural Sacrifices



Haggadah



Pesach



Last Day of Pesach



Rosh Chodesh Iyar



Lag BaOmer



Shavuot



Rosh Chodesh Sivan



Rosh Chodesh Tamuz



Rosh Chodesh Av



Tu BeAv



Rosh Chodesh Elul



Rosh HaShanah

Behold in the style/wording/text of the prayer "Master of worlds" that is said on Shabbos eve:"and blessed are they Your holy and pure angels that do Your will ... and this presents a difficulty for is there another (type of) angel that does not do the will of the Holy, may He be blessed? Are they then owners of free will?        Only, the explanation is that He, may He be blessed created the world that there would be reward and punishment. And the guiding principle/main aim was to benefit His creatures, and behold, the angels that also mete out punishment that He, may His name be blessed, created were also generated according to His will, may His name be blessed.        In any case, they do not fulfill His will entirely, may His name be blessed, at the moment that they administer discipline, as the will of Him, may His name be blessed, (ית"ש) is solely to benefit. And behold, from Him, may His name be blessed, (ית"ש), nothing negative will come forth.   Only on account of the sins of the human is a demon of destruction/destroyer created that harms the person and in all of this it is not the will of Him, ית"ש, for this to happen. And it can be said that those very angels are judged by Him, ית"ש, on Rosh Hashana (the New Year) He forgives/cleanses sins and judges them (the angels) for the excessive punishments they administered, as it is the main wish of Him, ית"ש, as the main aim for the creation of the "will to do evil" that is the force to be vanquished that when it is overcome there will be pleasure at having triumphed.  For being able to destroy (evil) brings satisfaction. And so the defeat of the will to do evil brings joy to Him, ית"ש. And this is the meaning of: the land and its' inhabitants hope for judgement, and the meaning of this "hope for judgement"  is that they look forward to it, as this is a benefit for them, and this is what was cited above. This is the meaning of: "shaking and trembling will grip and be visited upon the army above that have been created by the deeds of men that sanction them (the humans) for as in righteousness does He, ית"ש, judges the people so does He judge them and this is a great benefit/kindness.
And in that day, a great ram’s horn shall be sounded (Isaiah 27:13) etc. and shall prostrate themselves to H' on the holy mountain etc. (Isaiah 27:13 conclusion of verse). Behold the 12 months that are 6 months of winter and 6 months of summer are compared to/symbolized by the 6 attributes of "male" and 6 attributes of "female". In the winter they are in the mode of "male" that is the "influence/giving in abundance" to the "female" and she absorbs/accepts his influence and the "fetus" is created within her from the abundance of the "male" as the "female" conceives by him. By this we see that in the winter the land receives the abundance of the rains and the snow from the heavens, and we call the "days of rain" and that makes the land fertile. "For as the rain or snow drops from heaven" (Isaiah 55:10) and saturates the land and it "gives birth" and growth and she/it receives it within her/it in the mode of "pregnancy from the male" that is the preparation for the "birth". In the summer all the seeds will flourish and the land will bring forth its' fruit. This is the birth resulting from the "pregnancy" as it says "And makes it bring forth vegetation" (Isaiah 55:10) and reveals the "influence/emanation". And so says the Ari'sal (R. Yitzchak Luria) regarding the dissension re the world having been created in Tishrei or in Nissan, these as well as those are the words of the Living Elokim. That in Tishrei was the thought/plan that is like pregnancy as preparation for the birth as it says in the Gemarah Rosh haShana: "today is the conception of the world." in the aspect/view that the "male" as stated above/alternate translation: so it seems to me (כנ"ל) caused the "female to conceive". And in the point of view that the "birth" was in Nissan it became apparent that this pregnancy was due to the "male aspect" giving abundance, like e.g. that due to the birth of the baby it was made known to all and revealed to all that a union/private meeting of "male and female aspect" had taken place and from this came the birth of the child and so this particular "union" was revealed. And behold, as it says to start with "in the beginning Elokim created the Heavens and the earth" (Bereshit 1"1) that the heavens preceded (the earth) and then it says: these are the generations/history (translations vary greatly in the wording) etc."in the day that the Lord G--d made the earth and the heavens (Koren translation)". For the start is the mode of "pregnancy" that in Tishrei the heavens preceded which is the "male aspect" (as mentioned above/alternate translation: so it seems to me, כנ"ל) and on the day of "making/doing" which is the "birth" כנ"ל which is in Nissan and the land came first as the birth is from the "female aspect". Like the land gives birth/brings forth everything, כנ"ל. Therefore the 6 months of summer have the "aspect of female" as during (those months) the "birth" was revealed, כנ"ל.     And behold it is written in the "section"? that the 6 months of summer and winter are compared  to the 7 "gates/openings" in the head that are called the 7 entrance points in the skull: ears, eyes, nose/nostrils and they are in the aspect of male and also in the aspect of female. These are compared to the 6 months of summer and six months of winter; and the mouth (the seventh opening, explanation by the translator). As far as the aspect of either male or female is concerned it is hidden as no month can be assigned to it. And so in Nissan and in Tishrei that are the beginning of the male and female aspects, in regards to the mouth we find the revelation of the "voice" (קול) and the speech (דיבור). The "voice" being the manifestation of thought and the "speech" serves as the exposure of the voice/sound. As it is said in the parasha of Nitzavim in this context that the voice is the generalization of speech and the speech is "hidden' within it. For from a simple sound speech can be assembled at will using any letters. In Nissan "speech" was revealed as it says in the section (?) that the aspect of speech was in exile and went down to Egypt compelled by the "dibbur"(command) and afterwards speech was revealed and was called Pessach from the words Pe (mouth) Sach (clean, pure) in speaking as well as in the sounding of the Shofar that is also a manifestation of "mouth" by way of voice/sound alone and allows for the thought to be understood from the sound and the "speech" has yet to be revealed. The shofar blower lifts the "mouth" of the horn against his own "mouth" and the "voice" is heard and in spite of all that - it is still "hidden". As it says in the midrash "And G-d roars aloud" (Joel 2:11) etc. For the matter of scripture in the section of the gmarah Rosh haShana is still hidden and following this by way of "from the seal the writing is revealed" (meaning uncertain). And so we have found by the giving of the Torah that it is written: " Moshe speaks, and G-d answers him by a voice (Exodus 19:19)" and it is written: "And all the people perceived the thunderings (Exodus 20:15)". And we find that what they heard is called the Written Torah, and that it is still in the aspect of "hiddenness" until the scholars that are the commentators/interpreters of the Written Torah revealed the hidden (meaning) of the Written Torah and explained it and these/their words is called the Oral Torah which is the proclamation for the scripture is in the aspect of "hidden" כנ"ל. Only this is revelation in the aspect of "thought" for the thought has been revealed but it has not yet reached the aspect of "birth" כנ"ל, only the revealing of the thought. And so the vapor that ascends from the mouth of the blower to the "mouth" of the shofar causes an illumination from the 370 glows (ש"ע נהורין) and a perfection of the 10 attributes that are contained within it. And some interpret the word vapor (hevel) to have the numerical value 370 and that these (שע"נ) are in the aspect of "thought" for they originate from the two words/meanings of the word/name "(K)el"; the aleph and the lamed that are the name mentioned by the "13 attributes of mercy" (י"ג מדה"ר) that Moshe cited: "(The LORD passed before him and proclaimed: “The LORD! the LORD! G-d compassionate and gracious, slow to anger, abounding in kindness and faithfulness, extending kindness to the thousandth generation, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin; Exodus/Shmot 34:6) and the "13 attributes of mercy" (י"ג מדה"ר) that Micha said:  "Who is a G-d like Thee, who pardons iniquity" (Micha 7:18). The Aleph and the Lamed combine to the numerical value of ש"ע which is the aspect of "thought" which is the basis of the "13 attributes of mercy". So we find that in Nissan there is a revelation of the "speech" from the point of view of the "mouth that is hidden", כנ"ל from the view of "voice uncovering thought" and in Nissan and Tishrei it is the revelation of voice and speech from the point of "mouth in male/female aspect" and, behold, through these are made apparent various benefits that are contained within the 10 utterances with which the world was created, as cited above, that in Nissan and Tishrei the creation was in conception and giving birth and H', may His name be blessed, (שית"ש), sealed with His "signet ring" both Heavens and Earth (Aramaic) the capital letters of את השמים ואת הארץ  (א ה ו ה). The sum of these letters (aleph, heh, vav, heh) is טוב (or the numeric equivalent 17{translator})
3 "Blow the horn on the new moon" (Psalms 81:4) has the initials for the word Shabbat (שבת) because, behold, the horn (shofar) is a matter of freedom as is cited: "And you shall sound the shofar [in proclamation of the Jubilee]" (Leviticus 25:9); "and you shall call out freedom [for all (Hebrew) bondsmen], "Yovel" (Jubilee) [lit., "the shofar"] (Leviticus 25:10), for each individual. The shofar is blown to signify freedom because freedom is something without diminution because when a person is enslaved he is in a mode of shrinkage and cannot act and behave as he wishes; only as a free person is he "expanding" and the shofar when being blown instructs to do so from a place of constriction (mouthpiece) and the sound emerges in the place of expansion, and this teaches about freedom from all kinds of servitudes, and this is: "In distress I called (Psalms 118:5)"... (following words tillהכתוב  unclear) that scripture establishes in regards to serving Him with the reading of the Shmah. For the service of Him whose name shall be praised is to be done in awe/fear and love. The fear/awe is like a constriction/self discipline and not like the experience of freedom for it was his will that a person should refrain from behaving like this. It is indeed not his wish to behave like this but he abrogates his preference because he is afraid, but when he is on the levels of love he experiences freedom and greatly benefits and celebrates in the performance of the commandments of Him, whose name shall be praised, and is very happy and joyous regarding them until he will do them for no reason or without coercion other than his wanting to do so. He would in his love for Him, who shall be praised, and His commandments do them - and then he will perform them from an aspect of freedom and expansion. And so, also, is the matter of Shabbos from the aspect of freedom and expansiveness for on a daily basis it contained creation that was generated by way of constriction which brought the revelation of creation. And on the holy Shabbos there was no creation for it (Shabbos) is characterized by “Ein Sof”(without limit, another name for G-d), may He be blessed. It is free of any type of constriction and because of that on the holy Shabbos there can be no creation on Shabbos as it is is from the aspect of freedom. Moreover, Shabbos does not have any kind of vessel/instrument/container and is even more expansive from the aspect of space in comparison to the shofar.  The sound expands after exiting the shofar and demonstrates freedom and brings a huge influence of grace/mercy. This grace/mercy is characterized by being free of any kind of constriction and manifests only expansion and so it was explained that just as grace/mercy is called “benevolence” for it is a matter that is without measure, similarly, is medicine called restoration as it is coming from a world that is called “prepared” as the graces/mercies are in readiness there, without any limitation.  The aspect of power/self discipline is from the view of constriction and so an ill person is called “austere/lacking” as it says in (מ"א  meaning unclear, could be midrash aggadah) "Blow the horn on the new moon" (Psalms 81:4) and the book of Torah will be a(n umbilical) cord/line of the law and has the gemmatria of the initial letters of: “We beg You! With the strength of Your right hand’s greatness untie the bundled sins”. (Prayer Ana b’koach in the siddur) for with shofar and Shabbos is freedom guarded/preserved/guaranteed as discussed earlier and the mercies/graces overcome from the aspect of:”for great is His steadfast love toward us” (Psalms 117:2) and the citation:” the strength of Your right hand” which is grace/mercy and “untie the bundled sins” which is bound up in constriction in the aspect of power/strength.   “Untie” means that even the attribute of power/strength will be sweetened and come to expansion and through this will be revealed the mode of “freedom” and the holy sh’china (immanent presence of G-d in this world) shall be elevated. She is the concluding letter Heh (5th letter of the aleph beis) of the Name (of G-d) that is spelled with a Yud, a Heh, a Vav and a Heh. It is further written (Amidah prayer in siddur for a blessing of a year of prosperity):”Bless us with…” this year. Year has the gemmatria of s’fira (attribute) This (“Zot”) is the Heh that was just defined as the sh’china and she is called “Zot”. And we pray regarding the holy sh’chinah that she should shower them with blessing which means this attribute that is called “Zot”.   And all manner of crops should be abundant because of the influence, as already mentioned in the aspect of the “benevolence” of Your right hand and it’s many crops beyond the line of the law. 
Or it could be said: “Blow the horn on the new moon, on the full moon for our feast day” (Psalms 81:4). To understand why we say on Rosh haShanah 3 times: "Today is the birth of the world/existence". What is this matter regarding the 3 repetitions, only, that behold, it was the creation of the world. (So) it calls the “birth of Adam” that was created on Rosh haShanah; for the creation of the world started on 25 Elul (this was on Sunday, translator) and on Friday it was the New Year.     And we see that the Human is divided/partitioned into 3x3 parts. For in the (A) brain are 3 forces as (a) at the start the issue falls upon his thought (and brain) to do a thing that his understanding allows him to do and afterwards (b) it occurs to him that there is another mind that would refrain from doing that thing because of some reason and following this he decides to (c) either do or refrain from executing this idea.  Further we see that from the brain come 2 forces/strengths: 2 eyes to the right and the left (respectively) and also 2 ears and this teaches us that the strength of the intellect has two powers to be able to distinguish and similarly with the (B) heart which has 3 powers as has been mentioned upon his considering the matter with the understanding of the heart which has these 3 capabilities and so the branches that come from the heart are the 2 hands to the right and the left and the heart in between and also the lower organs that include the (C) liver which also has 3 strength/capabilities in the way it functions and brings forth the 2 thighs and the feet and all of these are compared to the issue of the 9 malchios (verses that have to do with kingship) 9 zichronos (verses that deal with recollections) 9 shofros (verses dealing with the shofar). Of each of these to reflect the 9 powers within the human being that are capable of crowning/declaring as a king Him, whose name be praised over all the organs, and all the worlds that are hinted at by this. And this is also the matter of the 3 fold sanctifications that are declared to increase His holiness in any way or shape or form and that say Kedusha 3 times. Says the holy Ari (R. Yitzchak Luria), may his memory be for a blessing, that in Tishrei creation was conceived in thought and in Nissan by deed. As was discussed earlier: this day is the birth of the world in the aspect of conception in thought and the intent is to introduce the idea of conception that will be covered up/hidden by the birth and revelation. This is the matter of (comparison to) the shofar in connection to which our wise men said re the verse: Sheol, a barren womb, Earth that cannot get enough water (Proverbs 30:16). Now in regards to the matter of the womb and so forth: just as the womb into which is inserted quietly and from which is removed with great fanfare and so on, so does the blower of the instrument insert the sound quietly into the shofar and the sound is unseen and unheard within the horn and only afterwards does the voice come out and is audible and what has been conceived quietly is revealed as if it had been given birth after conception.  And so on Rosh haShana the birth/creation is in the aspect of might and the initial letters of the verse: you are eternally mighty, my Lord (second blessing in the amidah prayer) have the gemmatria אל"ד (this can mean: I will birth-translator). And when they say: “The earth is the LORD’s and all that it holds” (psalm 24:1) for the full account (each letter will be spelled as if it is a word of it’s own and then the sum of those letters will be computed) of the letters ארץ has the gemmatria תלד (this can mean: I will give birth-translator) as the birth is in Nissan. And therefore it says:”in Nissan they were redeemed and in Nissan and they will be redeemed in the future” (Talmud Bavli, Rosh haShana 11b) as the importance of the revelation and birth/creation that we wish for is the redemption, as it says:”Yet Zion travailed and at once bore her children” (Isaiah 66:8)  And we say: “Today is the birth/creation of the world” (Mussaf prayer of Rosh haShanah) that conception and birth should be in mercy. As it says previously in regards to conception that the seed is brought forth from the intellect by way of the 5 ways/points of view/attributes as is mentioned in the verse: “Yours’ H’ is the greatness, the strength (the splendor, the triumph and the glory” 1, Chronicles, chapter 29:11) till the emanation of “foundation” by which the conception that we wish for is achieved in all extents of continuation only in grace/mercy and the gemmatria of the word “conception/creation” is 6 times (the angel) Michael (gemmatria 101) who stands for mercy/grace and so we say 3 times in regards to the birth/conception that we have discussed further up that the fetus is placed inside his mother 3 by 3, as has been said earlier that the human is made up of 3x3 forces/strengths and during pregnancy is not in expansion and through birth achieves expansion. And we want that this spreading of all these forces/strengths should be 3x3 in grace/mercy; to signify/indicate this we say 3 times:”Today is the birth/creation which is the gemmatria of 6 times Michael to signify the attribute of grace/mercy to achieve the increase of it in the “foundation” that include the attributes and through it the conception as cited further up that this is the reason that we say the 3 malchios and 3 zichronos and 3 shofros which are from the Torah, 3 from the prophets and 3 from the scriptures to symbolize the 3x3 (as already discussed) so that all should be an increase of the mercies and so we say after each iteration of the malchios, zichronos, shofros:”Today is the birth/creation as said before; and that (is the reason to say): “Blow the shofar” so the renewal will be in mercy and the book of Torah will be a(n umbilical) cord and has the gemmatria of the initial letters of: “We beg You! With the strength of Your right hand’s greatness untie the bundled sins”. (Prayer Ana b’koach in the siddur) for the sake of the mercy that is mentioned in:”Blow the horn at the new moon while it (the moon) is hidden on the day of our feast. (Psalms 81:4) the initial letters of which are Chessed (mercy) and strength and these attributes have the initial letters of the mode of “conception” which still has not revealed the substance of the child to be born and the “seeds” that are in the attribute of Chessed and Gevurah (mercy and strength/dominion) and therefore should be a continuation of chessed/mercy that shall manifest itself in the birth/creation as discussed previously. 
5 Should he say: “Blow the horn on the new moon etc,” (psalms 81:4) for, behold, all the holy days are with the aspect of benevolence. E.g. on Pessach/Passover, He, May His Name be Praised, did with goodwill, and took us out from Egypt and on Shavuot/Festival of Weeks He gave us His Torah,”a good instruction” (Proverbs 4:2) and so on all the Holy-days. And in all the festivals judgment is also included. as our sages, may they be blessed, wrote: in 4 particulars is the world judged on Pessach, and so on. Grace is a complete entity only if it is connected with self discipline/judgment to overcome the enemies who act hypocritically towards Him who gives with benevolence and this is the only way that grace can be given. And behold, on Rosh haShana/New Year on which just as all the other festivals that He, may His name be praised, deals benevolently with His people and judgment is executed on all the enemies of Israel. In any case the matter is hidden and covered up as it were and He whose Name be praised, sits to judge His people, as it says: they congregated upon H’, His glory, may He be praised, as it were, and they honor Him, and judgment is passed upon the enemies of H’ that attempt to overcome Him. And when we take up the shofar, about which we have already written that it is reserved to reveal from the obscure; and so becomes apparent the combined grace and justice that manifests itself in the true will from Him Whose Name shall be praised to give grace to His people and to overwhelm His adversaries and so the shofar blower puts his mouth upon the narrow opening of the horn: “In distress I called on the LORD; the Lord answered me and brought me relief” (Psalms 118:5) and in this is revelation.  Behold those that seek calculations that Chag/Holy day has the initial letter CHes as does CHessed/lovingkindness/grace and Gevurah/self discipline has the initial letter Gimmel (together they form the word “ch-g” Holy day, translator). These 2 aspects are part of every “ChaG”. (The author reiterates that:) inside the word chag are hidden the aspects of lovingkindness/generosity and discipline/judgment. In the citation: “Blow the horn on the new moon,” (psalms 81:4) that Chag/holy day conceals (within it’s meaning: translator) that neither the grace towards His people, nor the judgment against His enemies are apparent and therefore the exhortation to blow the shofar on the new moon reveals His formerly hidden might and awesomeness. And we wish to reveal/announce this and it is the reason for the shofar as has been explained further up: that breath is inserted into it in a hidden fashion and then exits as a sound. The intention is that the initial letters of the phrase:” and you are faithful/trustworthy to revive” (second bracha in the amidah prayer) that have the initial letters: vav (V’neeman the letter has the numerical value 6) aleph (Ata, 1) lamed (Lehachayot 30) with the numerical value 37 in the word hevel/breath with the same value for the letters Heh (5) Veis (2) Lamed (30). For you begin like a great warrior etc for it is desired that His might be revealed and He dominate over His adversaries and His benevolence be revealed by the Revival of the Dead in context with the beginning of creation that was effected with the letter Heh, arrived the small letter Heh, that is only breath/vapor as soon as a person breathes out. This is an analogue for the exhalation of the letter Heh (that was used to create the whole world, translator).
6 Should he say: “Blow the horn on the new moon etc,” (psalms 81:4) On the renewal of the kingship of H’, may He be blessed, blow the horn to threaten and instill fear upon the ministers of the nations of the world because it is the nature of the shofar to awaken fear, as it says:” When a ram’s horn is sounded in the town, do the people not take alarm? (Amos 3:6). With the shofar we instill fear upon the ministers of the nations of the world so they’ll refrain from approaching to accuse us. And, indeed, for us it is a great joy on Rosh haShanah and a great Holy Day as it is the revelation of the kingship of Him, Whose name be praised. Only we conceal and hide the joy of the festival day; and this is the meaning of:”...on the full moon for our feast day” (conclusion of Psalms 81:4). For we cover the joy and the festival in order to arouse fear and terror in the ministers of the nations of the world as has been explained earlier.
7 It is also possible to say:”on the full moon”(Psalms 81:4) and so on, as it is by the shofar that the sound is covered and the breath enters in stillness and the voice exits; and the sound hints at elevation from low to high for the foot/bottom part of the Kuf (the word sound/kol consists of a kuf and a vav and a lamed) has the lowest point of all the (Hebrew) letters and the Yud that makes up the very top of the letter Lamed is the highest of the all. The letter Vav that is between them teaches    על שית עזקאין דקנה from the Zohar that everything devolves from it. And with the help of the sound elevation occurs from the lowest to the highest level and this is the meaning of the verse: “Out of the depths I call You, O LORD. O Lord, listen to my cry” (Psalms 130:2-3) and a person needs to: “to walk modestly with your G-d” (Micha 6:8) and this narrative is hinted at with the sound of the shofar that the voice is inserted into the instrument in a whisper, invisibly, and afterwards the sound emerges audibly and is revealed. So does the person have to act: in the beginning s/he needs to hide the actions until they are openly recognizable by themselves, and this is the meaning of: “Blow the horn on the new moon” (Psalms 81:4) to renew/newly reveal (the word chodesh/moon and the word chadash/new are spelled identically; translator) his/her deeds. This is as regards “the voice of the shofar” and ”on the full moon”, as has been cited above.
8 “For it is a law for Israel, a ruling of the G-d of Jacob” (Psalms 81:5)etc. Behold, Rashi explained in the section of the “red heifer”: that the satan and the nations of the world adjure Israel to explain it’s meaning. So scripture caused to be written that it is a “rule without reason” etc. It is difficult to know why we don’t tell them, also, why are the nations of the world so insistent to want to know the exact rationale for this specific thing and to examine us. Even if, in truth, we do not know the reason why was it necessary for scripture to explain that it is a “rule without reason” that I have established. In any case we will not inform them of the reason as we don’t know the matter. For, behold, by the “red heifer” a multitude of reasons are given by our wise men, may their memory be blessed. They said: “may his mother come and clean up the excrement of her son and other reasons that Israel understands, but He, Who’s name shall be blessed, commanded us not to reveal to them, at all.  Should it happen that the accuser and the ministers of the nations would bring an indictment against us that would be to our detriment, as by law we do not have merit, He, Who’s name shall be blessed, will say: “If it is so then I will benefit them without a specific reason, as they obey/guard my “rules without reason” and do not query them at all. And if this is the case then it is just to benefit them without query (the same way). And this citation “For it is a law for Israel” on account of Israel observing H’s “rules without reason” that: “a ruling of the G-d of Jacob” (Psalms 81:5) is that He will benefit them also “with a rule without reason”.  This is the purpose of the satan and the nations of the world wishing to have revealed to them the basis for the “rules without reason” so they should be able to bring accusations against us to say that we, also, do not observe without any logic and so it might happen that He, Who’s name shall be blessed, would not be able to “defend” us as He does in the aforementioned.  And so it says: “By justice a king sustains the land.” (Proverbs 29:4) that justifiably Israel is called the sustainer of the land. According to Rashi: and the land will stand forever because we are the keepers of it’s laws (the “rules without reason”) meaning to say: without rhyme or reason. Scripture further says: “Deliverance is far from the wicked, for they have not turned to Your laws.” (Psalms 119:155) Also: “When there is no defender to intercede on our behalf against the accuser who reports our transgression, You speak for Yaakov [and invoke the merit of the observance of] the statutes and ordinances.” (Derech hamelech: Rosh haShana 8:2) Meaning: to speak to Yaakov so that Yaakov (the part of Israel that needs more elevation in spirituality, translator) that do observe the statutes and ordinances (the “rules without reason”) for by them both are equally to be guarded/sanctified as has been stated above.
9 “And H’ remembered” (Bereshit/Genesis 21:1), gemmatria 216, gemmatria of the word gevurah (the letters of this word also add up to the number 216, meaning the might) the Holy One, may He be praised, gave to Sarah, holy strengths, by means of which she was able to give birth; also to Avraham He gave. This is the reason that He gave them the letter Heh, signifying five forms of strengths as giving birth is rooted in “might” (strength) as it says: “You are mighty forever”, “G-d’s rule of the world is permanent and perpetual”.(Siddur, weekday amidah prayer, second blessing). The initials of this citation add up to אל"ד (the citation in Hebrew is אַתָּה גִבּוֹר לְעוֹלָם אֲדֹנָי Aleph is 1, Gimmel is 3, Lamed is 30, Aleph is 1 and this adds up to 35 and the reason for this calculation that results in the word before the brackets is the meaning of it; translator). This gives the name of H’ that is read E’L’ which is H’ in His aspect of mercy/grace. Furthermore, the word is also translatable as “the lords of the land” having to do with the aspect of “might” as in the citation:” For great is His steadfast love toward us” (Psalms 117:2) and this means contraction/restriction so as to be able to benefit (others). E.g. A man that is by nature miserly, that hoards his money to be able to give alms, behold, this parsimony is grounded in the wish to benefit others and upon giving alms he is lavish in the giving; in spite of all this his nature is basically stingy. However, he overcomes his character trait to enable him to give lavishly and this is illustrated by:” For great is His steadfast love toward us” (Psalms 117:2).  Behold, the female is in the aspect of the letter “dalet” for it “has nothing of its own at all” (Zohar I, p. 181a). Just as the name “Kel” (the K is added to the word to express reverence) on associating with the letter “dalet” becomes the word “El-ad” and therefore on Rosh haShana, upon the day of creation of the world, it is a time of remembrance/removal of barrenness for so it was with the creation of the world that happened by way of:” For great is His steadfast love toward us” (Psalms 117:2) and so it is in the material world. With the awakening of great love between male and female toward each other the might of self discipline is roused to bring forth and behold by the Binding (of Yitzchak) the intention of Avraham was to put an end to all the severities of the attribute of Yitzchak. When the angel told him:”and do not do anything to him” (Genesis 22:12) he did not want to remove him (from the altar), only wanted to sacrifice him, in order to bring to an end all the self strictures and only graciousness would remain, but the Holy One, may He be praised, did not wish for a cessation of self discipline as some of it is associated with holy Names and these He did not want abolished. Only:”behold, another ram” explains: “ayil” stands for self discipline/indomitable strength following other forms of self control “caught in the thicket by its horns” (Genesis 22:13). Explained our wise men in a medrash (parable/commentary) about the exile in which Israel is entangled over and over, these the Holy One, may He  be praised ordered to come to an end, but from the self discipline that “sweetens” only complete goodness comes to Israel.
10  For His victory? We hope that He, may His Name be blessed, will win, as on account of His choosing us for a people, obviously, should somebody accuse/vilify us, consequently it seems as if He had chosen badly, and had acted incompetently. Also the explanation of “for His victory” (I have found no clues and explanation and it is a pity that this was lost) (Translator: the content of the prior brackets is part of the text).

Erev Yom Kippur



Sukkot
































































And in the Midrash: "Oil and incense gladden the heart" (Proverbs 27:9). Oil – that is Aharon, who was anointed with anointing oil. Incense – that is the Jewish People, etc. As behold there is revealed impact and hidden impact. This is as I have written in Parashat Haazinu about the matter of rain: As rain is what gives the power of growth to vegetative matter. And rain (<i>matar</i>) is the acronym of, appearance, taste and smell (<i>mareh, taam, reiach</i>) – it is very hidden, since each one [receives] according to that which is fit for it, as they said, “The etrog (citron) has taste and smell, the myrtle has smell without taste, etc.”  And dew is [also] very hidden and extremely fine to the point that [when compared to] water, which is also nothing and is not held physically by the the hand; nevertheless, it is considered material in comparison to [dew]. For dew is the source of the production of water and is its fineness before it becomes materialized at all. Rather, it is only the source of the production of wetness. Hence it has in its nature the power to give an additional power of wetness to the ground. For dew is the source of the dampness which dampens the ground. But with rain, there is differentiation, in that it falls according to the merit of the generation and visa-versa; which is not the case with dew, as it never ceases, so there is no differentiation. So, behold the high priest – after he mentioned the ten names, as mentioned earlier – prayed, “If it is to be dry, let it be rainy.” And we have already written that the high priest brings down [bounty] from the source of the good, the source of impacts – it appears that he brings down this dampness from the source which is the dew that secretly falls, but its falling is not recognizable at all. Likewise, is the service of the priests secret, as I have written in the sermon for Channukah. And afterwards he brought down the aspect of dew to all ten of the statements – the aspect of the ten names that he mentioned. And ten times [the numerical equivalent of] dew (<i>tal</i>) is oil (<i>shemen</i>). He then brings down the impact through the three hundred and ninety (<i>shatz</i>) skies, as it is written in the holy Zohar (Shelach 290) that there are between the heavens and the earth. Hence the cantor is called <i>shatz</i> (the common acronym for <i>shaliach tzibur</i>), based on these skies that prayer pierces and goes above. And this is [the understanding] of that which is written in the Midrash, “Oil – that is Aharon” – as he pulled down ten times dew through the 290 skies, as mentioned earlier, from the aspect of the source. And he brought down all of it from the aspect of ‘fine oil on the head running down onto the beard.’ This is the aspect of the thirteen rectifications of the beard (<i>tikunai dikna</i>). And <i>shemen</i> (oil), in the <i>at-bash</i> [letter configuration scheme] is the name, <i>Bit</i>, the numerical equivalent of which is, ‘<i>Eheyeh</i> (I will be).’ This is from the aspect of, ‘I will favor whoever I will favor,’ in the future. It is, as I have written in another place – the aspect of ‘I will be’ is the source of impact, and it descends from there according to its traits like dew, as mentioned above. For rain has differentiation, which is not the case with dew; since the source of dew is very high, and hidden to the point that no differentiation can occur in it – if the world is fitting. “Incense – that is the Jewish People” – as through them, there is the connection of all of the traits and the unification of the names [of God], via their clinging to Him, may He be blessed. ‘And let them place incense before You, etc.’ – the acronym is the numerical equivalent of, ‘I will be,’ ‘I am’ and ‘the Master’ – which, when unified, brings the impact of kindnesses and mercies.

Hoshana Rabbah



Shemini Atzeret



Rosh Chodesh Kislev



Chanukah



Rosh Chodesh Tevet



Tu BiShevat



Rosh Chodesh Adar



Purim






<b>Since</b> she did not have a father or mother (<i>ein lah av ve'em</i>): As she drew down the flow from the aspect of Nothingness (<i>Ayin</i>, which is spelled the same way as <i>ein</i>). She had a Father and Mother from that trait. For the traits of Wisdom and Understanding, which are called Father and Mother, receive the flow from [Nothingness].

Likkutim



Likkutei Maharam

