Bartenura on Mishnah Yoma
ברטנורא על משנה יומא
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Bartenura on Mishnah Yoma



Chapter 1



Mishnah 1

Seven days... We separate the High Priest. Since all the service of Yom Kippur is not kosher except through him [Yuma 32a and many other places], as it says in regard to Yom Kippur (Vaikra chapter 16) "And the Cohen ,who will be anointed with oil, will atone." [note of the translator: from this verse we see that only the anointed Cohen, i.e. High Priest can perform atonement service of Yom Kippur]. And this separation is learned out for us from what is written in regard to seven days of the dedication [of the Mishkan] (ibid. chapter 8) "And from the entrance of the Tent of Meeting don't go away for seven days", and after this it is written (ibid.) "Just like was done on this day commanded Hashem to do to atone for you", and the sages expound: [the phrase] "to do" this is doings of the cow [red heifer], [and the phrase] "to atone for you" this is doings of the Yom Kippur. Thus, the Cohen that burns the cow [red heifer] and the Cohen serving on Yom Kippur, both require separation from their houses for seven days just like were required Aharon and his sons during the seven days of dedication [of the Mishkan]. [note of the translator: thus, from the proximity of the two verses, the verse that talks about the seven days of separation during the dedication of the Mishkan and the verse that was expounded to mean "just like was done on this day, commended Hashem to do for the procedure of the Red heifer and the Yom Kippur service", the sages learn that the Cohen that does the burning of the red heifer and the High priest that serves on Yom Kippur should be separated from their houses similar to the seven day separation of the days of dedication of the Mishkan.]   

Mishnah 2

He casts the blood. Of the sacrifices, so that he will be knowledgeable in the service

Mishnah 3

And they read before him. All seven days.
From the order of the day. From parashat Acharei Mot.
My master. My lord.

Mishnah 4



Mishnah 5

The elders of the Court would transfer him. Those who had read before him the order of the day.

The House of Avtinas. There they would make the incense.

Mishnah 6

If he was clever he would explain. The issue of halacha all night of Yom Kippur, so that he wouldn't fall asleep. And if he wasn't so clever, and wasn't able to understand and explain an issue of halacha, then they would explain it to him.
From Job and Ezra. These are things which depress the heart and make it hard to sleep.

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Mishnah 1






Until Hebron: Those who are standing below ask him "Has the light reached Hebron?" and he answers, "Yes."  Hebron is mentioned in order to invoke the merit of the forefathers.