Tiferet Shlomo
תפארת שלמה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Tiferet Shlomo

on Torah

Bereshit

For the sake of the union of the Holy One Blessed Be He with His Shechina to unite His Name Blessed Be He, I begin to write to my soul words of reverence and of ethics on the order of the parshas of the Torah. May it be Hashem's Will that we should merit to study, teach, guard, and do [mitzvot], with fear and love. May we merit to see the comfort of Zion, Jerusalem, and the Jewish people and may the glory of Hashem fill all the earth, speedily in our days.   

Noach



Lech Lecha

Genesis 12:1: Avraham Avinu was the chariot of the attribute of kindness as explained in Zohar and all other holy books. The essence of the kindness is to draw into this world so that G-d's glory fills the earth. As it says, "from glory, I created him, I formed him and I made him." This verse refers to the 4 spiritual worlds, and the Asiyah [the lowest of the worlds] is the main creation of Hashem. Avraham Avinu said to Eliezer: "I want you to swear in the name of Hashem, G-d of heaven and earth." Rashi explains that he could say “heavens and earth” since Avraham Avinu introduced Hashem to the world – before Avraham Avinu, only heavenly beings talked about the Hashem. Angels also praise G-d "full of glory” -- they desire that the whole world would be full of glory, as it says in the beginning: “G-d saw all that He had made, and saw that it was very good." This means that the goal of creation is this world since "made” [paralleling a part of an aforementioned verse, “I made him”, which corresponds onto Asiyah] and “saw that it was very good." Kindness, in its source, is called by name of “Avram.” “Av” [Father] is kindness as it says "A father has mercy on his children" [and “ram” meanings on “high,” so “Avram” is “High Father”]. Therefore, Avraham Avinu wanted to bring kindness and G-dliness as a chariot, so Hashem spoke to Avraham Avinu, and Hashem said that supernal kindness should descend to this world. This is the meaning of “lech lecha”[go forth]--that kindness should spread, “go forth,” and when it manifested into Abraham, it added a “hei” to his name. This is because the world was made with a “hei” and the source of Jewish people is called “hei,” and divine energy comes from the “yud” of the Divine name and into “hei.” "I’ll make your name great"—[Hashem said that] I'll add a “hei” to your name. Seemingly, what is the gift of “hei”? Rashi says it equals 248, and, according to me [the Tiferes Shlomo], Avraham Avinu was given the letter to draw down the supernal kindness into this world as this world corresponds to the Shechina, which the lower "hei" of Hashem's name. That's the [additional] meaning of the words "I'll make your name great": [the verse can be read as] “I'll add the 'hei'.” [Likewise,] “I will bless those who bless you” could we be read as "I will bless the 'hei'." The end of the verse, "you will be a blessing," has all the letters of the Divine Name, so may His name be blessed to draw down kindness into the world and for the Jewish people.





Genesis 12:1: Hashem says to Avraham: “you should go for your sake.” Rashi comments: “for your benefit and goodness.” Question: what benefit does Avraham need? Those who fear Hashem have no lack. So, how could Avraham Avinu be lacking something? The attribute of Avraham Avinu is to give lots of kindness to this world and to spread it; so, Avraham Avinu was missing the benefit of giving kindness. That's why He tells Avraham Avinu to leave his father's house to spread kindness so that everyone will be like his family.

Vayera

*G-d appeared to Avraham* Rashi explains: said Rabbi Chama bar Chanina: this was the third day after his circumcision and G-d came and asked about his welfare. Our sages say in Tractate Brachos that even if a snake is wrapped around your heel and even if the king asks about your welfare, you should not interrupt. To understand their word: what's the relevance of the snake to the king [in the allegory]? They're [the snake and the king] are diametrically opposed. The words allude to the following: a wicked person can be destroyed because of his wickedness, and a righteous person can be destroyed because of his righteousness. [How?] Since, when a wicked person sees that he's in a wicked state and he has angered G-d's spirit, he gives up hope of ever returning to G-d. His last sin [giving up] is greater than all the other sins before. As for a Tzaddik, when his heart seduces him and tells him that he has the power to perform miracles on the earth, he feels that he can be lazy and he be lax in his service to Hashem. [Thus] he is also destroyed, G-d forbid. That's the verse means when it says "those who are cast aside in the land of Egypt..." The Land of Assyria refers to the tzaddikim. Those cast aside in Egypt refers to the wicked. Concerning these two scenarios, our sages warned us and said "even if snake is wrapped around your heel.." to hint to a wicked person enveloped by the impurity of the snake, G-d forbid, [that] he should not cease his service to Hashem because Hashem has abundant kindness and he pardon abundantly without any limit. On the other hand, regarding a tzaddik, "even if a king seeks your welfare, don't interrupt your service to Hashem" parallels "Don't trust yourself until the day you die..." So, too, Avraham Avinu, even though G-d asked about his welfare, sat at the entrance of the tent, which means that he asked to open the Torah for him as it says "open for me the gate of righteousness..." so it says later on that when Hashem finished speaking to Avraham, Hashem traveled after he spoke to Avraham, which means that Hashem ascended through Avraham. Understand this.

Chayei Sara

Genesis 23:1: Rashi says all of Sarah’s years were good. The Midrash asks: why did Moshe merit to have his face shine? Because, for all of his life, he waited for the glory of Hashem and glory of the Jewish people and for there to be peace between the Jewish people and Hashem. It's known that Hashem created this world as a kindness to His creation; His only intention was to do kindness for the world. [Hence] we always need to draw kindness and mercy to the Jewish people, which is the glory of Hashem, and, concomitantly, the glory of the Jewish people, and it is good to them for all their days. When a person prays for Hashem's name to be sanctified in the world, he needs to attach, to that prayer, [the supplication] that there should be more kindness and mercy and more abundant goodness to the Jewish people since the glories of Hashem and the Jewish people are interdependent. This is the meaning of a Talmudic teaching: "if two people entered a synagogue to pray, and one of them finishes early and doesn’t wait for the other person: his prayers are taken away and he causes the Shechina to depart from the Jewish people.” The meaning [is that treatment of your fellow Jew impacts the glory of Hashem and that] you have to daven for two things-- glory of Hashem and glory of Jewish people and know that they’re interconnected. This is also the meaning of the Mishnaic teaching: whenever you ask about your friend’s welfare, you should mention Hashem's name. [In light of the theme, this means that] when you ask about your friend’s welfare, you should pray for the glory of Hashem [since that, in turn, draws blessing to the glory of the Jewish people and this will result in] your friend’s welfare and peace. Also, in the Torah, Boaz said "Hashem is with you.” [By doing so,] he was blessing the work of their hands. This is also explains the significance of saying the blessing of the Kohanim after the blessings of the Torah [since this draws blessing from Hashem’s glory directly to the Jewish people]. Also, the Talmud says "a Torah scholar is immediately accompanied by blessing.” Additionally, Avraham Avinu said “I will bless those you bless you”: blessing the Jewish people causes the glory of Hashem to be enhanced, as intended in creation. This also the meaning of baruch she’amor: [when it says] blessed is the One Who Spoke and it came to be [and] blessed is the One Who Makes Creation, [this is followed by] blessed is the One Who Has Mercy on His Creations. Hashem bestows goodness, and they sing and praise His name with appropriate blessing: “All powerful G-d, all merciful Father.” G-d is exalted when He has mercy. Moreover, when the Red Sea split, the Jewish people observed the dead Egyptians and saw His great hand, which caused them to sing to Hashem [once again, demonstrating the beneficial dynamic between the glory of Hashem and the glory of the Jewish people]. They sang at their best because of the visible victor; yet, if G-d forbid, it wasn’t that way, the Jewish people would still bless G-d since we bless Him for the good and for the band. However, how would that praise look? Doesn't Hashem's praise need joy? That's the meaning of the verse: satiate us in the morning with your kindness, and we will sing and rejoice all our days. [Thus] that’s the meaning of the verse: the entire life of Sarah was good for the Jewish people forever, amen

Toldot



Vayetzei



Vayishlach

Genesis 32:4: "Yaakov sent angels"-- Rashi explains that the word "angel" [in context] means just that: an angel [whereas other commentaries could interpret the word as "messenger"). It's known from the Zohar that every mitzvah creates an angel. The main antagonism to the angelic minister of Eisav is saying the prayer of Shema. This is the meaning of the verse: "the house of Yaakov is fire, the house of Eisav is straw" (Ovadia 1:18) -- "straw" is an acronym is for "kriat shema" [the prayer of Shema]. The Shema directly opposes Eisav. As it says Megaleh Amukot, "so shall say you to my master Esiav" -- "so" refers to recital of Shema. The word "mamish" [used by Rashi in his commentary] stands for "mekabalet malchus shamayim" (accepting the yoke of heaven), referring to the angels emerging from the intent of our Shema. This is the main antagonism to subjugate the angelic minister of Eisav. Eisav also includes the seed of Amalek, and the Torah says that Hashem's name is not complete until Amalek is eradicated. On that day, when the saviors go to the mountain of Zion to judge the mountain of Eisav, dominion will belong to G-d, and on that day Hashem will be one and His Name will be one. 
If Esau comes to one of the camps and strikes it, and the remaining camp escapes. Rashi explained that he prepared himself for three things: a gift, prayer, and war. It seems to hint at this without us delving into grammatical details (a) what does the language of "and he struck it" mean? (b) How did such words come out of his mouth? It is not good for a righteous person to decisively say such words, "If he comes to one of the camps and strikes it," lest it be, God forbid, like a mistake uttered by a ruler). However, it is explained in the writings of the Ari zal that the primary sustenance of the wicked in this world is through the swallowing of holy sparks that are within them, and through the utterances of Balaam's words from their mouths they are annulled. As it is explained in the Gemara regarding the matter of "he cast his eyes upon her and she became a heap of bones," which is through the sight of his eyes and the gaze of the righteous one, he removes the holy sparks from within him, and thus he immediately dies and becomes a heap of bones. It is already explained that Esau the wicked had many great holy sparks, which are what he spoke from within him, as explained in the Ari zal about "hunting is in his mouth," which are the souls of the righteous that were in his mouth. And here it says, "and four hundred men with him," meaning four hundred holy sparks were with him, right within him, and therefore this wicked one strived to go out to meet Jacob. But when Jacob our father looked at him, he removed these holy sparks from him and they returned to holiness. And that is what is meant by "therefore I saw your face as seeing the face of God," through the removal of holy sparks to return them to holiness, and thus the power of the wicked one was annulled and he returned to love Jacob, because the four hundred men went out of him. And that is what Rashi means by "and Esau returned that day on his way, Esau alone," but the four hundred men who went with him were removed from him, one by one. Meaning the four hundred holy sparks were removed and went out of him and attached themselves to the One who is holy. And this is the "one by one" of the Shema in the upper unity. And the prophet says, "from the violence of your brother Jacob you shall cover shame," meaning the violence of the holy sparks that you violently took from your brother Jacob, because of this you shall cover shame, because nothing remained in your hand. And it is called violence because he violently took their blood. And here too, through the gift that he gave him, he removed the holy sparks from him. And that is what Rashi means that he prepared himself for three things: a gift, prayer, and war. All three are to remove holy sparks. His action is what is called war, as it says, "The Lord is a man of war," through the raising of the sparks of Egypt, the Lord's name was sanctified, and this is why it says in the Book of the Wars of the Lord, "He gave them at the end," meaning He gave them at the end, the holy sparks. And that which is said here, "and the remaining camp escaped," is the escape of the holy sparks that were within him, they went out to holiness.
"The God of my father Abraham and the God of my father Isaac, the Lord who said to me, etc., ‘I am too small for all these kindnesses,’ etc. In the aforementioned Rashi commentary, he prepared himself for three things: a gift, prayer, and war. For behold, I have already explained at ‘and the angels returned to Jacob’ how a person must learn to repent completely before approaching the Holy One, Blessed is He, to stand in prayer before Him. And behold, likewise in this entire portion, we learn the order of a person’s prayer from our father Jacob, of blessed memory, as Rashi explained, ‘he prepared himself for a gift, prayer, and war.’ For a gift, meaning according to what the Sages said, ‘one should give a penny to the poor and then pray,’ for behold, a person must direct his actions to the higher levels of prayer, for he cannot ascend to the world of Atziltut before he has ascended to the worlds of Asiyah, Yetzirah, and Beriah. Therefore, he must do this: to direct his actions and matters through every world in his ascent to the House of the Lord, the heavens. Against the world of Asiyah, he must do charity and good deeds before prayer. Likewise, in Yetzirah, he must direct his actions against Yetzirah. And so in all of them, as explained in the intention of the Tree of Life. And this is the intention of the commandments that we perform in physical action, which is also connected to prayer, like the action of placing tefillin and tzitzit, to ascend on the ladder that ascends upwards according to their order, with the correct intention of thought accompanying them. And that is what Rashi means by ‘a gift,’ as we explained against the world of Asiyah, so too the performance of commandments is a gift in the physical realm, and for prayer. And with all this, for war, because in every prayer one must intensify his war against the thoughts that annul him from his intention, for the service of the heart is prayer, and truly it is difficult work to direct one’s thought so that it is without a foreign thought, therefore prayer is called work. And that is what is said here, ‘The God of my father Abraham,’ etc. What is the meaning of saying ‘The God of my father Abraham’ and not simply ‘Abraham’? But behold, it is written, ‘This is my God, and I will exalt Him, the God of my father.’ For behold, we have already explained that thoughts are called fathers, and that is why they say, ‘Our God and the God of our fathers,’ these are the desires and thoughts that one prepares for the Lord, for indeed the essence of accepting Godliness is the purity of thought. And whoever strengthens himself over his thought to annul foreign thoughts, thereby the glory of the Creator, Blessed is He, is exalted, for a king is forbidden from idle chatter, the idle chatter of the mind, as explained in the Zohar. And that is ‘the God of my father, and I will exalt Him,’ the Godliness is in his thought, and in this, ‘and I will exalt Him.’ And that is what our father Jacob, of blessed memory, said, ‘The God of my father Abraham and the God of my father Isaac.’ For indeed, it is true that he was complete in his thought, not damaged by a foreign thought all the days of his life, as it is said, ‘Pure before the Lord, the God of Israel.’ Commentary: For in the future, at the time when the King will judge and establish the earth, behold, the main fear and dread will be when one examines the aspect of the Godliness of Jacob, for they will be held accountable for their foreign and hated thoughts. This is more difficult than anything else, for there is one who in deed did not do evil, but who can know the thought? And that is the measure of our father Jacob, as it is said, ‘My strength and the first of my might,’ for his thought was not damaged at all. And that is why it is said, ‘Israel ascended in thought,’ and therefore he merited that his bed was complete without defect. And therefore he prayed in the aspect of ‘the God of my father,’ as stated above, for You alone are in my thought. ‘I am too small.’ For I am not worthy of all this holiness except for Your help with me, and let my thought not be confused anymore, for I fear Him, etc. And You said, ‘I will do well with you.’ For the intention of creation was to do good to His creatures, and for our good the world was created, and therefore You will guard us and save us all the days."

Vayeshev



Miketz



Vayigash



Vayechi


...Rashi says the kindness you do with those that passed away is called true kindness becuase you're not expecting any reward. Ramban asks Rashi, by Eliezer, Avraham asked Eliezer to do kindness and truth with him, but there he wasn't passing away. It appears to me this how we should explain Rashi: there are some people who merit to have a very lofty soul at birth, while others, later on in life, can attain a lofty soul by doing a mitzvah with a good intention (as is known in Kabbalistic circles). So when you merit this soul (from your good intent), you attain more strength and power in your service of Hashem because these souls assist you. This is when the Talmud means when it says that "if someone wants to become pure, they assist him." "They" refers to those souls. It also says in the Talmud that "they tell him to finish the mitzvah." Who tells it to him? These souls which he has acquired tell him to finish the mitzvah. This is also the meaning of the Mishna: "your house should be a house where the wise men meet." As it says in the Torah, "with wisdom you can build a house." That is referring to the soul: what it means that by preparing your soul you will merit to have many souls of the wise." Like we find by the Ri M'Gash, he had many souls for the Tannaim in him, as the Arizal says. The Mishna continues "and you should drink their words with thirst" means that you will do mitzvot with passion, because they [the souls] will inspire him. This is meaning concerning the building of the Mishkan, "and all the wise-hearted among you will come and do." The wise-hearted refer to these souls that have become part of you; they will do all that G-d has commanded. Also in the possuk: all wise-hearted among will perform the task. What that means that is that these supernal souls will work with you to build the Mishkan with the deepest mystical intent. This is what Rashi means with kindness of truth: this means that these holy souls, which have passed away, what they do with you is a kindness of truth because their intent is certainly true, without expecting any ulterior motive.


..*Gather together and I will tell you:* Rashi says he [Yaakov] wanted to reveal the date of Moshiach's coming, but the Shechina departed from him. To explain: when he focused and looked at every subsequent generation and saw what would happen to the Jewish people until the coming of Moshiach, he saw the length of the bitter Exile and the great darkness. He became greatly saddened and the Shechina departed from him as a result [of his sadness].  However, the Tribes [his sons] comforted him by saying Shema Yisroel, Hashem Elokeinu, Hashem Echad. Rashi comments on that verse, Hashem is now our G-d, but in the future [the Times to Come] He will be One and his Name will be One. [Thus, they were comforting Yaakov by pointing out that] he should be happy with the knowledge that in the Times to Come, after Moshiach's coming, Hashem will be One for the entire world [as the verse says] "on that day, He will be [One and His Name will be One]. [Yaakov accepted his sons' comfort] and [added his own prayer] "may the glory of the Name of His Kingdom be blessed forever and ever." That it may be speedily in our days, amen.     

Yaakov wanted to tell when Moshiach was going to come, and the Shechina departed from him. What that means that is that Yaakov requested the coming of Moshiach, to reveal the Guela. Through this, the Shechina departed from him. What that means is that he elevated himself [spiritually] and he went so much higher than himself through prayer. He went away from himself to the Shechina. 

Shemot

"These are the names of the children of Israel who came to Egypt: Yaakov, etc" What appears to me is that based upon the Talmud, "Yaakov our father did not die; just as his children are alive, so he is alive." This alludes to Tracte Terumos Chapter 9, where it says over that when you plant terumah whatever grows from those seeds is also terumah as long as the seed isn't ruined [as long as the seed exists, like an onion]. So it says in the Zohar, in Yayechi, "come and see: Yaakov approached to the moon and he made fruits for the world, and there is no generation forever that does not have the seed of Yaakov." Because he made an arousal from above, as it says in the Torah "he gathered his feet to the bed," and that is the bed of Yaakov. That's the meaning of the Gemara "just as his children are alive, so he is alive" because he is also alive with them as the Gemara compares with terumah "whatever grows from seeds of terumah is also terumah as long as the seed isn't ruined." This is the meaning of the verse, "these are the names of the children of Israel that came with Yaakov," as they are all called by the name of "children of Israel" since Yaakov's strength has not ceased from them, just as a fruit whose seed is still there has the same status as the seed so too Yaakov's power like himself. That's the meaning of the verse that "Ephraim and Menashe should be considered like Rueven and Shimon to me." That means there isn't a new generation; rather, they are literally like the previous generation, because they are likened to the fruit whose seed is still there and therefore grandchildren are just like children.   

Vaera

......



...Exodus 6:3: Rashi explains that Hashem "appeared to our forefathers." The explanation: Hashem told Moshe that Aaron will be happy to hear about Moshe's appointment [as leader] and won't be jealous. [Normally,] when a person sees another elevated, they, filled with jealousy and hatred, say "how did you merit this?". However, a real, G-d-fearing friend will rejoice, exclaiming "I didn't merit to be a tzaddik before Hashem, and it brings great joy to me that my friend, who serves Hashem and does His will, will be rewarded in heaven." In fact, we pray "Let us see the virtue of our friends and not their faults, and we should merit to see the virtue of our friends in heaven" [this is a prayer that's said in certain Hasidic groups]. This explains the statement of the Talmud that "every person is jealous of the chuppah of their friends". This means that if he was jealous of his friend today, he'll also be jealous of him in the future. It's important to note that he'll be jealous 'of his friend chuppah' but won't be jealous of the original tzaddikim [Abraham, Yitzhak, Yaakov] because he won't merit to see their virtue. This is the meaning of Rashi's comment that "Hashem appeared to the forefathers."

Bo

Hashem said to Moshe, "stretch your hand upon the heavens and there will be darkness in the land of Egypt". The question could be asked: Mosher was under the heaven, but he lifts his hand above the heaven--it should've said "lift your hand to the heaven." It sounds like he's on top of the heaven. The explanation is: it says in the posuk "praise Gd from the heavens...and the water that is above the heavens. Let us praise the name of Gd because He commanded and it was created and He caused it to endure forever." We need to understand what is this great praise of the water above--how come the Torah specifies that specifically? The answer is a hint to kindness, as is known. Kindness is greater than the heavens. It says in the posuk "your kindness is greater than the heavens," and kindness is beneficial when it descends into this world through a perfect tzaddik. Also, water is gematria "90," which equals, numerically, to "tzaddik." A tzaddik is a conduit from whom the Supernal Kindness [above the Heaven] descends. He does this with the power of his soul, which is in this world, but his source is in the highest of heavens. Therefore, the highest lights are able to descend through him. Just as this was for Moshe Rabbeinu, who brought good kindness and holy lights to the world. This is the inner meaning of the posuk "G-d saw the light was good, and G-d separated between the light and darkness." What this alludes to: how G-d saw and prepared the Supernal Light (which is Supernal Kindness), "His Kindness is everlasting." G-d prepared it to bring it down through the tzaddik, Moshe Rabbeinu, who's called "good" as it says in the Torah "...and she saw that he was good." Every tzaddik is also called "good," as it says in the posuk "say to the tzaddik that he is good." That's the meaning of the posuk that "G-d separated between the light and the darkness." Why does the Torah repeat G-d's name in the same posuk? This actually refers to Moshe Rabbeinu, who's referred as "Elohim" in the posuk "Look, I have given you as Elohim to Pharaoh." Moshe's also called a "man of Gd." What this means is that when Moshe serves as a vessel for G-d's kindness, he separates between the light and darkness, between the actions of the tzaddikim and wicked, so they will not be mixed up, so the Jews shouldn't go sometime in light and sometime in darkness, G-d forbid. Instead, with a power of his soul, he brings this [kindness] to the Jewish people, separating them from the Egyptians. This is the main separation of light and darkness: the separation between the Jews and gentiles. However, this Supernal Hidden Light is hidden in Shabbat, which is called a "good gift" as it says in the Talmud "I have a good gift in my storage house." So, on Shabbat this hidden Light goes down to the Jewish people, which is why we say, in Havdalah, Hashem separates between the Jews and the gentiles, immediately followed by Hashem separating the Seventh day and the rest of the week. That's why it says in the posuk "they had light where they lived (b'moshvotam) [which has the same letters as Shabbat]." What that means is that Moshe brough the Supernal Light on Shabbat, and he made all the separation between light and darkness, the Jews and gentiles, the Seventh day and six days of the week. So, when he brought the light of Shabbat to Jewish people it automatically caused the Egyptians to have darkness because they don't deserve to use that light. This is the meaning of the Midrash that the darkness he brought upon them the Supernal Darkness. There's a Moshe Rabbeinu in every generation and that tzaddik is a conduit to bring down the Supernal Light, as it says in the Torah "the light is planted for the tzaddik" and he brings it down to the Jewish people, as it verse concludes "the upright have joy." Because he brings to the upright of heart (the Jewish people), the simcha, the joy, and the tranquality, which is why tzaddikim are called "luminaries"



...Exodus 12:16: We say in our prayers: "from His place He will turn to us in mercy." There's a higher world called "Hoo," which lacks angels and seraphs [a different type of angel], which has only G-d [since this world is on such a high spiritual plane]. That's the meaning of the verse, "eaten by every soul," [this is like when a person] doesn't want to enjoy any worldly pleasure and [focuses on] giving life to his soul. This is like Hillel the Elder, who would do "kindness to his shameful body" by eating; [he was] only eating [for the sake of his soul].  All the needs of a person of such caliber are taken care of by Hashem. As it says, "He will do for you"-- He will take care of all your needs. The sages add that it's "for you only," and not for the wicked. This divine flow comes down from the world of Hoo, which can't be attacked by kelipa [demonic forces] to derive energy. Similarly, Yitzhak says to Yaakov, "how did you find [the wild game] so quickly"? Yaakov responded with "Hashem your Gd brought it before me." The Midrash expounds: Hashem takes care of your sacrifices--how much more so of your food." Why? Because the food of a tzaddik is more important than a sacrifice.        

Beshalach



Yitro

Yisro heard all that Hashem the Jewish people out of Egypt: Later on, the Torah says, that Moshe told his father-in-law all that G-d did to Pharaoh and the Egyptians. Yisro rejoiced because of all the good that Hashem did. And Yisro said Blessed is Gd that saved you from Egypt and Pharaoh. We need to understand what did Moshe tell Yisro that he didn't know because the Torah says already that Yisro already heard about it at home, and that's why he came to convert. Also, why did he have joy in his hear only after Moshe told it to him, and not at home? How come it first say "All that G-d did for Moses in Israel" and "...all that G-d did for Pharaoh and Egyptian?  So the answer is: the Torah is telling us that the main thing that Yisro heard and why only he was motivated to convert to Judaism. The answer is that when he heard about all the miracles that G-d did to the Egyptians that broke the order of heavens above and the earth below and changed the nature of the world. G-d did all this for the sake of the Jewish people. So Yisro understood that all that G-d desires in all that He has made is for the Jewish people. For their sake, all of creation changes. Anything else has no intrinsic purpose because the world was made only for the Jewish people. He took this heart and wanted to connect to the Jewish people. And that's what the Torah says "that he heard all that G-d did" that means all that G-d has created is for the sake of Moshe and the Jewish people. Everything was created for their sake and their needs. This is apparent because of the miracles that G-d caused because of the Jewish people. Then Moshe told Yisro something else. All that G-d did to the Pharaoh and Egyptains, he wanted to explain why did G-d create all the Egyptian and kelipa that hurt the Jewish people and caused them to sin chas veshalom and drowned them in the darkness of the bitter exile. Why does G-d do this? The Torah says Moshe told him about the Jewish people and the word "about" have the same letters "letter dalet" and the letter "dalet" interrupts G-d's name in word "Yehuda". Because in the exile as long as this unity has not been fixed, the hei remains poor, as long as hei is not attached to the vav, the hei is poor. Only through the deeds of people in this word can the hei become whole again because G-d's kindness is everlasting. This acheived through the work of the Jewish people, to correct things so that be the same way they were orignially. When they have good and evil mixed together in their lives, and the person has free choice, to turn his heart, through this, a person is elevated by his good deeds very high, as the sages say "when the world was created, G-d said it was very good." Good is the yetzer tov, very good is the yetzer hara because it elevates the Jewish people so high. Therefore, those Egyptians that prevent the Jewish people from performing good deeds are also there to help the Jewish people so that the Jewish people can overcome them and become elevated. This is the meaning of the verse, "he told all the hardship that they found on the way and that G-d had saved them." What this means is all of the hardships that a Jew will have in their journey will eventually be saved by Hashem, and that's why Yisro is so happy. Because Yisro understood the goodness of Hashem's Unity in this physical world. That was a very necessary step to recieve the world. When the Jewish people would hear about the service of G-d and what it was about. G-d begins  talking to the Jewish people (before the Torah) saying "You have seen all that I've done to the Egyptians and I have carried you on eagle's wings" what this means is by making the Egyptians for you, and the hardships you, and despite this you strengthened yourself in your fear of Hashem you have been uplifted on eagle's wings, to this high, elevated state. And this is why the Ten Commandments begin with "I am the L-rd your G-d who took you out of Egypt" and not "I am the L-rd your G-d who created the world" because this is the fundamental principle of receiving the Torah; the yichud of Anochi, to subdue all of the kelipa that causes pain to the Jewish people and return it all to good. And this will bring you to have fear of Hashem's exaltedness, not merely fear of sin, because you corrected all the evil to good and can achieve a higher fear. As the Jewish people merited "they saw and they trembled and they stood at a distance." And this is the meaning of "Hashem has come in order to test you" the word "test" means to "lift up" and Moshe continues to say "you should have fear of Hashem upon your faces so that you shall not fear" so that you should have fear of G-d's exaltedness, but you should have fear of sin nonetheless like Yizthak Avinu. This explains the verse, "my eyes yearn for your salvation, and for the words of your righteousness." This refers to the Ten Commandments, but fulfill for your servant your words so that he may fear You may he merit to achieve fear of Your Exaltedness by studying Torah."

Exodus 18:1: Hashem finished creating the world on the 7th day, and Hashem [in this context] is referred to as "Elokim" [one of G-d's Divine Names], and Elokim stopped through the 7th day, and 7th day is the tzaddik, who's called the 7th day, and he is on the level of Shabbat. A tzaddik sweetens judgment, which is why he's called a partner in creation. This is the meaning of the prayer, "Your Holy Shabbat, with love and desire, you have bequeathed to us." The Talmud [in Bava Metzia 59] relates that, after Rabbi Yehoshua successfully argued with Voice from Heaven, Rabbi Natan asked Eliyahu HaNavi about Hashem's reaction [to this incident]. He answered that Hashem was "smiling," saying, "my children are victorious over me, my children are victorious over me." This is the will of Hashem: the tzaddik should sweeten judgment; Hashem makes the decree, and the tzaddik nullifies the decree. This is the meaning of the words: "holy Shabbat" -- the supernal blessing of the 7th day are dependent on the tzaddik, [and] this power of tzaddik you "gave with love and desire" because this is G-d's desire, blessed be His Name. This is the meaning of Talmudic statement: the world was first frightened then it calmed-- the tzaddik sweetened the judgement. The Torah says "this Yitro heard": Yitro understood what Elokim did to Moshe, placing all of the judgement on Moshe and the Jewish people in order for them to sweeten the judgement. As such, the judgement coming from Elokim would be nullified by the tzaddik and transformed to good. Hence Yitro instructed Moshe to assign officers to govern people. In the words of the Torah: "you should appoint over them leaders over 1000s, leaders over 100s, leaders over 50s, and leaders over 10s." [The question here is that] the verse should've said "you" in the plural. The answer: the Arizal said, regarding the four spiritual worlds, that the higher world [Atzilut] is the 1000s, the next world [Beriah] is 100s, the next world [Yetzirah] is 50s, and the next world [Asiyah] is 10s. Therefore Yitro implied that the judges needed to be able to arouse mercy in all four worlds in order to sweeten judgement at its root. This is the meaning of "you should appoint them"-- appoint power in the judges from the 1000s, from Atzilut, so they can draw down blessings. 

Mishpatim

Exodus 21:1: Rashi explains that "you shall set [the ordinances] before them" [should be] like a table that's set before someone who's ready to eat. It appears to me that there's an essential value to the mishpatim (ordinances), given to Jewish people. [On one hand, the ordinances] refine G-d's creations; there's the forbidden, the permitted, [as well as] monetary fines, capital punishments, [and other laws that refine human society]. However, the main purpose of these ordinances is pure kindness. [Indeed,] G-d wanted to give merit to the Jewish people; to give them a path and a means to draw down kindness into the world by fulfilling these laws. In addition to the ethical value, these laws, when fulfilled in this world, arouse G-d's infinite kindness and bestows kindness and goodness to the Jewish people. [Hence] the main purpose [of these laws] isn't judgment, but rather [a way] to bestow good, beneficent kindness upon His children, Israel. This is the reason the parsha mentions various blessings, such as the blessing that no women will miscarry, no women will be barren, "I will fill the number of your days," [etc]. If you keep these laws, G-d will guard your covenant and your kindness. The purpose of ordinances is to do kindness with you as it says in Torah,"He loves righteousness and justice and the kindness of Hashem fills the earth." This means that the reason "He loves righteousness and justice" is so that, [by exercising them], kindness should fill the earth. [Similarly,] the verse -- "Because I Hashem do kindness, justice, and righteousness" -- [shows that] kindness is a result of practicing justice and righteousness. This is the inner meaning of the Sages' phrase, "who ever wants to become a chossid (pious person) should fulfill the precepts of Torah about damages." [On the surface, this phrase means that a pious person is extra careful with other people's property. However, the deeper meaning is that]  "chossid" should be read as "chesed" (kindness)--whoever wants to bring kindness into the world must follow the laws of damages. Likewise, the verse says, "Laws of Hashem are truth; they are righteous together," which means that the laws of Hashem unify of tzaddik and tzedek, and this is also the corresponding meaning of "justice and righteousness". These are the ordinances and live in them; by doing Torah, we are exempted from other judgement because if there's justice in human realm, then there's no need for heavenly justice. As the verse says, "how fortunate is he who Hashem rebukes, and from your Torah you teach them that they should learn and fulfill the laws of the Torah." "The laws" refers to judgement as the Torah says "He spoke with justice." These laws shall be before them that they should obligate to fulfill the Torah. This is the meaning behind Rashi's comment about table being set for a person ready to eat; by keeping the laws of Torah, the Jewish people will get kindness, goodness, satisfaction and blessing. 

Terumah


...Exodus 25:2: In the name of the Baal Shem Tov, the meaning of the verse is that every person should acquire good character [traits] to serve the Creator. "...With your magnanimous heart take My offering" means that the energy of the Evil Inclination, to love and fear bad things, should be redirected to love Hashem and acquire and good character [traits]. In truth, it says in holy books that Esav's service would've surpassed that of Yaakov if he would've redirected himself toward good --  Esav comes from the side of Great Judgement, and his heart turns to all undesirable lusts. If he would've redirected and elevated his energy to Hashem that would've been good since all light comes from darkness. This is also the explanation of the verse: "love Hashem with all your hearts"-- the Talmud explains that "hearts" refers to the Good Inclination and the Evil Inclination. This helps elucidate the verse, "He forms light and creates darkness" -- [this can be answered with a question:] If the world of Beriah is above the world of Yetzirah [and thus is holier and has less darkness], then why use "create" ["briah," which is similar to "Beriah"] and associate it with darkness? In truth, someone who is in a dark place and exerts themselves to go to the light will ascend to a higher level, a higher world called darkness as it says on Torah, "He makes darkness his cloak." This is also idea of gold: gold is judgement, and [there's a concept of] pure gold because there's [such a thing as] impure gold, and purity is greater than holiness because holiness never interacts with the otherside [its opposite] but purity does [by its nature]. Angels are called all pure. [Why? Because] it is explained in the holy books that there's a world where the angels announce the sins of people, and the blemish of the sins affect the angels. The angels have to purify themselves since they spoke about the sin in their mouth; thus they're called "pure." This is also the meaning of the verse, "Hashem is coming to test you"-- [to explain:] this verse was written after Jewish people asked not to speak directly to G-d lest they perish. They didn't want fall from their level into slavery, and Hashem answered them that, on the contrary,  they'll reach a loftier level because, through Hashem's test, they will strengthen the good, and there is no light that doesn't come out of darkness. 

Tetzaveh


You should bring to yourself Aaron your brother from amongst the Jewish people: it says in the posuk make for me a sanctuary and I'll dwell within them, why doesn't it say I'll dwell in it? The answer is everything originally begins with female waters and then the male waters come, and the Torah says from any person with a generous spirit you should take my donation. What this means is the generosity of the heart and the good desire for the Mishkan was created from the good desires of the Jewish people that their hearts were magnanimous towards their Father in Heaven. Every single Jew merited that his gift would create something and sync with his devotion with Hashem. One person merited the level of the courtyard, one person merited the level of the heichel, and another person merited that his gift created the Holy of Holies. In the very same place where the arousal from below reaches that is where the response comes on from on high because words that come from the heart enter the heart. Meaning words that come from the heart of the Jews in this world enter into the heart of Heaven. This is then the meaning of the words "I shall dwell within them"  within the inner most desire of the hearts of the Jewish people [and their desire and kavanah] that is what arouses the revelation of the Shechina.  This is similar to the concept of the Ark carrying its bearers, and similar to the concept of how Kohen Gadol is given wealth from his brothers. Spiritually, they should agree   in their heart that they want him to be the Kohen Gadol and, once they agree, he becomes sanctified for the Jewish people. This explains the verse "Bring your brother Aaron close to you from amongst the Jewish people [with their acceptance; that's how he is brought closer]." And that is the meaning of the word "bring his close to you," to you, refers to Moshe because the Torah says everything that G-d commanded is through Moshe. Everything from Moshe because he is the da'at of the Jewish people. Today as well everything happens through Moshe and the Moshe of that generation. Therefore, when Tora says "Hashem was angry at me because of you" the word "angry" is related to the word "pregnancy" [Hashem "impregnanted" within me various revelations for your sake]. Therefore, when a Jew does something altruistically it returns and connects again to Moshe Rabbeinu. And that is why the Torah says "they should bring your pure olive oil" pure means without sediment this referring to a mitzvah that is pure [without selfish motives] that is what should be brought back to you.  
   
....THE EDGE FOR THE OPENING etc. The hint here is that one's prayer should always be regarding the bitter exile of the Shekhinah (from which we should be quickly saved). The language from our mouths should be continual prayer regarding the pain of Shekhina's exile.

... 
Aaron and his children should set up the Menorah so that it should be light from evening to morning: This posuk is alluding to the fact that the menorah is only necessary at night because the night time is a time of when kelipa dominates the souls, definitely, G-d forbid, and the candles of the Menorah allude to the Jewish people. As the Torah says "the candle of G-d is the soul of man." Therefore, he commanded Aaron to kindle the lights of the menorah, thus protecting the Jewish souls all night to remain holy. 

Parashat Shekalim



Parashat Zachor

Remember what Moses did to you: A question to ask: if there's a Biblical commandment to erase Amalek all the time since it says that "G-d has a war with Amalek in every generation," why doesn't he mention this commandment until the time of Shmuel HaNavi and then until the times of Mordechai and Esther (400 year gap). And it also says that the mitzvah is "not to forget Amalek" and Hashem never forgets. This mitzvah comes from the power and inspiration of tzaddikim in this world and the kind of service which is needed comes from a level of tzaddik who is called "faithful." Like it says about Moshe Rabbeinu, "Moses is faithful in My House," and Shmuel is also called "faithful." What does faithful? Those who souls that have no intent for themselves. And by them being so faithful, Hashem is faithful in return, and this pushes away the attribute of falsehood. Falsehood has no feet [no sustainability]. It says that kelipa gets its nourishment from Netzach and Hod, and it destroying Amelek "His anger He guards forever [netzach]." It also says that "Netzach of Israel does not lie." This is the attribute of Moshe Rabbeinu, the Faithful Shepard, his entire intent is for the benefit of the Jewish people and he gives his soul to them and Moses said to the Jewish people erase me from the book. Even when Moses left the world there's still a spark of Moses in the tzaddik of the generation. As it says, when 'Moses passed away his eyes did not dim' and next verse say "he went and spoke to the Jewish people." Even though he left us, he still speaks to us via  extension of Moshe in every generation (the tzaddik). This the meaning of the verse "she tasted the merchandise was good, her candlelight will not be put out at night." The goodness refers to the tzaddikim and the night to exile, and the candle light will not be put out. And so it says about Shmuel, "the candle of G-d, before it was put out, Shmuel was lying down in the chambers of Hashem."  This means that even while Shmuel is lying down [passed away], he still in the chamber of Hashem as to ensure the candle doesn't go out. As it books, even after Shmuel passed away, he did not want to enter Gan Eden, he wants to help the Jewish people, so he lies down in that place during their exile in order to assist them. This is also the meaning of the posuk "Moses and Aaron are among his Cohenim and Shmuel is among those who invoke his name."  And they call upon Hashem in the current times too (happening in the present). They call to him and He answers. This is the meaning of Chana's prayer "may you give your maidservant the seed of man." The seed of man refers to the light planted for the righteous to influence and illuminate the heart of Jews to create reverence and love for Hashem. She said "I am a woman of grievous spirit." Chana = 63, which is Bina, which is called "mother," which is a level of soul. She wanted to bring to him a soul from that place beyond the level of ruach. That's the meaning of a 'grievous spirit' because it's hard to make for her to make a nest, which the level of mother which hovers over her sons. This is the meaning of the verse "a small cloak his mother made him." Cloak = nest, which is the unity described in the verse "there is no man to work on the earth." Read this as "from the level of ayin, there is the earth." The first 'hei' of earth refers to Hashem's name. Then there is the word 'adam' and there is the last 'hei;' this is the unity of one world to another. And the one who merits to have the cloak in a similar way the Kohen Gadol does is from the level of Yosef, who got a cloak from his father, like Shmuel who made him a cloak. This is the meaning of the sound of the Kohen Gadol when he entered the Kodesh HaKodoshim. This is also the meaning of the verse "the old man wears the cloak," because this lets him daven for the Jewish people. So Moshe Rabbeinu is the level of netzach, Shmuel is netzach and hod, and Mordechai comes from Binyomin, who never bowed to Amalek (Eisav). And this is a tikkun for the thigh of Yaakov, which is netzach. This is the meaning of the destruction of Amalek. Mordechai never bowed down to Haman either. Therefore these three tzaddikim could cause the destruction of Amalek. So Moshe forced Amalek to come against him, and so did Shmuel and so did Mordechai, to give him the just punishment. The destruction of Amalek is the prelude to the building of the Temple. Therefore, it was delayed so long in order to destroy Amalek first, in order to build the Temple. When Shmuel saw the Temple being built, he needed to see the destruction of Amalek. Mordechai also needed to get rid of Amalek to prepare for the Second Temple. So to in the future it says "there salvation will be forever [netzach]" and the Temple will speedily built in our days, amen.  

Ki Tisa


When you count the Jewish people: we'll preface by first explaining the Megillat Esther. In says that Mordechai HaYehudi was the top advisor to Achashverosh, he was greatly by the Jewish people. What this means is that Mordechai HaYehudi did the exact opposite of the opinion of Achashverosh, the word Mishna is to change as Gemara says when someone changes from the expressed wishes of his master. Achashverosh entire intent was to show his greatness, and also the party he made was to show his greatness. He did not care for the benefit of his generation and it says in the next verse "Achashverosh placed a tax on the land to cover the cost of the party." This is not the way of righteous, their entire efforts are for the sake of the generation. This is the inner meaning of the word "he was great by the Jew" what this means is that all his greatness was for the sake of the Jewish people. That's the way by all tzaddikim, that they did not look at their own benefit. And that's the meaning of the verse: "G-d does good to those who are good and to those who are upright in their hearts." The tzaddik is called good as it says in the Torah "praise the tzaddik for he is good" and the upright in their heart who seek benefit for themselves. It says in a posuk "a light in planted for the righteous, and for the upright, joy" there are two types of tzadik: one who makes sure his path is righteous and he does not pay any attention to his generation. But a true tzaddik is someone who continually pursues welfare of the Jewish people. As it says in the posuk, "You are good and Your deeds are good, teach me your statutes." What this means is just like how Hashem is good and does good and the entire of creation was only to do kindness, so too did King David pray that his study of Torah was like Hashem's deeds, that he should study to be good and do good to others. And that is what he meant when he said "teach me your laws." This is the meaning of our prayers "therefore the tzaddikim will see and rejoice and the upright will celebrate" what this means is that tzadikim will rejoice because the upright will celebrate. This is the meaning of our prayer in the musaf of Rosh Hashanah, "Those who seeks you will never stumble and will never be shamed forever, all those who shelter in you." "Those who seek you" are those who pray for the world, they will never stumble and their merit will last forever and this is a level that Mordechai was on; as the Torah says, he sought the welfare of his people. When you count the Jewish people, this is refers to the tzaddikim who are the heads of the Jewish people, "they will give" means they give atonement to the Jewish people's when Hashem counts them. What that means is when the generation is missing something they will have sacrificed for them and the Jewish people will not be plagued but rather have long life and good years. This is the meaning of the next section of this week's parsha "and you should take for yourself choice spices, 500 weight of solidified myrrh." The word, myrrh, allude to Mordechai as the Talmud says his name is "morry dechi" [crushed spice in Hebrew]. He was at this level, he sought the welfare of the Jewish people and was thus a true leader. And in the words of the Torah, "choice spices," literally 'heads of spices' means that Hashem appoints the head of Jewish people from heaven (spice share the same letters as heaven) so the leader of the Jewish people should arouse mercy and kindness. And this the meaning of the teaching of the yeshiva of Eliyahu HaNavi: why did Moshe Rabbeinu merit to have his face shine? Because his whole life he would sigh and yearn for the glory of the Jewish people so that there should be peace between them and their Father in Heaven, and all of the Torah that he learned was for the benefit of the Jewish people as it says that when Moshe got the Torah he gave it to Yehoshua. This is the meaning of a verse from Naomi Melech "let my words flow like rain" just like rain saturates Earth, it comes down with no benefit to itself, instead it get mingled with the mud just for the sake of the world, to bring bread from earth, so should his Torah teaching be like the rain. And this is the meaning of the posuk "just like the rain and snow irrigates the earth and brings forth bread likewise Hashem's word will not come back empty handed." 

Vayakhel

...Moshe gathers all the Jewish people and tells them 6 days to work, 7th day is holy. I have explained early the virtue of a tzadik, the foundation of the world. Since the beginning of creation, Gd's desire, may He be blessed, is that there should in every generation a tzaddik of the generation. As we say in our prayer, the "Creator of the worlds, [provides someone who is] righteous in all generations." The virtue of a tzaddik is very great, he brings benefits to all those who are associated with him. Anyone who touches him is purified, he is the pure mikvah of the Jewish people. This will enable us to understand the words of the Mishna. In Chapter 6 of Pirkei Avot, "anyone who studies Torah for its own sake will become like a fountain that flows with ever increasing strength." Although all the water in the world passes over a wellspring, it still remains pure because the wellsprings purifies all that immerses in it. There's water that drips and there's water that flows so even if there is more dripping water than flowing water it is still considered pure because it is flowing with an ever increasing strength. The wellspring alludes to the tzaddik. Everyone who comes to him to get purified from all blemishes, to all those who are associated with him and trust in him, he is like a fountain that flows with ever increasing strength despite all the water that goes upon him. Even though there are more dripping water than the flowing water. The flowing water, the yetzer hara, as it says in the Torah "it crawls on the earth" [see the Hebrew for the explanation]. This is the meaning of the posuk "a pure man should take a hyssop and dip in the water and sprinkle it on the what became impure." This hints to that whoever comes to the tzaddik must be humble, like the hyssop, and then will be able to dip in the water, which is the Torah of the tzadik. This is the meaning of the Mishna "how fortunate are you Jewish people in front of whom do you purify yourself and who purifies you? your Father in Heaven. For the mikvah of the Jewish people in Hashem." What this hints to, in order to become pure, you have to get sprinkled by red heifer water on third and seventh day for the impurity and then you go into the mivkah. First, you're pure on the outside and then within. Likewise, the tzadik purifies all those who enter within him and that is why is compared to a fountain that flows with ever increasing strength. The word 'wellspring' (mayon) relates to 'taste' (meyen) he is a taste of the World to Come. All of his effort is for the sake of the Jewish people as it says about the coming of Moshiach "a redeemer will come for the life of the World to Come". This also alludes to the fact that the redeemer is willing sacrifice his World to Come for the Jewish people. This is the meaning of the verse in Judges "the heart goes out to the dignitaries of Israel who offer themselves willingly among the people. Bless you Hashem." Those who are who offer themselves willingly what we will understand the difference between a neder and nedava. What's the difference? A neder is "I'm responsible" and nedava is "this animal is going to be a sacrifice." Nedava means that the people who offering themselves willingly that they are ready to be sacrificed [like the animal]. And this is the meaning of the "those who give..Blessed be Hashem." They have the ability to bring down the blessings to the Jewish people. "Moshe gathers the Jewish people..." the tzadik has within the Daas [connection] of the generation what is known during the golden calf is they sinned with their thoughts and blemished their Daas and Moshe took from them a 1000 lights. The Arizal writes that on Shabbat they are returned as it say in davening "Moshe will rejoice in his gift." This is the relationship of the 6 days and the 7th day, why does Moshe preface the commandment of Shabbat to the commandment of the Tabernacle. So, according to the explanation, Moshe was hinting to them that while he was alive he could've fixed their daas as the Torah concludes "all the adas [commuity] left before Moshe." This alludes that the Jewish people could be corrected through Moshe Rabbeinu so Moshe knew he wouldn't always be with them, therefore he said Shabbat before Tabernacle since Shabbat rectifies daas as it says in the Torah "in order that you should know that I, Hashem, sanctify you." Why? The power of Shabbat is the power of Moshe, who has an extension of Moshe in every generation. Shabbos can therefore be a pure mikvah to fix the daas of the Jewish people.

Pekudei


Exodus 38:21 This is similar to what I [the author] explain later on: how Moshe saw all the work that was done and how they did it as Hashem's commanded. This hints to us that all the miztvot, done by a person, need to be elevated via a tzaddik. [Indeed], the Mishkan's completion was only possible through Moshe-- Moshe _saw_ all the work, which is why it was completed as Hashem's commanded. This is also explains the meaning of "He's deserving of the whole world": all the prayer of the world depends on the tzaddik since he elevates them to their source in heaven. This also explains "he causes joy to Hashem and causes joy to creations": bringing joy Hashem _causes_ joy to creation. Furthermore, "he causes joy to the place," referring to the Beit HaMikdash, which draws down good sustenance to the world and causes joy to the creations of Hashem. This also explains [, as we say in our prayer,] "our share should be among those who trust in Hashem": although all Jewish people have a share in the World-To-Come, we request is that our share should be with the tzaddik, so that our prayer [in this world] should be elevated with theirs. This also explains: "Blessed are you, Hashem, who is a support and security for the tzaddikim." The word "security" relates to the word "connected" -- [we bless Hashem] for letting us connect with the tzaddikim. This also explains the verse: "Moshe relayed the words of people to Hashem." The word "relayed" can also mean "elevate"; thus Moshe "elevates" the word of the people to Hashem. This also explains why "3 times a year, the males should appear before the face of Hashem." Hashem appears to the Jewish people through the tzaddik, who's called the face of the Shechina, [so seeing the tzaddik is] how the Jewish people fulfill their obligation. Now we can understand why the Jewish people would visit Hillel the Nasi before going to the Beit HaMikdash; since a mitzvah needs to be elevated through a tzaddik, they had to appear before him. This is why he was called "Nasi"--he elevated mitzvot. This also explains the verse "Yaakov lifted his feet." Even the mitzvot on the level of feet, which is very low, were lifted by Yaakov.  This also explains "these are the counting of the Mishkan." The word "counting" also means "commandments." How can mitzvot be a Mishkan? The mitzvot drawn down G-dliness through Moshe. 

Vayikra





Leviticus 1:2 According to Kabbalah, all the mitzvot and good deeds are meant to rectify the blemish of Adam HaRishon. This blemish taints the holy sparks, even to the level of the feet as it says in the verse, "his feet will stand on that day on the mount of olives." [Returning to the original verse], the meaning is as follows: the "man" is referring to Adam HaRishon, he will become closer through your good deeds, and the "animals" refer to holy sparks, which are reincarnated in an animal. All 4 levels of vitality (animal, plant, etc) have sparks, scattered in mixture of good and evil, and the Kohen, through sacrificing with proper intent, causes a rectification to the appropriate place for that animal. The Arizal explains that all the mystical unification, which happened during the Bet HaMikdash, can occur when we eat with the right intent (as this elevates the sparks). As the verse says: "they were hungry and were thirsty, and their souls were wrapped within." The "soul wrapped within" doesn't refer to a person; rather, this refers to the spark within the food (the soul of reincarnation is within the food). This is the meaning of the verse: "He gives food to hungry, Hashem frees the bound": Hashem, by giving food to the hungry, frees the bound [ie the soul]. [To explain:] the sparks are bound in the food, and the person eating food with the right intention frees the soul in the food. This also explains the phrase from the Gemara: " It's as hard for Hashem to provide sustenance for a person as it is to split the Reed Sea"-- our holy intent, during food consumption, can replace sacrifice. The unity of Adam HaRishon achieved with the right intent [while eating] is difficult, as difficult as splitting the Reed Sea. The point of splitting the Reed Sea was to elevate the sparks in Egypt, and this is the same goal for eating food.  





“The priest will make an atonement for his sin, and he will be forgiven” we can explain this verse by what is written in the Gemara (Rosh Hashana 25:2) “The Verse equates three lowly sages {Gidon, Shimshon and Yiftach} with three great sages {Moshe, Aharon and Shemuel}” meaning since they weren’t as righteous as the earlier sages thus these low sages sought out the good aspects of others, and they didn’t hate them since they saw that they were in some aspect lacking righteousness. This too is the explanation of this verse “The priest will make an atonement” for when someone that sinned came to a priest seeking forgiveness the priest needed to see in himself [saying] “I too am like him” thus he would first forgive himself then forgive the other. This is the explanation of the verse, “ The priest will make an atonement for his sin” first he would seek forgiveness for himself, then “and he will be forgiven” the other will be forgiven.

Tzav



Shmini



Tazria

*The women who will conceive and give birth to a male:* why doesn't it mention the seed? It says in the Torah "just like the land produces its produce and like the garden produces its produce so does G-d cause righteousness to sprout." If you plant something in the ground, the ground accepts the seed and, if it doesn't get ruined, it will certainly grow without a doubt. In a similar way, we pray for the sprouting of the Redemption, the coming of Moshiach speedily in our days. As it says in davening: "Moshiach should come." We also say in our prayer "Let the glory of Dovid your servant sprout." It also says "there's a man who's named is Tzemach" that's a reference to Moshiach. Why is Moshiach associated with growth and sprouting? The name of Moshiach existed before the world. So, too, G-d created Heaven and Earth and then there was Light and that light is the light of Moshiach. The original light that Hashem is planted and from that time it came to the world, from before, to grow and sprout our Moshiach, he come speedily in our days. Because of the generous rain and prayer and tears, asking for Moshiach, causes the light to continually grow. All of the prophets who prophesized about Moshiach use the present and past tense. This is because the growth of Moshiach happens every day, which is why the Tanach uses present and past tense. As it says "the first one to Zion, behold, behold them, and for Jerusalem I will give a herald" Yeshaya 41:27 [https://www.chabad.org/library/bible_cdo/aid/15972/jewish/Chapter-41.htm]. We are asking to speedily see the growth and greatness of Moshiach when he is revealed, may it happen speedily. That's why we say in our prayers "let our salvation quickly sprout and may agony and sighing depart from us." Even in our time, when Moshiach hasn't come, there should be growth in the light of Moshiach to feel some of the effects of Redemption. This is the meaning of the posuk "just like the earth produces it produce so will G-d cause righteousness to sprout." The similarity is that when seed is in the ground and not ruined, the growth is guaranteed; so too, with the light of Moshiach, it is certain it will sprout. This is the meaning of the posuk "the woman who gave seed gives birth to a boy." What this means "when a women seeds, and she receives the seed in a proper way" that when the Jewish people put in effort to become closer to G-d then the offspring is male. Male is associated with mercy and through this the good deeds of the Jewish people cause the elevation of the female waters properly and they draw down kindness and mercy upon the Jewish people in this world.

Metzora



Achrei Mot




"After the death of Aaron's two sons, when they drew near before the L-rd, and they died" -- this was written with a double expression, as mentioned earlier. According to what we explained before, they were in a state of sacrifice -- they wanted to help the future. By them coming close to Hashem, they allowed for all future souls to ascend and come close to G-d, as explained by the Arizal. This was their great righteousness; although they could've given themselves life, they didn't because their whole being was to help the Jewish people. This is the meaning about what the Talmud says about R Akiva. In the story of R Akiva, where his skin was combed with iron combs while he was reciting the Shema, his students said "to such an extent?" What do they mean "to such an extent?" They knew the great power of R Akiva to resurrect the dead. Although he could resurrect the dead and give himself life and immediately destroy his enemies, he didn't -- he submitted his soul to be killed with this kind of torture. That's what they meant "to such an extent"--why wouldn't he save himself? He responded "my whole life I read to love Hashem with all your soul and now I can do it" and now I can give my soul for the sake of the Jewish people. This was the truth. The whole purpose of killing the 10 people was to fix all worlds and that's why they're called the 10 people killed by kingdom (malchus). Because they were trying to elevate from below to above, the feminine waters (elevating the malchus). And that's why they're called the "children of malchus" as it's written in the Arizal. This is what happened to the children of Aaron; they could've resurrected themselves although their souls left them. Just as it says in Torah about our resurrection at the Giving of the Torah. So they didn't want to resurrect. And that's why it says "after the children of Aaron...and they came close to Hashem and they died" the repetition is because there were two deaths to create an atonement for their children afterwards. And this is why our sages say "just as sacrifices create atonement so too the death of tzaddikim creates atonement." This is the way of truth, Tzaddikim elevate the sacrifice and through them everything happens.

Kedoshim

"You should be holy because I Hashem your G-d am holy:" To explain this, this is similar to what our sages say that if there's is a letter that's used as a prefix to G-d's name that it can be erased, but if it's used as a suffix it can't be erased like the name Elokiechem because the letters are sanctified with the Name in the front. This hinted in the Torah as it says "you should cleave to Hashem your G-d" and "You should cleave to Hashem." What this means it that you should cleave to Hashem via mitzvot and good deeds. Our sages are alluding that even though one achieved devikut to Hashem that they have not reached the higher level and always stand in front of Hashem because a person like this can fall all the way down, chas veshalom. The real path is that a person shouldn't considered himself important at all. Even if they reached the highest level, they should think nothing of themselves like Avraham Avinu who said "I am but dust and ashe." and like King David "I have drawn my heart to do your mitzot and I will always still be a heel." What that means is even though I drew my heart to do miztvot and I reached the highest level, I am still a heel, the lowliest of people. This is also what it means when it says "I have not gone to do things which are greater than me and more wonderous than me." This what our sages mean when they say that a "prefix" which means secondary in Hebrew [in front and in the beginning of the word] what this means that he thinks that he is secondary and is attached and is always in front of Hashem he can fall [be erased]. But anything that is a suffix to Hashem, that he is lowly and humble and follows after Hashem, this kind of person will not be erased and will merit to cleave to Hashem. This is the meaning of the verse that "you should walk behind Hashem and cleave to Him"... and this is what the Torah means when it says "you shall be holy" if you're able to estimate yourself as being like the verse continues "I am Hashem your G-d is holy" when you consider yourself attached to Hashem behind, like -leichem, you should be holy. The Gemera says that in food if there's a primary part and a secondary part and that you should make a blessing on the primary part. What this means is make a bracha on the major part of Hashem's name and through this you'll elevate the first part of the Name.  This is explains the story in the Gemara where R Chanina ben Doysa prayed for rain and R Yochanan Zachai confirmed why his prayers were answered. He said that [to R Chaina ben Doysa] "you're like a servant to behind" and I'm "like a minister in front of Hashem."  
"You should be holy because I Hashem your G-d am holy:" It appears to me that the meaning [of the verse] is as follows: we say in, the song of Shabbat, "help those who rest on 7th day, their righteousness will shine like light of the 7 Days of Creation." Tzaddikim are compared to, and called, "light"; the Midrash expounds, concerning the verse "Let there be light," that this refers to the deeds of the righteous. These tzaddikim, with their righteousness, illuminate [the world], similar to the 7 Days of Creation. The sages say that the light of Creation was hidden for tzaddikim for the future. It's similar to what our sages about the land of Israel; once it was sanctified by Joshua, it was sanctified for the future [forever]. [Indeed,] the power of the original holiness helps power the future holiness. This explains the words, "The light was hidden for the future"; Hashem shines with great light, which illuminates the world from beginning of Creation, and, it arose, before Hashem, the desire to bring out and emanate the souls of righteousness to give light to entire world from the beginning of Creation. Thus, [in these generations], when they come to this world and illuminate with righteousness, even after their light was gathered in and they passed away, their righteousness still shines forever. Just like the 7 Days of Creation, this light lasts forever through all the days of the world,  uninterrupted. As verse says, "their righteousness stands forever," [which explains why] the light of tzaddikm is like that of the 7 Days of Creation; the light of the 7 Days was shining through the entirety of Creation. Furthermore, "the light was hidden for the future" [can also mean that] the tzaddikim that were present at the beginning of Creation and were given light in order to shine in every generation, to give light to the eyes of the Jewish people in their righteousness. This is the meaning of the story where Hashem showed Adam each generation, including those who seek Hashem in that generation. Hashem ensured that there was a tzaddik in every generation, and the people of a generation are referred to by the tzaddik of that generation. [For example, an individual would be referenced as] a person from Avraham Avinu's generation, a person from Chizkya's generation, a person from Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai's generation, [etc]. All the people of that generation depend on the light of the tzaddik. "The light was hidden for the future" can be further explained as follows: although the light of tzaddik was gathered and he's [physically] gone, his light continues forever, as the verse states: "How wonderful is the good that you've hidden for those who fear you." It also explains in the Zohar that there's an extension of Moses in every generation in the tzaddik of that generation. The tzaddik [physically] departs from the world, temporarily, in order to shine in the next generation [through the next tzaddik]. Thus, the verse, "Speak to children of Israel in every generation," [is an imperative to the Moshe of the generation] to speak to the Jewish people that they should be holy, as said before. 

Emor

Hashem told Moshe to tell the Kohanim that they're not allowed to become impure. Rashi explains that the double expression here indicates the older Kohanim should inform the younger Kohanim about this. This is eluding to the following: it says in the Mishna that "the wool and hooves and other parts of the sheep, when attached, is brought up to the Altar--however, the waste isn't brought up." To understand this, we need to preface about the power of tzaddikim. From their mouths we live and anyone who is attached to them will never be forsaken; rather he will be elevated and be included in their service of Hashem. This is the meaning of our prayers: "may Hashem bless those who are G-d-fearing, the old with young." Like it says in the Torah "I ate my sugar cane with my sugar." This is the meaning of the Mishna that the wool ascends to the Altar as long as it's attached, even if it's disgusting and has a foul odor--it will also ascend to Hashem. The waste cannot ascend, however; waste also means separation. If you separate from the tzaddik, chas veshalom, you can never ascend ever again. This was revealed to us by the Baal Shem Tov in his generation, and so in all subsequent generation til Moshiach's coming, all those who cleave to tzaddikim will be elevated and will not be pushed aside. This is the meaning of the Rashi: this is to encourage tzaddikim that they should elevate the smaller people of the generation to Hashem. This is what Yosef was alluded to when he said "you will not see my face without you bringing your brother with you [unless they bring Binyomin]"-- according to your opinion that I [Yosef] am low in your eyes (as they felt he deserved the death penalty chas veshalom, therefore he told them to not to leave him alone since he should be elevated him with them). That's the meaning of the Rashi.     

Behar

The earth shall have a Shabbat for Hashem: The first letters and the last letters of rest [in Hebrew] are vav and kay [letters of G-d's name] and Shabbat is in between. Tzaddikim are called Shabbat as it says in the Zohar, and they connect the letters of vav-kay as it says in the Torah "You who cleaves to Hashem" means that they bring it together.  And "rest" has the same letters as teshuva because teshuva causes the unity of Hashem's name, and this is meaning of the earth will rest: the shechina is called earth as it says "Tzaddikim will inherit the earth (shechina)." And this is the meaning of the verse "the chronicles of the heaven and earth when G-d created them" so the words of the last words are the same letters as Avraham. And he achieved a unity in the name Yud-Kay-Vav-Kay and that brought rachamim and chesed to the name Elokim. He acquires earth and heaven arousal from below to supernal earth and this causes the masculine waters to descend from heaven. This is the meaning of the verse, this is because the tzaddikim connecting the yud and kay and cause revelation of Shabbat. 


The Jewish people arose in Hashem's thought. How come tzaddikim get to know what has happened and what will happen? This is because the holiness of the thoughts of tzaddikim, which have never been blemished. They always think holy thoughts for Hashem's sake and therefore their thoughts ascend and cleave to the Infinite One Blessed Be He. In Heaven, the past and future are the same, and so they merit the light of ruach hakodesh and prophecy by drawing down the infinite light of Hashem to their thoughts. 
The land should rest for you to eat: it's a Shabbat for the land, this refers to the tzaddikim, who are called Shabbos, and tzaddikim inherit the earth. What this is means that in the merit of the tzaddikim on the earth, the parnasa shall come to earth for you to eat.  As it says in the verse, "this is for the holy ones in the earth." And this is what it means that the earth shall appease Hashem's wrath. The sabbatical years refer to tzaddikim, and they appease Hashem. As it says in the verse "I will remember the earth" which means I'll remember the tzaddikim. 

Bechukotai

If you follow My statutes and observe My commandments them: it appears to me that every mitzvah has ten sefirot and the entire organism. The offspring of Yaakov is Yosef, and Yosef is the idea of Yesod, which gives life to Malchus, which gives life to all the worlds. That's the meaning of the words "you shall do them"--them refers to yesod because yesod is a sign. You should do the mitzvahs with love and fear of G-d so that every mitzvah should have yesod in it to give life to the world. This is the meaning that part of the Shema. A part of the expression is redundant, what's the meaning of this? In every mitzvah, the intent is to become one with and arrive to holiness as we say in our prayers "He has sanctified us with His mitzvot" as it says in Zohar: there are 613 pieces of advice as the commentaries explain. If you do the mitzvot, they will bring love, reverence, and holiness, but that's only if you do these mitzvot with the focus of yesod. One limb strengthens the other limb. We cause the yesod, in each mitzvah, bestows holiness and light to those who do the mitzvah. It says in the verse "you fulfilled your words because you're tzaddik and saw the pain of our forefathers in Egypt" The Torah is explains about the divine flow of yesod, which is called tzaddik. Our sages say that when it says in the Torah (about the pain of our forefathers) that this refers to when there was a lacking of intimacy in Egypt. He saw that they were pained. This is the meaning of the verse "who is like this great nation that has chukim, mishpatim, and tzaddikim" this is because every mitzvah has ten sefirot, and the yesod is called tzaddik because it brings life, health, parnasa, reverance, and love.  




You will eat old grain: Targum Onlekos translates the words "old grain" as atik of atik. This is like the hymn that invites the atika kadisha. On Shabbat, the divine comes down from the Old World (atik). When Moshiach will come, all days will be on the level of atik which why it says that all days will be like Shabbat.  This is the meaning of "you will eat old grain": this refers to the mercy of Hashem that we must bring to this world. "You have remove the old grain for the sake of the new grain." Hashem renews each day with His goodness, and every person is created anew and Hashem must bring down His mercy to renew people in this world. Hashem has to bring out the mercy from atik, the old world. 

Bamidbar



Nasso



Beha'alotcha



Sh'lach



Korach

"Korach said 'you children to Levi are trying to take too much'." Rashi asks why did Korach make this foolish mistake? He saw a great chain of people coming out of him, including Shmuel HaNavi who is equal to Moshe Rabbeinu, and so he was sure he'd stay alive. Why did Hashem show him that vision? It's because Hashem tests a tzaddik--this is the way of Hashem to test people in order to grant them good. Sometimes a person reaches a level of greatness and is shown something that makes him good and just in the eyes of G-d. This is all a challenge. Even the greatest tzaddikim-- Hashem shows their greatness by letting them to perform miracles-- this is a test to see how he'll feel about himself and if this will make him negligent about Avodat Hashem. However, a wise man will check his own deed so as not to become haughty and Hashem will bless him seven-fold and he'll be successful.  Similarly, in a story with the Besht, he forced one of his students to be a Rabbi and he pretended to be angry with this student (for not accepting the position). The student didn't want this position (continued to push back), and, when the Besht saw this, he told him that this was a test. Therefore, a person must be very G-d fearing--maybe this is only a test. This is meaning of the offer of G-d to Moshe (to destroy Israel and create a new nation from him). If Moshe's accepted the offer, he would've been destroyed. He said "if you destroy them erase me from your book"-- Moshe negated himself for the Jewish people. This is the reason why Hashem to continue to convince Moshe to accept the position of leader of 7 days (burning bush)--Moshe thought this was a test.  Moshe Rabbeinu was truly more humble than all people, and he had no arrogance from being a leader of the Jewish people, and he was supposed to do this. Because he was so humble, the test had to come from Hashem Himself since the yetzer hara had already been conquered. Likewise, Avraham Avinu had "Hashem test Avraham." This is also the meaning of the story with Chananya, Mishael and Azarya: first Hashem said that He wouldn't save them and they did the right thing anyways then Hashem saved them. Likewise, Avshalom exalted himself against his father and was enticed to gain the power and this was a challenge and he, because of his arrogance, thought he was worthy. This is also the idea of Korach: Korach saw the great chain of people descended from him and he was supposed to be bittul to Moshe and Hashem wanted him to be humble under Moshe Rabbainu. He was not humble and he argued with Moshe Rabbainu. Hashem should place us among those people who walk before Him for good for all of his days amen.  ...

Chukat

Summary: The Tiferes Shlomo discusses a particular kavanah that one may use to enthuse himself towards Torah study and mitzvot. It involves imagining that Gan Even gave a day to you, to come back and do teshuva. How would you conduct yourself during this day? Apply that feeling to fuel your personal avodah.

Balak

Numbers 22:2: There are many questions about this. First, why reference what the Jews did specifically to the Amorites? Why the redundancy in Moab's expression (terrified / disgusted)? Why say Balak saw it if the whole world also saw it? Also, it says here that they were disgusted, the same language used by the Egyptians. Why? The answer is found in the early books that the whole point of the Exile is that there should be more converts. It says that in Egypt, the more that Jews were in pain, the more they increased. How? Through converts. That's the meaning of 'disgusted' since the Jews were like thorns in their lives because the nation felt like they needed to convert. This is the difference between Balak and Bilaam. Bilaam said "Let my soul die the death of the just", he was hoping to be among the Jews and he was killed by the Jews. Balak hated the Jews and he saw that some Amorites became Jewish. That's the meaning of the verse that he saw what the Jews did to Amorites--that his nation was converting into Jews. That's why he was afraid of them growing is because the Jews were taking away the sparks of holiness (via conversion). This explains Yosef where buying the grain, grain = _bar_ (which equals to 202), hinting to 202 sparks. Elsewhere, Hashem hovered over the world, (hovering equals) to 288 spark. That's the meaning that Moab was disgusted because of the Jewish people. They were disgusted that some would convert to Judaism. This also explains the verse "and now the community will chew us up"--why is it the community? It's hinting to the sparks of holiness which was taken from the nation by the Jews via conversion. That's why the verse says "don't curse the people because they're blessed"-- sometimes a person can be ruined by the sparks of holiness leaving him. Which is why Balak says "please curse them for me" and "bring a strange fire to the Jewish people" to consume their G-dly sparks and through this they will be ruined. Balak says maybe "I will kill them and drive them out". Hashem said that even that method [using their sparks] can't be used since He protects them from klipa. Balak saw all that the Jewish people did and was afraid. Why didn't he mention Sihon or Og? Also, what did he see more than anyone else? The answer is that the sages say that the main thing that Balak saw was that they were victorious in a miracle way-- it wasn't thanks to military might, but rather that Hashem was helping. When he saw this, he tried to circumvent by using prayer but Hashem is far from the wicked and he listens to the prayer of the righteous. When he saw his prayer wasn't going to be accepted because it was disgusting, he decided to see what was the special reason that He answers the Jewish people and not him. He saw there was a lot of purity and holiness and kavanah before the prayer goes to Hashem. There needs to be a lot of good deeds and teshuva before prayer (in order for the prayer to make an impact). Then the prayers come before Hashem with humility. He was very afraid and felt his bones rotting because he couldn't do this. He was disgusted because the service was very great and called for Bilaam who could figure this out. This also explains the use of Amorites, which is similar to amori =speaking, which shows all the preparation and teshuva and purity done through words by the Jewish people.That's why he was afriad because their service was great and he was disgusted and he sent for Bilaam.

Pinchas



Matot



Masei

Numbers 33:1: What it feels like this in these psukim are explained in the commentaries. It appears to me, based on what I explained earlier, on the verse "Moshe Rabbeinu returns the words of people to G-d." This is the virtue of the tzaddikim of the generations that they elevate all the prayers and the all good deeds of the simple people to go up to heaven. That's the meaning of the words "Moshe Rabbeinu returns the words of people to G-d", meaning he returns them and their deeds to Hashem. This is what is written here as well: their journey was from level to level within kedusha because while they were in Egypt, they were immersed in the 49 gates of impurity. When they left from the great darkness to the great light, they were traveling in kedusha, going higher and higher. That's the meaning of the verse "these are the journeys": these people ascended higher and higher as the result of them leaving Egypt to become the army of Hashem, all of this was achieved by the tzaddikim, Moshe and Aaron, who lifted them up before Hashem. And this is the meaning of the verse "Moshe wrote down their departures to their journeys" that he achieved all of this; all of their depart and their journey, he achieved that all of this should be for the sake of Hashem to journey by Hashem's instruction to go higher and higher. Another verse "these are their journey according to their departure": these 42 journey allude to Hashem's 42 letter name, because His Kindness is Everlasting, all of this achieved through Moshe and Aaron.
Numbers 33:1: This verse can be understood by another verse: "Man cannot live on bread alone but by the word of G-d." The main energy of a person is that G-d should say Torah in the person's name. It says in Talmud: "When Moshe Rabbeinu went to Gad Eden, he saw G-d sitting and saying that 'my son Eliezer is saying that cow refers to a 2-year old cow, that's how it's written in heaven'." This is the meaning of Mishna where it says "the language of sages and the names of the sages are studied in their mouth" that's how we explained earlier in Behalotcha "according to the mouth of G-d, when they were told to camp, they camped and when told to travel, they traveled." Tzaddikim do no rest, neither this world or the next, because the more they understand, the higher their understanding ascends until G-d will say a Torah in their name and, at that point, they "encamp." This, in turn, brings a new Torah insight like a wellspring. [In the times of Tanna,] this empowered the strength of Torah for the Talmud for the next generation [,the Amorim]. At the end of the generation [the Amorim], called the conclusion of the Talmud, this stopped except for unique individuals. That's the meaning of the verse "Man cannot live on bread alone but by the word of G-d" that the main life/energy of a person is that G-d says in Torah in his name. By the Jewish people, it says that "these are their journeys for their coming out of Egypt," "coming out" means saying words of Torah, according to G-d's word--like how when they were told to travel, they travelled-- they reached higher and higher until G-d said Torah in their mouth. This is the meaning of the posuk "they're coming out of their journey": they're revealing a new flow of Torah as it says "G-d renews the world every day."

Devarim



The Three Weeks



Shabbat Chazon

It seems correct to explain the meaning of this verse: the intent of the verse is to highlight the great virtue of Shabbos during galut: when Shabbos comes, it brings more simcha to G-d than when the Beis HaMikdash stood. [Why?] Because on Shabbat there's a yichud in heaven, even during galut, and during the days of the week, Hashem is in "exile" as it says "I am with him in his pain." So, when Shabbat comes, there's a great joy because Hashem leaves the exile and there's a yichud. In the times of Beit HaMikdash, there was a yichud during the week and on Shabbat it was on a higher level, but, as a result, it wasn't as joyous to Hashem. This is the meaning of the verse "then during the times of the exile the earth will desires its Sabbatical": they are desirable to Hashem with great joy. It says in the verse "It's enough for you to stay by this mountain," [which, homiletically, praises Shabbat]: your Shabbat is very great for you in the time of great tears. Now, the days of the three weeks are a time of deep tears-- as a result, this Shabbat is even greater than all other Shabbotim because during the week there is great pain, but, during Shabbat, it's great joy as it says "on the 7th day He ascended and sat on His throne of glory" and, even though the Jewish people are pain, there's no pain for Hashem on Shabbat. What we learn from this is that every single Jew must be very joyous on Shabbat;  the main pain [that Jews] should experience is that the shechina is galut (during the weekday), but on Shabbat the shechina is in peace, so th Jewish people should be joyous, and this causes more simcha to Hashem.   

Tisha B'Av



Shabbat Nachamu

Yeshayahu 40:1 The first question is why does it say "your G-d"-- it should be just "G-d" [without the possessive]. The second question is: how come it says that we were punished doubly? How can G-d, who forgives us abundantly, punish doubly? The explanation: it says about Noah that "this one will comfort us from our work and the toil of our hands." What's the meaning of comfort in this context? The answer: the source of the all comfort for the Jewish people is that, despite us being in the lands of the exiles and are exiled from our father's table and don't know when He will reveal to us, G-d glory has not departed from us and G-d does not despise the Jewish people. The shechina is in our midst and Moshiach is standing behind the wall. He [G-d] is imprisoned with us and is close to all who call Him and He hastens to redeem us with an everlasting redemption. Besides the suffering and pain caused by the nations, the more difficult evil and pain is that Jewish people are in a state of sadness and despair because Hashem is above them and they don't know if G-d desires to redeem them (because what are we? How are we important to arouse G-d's love? Who knows if all of our efforts will ascend to cause favor before His Throne? Who knows if He'll listen to our voice). These thoughts and others sadden the Jewish people and make them weak in their service of Hashem as the Jewish people once said "what gain do we have to serve Hashem, how will it help us?" [from Iyov / Job]. Therefore, the first comfort is to show the Jewish people that Hashem is with them wherever they are and has not departed from them and He desires their service and listens to their prayers. And this is meaning of the Zohar about Ezekiel's Chariot: the reason why the chariot was shown in order to remind that, even during the exile, the entire Chariot is with them. This will strengthen the service of Hashem, and this strength will never leave because they'll feel Hashem with them. And this is the theme of prophecy of Aaron in Egypt: Aaron's path is to pursue peace and make peace between people and G-d. He would prophesize that G-d has seen their pain and knows their suffering so, G-d forbid, they wouldn't forget Him (and that's why Aaron was sent to Egypt). This concept is the foundation of all service of Hashem. To strengthen service in exile and show that G-d eyes are always towards His people and His hand is always outstretched to collect the teshuva [repentance] of His people. This is the meaning of Moses' statement "Why are you complaining about Aaron"-- complaining, here, can also mean to hang or be depend on. [Moses was saying:] 'look how great Aaron is; thanks to him, you believe in Hashem and all of you on depend on him to strengthen service to Hashem.' This also explains Yosef's statement to the Jewish people, "I'm going to pass away and G-d will remember you and will lift you of this land", and another statement, by Moses, "G-d had remembered you and what had been done to you." The Talmud says that the Messiah will use the expression of remembrance, which is why Moses used it. What's the reason for this? Remembrance also means to be united with, as it says "the husband must remember his wife, to be with his wife before he goes on the road." Yosef, who is yesod [the sefirah] , said that 'I'm passing away in exile, but G-d will still remember you and will unite with you even in exile and this is how you will be redeemed (by G-d being with you in exile).' That's why remembrance is the sign of redemption: redemption is a product of unification between G-d and the Jewish people. That's the meaning of the verse, "G-d saw the Jewish people and knew them"--- knowing means united with them. Also, regarding other exiles, "G-d saw their pain," and, because He saw their pain, He remembered their covenant and He was appeased by His great kindness. We also say in our prayers, "remember for us good and for blessing"--remember means to be with us. Also, during Rosh Hashanah services, we say "you remember the deed of the world," which refers to the divine flow elicited by the tzaddikim uniting with Hashem. It also says, in the end, "you remember all creatures from long ago"-- He remembers both tsaddikim and all creatures. The source of comfort of Jewish people, who are called tzaddikim, is telling them that their service is desirable before Hashem, they shouldn't be upset when He hides His face in the exile, and they need a great encouragement to keep steady. Yosef said "I haven't done anything here yet they put me in the pits"-- when he was in the pit, he didn't know all the good deeds that he did [he couldn't see the divine favor created by his deeds]. No one could tell him that until he was free forever. This is the meaning of the verse "those who plant with tears will reap with joy": Jewish people are planting with tears, not knowing if their deeds are good or impactful. When Moshiach comes, we will reap with joy, because no good deed will fall to the ground. And this is why we ask in our prayers "may our service always find favor", which means that the prayer should truly find favor and be revealed as such before the coming with Moshiach. This is also why we say "may the words of my mouth... find favor before You"-- there's a doubt if we're giving pleasure to Hashem, and this is first thing that needs to be told to Jewish people to strength them. This is what will comfort us, and the word "comfort" has "Noah" in it. Why? Because despite the evil of that generation, Noah found favour [in G-d's eyes]. In the future, we'll see how Hashem has desired our deeds. This is meaning of the doubly pained: one pain affects the body and the other affects the soul (anxiety about G-d's love), therefore we got double nechama (comfort), for the body and the soul. Even in galut "Hashem is your G-d." 

Vaetchanan



Eikev

Deuteronomy 7:12: The word 'eikev' appears earlier in the Torah: "because [eikev] Avraham listened to My voice...". We find that 'eikav' means 'because', and that's why Avraham was blessed. 'Eikev' also means 'heel,' which is attributed to tsaddikim since they're the level of heel--they don't consider themselves anything at all [heel is a symbol of humility]. This is what King David meant "...forever to the last": [he meant that] "I [King David] am always at the level of a heel because what I am and what is my life" [as in, he is humble like a heel]. This is also the level of Avraham Avinu since "I [Avraham] am dust and ashes"-- he didn't consider himself to be important. G-d praises Avraham due to his humility, "because [eikev] Avraham listened to My voice...". Even though Avraham considered himself to be a "heel", he guarded the mitzvot and chukot. We also find the same sentiment with R Yochanan ben Zaki. He praised his five students. Why only 5 [of all his thousands of students]? Why he did he count his praise? These 5 pupils always considered themselves as mere students--they didn't consider themselves as important at all. They were like a student who needs his teacher all the time. That's why he had to list their praise-- they were unaware it. So that's why Hashem praised Abraham: he was a level of heel. This is the meaning of verse [from the beginning]: "if you will listen"-- if you will be at the level of a heel and listen to Hashem-- He will give you brachot. This is the meaning of the Jewish people's utterance "I'm black and beautiful" (Shir HaShirim): I am beautiful _because_ I am black [to paraphrase: "I'm aware of my position and that makes me beautiful"].
Deuteronomy 7:12: Rashi asks: what will you listen [/abide] to? The miztvot which people usually trample under foot. So, it says in Talmud, right before Moshiach comes there will be lots of chutzpah. Arizal says that's the time to fix the feet of Adam. Since feet are coarser than the rest of the body, so they represent chutzpah. The main rectification is by guarding the bris since the 6th millennium is associated with [the sefirah of] yesod. This is what Hashem's promises, in the times of the heel of Moshiach, the Jewish people will be doing mitzvot and learning Torah despite being at the level of a heel as it says "it won't be forgotten from your children." Rashi, when talking to the mizvtot which people [adam=man] trample, refers to Adam himself. Rabbi Eliezer says that you should engage in coitus as if you were being forced by a demon. The "demon" has a shin and a daled. In a person, the head correspond to shin, the feet and hands correspond to the daled, and bris correspond to the yud. Rabbi Eliezer sanctified himself with bris, and he had the whole name of Hashem (Shin-Daled-Yud). If someone doesn't sanctify his bris, he misses the "yud" then becomes associated with demons (shin dalet). This is the meaning of Jewish demons as discussed in the Zohar. We also find that Adam wasted seed and demons and kelipa came from that. Adam committed coitus interruptus and spilled that seed.  If a person doesn't have a intent of holiness and does not sanctify himself then it's as if he does dash, wasting seed, which is same letters as "demon." Zorah, to winnow, refers to kelipah because kelipah is always external, since during winnowing husks are separated from inside, thus zorah refers to externality. That's what Rashi is referring to by the ignored mitzvah: sanctifying oneself during coitus. So, the Torah says that if a person will sanctify his intimacy then G-d will guard the covenant and this will reveal blessings.

Re'eh



Shoftim

Deuteronomy 16:18: This alludes to the path of tzaddikim and the path of good leaders. The main idea of judge is, as the Torah says, "[to] judge everyone favorably" in order to arouse G-d's mercy and kindness on every single Jew, even those of the lowest level--they, too, must be judged favorably. This will help us understand a verse from Kings, "you should give your servant a listening heart to know how to judge your people, to differentiate between good and evil, for who is able to judge your blamable people." The question [about this verse concerns the fact that during] the times of Shlomo HaMelech,  there was lots of money; it was insignificant and as common as pebbles in the street. What is the novelty of this saying [since, during times of prosperity, there are fewer conflicts]? This was Shlomo HaMelech's intent: he should be able to judge every person favorably, as the way of tzaddik (they see themselves as lowly, and he who is great is small [great people think little of themselves]). They [tzaddikim] never rest, and it's as if they have a judge and policeman watching them as the Talmud says "tzaddikim are judged by their yotzer tov (good inclination)." However, their perspective is self-denigrating. Tzaddikim judge their friends favorably and are greater in their eyes, even though their friends don't reach their ankles [spiritually, their friends are at a much lower level]. This is despite the tzaddik's self-denigration; as the Talmud says "what is hateful to you don't do to others," which means [that one shouldn't project their self-hatred] and judge other people. All the Jewish people, as one, are important and beloved, and in their hearts [want] to do goodness and kindness. It says about Rabbi Hanina ben Dosa that "the whole world is nourished by Rabbi Hanina ben Dosa my son, and he only needs the nourishment of a small carrot." He [Rabbi Hanina ben Dosa] was so self-contempting that he thought that the small carrot was more than enough for him, and he wasn't even sure that the carrot was meant for him, and he saw it as gift of G-d. However, for the rest of the world, he'd give "all good"-- the tzaddik, seeing the earth favorably, was able to give the world goodness and kindness. This is the meaning of original verse: tzaddikim, who are disgraced in their own eyes (as if they have judges and police watching them) always judge themselves unfavorably and say that they don't have good deeds to justify themselves. However, they judge the people favorable and "they shall judge the people righteously [favorably]" because people, in the eyes of tzaddikim, are like perfect tzaddikim. This is the meaning of the Torah's admonition, "you must not show favor": [the literal interpretation of the verse asks not to judge a person's face and] there are some people that say they can [characterize and understand a person] by looking at their face, and one shouldn't do that. Rather, judge them [the Jewish people] favorably because all of the Jews are tzaddikim and bring mercy and kindness to the whole world, amen. 

Ki Teitzei

Deuteronomy 21:10: It appears to me that this [verse] alludes to the war with the yetzer hara. We see that there are people of virtue who wage war with the yetzer hara and [can] win; [however], a few days later, they lose and must wage war again. The truth is that this is a big wonder-- what is this about [what’s the point of this cycle]? We already waged this war and conquered the yetzer hara, and that appears to be sufficient [the war has been won]. Now, the yetzer hara overwhelms again. What will happen to them [the person] in the end [of the struggle]? The Torah hints to this in the verse-- “you go out to war”-- which refers to going out of Gan Eden (Heaven) to the physical world for the purpose of this war [to struggle against the yetzer hara]. This is the reason why it says about Yaakov Avinu that Yaakov sought to live in peace. Hashem told Yaakov Avinu: 'is it enough for tzaddikim to have World To Come and want peace in this world too?' And then He sent the difficulty with Yosef [when he got sold]. This means that Yaakov was preparing his portion for the World To Come [approaching his departure from this world], but it wasn't time for him to leave. Therefore, when he was about to depart, the yetzer hara returned. [If wouldn't return, his struggle with the yetzer hara—a central purpose to his presence in the world— would cease and, consequently,] he would depart. Likewise, during the time of King David, the king’s assistant found a young maiden (Avishag) who would warm King David [when he would sleep]. King David was at a level where he had no desires, no yezter hara, as it says “My heart is empty in me” (the Talmud explains that this refers to his successful removal of his evil inclination). That's the meaning of the story: they covered him with clothing and he was not warm, so they were afraid that he'd pass away. [To prevent that they] gave him the maid so that he'd have to fight a new war with the yezter hara so he'd stay longer in this world. That's the connection between the previous parsha (chapter) and this parsha: the end of the previous parsha is “you should do what's just in the eyes of the Hashem,” which is to “go out to war” (this parsha). The path of the just is to always fight the yezter hara-- that's the avodah. When you will do the just, you will go out to war to fight the yetzer hara.

Ki Tavo

Deuteronomy 26:3: What's the meaning of "kohen in those days"? Rashi says you only have the kohen in your time [you must choose a kohen who's your contemporary, regardless of his qualities]. However, [approaching the verse a bit differently] we need to understand first fruits. A Jew brings two or three dates in his basket [as an offering] and with these mere two dates he merits to say the proclamation [of thanks]. It is known that the tzaddik has the ability to raise the prayers to Hashem and through the tzaddik everything can be raised, and therefore the Torah commands the Jew to come before the kohen so that the tzaddik of the generation [the kohen] will elevate it. And it says that the kohen will take the basket from his hands (and, in Hebrew, "basket" is an acronym for "tune, vowel, letter," which corresponds to prayer), and it says you will place a basket before alter of Hashem so that the kohen will raise your offering and prayer to Hashem. The Torah continues with "you will proclaim and say" (ibid 26:5). "You will proclaim" [can be homiletically understood as] even though at times your were low and couldn't pray and learn [the relationship between the "proclaim" and feeling low:] ("proclaim," in Hebrew, is related to the word "poor"), and, although you are poor in Torah and prayer, you should continue. "...and say" (ibid 26:5) [can be homiletically understood as] you bring your learn and pray before Hashem, even though you bring "little of fruit", a few mere two dates, and it didn't ascend upwards: nevertheless, the tzaddik of generation will lift it [the prayer and Torah learning] all up. 

Rosh Hashanah



Nitzavim


Deuteronomy 29:9: It appears to me to say the following about this verse: it says earlier in the Torah [in the previous chapter] that "...until this day, Hashem did not give you a heart to know, ear to hear, eye to see" [Deuteronomy 29:3]. [This means that] the entire service of Moshe Rabbeinu was for the Jewish people to hear all mitzvot from his mouth; his intent was to imbue their hearts with the power of holiness of Hashem with his holy words. The Shechina would speak from his throat, and the goal was that the Jewish people would not be able to transgress anything in the Torah. It says in the Torah, "just like snow comes from heaven and never returns... so, too, My words will not return empty-handed [Isaiah 55:10]. This was the level that Moshe spoke [to Hashem], and Hashem answered him [directly] with a voice and He wanted to place a holiness within him so that [listening to Moshe's words would] be equal to hearing them from Hashem. This is the meaning of the previous verse, "Hashem did not give you a heart to know...": The Jewish people were lifted up to a very lofty level after 4o years [of being in the desert], and it says "...on this day, you've become a people for G-d" [Deuteronomy 27:9]. [This means that] at the end [of the Jewish people's journey], when Moshe Rabbainu would speak, the experience was that of  Mount Sinai (--of G-d speaking--) and thus the Torah would never be removed from their mouth. This is also explains the verse: "I heard the voice of my G-d and did according to all that was commanded me" [Deuteronomy 26:14]. "I heard to voice..." means that I did what G-d commanded and I'm listening now just like I did at Mount Sinai; I did all that I'm commanded and I haven't missed anything. [Moses] successfully elevated you so that you can stand before Hashem without any separation. Moshe Rabbainu expresses this covenant with everyone, not just the generation of the desert [Deuteronomy 29:14]. In the future of the generation, the tzaddik of the generation will also be speaking. This is [literally as if] Moshe Rabbainu [is speaking to you], which, [in turn, is as if] you're hearing it from G-d. As it says in the original verse, all will stand before G-d [meaning] in every future generation through the tzaddik.

Vayeilech



Ha'Azinu



V'Zot HaBerachah



on Festivals

Introduction



Birkat HaTorah



Shaar Tefillah



Shaar Keriat Shema



Kabbalat Shabbat



Shabbat



Rosh Chodesh



Rosh Hashanah



Shabbat Shuva



Erev Yom Kippur



Yom Kippur



Sukkot



Shabbat Chol Hamoed Sukkot



Hoshanot



Hoshana Rabba



Shemini Atzeret



Chanukah



Shabbat Chanukah







"To the One who makes great lights, God's love endures forever" (Ps. 136:4) [We can understand] the verse according to what is written in the Zohar (Zohar 2:136b) "R. Hamnuna the Elder, when the morning star would come out throughout Shabbat, he would sit for a moment and raise his eyes, and was happy, and would say that he was sitting under the sight of the joy of the superior angels. They go out and they rest, and throughout Shabbat a person sits in the world of souls." according to what is known, in every Erev Shabbat Kodesh the souls have an ascent, and through this the extra souls come down, on Shabbat, to this world. And through this we explained what is written in the Gemarah in the name of Rabbi Zeira, that Rabbi Matana said, that Rav said: the fats and the wicks that our sages talked about, which we to not light the candles of Shabbat, we do light with them the candles of Chanukah, whether on Shabbat [of Chanukah] whether the rest of the week. And this is a hint regarding the souls that are distant, as it is explained in other places the fats are symbolic of the soul, the wicks are symbolic of the body. The fats and wicks which are not kindled for Shabbat are due to the fact that there are some defects on humans, God forbid, defects that make them distant, every so often, from ascending the place of their soul-root. And this is the strength of the Shabbat and Chanukah that are an ascent even for souls that are distant, and [feel] outside. And this is the explanation of "Maker of great lights" - those are the lights of Shabbat and Chanukah. Shabbat is called light as we say "a rest and a gladness, light for the Jews" (zemirah of Shabbat). And on Chanukah the hidden light of the seven days of Creation is aroused and this is why, together, they are called "great lights." "Because God's love endures forever" (Ps. 136:1) - this is the Higher Love to all the world, without any dismissal of any sort, and to rise them to the source of their quarrying [creation]. Despite all this, they hinted so we could understand the greatness of the Tzaddik of the generation, that he is a conduit to pull down the Flows and all the above mentioned Fixings are done through his hand, as it was when we heard the deed that occurred in the times of the Besht z"l. A reincarnation of a certain great man, from the times of the Ari z"l, came to him and from that time [of the Ariz"l] onward he was waiting for hundreds of years until the Besht came and fixed his soul. And he was not able to merit to go to the righteous of his generation because he was not set in front of them, until the time of the Besht z"l. And to understand - why is this thing dependent upon the will of the tzadik? Isn't God, in God's compassion, able to free the bound? Why did he need to wait until the compassion of the tzadik was aroused (?) towards him? Indeed, from the beginning of creation it arose in the Will of the Blessed Name that a tzadik would govern etc as it is written "gracious compassionate and righteous" (Psalms 112:4) (Shemot Rabbah 15:20). And the Tzadik that is the basis of the world, he is the middleman through whose hands the salvation that fixes [the other person's] soul root above. And this is the verse "say of the tzadik, he is good" (Isaiah 3:10) - the righteous is called good. And this is "a good name is better than fragrant oil [shemen]" (Eccl. 7:1) - because the tzadik unifies the Name and therefore it is in his hand to fix a soul [neshamah], a good oil [shemen] - that comes [shemin] from God. [שמ"ן ה' and נשמה share the same letters]

Zot Chanukah



Purim



"You were their salvation forever and their hope in every generation" (Shoshanat Yaakov): Moshe Rabbeinu, in Parshat Yisro, said that "when the Jewish people have an issue they come to me, and I let them know the laws of Hashem and his teachings." Yisro didn't understand: "why are you sitting here by yourself and all people stand upon you from morning til night?" [he asked.] Yisro was surprised that Moshe took the time to take care of the needs of the people. He was surprised because he knew the virtue of Moshe; Moshe spoke face-to-face with the Shechina, he spent 40 days in heaven, etc. Thus, he was wondering how Moshe was sitting and having people stand upon him. Shouldn't it be better for him to speak to Shechina? Why is he neglecting his stature? Why should he bother to take care of the people? Moshe responded: "when the Jewish people have an issue, they come to me. This means that if a person has a personal matter in this world, it comes before me, and its care brought them to this meeting. However, I have a different spirit with me [a different perspective]. [Indeed,] I, through my words, enlighten them with the ways of Hashem-- 'I let them know the laws of Hashem and his teachings' is my main intent." This is similar to the ways of the Baal Shem Tov, [also known as the Besht,] and the Maggid of Merezich: the Besht didn't want everyone to be subject to him and come to him. There was a reason that people came to him. [For example,] a person was once sick and he came to the Besht and asked for medicine. The Besht cured him via a miracle, and this, eventually, opened the wellsprings of wisdom to the Besht, and he merited to become the leader of the generation and their [the Besht's and the Maggid's] light still shines through their students in every generation and from their mouths we live until the coming of Moshiach, may he come speedily in our days. [It's important to note that] the Besht had to show a miracle to bring the person under his wings. [Thus,] this is the meaning of the prayer [Shoshanat Yaakov]: "you are the salvation forever" means that tzaddikim cause salvation to flourish through the ways of this world, showing miracle and wonder so that people to bond with the the tzaddik. [This, in turn, creates and] attracts more students, and these students spread the light of their Torah. This is forever. [The verse continues] "their hope in every generation"--the meaning parallels the first part of the verse. [This also explains] the Midrash Raba where Reb Alexandri proclaims "who wants the elixir of life." [In the story,] when an individual asked for the elixir, Reb Alexandri took out a Book of Psalms and showed him where it says "guard your mouth from evil." This means that, as is the way of the world, people came to ask for their needs, such as health-related issues, and this gave Reb Alexandri the opportunity to explain the ways of Hashem, [like how he explained the verse] "guard your mouth from evil" [to the inquirer]. 

Parashat HaChodesh



Shabbat HaGadol


Matzah is equal 135 (130+5) and that is a hint that matzah fixes blemishes of the bris because Adam was 130 years old and therefore the first exile, which was the abomination of the world, was meant to take out the sparks that were scattered there. And that's why it says in the Torah "I will smite the firstborn Egyptians in the land of Egypt" the last letters of these words is also 130. And it says "I will smite also the firstborn of man til animal" because it's supposed to rectify all the sparks that have been scattered from Adam and have fallen into a reincarnation of an animal. By eating matzah, this fixes it up by taking out the spark and uniting with the hei (5), Hashem. 
..Why is it called the Great Shabbos? This is because we say in the Amidah that Hashem is great, mighty, and awesome, which corresponds to the Patriarchs. "Great" is associated with Abraham. How do we know that greatness is related to Abraham? As it says "your kindness was great on me." Thus Abraham, who is associated with kindness, is here "greatness." "Gevurah" corresponds to Isaac since he's connected with fear, which is associated wit strength. "Awesome" is associated with Yaakov since he said "How awesome is this place." It's known that all of the goodness and kindness during the week descends from Shabbat. The previous Shabbat as it says in the Zohar "all the blessings above and below are dependent on the seventh day." "Blessing from above" refers to our service of Gd, our fear of heaven. "Blessing from below" refers to the needs of man. Shabbat is established without us doing anything, but the Yom Tov has sages determine the times.  That's the meaning of why the section of the Torah, Parshat Emor, it says "These are the holidays of G-d" and ends with "six days you should work and the 7th you should rest." This is because the Yom Tov too comes from Shabbat. All the kindness that came as we were leaving Egypt came from Shabbat. This Shabbat was also on the 10th and this is how it always is. And that's when the time of attribute of Abraham shines, the attribute of kindness, all the kindness descends in the Shabbat before. And that's why it's called the Great Shabbat.  And that's the reason why bless the month in the Shabbat before since the month also comes from Shabbat.
... In a similar theme, based upon what is written in the posuk "Hashem grants great salvation to his king and kindness to his Moshiach , Dovid and his offspring." Why does Moshiach need kindness? He is the chosen one of the mankind, in all generation. This alluded by Adam since Adam stands from Adam, Dovid, Moshiach, Moshiach is what perfects Adam. So why does he need kindness? This is because when Moshiach comes, there will have such kindness from Hashem, that the kindness expressed to him will be considered a kindness still. This is also what the posuk "do kindness to my master Abraham." It's known that Abraham's kindness was used to build the world. What's the meaning of giving kindness to Abraham? It's the kindness that comes from an older world (Tohu). That's why we ask "Where is your first kindness"? That's why it's called the Great Shabbat. All of Nisan is all kindness. Every month is associated with a combination of the yud kay vav key, and only in Nisan has it in order. However, we need to arouse a greater kindness  in these auspicious days, and that's why it's called the Great Shabbat. 

Pesach


"At present we are here; next year may we be in the land of Israel. At present we are slaves; next year may we be free" (Hagadah). To explain the redundancy of this language: in the present time of exile, because of great sin, we are merely considered servants of Hashem. We don't have a revelation of Hashem's light of love (for His people), which would draw their hearts to serve Him out of love and yearning, with sweetness and pleasantness, in the service of Hashem, to cleave to Him. Instead, most of time, we are seen as a servant who receives his portion from his master. We have been instructed by the Tanna [a type of Talmudic sage], "Do not be like servants to serve with intent of receiving a reward." When Moshaich will come, and Hashem's glory will be revealed (speedily), all flesh will see that the mouth of Hashem is speaking, and then we will be as sons to Him. We'll be called the children of Hashem. The Zohar explains the difference between a son and a servant: a son rushes to do the will of his father because of natural love (instead of fear or future compensation). The nature of the child is to be drawn after the father. This virtue is called freedom ("ben choren" means a "son who is freed") At present we are slaves; next year may we be "sons who are freed" [this is the literal translation of the phrase]. 

"At present we are slaves; next year may we be free" (Hagadah). Because of great sin, the Evil Inclination controls a person; a person becomes a slave to the Evil Inclination and becomes obedient to it in all ways that a person may be seduced (Hashem may protect us). And this is the meaning of the phrase, "a servant to servants." [However], the Torah says "they're My servants"; [the Jewish people are] not "servants to servants." Those who study Torah for its own sake are called ben choren (sons who are free),  [meaning they are] emancipated, as Talmud says "No one is free but person who is occupied in Torah." This is what we ask for: let us be free people like at the time of giving the Torah as the Sages say words of Tablet were engraved [choren, which can also mean freedom].

"You pour the cup and hear the son asks what..." (Hagadah): This hints to the fact that the night is called the Second Level of Greatness [a kabbalisitic concept], and this is the level of the question of the father to the son (and then it returns because Hashem's kindness is everlasting).

Sefirat HaOmer



Lag BaOmer



Shavuot



Ruth

..."It was in the days of the judging of Judges and there was famine in the land": this alludes to the following: the Talmud says that "tzaddikim are rules by their good inclination, the wicked by their evil inclination, and the intermediates by both." It's known that every mitzvah you do creates an angel and that impact of making of an angel is explained in Tehilim. No evil will befall you because G-d will commend his angel to protect you" what this means is that whoever is involved in Torah, the angel that cares of him, will take care of him in the way of Torah. If he's involved in charity, he will be given an angel of charity. This is the meaning of "one mitzvah will lead to another mitzvah"--in Sefer HaMagid, which was taught by an angel, it says that the angels need a parnasa and their parnasa is from the Torah and mitzvot of the Jewish people. That's the meaning of the Talmud--"angels wait to sing the kedusha until human sing it" because their kedusha comes from the Jewish people. This is the meaning of "keser" a crown will be given to by a host of angels with the Jewish people--which means with the kedusha that they get from the Jewish people. According to this, these angels are always waiting for the Jewish people to do Torah and mitzvot and that's why one mitzvah causes another mitzvah. Because the created angel from the first mitzvah needs parnasa becomes to a yotzer tov that assists a person to do another mitzvah. So it's known that the students of the Arizal wrote "do not delay payment" which means that every mitzvah creates a angel so as soon as person makes a neder to give charity, an angel is created and the angel isn't finished until the person fulfills his vow and the angel has a lot of pain--"pay" is related to "complete." This is how to explain the verse "do not allow your mouth to sin with your flesh and don't say in front of the angel that it is an accident"--this refers to the angel created by the words of the neder. That's the meaning of the Talmud that whoever starts a mitzvah and doesn't complete it he buries his wife and his children" because the angel is angry at the person who's not completing. The good angel says that you should have this next Shabbat and wants to have energy next Shabbat and wants benefit for the person because the angel is like a child and wants to respect father. The angel assists you to do mitzvot and advocates for you in heaven. That's the meaning of the verse "Hashem check if an angel is beseeching on behalf of this person" this means that an angel argues for the person to live and do more mitzvot. Just like a child davens for his father that his father should live long. This how I explained another verse "the Jews already have already cried in the streets for their altar" the Temple has called "Ariel" because there was a fire shaped lion that was created from the sacrifices and so these angels have no parnasa and so the angels themselves are crying. 


"Hashem should pay back your deeds and your payment should be complete from Hashem, G-d of Israel, under whom you've come to bask under His wings." It appears to [the author] as follows: the great virtue of receiving the Torah was that we were able to reach the perfection of all 613 mitzvot. What can this be compared to? It can be compared to a doctor  ordering a gravy, made of all kinds of meat, to be cooked for some sick people. This gravy would be very voluminous, and, because of the power of the fat, it would [act as] a strong medicine, strengthening all faculties of the body. This is the great virtue of the receiving of the Torah. Every holiday has a unique mitzva, such shaking the lulav during Sukkot, and a [unique] bracha for every mitzva, such as the blessing over the lulav, and time for one mitzva isn't the time for another other, and each thing is done at its proper time. However, this holiday, [Shavout], contains all the 613 mitzvot. Concerning the Torah, those who taste it merit life and nothing is missing in it in anyway. This explains the verse about Ruth-- you've come to convert and accept all mitzvot, [and] because of the acceptance of Torah, you'll get the reward of the mitzvot. Why? Because you decided to bask under His wings, so by converting, you will reach perfection.

Pirkei Avot

