II Kings
מלכים ב
The Metsudah Tanach series, Lakewood, N.J
https://www.judaicaplace.com/metsudah-kings-ii-hardcover/m154q/

II Kings



Chapter 1

Moav rebelled against Yisroel after Achov’s death.
[Then] Achazyohu fell through the lattice in his loft that was in Shomron, and he became ill. He sent messengers [to Ekron] and said to them, “Go inquire of Baal-Zevuv, the god of Ekron, if I will live [recover] from this illness.”
An angel of Adonoy then spoke to Eliyohu, the Tishbi, “Arise [and] go up to meet the messengers of the king of Shomron, and speak to them [saying], ‘Is there no God in Yisroel that you are going to inquire of Baal-Zevuv, the god of Ekron?
Therefore thus said Adonoy, “[From] the bed you have gone up onto, you will not go down from it for you will definitely die.’” And so Eliyohu departed.
The messengers returned to him and he said to them, “Why have you returned?”
And they said to him, “Adonoy man came up to [meet] us and said to us, ‘Go’ return to the king who sent you and speak to him [saying], this is what Adonoy has said, ‘Is there no God in Yisroel that you send to inquire of Baal-Zevuv’ the god of Ekron? Therefore the bed on which you have gone up you will not go down from it for you will definitely die.’”
And he [the king] spoke to them, “What is the description of this man who came up to meet you and spoke to you these words?”
And they said to him, “He was a hairy man and was girded with a leather belt around his waist.” He said, “He is Eliyohu, the Tishbi
And he sent to him an officer over fifty [men] with his fifty [men]. He [the officer] went up to him, and there he [Eliyohu] was sitting at the top of a mountain. He said to him, “Man of God, the king said, ‘Come down.’”
Eliyohu replied and spoke to the officer of the fifty [men]. “If I am really a man of God, let fire come down from heaven and consume you and your fifty men.” A fire came down from heaven and consumed him and his fifty [men].
Once again he sent to him another officer of fifty [men] with his fifty [men], and he raised his voice and spoke to him, “Man of God, thus has the king spoken ‘Make it fast [and] come down.’”
And Eliyohu replied and said to them, “If I am really a man of God, let fire come down from heaven and consume you and your fifty [men].” A fire of God came down from heaven and consumed him and his fifty men.
Once again, he sent a third officer of fifty [men] with his fifty [men]. The third officer went up and came, and bowed on his knees opposite Eliyohu and begged him and said to him, “Man of God, let my life be precious, and the lives of your servants, these fifty men, be [precious] in your eyes.
Behold, a fire has come down from heaven, and consumed the first two officers of the fifty [men], and their fifty [men]. And now, let my life be precious in your eyes.”
And the angel of Adonoy said to Eliyohu, “Go down with him, do not be afraid of him.” He then got up and went down with him to the king.
And he spoke to him [the king], “Thus Adonoy has said, ‘Because you sent messengers to inquire of Baal-Zevuv, god of Ekron, is there no God in Yisroel to inquire of His word? Therefore, from the bed you have gone up onto, you will not get down from it, because you will definitely die.’”
And he died in accordance with the word of Adonoy that Eliyohu had spoken, and Yehorom reigned in his place, in the second year of Yehorom, son of Yehoshophot, king of Yehudah, for he had no son.
The rest of the events of Achazyohu [and] what he did are recorded in the Book of Chronicles of the kings of Yisroel.

Chapter 2

And it happened when Adonoy was about to bring up Eliyohu to heaven in a mighty wind, Eliyohu and Elisha traveled from Gilgol.
Eliyohu said to Elisha, “Please remain here for Adonoy has sent me to Beis Eil.” And Elisha said, “As Adonoy lives, and as your soul lives, I will not leave you.” And they went down to Beis Eil.
They came out — the disciples of the prophets — who were in Beis Eil [came out] to Elisha, and said to him, “Do you know that today Adonoy is taking your master from upon your head?” He said, “I also know it! Be quiet.”
And Eliyohu said to him, “Elisha, please remain here, for Adonoy has sent me to Yericho.” And he said, “As Adonoy lives, and as your soul lives, I will not leave you.” And they came to Yericho.
They approached — the disciples of the prophets who were in Yericho—Elisha and they said to him, “Do you know that today Adonoy is taking you master from upon your head?” He said, “I also know it! Be quiet.”
And Eliyohu said to him, “Please remain here, for Adonoy has sent me to the Yardein.” And he said, “As Adonoy lives, and as your soul lives, I will not leave you.” And so the two of them went.
And fifty men of the disciples of the prophets went and stood opposite them at a distance; and the two of them stood at the Yardein.
Eliyohu took his cloak and rolled it up, and struck the water, and it split to this side and that side; then the two of them crossed over on dry land.
As they were crossing Eliyohu said to Elisha, “Ask what I shall do for you before I am taken from you.” Elisha said, “Please let there be a double amount of your spirit upon me.”
And he said, “You have made a difficult request. If you witness my departure from you, it will be so for you, and if not, it will not be.”
As they were walking and conversing, behold a fiery chariot and fiery horses [appeared] and separated the two of them. And Eliyohu ascended to heaven in a mighty wind.
Elisha saw and was crying, “My father, my father! Chariot of Yisroel and its riders!” And he did not see him any more. He took hold of his clothes and tore them into two pieces.
He picked up Eliyohu’s cloak that had fallen off of him, and he went back and stood on the bank of the Yardein.
And he took the cloak of Eliyohu that had fallen off of him, and struck the water, and said, “Where is Adonoy, the God of Eliyohu?” Then he also struck the water, and it split to this side and that side, and Elisha crossed over.
They saw him— the disciples of the prophets who were in Yericho — from afar and said, “The spirit of Eliyohu has rested on Elisha.” They came to greet him and prostrated themselves before him to the ground.
They said to him, “Behold, please, Your servants have fifty able bodied men; please let them go and search for your master, perhaps the wind of Adonoy carried him up and threw him on one of the mountains, or in one of the valleys.” And he said, “Do not send.”
They pressured him until he was ashamed, and he said, “Send.” They sent fifty men and they searched for three days but did not find him.
They returned to him as he was staying in Yericho, and he said to them, “Did I not say to you, ‘Do not go’?”
The people of the city said to Elisha, “Behold, please the city is a good place to live, as my master sees, but the water is bad, and the land causes bereavement.”
And he said, “Bring me a new jar and put salt in it,” and they brought it to him.
He went out to the source of the water and threw salt there, and said, “Thus Adonoy has said, ‘I have cured these waters, there will no longer be from there a cause of death and bereavement.’”
The waters were cured until this day, like the word that Elisha had spoken.
He went up from there to Beis Eil, and as he was going up on the way, little boys came out from the city and taunted him and said to him, “Go away, baldy! Go away, baldy!”
He turned around and saw them. He cursed them in the name of Adonoy. Two bears came out of the woods and tore apart forty-two of the boys.
He went from there to Mount Carmel, and from there he returned to Shomron.

Chapter 3

Yehorom, son of Achov, became king of Yisroel in Shomron in the eighteenth year of Yehoshophot, king of Yehudah, and he reigned for twelve years.
He did what was evil in the eyes of Adonoy, but not [as bad] as his father and mother. He removed the monument of Baal that his father had made.
However, to the sins of Yorovom, son of Nevot, who caused Yisroel to sin, did he cling. He did not reject them.
Meisha, king of Moav, owned many flocks. He used to send to the king of Yisroel one hundred thousand fattened sheep and one hundred thousand wooly rams.
And when Achov died, the king of Moav rebelled against the king of Yisroel.
King Yehoram went out on that day from Shomron and took a census of all Yisroel.
He went and sent to Yehoshophot, king of Yehudah, saying, “the king of Moav has rebelled against me. Will you go with me to war against Moav?” And he said, “I will go up. I am like you, my people are like your people, my horses are like your horses.”
He [Yehoram] said, “By which road shall we go?” And [Yehoshophot] said, “through the road of the wilderness of Edom.”
And the king of Yisroel went with the king of Yehudah and the king of Edom; and they circled around for seven days; they had no [more] water for the camp, or for the animals that were with them.
The king of Yisroel said, “Alas, Adonoy has called these three kings to hand them over to Moav.”
And Yehoshophot said, “Is there no prophet of Adonoy here that we might inquire of Adonoy through him?” And he answered — one of the servants of the king of Yisroel — and said, “Elisha son of Shofot is here, who poured water on the hands of Eliyohu.”
And Yehoshophot said, “the word of Adonoy is with him.” And so they went down to him, the king of Yisroel, Yehoshophot and the king of Edom.
Elisha said to the king of Yisroel, “What do I have in common with you? Go to your father’s prophets, and to your mother’s prophets.” The king of Yisroel said to him, “Do not [say that] for Adonoy has called these three kings to hand them over to Moav.”
And Elisha said, “As Adonoy of Hosts lives, before Whom I have stood, if not for the presence of Yehoshophot, king of Yehudah, whom I respect; I would not even look at you or see you.
So now bring me a musician.” When the musician began to play, the hand [Spirit] of Adonoy was upon him.
And he said, “This is the word of Adonoy, ‘this valley will be made into many pools.’
For Adonoy has said, “You will not see wind and you will not see rain, and yet that valley will be filled with water; and you will drink and so will your flocks and animals.
This is easy in the eyes of Adonoy, and He will deliver Moav into your hands.
You will strike every fortified city, and every choice city, and every valuable tree you will chop down, and all the wells of water, you will close up; and every fertile field, you will ruin by cluttering it with stones.
At the time of the morning when the meal-offering was brought up, behold, water was flowing by way of Edom, and the land was filled with the water.
And all of Moav heard that the kings had come up to fight them, and they gathered everyone who could buckle on a sword and [anyone] stronger, and they stood at the border.
They got up in the morning and the sun was shining on the water. Moav saw the water from a distance and it appeared to them red as blood.
They said, “This is blood! The kings have been destroyed, they have killed each other! Now Moav, let us go for the spoils.”
They came to the camp of Yisroel, and Yisroel rose up and struck Moav, and they fled from before them, but they attacked them and killed the Moavim.
They demolished the cities, and all the fertile fields — each man threw his stone and filled them up; they stopped up every well of water, and every valuable tree they chopped down, until all that remained were the stones of the wall of Charoses; and the catapulters surrounded it and destroyed it.
The king of Moav saw that the battle was too strong for him, and he took seven hundred men with him with drawn swords to try and break through to the king of Edom, but they were unable to do it.
He then took his firstborn son, who was to rule in his place, and offered him as a burnt offering on the wall; this caused a terrible anger against Yisroel. They withdrew and returned to the land.

Chapter 4

A woman, a wife of one of the disciples of the prophets cried out to Elisha, saying, “Your servant, my husband died, and you know that your servant was one who feared Adonoy. Now the creditor has come to take my two sons for himself as slaves.”
Elisha said to her, “What can I do for you? Tell me what do you have in the house?” She said, “Your maidservant has nothing in the house except a jar of oil.”
And he said, “Go borrow containers from the outside, from all of your neighbors, empty containers, do not skimp.
And then come in and close the door behind yourself and behind your sons; pour into all these containers, and the full one[s] you shall remove.”
She went from him, and closed the door behind herself and behind her sons. They would bring [the containers] to her and she would pour.
When the containers were full she said to her son “Bring me another container,” and he said to her, “there is no other container.” Then the oil stopped.
She came and told the man of God, and he said, “Go sell the oil and pay your creditors, and you and your sons will live on the remainder.”
It was that day that Elisha passed through to Shuneim. There [lived] a prominent woman and she prevailed upon him to eat a meal; thereafter whenever he passed through he would go there to eat a meal.
She said to her husband, “Behold, now I know that he is a holy man of God who passes by us frequently.
Let us make a small attic room and put there for his use a bed, a table, a chair and a lamp. And whenever he comes to us, he can turn in there.”
And the day came and he went there, and he turned into the attic room and he lay down there.
He said to Geichazi, his servant, “Call this Shunamis.” He called her and she stood before him.
And he said to him [Geichazi], “Please say to her, ‘Behold, you have busied yourself with us with all this attention. What can be done for you? Should we speak to the king on your behalf, or to the general of the army?’” She said, “I live in the midst of my people.”
And he [Elisha] said, “then what is there to do for her?” And Geichazi said, “She has no son and her husband is old.”
And he said, “Call her.” He called her and she stood at the doorway.
He [Elisha] said, “At this season [next year] when the time comes to give birth, you will be hugging a son.” And she said, “Do not my master, man of God, do not deceive your maidservant.”
The woman conceived and gave birth to a son at that season when the time was for her to give birth, as Elisha had spoken to her.
The boy grew up, and one day, he went out to his father to [join] the reapers.
And he said to his father, “My head! My head!” He said to the young servant, “Carry him to his mother.”
And he carried him and brought him to his mother. He sat on her lap till noon and he died.
She went up and laid him on the bed of the man of God, and she closed [the door] behind him and went out.
She called to her husband and said, “Please send me one of the young servants and one of donkeys, and I will hurry to the man of God, and I will return.
And he said, “Why are you going to him today? It is neither Rosh Chodesh nor Shabbos?” She said to him, “Peace [all is well].”
She saddled the donkey and said to her young servant, “Drive and go on; do not hold back the riding because of me, unless I tell you.”
And so she went and came to the man of God to Mount Carmel. When the man of God saw her from a distance, he said to Geichazi, his servant, “Here is the Shunamis.”
Now please run and greet her, and say to her, “Is it well with you? Is it well with your husband? Is it well with the boy?” And she said, “All is well.”
She came to the man of God, to the mountains, and took hold of his feet. Geichazi approached to push her away, but the man of God, said, “Leave her, for her soul is bitter, and Adonoy has concealed it from me and did not tell me.”
She said, “Did I ask for a son from my master? Did I not say, ‘Do not mislead me.’”
And he said to Geichazi, “Gird your loins [strengthen yourself], and take my staff in your hand and go. If you meet anyone, do not greet him, and if anyone greets you, do not answer him; and place my staff on the boy’s face.”
The boy’s mother said, “As Adonoy lives and by your life, I will not leave you.” He got up and followed her.
Geichazi had gone on ahead of them and placed the staff on the boy’s face but there was no sound or awareness. He went back to meet him [Elisha], and told him saying, “the boy did not wake up.”
Elisha came into the house and behold the boy was dead, laid out on his bed.
He came in and closed the door behind both of them and he prayed to Adonoy.
He got up and lay down on the boy. He put his mouth on his mouth, his eyes upon his eyes, his palms on his palms, and he spread himself on him; and boy’s flesh became warm.
He got back [onto the floor] and walked in the house, once this way and once this way, and got up and spread himself upon him. The boy sneezed seven times, and the boy opened his eyes.
He then called Geichazi and said [to him], “Call this Shunamis.” He called her and she came to him [Elisha]. He [Elisha] said, “Lift up your son.”
She came in and fell at his feet, and prostrated herself to the ground. She lifted her son and went out.
Elisha returned to Gilgal. There was a famine in the land, and the disciples of the prophets were sitting before him. He said to his servant, “Put up the large pot and cook a porridge for the disciples of the prophets.”
One of them went out to the field to gather greens [herbs] and he found a vine in the field and gathered wild gourds from it, enough to fill his garment. He came and sliced [them] into the pot of porridge for they did not know [that it was poisonous].
They poured it out for the men to eat, and when they ate from the porridge, they screamed and said, “Death is in the pot O man of God.” They could not eat.
And he said, “Bring some flour,” and he threw it into the pot, and said, “Pour it out for the people and let them eat,” and there was nothing harmful in the pot.”
A man came from Ba’al-Shalishah and he brought for the man of God bread from the first crop, twenty loaves of barley bread and fresh grain in their shells, and he said, “Give to the people and let them eat.”
His servant said, “How will I present this before a hundred men?” He said, “Give it to the people and they will eat, for Adonoy has said, ‘they will eat and have left over.”
And he gave it to them, and they ate and left over as was the word of Adonoy.

Chapter 5

Na’amon, the general of the king of Arom’s army, was a prominent man before his master, and was highly respected, for through him Adonoy has given victory to Arom. This man was a mighty warrior, but he was a metzora.
Bands of marauders from Arom went out and kidnaped a little girl from Yisroel, and she become [a servant] to Na’amon’s wife.
She said to her mistress, “My master should plead [for curing his illness] before the prophet who is in Shomron; and then he will cure him of his tzora’as.”
He [Na’amon] came and told his master, saying, “Such and such spoke the girl who is from the land of Yisroel.”
And the king of Arom said, “Come, go and I will send a letter to the king of Yisroel.” He went and took in his hand ten kikar of silver, six thousand gold [pieces] and ten changes of clothes.
He brought the letter to the king of Yisroel, saying, “Now when this letter reaches you, I will have sent to you my servant, Na’amon; arrange to cure him of his tzora’as.”
When the king of Yisroel read the letter, he tore his clothes and said, “Am I God, Who causes death and life, that this one sends to me to cure a man of his tzora’as? I want it to be known and seen that he is looking for an excuse [to start a war] against me.”
When Elisha, the man of God heard that the king of Yisroel had torn his clothes, he sent [a message] to the king, saying, “Why have you torn your clothes? Let him come to me now and he will know that there is a prophet in Yisroel.”
And Na’amon came with his horses and chariot and stood at the doorway of Elisha’s house.
And Elisha sent a messenger to him saying, “Go and wash seven times in the Yardein, and your flesh will be restored to you and you will be pure.”
Na’amon was enraged and left. He said, “Behold, I thought he would come out to me and stand and call in the name, Adonoy, his God, and wave his hand toward the spot and the tzora’as would be cured.
Are they not better — Amanah and Parpar, the rivers of Damesek — than all the waters of Yisroel? Behold, I will wash in them and become pure.” He turned and went away in anger.
His servants approached and spoke to him, and said, “My father [master], has the prophet proposed a difficult thing would you not do it? Certainly since [all] he said to you was ‘Wash and become pure.’”
So he went down and immersed himself in the Yardein seven times like the man of God had spoken; and flesh was restored [and became] like the flesh of a small boy, and he became pure.
He returned to the man of God, he and his entire camp. He came and stood before him; and said, “Behold, now I know that there is no God in the entire earth except in Yisroel; and now, please accept a blessing [a gift] from your servant.”
And he said, “As Adonoy, before Whom I have stood, lives, I will not accept.” And he [Na’amon] urged him to accept but he refused.
Na’amon said, “Please may there be given to your servant a load of earth, the burden of two mules; for your servant will no longer offer a burnt-offering or sacrifice to other gods, but only to Adonoy.
Only for this [one] thing may Adonoy forgive your servant — when my master [the king of Arom] comes to the house of Rimon to bow down there, and he leans on my hand, and I too bow down at the house of Rimon; when I bow down at the house of Rimon, may Adonoy forgive your servant for this thing.”
And he [Elisha] said to him, “go in peace,” and he went a distance away from him.
Then said [to himself] — Geichazi, the servant of Elisha the man of God — “Behold, my master, has spared Na’amon, this Arami, by not taking from his hand that what he brought. As Adonoy lives, I will run after him and take something from him.”
And Geichazi rushed after Na’amon, and Na’amon saw someone running after him, and he jumped off the chariot to meet him, and he said, “is everything well?”
And he said, “all is well. My master sent me, saying, ‘Behold, just now there came to me two boys from Mount Ephrayim, who are disciples of the prophets. Please give them a measure of silver and two changes of clothes.’”
And Na’amon said, “Please take two measures.” He urged him and he tied two measures of silver in two bags and two changes of clothes. He gave them to his two servants and they carried them before him.
And he came to a concealed place, and took [the things] from their hands and secured [them] in the house. He then dismissed the men and they left.
And he came and stood before his master, and Elisha said to him, “From where have you come, Geichazi?” He said, “Your servant did not go anyplace.”
And [Elisha] said to him, “Didn’t my heart go there when a man turned back from his chariot to greet you? Was that the time to take silver and to take clothing [in order to buy] olive [trees] and vineyards, sheep and cattle, and slaves and maidservants?
The tzora’as of Na’amon shall therefore cling to you and to your offspring forever.” And he departed from him stricken with tzora’as [white] as snow.

Chapter 6

The disciples of the prophets said to Elisha, “Behold, the place where we sit before you is too crowded for us.
Let us go now to the Yardein, and each man will take one plank from there and we will make for ourselves a place there, to sit there.” He said, “Go.”
One of them said, “Please agree to go with your servants,” and he said, “I will go.”
He went with them, and they came to the Yardein and cut down the trees.
As one of them was cutting a plank, the iron [ax blade] fell into the water. He cried out and said, “Alas, my master, it is borrowed.”
The man of God said, “Where did it fall?” And he showed him the place. He cut off a piece of wood, and he threw it there and the iron [ax blade] floated up.
And he [Elisha] said, “Pick it up for yourself,” and he stretched out his hand and took it.
The king of Arom was at war with Yisroel. He consulted with his servants, saying, “In this concealed and secret place, I will make my camp.”
The man of God sent [a message] to the king of Yisroel, saying, “Be careful not to pass by this place, because Arom[’s camp] is hidden there.”
The king of Yisroel dispatched [scouts] to the place about which the man of God had spoken to him and warned him, and he took precautions there, not once and not twice.
The king of Arom’s heart was troubled over this situation. He summoned his servants and said to them, “Will you not tell me which one of our [people] is [reporting] to the king of Yisroel?”
And one of his servants said, “No, my master, the king, but Elisha, the prophet who is in Yisroel tells the king of Yisroel the words that you speak in your bedroom.”
And he said, “Go and see where he is, and I will send and take him.” It was told to him, saying, “He is in Doson.”
He sent there horses and chariots, and a huge army; they came at night and surrounded the city.
The servant of the man of God awoke early, to get up and went out, and behold, an army was surrounding the city, with horses and chariots. His attendant said to him, “Alas, my master, what will we do?”
He said, “Do not fear, for those who are with us are more than those who are with them.”
Elisha prayed and said, “Adonoy, please open his eyes and let him see.” Adonoy opened the eyes of the lad and he saw, and behold, the mountain was filled with horses and chariots of fire [all] around Elisha.
They [Arom’s army] came down towards him, and Elisha prayed to Adonoy, and said, “Please strike this nation with blindness.” He struck them with blindness as Elisha had spoken.
Elisha said to them, “This is neither the way nor is this the city. Follow me and I will lead you to the man you are looking for;” and he led them to Shomron.
When they came to Shomron, Elisha said, “Adonoy, open the eyes of these and let them see.” And Adonoy opened their eyes and they saw, and behold they were in the middle of Shomron.
The king of Yisroel said to Elisha, when he saw them, “Shall I slay them, my father?”
And he said, “Do not slay them. Those that you captured with your sword and bow would you slay? Set bread [food] and water for them, and let them eat and drink and let them go to their masters.”
He prepared a lavish feast for them, and they ate and drank and he sent them away, and they went to their masters. No longer did the bands of marauders from Arom come to Eretz Yisroel.
After this, Ben-Hadad, king of Arom gathered his whole camp and went up and laid siege over Shomron.
There was a severe famine in Shomron, and now they were besieging it. It became such that the head of a donkey [sold] for eighty pieces of silver, and a fourth of a kav of pigeon dung [sold] for five silver pieces.
As the king of Yisroel was passing on the wall, a woman cried out to him, saying, “Save [me], my master, the king.”
And he said, “If Adonoy will not help you, how then can I help you? From the threshing floor or from the winepress?”
And the king said, “What troubles you?” And the woman said, “This woman said to me, ‘Give your son and we will eat him today, and my son, we will eat tomorrow.”
So we cooked my son and we ate him, and I said to her the next day, “Give your son and let us eat him,” but she has hidden her son.”
When the king heard the woman’s words, he tore his clothes as he was passing by on the wall. The people saw, and behold there was a sackcloth on his flesh beneath [his royal garb].
And he said, “So should God do to me, and even more if the head of Elisha son of Shophot stands [remains] on him today.”
Elisha was sitting in his house and the elders were sitting with him. He [the king] sent a man from his presence. Before the messenger came to him, he said to the elders, “Are you aware that this son of a murderer has sent [a man] to remove my head. Look, when the messenger comes, close the door, and push him out with the door; the sound of his master’s footsteps will surely follow after him.”
He was still speaking with them, and behold, the messenger was coming down to him. He [the king] said, “This tragedy is from Adonoy; What can I hope for from Adonoy?”

Chapter 7

And Elisha said, “Listen to the word of Adonoy, thus has Adonoy said, ‘At this time tomorrow a measure of fine flour will cost a shekel, and two measures of barley will cost a shekel at the gate of Shomron.’”
And the king’s aide answered — he was the one upon whose hand he leaned — the man of God, and he said, “Behold, if Adonoy makes windows in the sky will such a thing happen?” He [Elisha] said, “Behold, you will see this with your eyes, but you will not eat from it.”
There were four men, suffering with tzora’as at the entrance of the gate, and they said to each other, “Why are we sitting here until we die?
If we say [decide] to come into the city, there is a famine in the city, and we will die there, and if we sit here we will die. So now let us go and fall [defect] to the camp of Arom. If they let us live we will live, and if they kill us we will die.”
They got up at dusk to come to the camp of Arom, and they came to the edge of Arom’s camp, and behold there was no one there.
For Adonoy had caused the camp of Arom to hear the sound of chariots, the sound of horses, and the sound of a great army. They said to one another, “Behold, the king of Yisroel has hired the kings of the Chittim and the kings of the Egyptians at attack us.”
They got up and fled at dusk, leaving behind their tents, their horses and their donkeys, the camp as it was, and they fled for their lives.
These metzora’im came to the edge of the camp, and they entered one tent and ate and drank. They carried from there silver, gold and clothing, and they went and hid them; they returned and entered another tent, and carried from there, and then they went and hid them.
They said to one another, “It is not proper, what we are doing, this day is a day of good news, and we are keeping quiet. If we wait until daylight, we will be considered guilty. So now let us go and come, and tell [this] to the royal household.”
They came and called out to the gatekeeper[s] of the city and told them, saying, “We came to the camp of Arom and behold there is no man there nor the sound of a human voice. Only, the horses are tied and the donkeys are tied, and the tents are as they were.”
The gate keepers called and related [the news] to the royal household within.
The king got up at night and said to his servants, “I will tell you what Arom has done to us. They know we are starving, so they left the camp to hide in the field, saying, ‘When they go out of the city, we will capture them alive and come into the city.’”
And one of his servants answered and said, “Let them take five of the remaining horses that are left in it [the city]. Behold, they are like all the multitude of Yisroel that are left in [the city], behold they are like all the multitude of Yisroel that have perished; let us send [them out] and we will see.”
So they took two horsemen, and the king sent them after the camp of Arom, saying, “Go and see.”
They went after them up to the Yardein, and behold, the entire way was filled with clothes and utensils that Arom threw away in their haste. The messengers returned and told the king.
And the people went out and looted the camp of Arom, and it was then that a measure of fine flour cost a shekel, and two measures of barley cost a shekel, as Adonoy had said.  
The king appointed his aide upon whose hand he leaned to be in charge of the gate, and the people trampled him at the gate and he died; as the man of God had spoken, which he had spoken when the king came down to him.
And it was when the man of God spoke to the king, saying, “Two measures of barley will cost a shekel and one measure of fine flour will cost a shekel at this time tomorrow in the gate of Shomron.”
And the [king’s] aide had answered the man of God and said, “Behold, if Adonoy makes windows in the sky will such a thing happen?” He [Elisha] replied, “Behold, you ill see this with your eyes but you will not eat from it.”
And so it happened to him, that the people trampled him at the gate and he died.

Chapter 8

Elisha spoke to the woman whose son he had revived, saying, “Get up and go, you and your household, and live wherever you want to live, for Adonoy has proclaimed a famine and it is coming upon the land for seven years.”
The woman got up and did according to the word of the man of God. She and her household went and lived in the land of the Pelishtim for seven years.
At the end of seven years the woman returned from the land of Pelishtim, and she went out to cry to the king about her house and her field.
The king was speaking to Geichazi, the [former] servant of the man of God, saying, “Please tell me about all the great deeds that Elisha performed.”
Just as he was telling the king how he [Elisha] revived the dead, behold there was the woman whose son he had revived, crying out to the king about her house and her field. Geichazi said, “My master, the king, this is the woman and this is her son whom Elisha revived.”
The king asked the woman, and she told him; the king then appointed for her, a certain officer, saying, “Return all that belongs to her, and [the value of] all the produce of the field from the day she left the land until now.”
Elisha came to Damesek and Ben-Hadad, king of Arom, was sick. It was told to him, saying, “The man of God has come here.”
The king said to Chazoeil, “Take a gift in your hand, and go greet the man of God. Ask of Adonoy through him, saying, ‘Will I recover from this sickness?’”
Chazoeil went to [greet] him and took a gift in his hand, and all the best of Damesek, forty camel loads. He came and stood before him, and said, “Your son, Ben-Hadad king of Arom, sent me to you, saying, ‘Will I recover from this sickness?’”
And Elisha said to him, “Go say to him, ‘You will surely live,’ but Adonoy has informed me that he will surely die.”
He [Elisha] kept his face emotionless and held it so for a long time, and then the man of God wept.
Chazoeil said, “Why is my master weeping?” He said, “Because I know that you will do evil to the Bnei Yisroel; their strongholds you will set on fire, their youths you will kill with the sword, their infants you will dash to pieces, and their pregnant women you will split open.”
And Chazoeil said, “What is your servant but a [mere] dog that he can do this terrible thing?” And Elisha said, “Adonoy has revealed to me that you are to be the king of Arom.”
He left Elisha and came to his master, and he said to him, “What did Elisha tell you?” He said, “He said to me, ‘You will surely live.’”
The next day he [Chazoeil] took a blanket and dipped it in water; he spread it over his [Ben-Hadad’s] face and he died. Chazoeil became king in his place.
In the fifth year of Yorom son of Achov king of Yisroel, and Yehoshophot king of Yehudah, Yehorom, son of Yehoshophot became king. king of Yisroel.
He was thirty-two years old when he became king, and he reigned for eight years in Yerusholayim.
He followed in the way of the kings of Yisroel, as the house of Achov had done, for Achov’s daughter became his wife. He did what was evil in the eyes of Adonoy.
[However] Adonoy did not want to destroy Yehudah for the sake of His servant, Dovid, as He had said to him, to give him a kingdom for his descendants all the days.
In his days, Edom rebelled against Yehudah’s rule, and appointed a king over themselves.
So Yorom went over to [attack] Tzo’ir, and all his chariots were with him. He got up at night and struck Edom that were surrounding him, and the officers of the chariots; then the people fled to their tents.
But Edom [continued] to rebel against being under Yehudah’s rule to this day. Then Livnoh rebelled at that time.
The rest of the events of Yorom and all that he did, they are indeed recorded in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Yehudah.
Yorom lay with his forefathers, and was buried with his forefathers in the City of Dovid. Achazyohu, his son, reigned in his place.
In the twelfth year of Yorom, son of Achov, king of Yisroel, Achazyohu reigned; [he was] the son of Yehorom king of Yehudah.
Achazyohu was twenty-two years old when he became king, and he reigned for one year in Yerusholayim. His mother’s name was Asalyohu, the daughter of Omri king of Yisroel.
He followed in the way of the house of Achov, and did what was evil in the eyes of Adonoy, like the house of Achov, for he was a son-in-law in the house of Achov.
He went with Yorom, son of Achov, to war against Chazoeil king of Arom, at Ramos-Gilod, and the Aromeans wounded Yorom.
And king Yorom returned to recuperate in Yizre’el from the wounds that were inflicted upon him by the Aromeans in Romoh when he fought Cagainst hazoeil king of Arom. Achazyohu, son of Yehorom, king of Yehudah, went down to see Yorom, son of Achov, in Yizre’el, for he was sick.

Chapter 9

Elisha, the prophet, called to one of the prophets’ disciples, and said to him, “Gird you loins and take this flask of oil in your hand, and go to Ramos-Gilod.
When you get there look for Yeihu, son of Yehoshophot, son of Nimshi. You shall come and elevate him from among his friends, and bring him into an inner room.
And take the flask of oil and pour it on his head, and say, ‘Thus says Adonoy, “I have anointed you king of Yisroel.’” Then open the door and flee; do not wait.”
The lad, the prophet’s disciple, went to Ramos-Gilod.
He arrived and behold, the officers of the army were sitting. He said, “I have a message for you, officer.” Yeihu said, “For which one of all of us?” He said, “For you, officer.”
He got up and came into the house, and he [the lad] poured the oil on his head; and said to him, “So said Adonoy, God of Yisroel, ‘I have anointed you king over the people of Adonoy, over Yisroel.
You shall strike down the house of Achov, your master, and I will avenge the blood of My servants, the prophets, and the blood of all the servants of Adonoy, from Ezevel’s hand.
The entire house of Achov will be destroyed, and I will cut off every male person belonging to Achov and anyone who survives or remains in Yisroel.
I will make the house of Achov like the house of Yorovom, son of Nevot and like the house of Basha, son of Achiyoh.
And Ezevel will be devoured by the dogs in Yizre’el’s portion, and no one will bury [her].” He then opened the door and fled.
And Yeihu went out to his master’s servants, and [one of them] said to him, “Is everything alright? Why did this crazy man come to you?” And he said to them, “You know the man and his talk.”
They said, “That is a lie; please tell us.” He said, “Such and such did he say to me, saying, ‘So said Adonoy, “I have anointed you king over Yisroel.’”
And quickly, each man took his garment and placed it under him on the top step; they blew the <i>shofar</i>, and said, “Yeihu has become king.”
He conspired— Yeihu, son of Yehoshophot, son of Nimshi, against Yorom. Yorom had been keeping guard at Ramos-Gilod, he and all Yisroel against Chazoeil, king of Arom.
King Yehorom had returned to recuperate in Yizre’el from the wounds that were inflicted upon him by the Aromeans when he fought Chazoeil, king of Arom. Yeihu said, “If you really want [me as king], let no survivor leave the city to go and report in Yizre’el.”
Yeihu rode and went to Yizre’el, for Yorom was lying there, and Achazyoh king of Yehudah had gone down to visit Yorom.
The lookout was standing on the tower in Yizre’el and he saw Yeihu’s troop as it approached, and he said, “I see a troop.” Yehorom said, “Take a horseman and send him to meet them and ask, ‘Is everything alright?’”
The horseman went to meet him and said, “So said the king, ‘Is everything alright?’” And Yeihu said, “What difference is it to you if everything is alright? Come around and follow me.” The lookout reported, saying, “The messenger came up to them but he did not return.”
So he dispatched a second horseman and he came to them and said, “So said the king, ‘Is everything alright?’” And Yeihu said, “What difference is it to you if everything is alright? Come around and follow me.”
The lookout reported, saying, “The messenger came to them but he did not return. The driving pace is like the driving of Yeihu, son of Nimshi, for he drives recklessly.
And Yehorom said, “Hitch up [the chariot],” and he hitched up his chariot. Yehorom king of Yisroel went out [accompanied by] Achazyohu king of Yehudah, each in his own chariot. They went out towards Yeihu, and they met him in the territory of Novos, the Yizre’eli.
When Yehorom saw Yeihu, he said, “Is everything alright, Yeihu?” And he answered, “How can everything be alright with the harlotries of Ezevel, your mother, and her abundant witchcraft?”
Yehorom turned his hands around and fled. He said to Achazyohu, “It is treachery, Achazyoh[u].”
And Yeihu drew the bow with all his strength and struck Yehorom between his arms; the arrow protruded from his heart and he collapsed in his chariot.
And he said to Bidkar, his aide, “Pick him up! Throw him into the portion of the field [that belonged to] Novos, the Yizre’eli, for remember that you and I were riding together behind Achov, his father, when Adonoy put upon him this decree:
‘Did I not see the blood of Novos and the blood of his children last night?’ Said Adonoy. ‘I will repay you in this portion,’ said Adonoy. So now pick him up and throw him into this portion according to the word of Adonoy.”
Achazyoh king of Yehudah saw [what happened], and he fled by way of Beis-Hagan; and Yeihu pursued him and said, “Him too, strike him down in the chariot,” [and he was struck] on the way up to Gur which is next to Yivle’om, and he fled to Meggido and died there.
His servants drove him to Yerusholayim, and they buried him in his grave with his forefathers, in the City of Dovid.
In the eleventh year of Yorom, son of Achov, Achazyoh became king over Yehudah.
Yeihu came to Yizre’el, and Ezevel heard [about it]. She painted her eyes, and made up her hair, and looked out of the window.
Yeihu came into the gate, and she said, “Is everything alright, Zimri, murderer of his master?”
And he lifted up his face to the window, and said, “Who is with me? Who?” Two or three officers looked out to him.
He said [to them], “Push her out!” They pushed her out; and her blood splattered on the wall and on the horses, and they trampled her.
He then came and ate and drank, and he said, “Please attend this cursed one and bury her for she is a king’s daughter.”
They went to bury her but they found nothing left of her except the skull, the feet, and the palms of the hands.
They came back and told him; and he said, “It is the word of Adonoy that He spoke through His servant, Eliyahu, the Tishbi, saying, ‘In the plot of Yizre’el the dogs will eat the flesh of Ezevel.
The corpse of Ezevel will be like dung on the field in the portion of Yizre’el, for no one will ever say, “This is Ezevel.’”

Chapter 10

Achov had seventy sons in Shomron. Yeihu wrote letters and sent them to Shomron, to the officers of Yizre’el, the elders, and to the custodians of Achov[’s children] saying,
“Now, when this letter reaches you, and with you are your master’s children; and with you are the chariot[s] and the horses, and the fortified city and weapons.
See which is the best and most befitting of your master’s sons, and place him on his father’s throne, and fight for your master’s house.”
They became very frightened and they said, “Behold, two kings were unable to stand up to him, how then can we stand up [to him]?”
They sent— the guardian of the [royal] household, the governor of the city and the elders, and the custodians—to Yeihu, saying, “We are your servants, and everything you tell us we will do. We will not appoint a king, do whatever is good in your eyes.”
He wrote them a second letter saying, “If you are with me, and [wish to] listen to my voice, take the heads of the men of your master’s sons and come to me at this time tomorrow, to Yizre’el; the sons of the king [number] seventy men, and the great men of the city are raising them.”
When the letter reached them, they took the sons of the king, and they slaughtered the seventy men; they put their heads in pots, and sent [them] to him to Yizre’el.
The messenger came and told him saying, “They have brought the heads of the king’s sons.” And he said, “Arrange them in two piles at the entrance of the gate until the morning.”
In the morning he went out and stood and said to all the people, “You are righteous. It was I who revolted against my master and killed him, but who killed all these?
You must know therefore, that no word of Adonoy will remain unfulfilled, that Adonoy spoke against the house of Achov. Adonoy has done what He had spoken through His servant, Eliyahu.”
And Yeihu struck all those who remained of the house of Achov in Yizre’el, and all his notables, relatives and <i>kohanim</i>, until there was no remnant left of him.
He got up and went to Shomron. He was at the gathering place of the shepherds, on the road.
And Yeihu met relatives of Achazyohu king of Yehudah, and he said to them, “Who are you?” They said, “We are the relatives of Achazyohu, and we have come down to greet the king’s sons, and the queen’s sons.”
And he said, “Take them alive,” and they took them alive; and he slaughtered them, into the pit of the gathering place, forty-two men. He did not leave any of them [alive].
He went from there and met Yehonodov son of Reichov [coming] toward him. He blessed him and [Yeihu] said to him, “Is your heart upright as my heart is with your heart?” And Yehonodov said, “It sure is, give me your hand.” And [Yeihu] gave him his hand and he lifted him up to him, into the chariot.
And he said, “Come with me and witness my zeal for Adonoy,” and they had him ride in his [Yeihu’s] chariot.
He came to Shomron, and struck all who remained of Achov in Shomron, until he obliterated him; like the word of Adonoy that He spoke to Eliyahu.
Yeihu gathered all the people, and said to them, “Achov worshiped the Baal little, Yeihu will worship him much.
So now, all the prophets of the Baal, all its worshipers and all its priests, summon them to me. Let no one be missing, for I have a great sacrifice for the Baal. Anyone who is missing will not live.” Yeihu did this with cunning in order to obliterate the Baal worshipers.
And Yeihu said, “Sanctify an assembly for Baal,” and they proclaimed it.
Yeihu sent [messengers] throughout all of Yisroel, and all the Baal worshipers came. There was none left who did not come. They came to the temple of the Baal, and the temple of the Baal was filled from end to end.
And he [Yeihu] said to the one in charge of the wardrobe, “Bring out uniforms for all the Baal worshipers,” and he brought out the uniforms for them.
Yeihu and Yehonodov son of Reichov came into the temple of the Baal, and he said to the Baal worshipers, “Search and see if there are here among you worshipers of Adonoy for [this assembly is] only for the Baal worshipers.”
They came to perform sacrifices and burnt-offering; Yeihu himself placed eighty men outside, and said [to them], “If anyone escapes— of these men that I put under your charge, you will forfeit your life for his life.”
When he finished sacrificing the burnt-offering, Yeihu said to the runners and the officers “Come and kill them, let no man escape,” and they slew them with the sword. The runners and the officers threw them out, and they went as far as the city, the [place of the] temple of the Baal.
They removed the statues of the temple of the Baal and burned it.
They shattered the statue of the Baal, and destroyed the temple of the Baal and converted it into an outhouse until today.
And thus Yeihu obliterated Baal from Yisroel.
However, from the sins of Yorovom, son of Nevot, who caused Yisroel to sin, Yeihu did not turn away from them, the Golden calves that were in Beis Eil and in Don.
Adonoy said to Yeihu, “Because you have done well, doing that which is upright in My eyes; and all that is in My heart you have done to the house of Achov, four generations of your sons will sit on the throne of Yisroel.
But Yeihu was not observant in following the Torah of Adonoy, God of Yisroel, with all his heart. He did not reject the sins of Yorovom who caused Yisroel to sin.
In those days Adonoy began to show His disgust with Yisroel, and Chazoeil struck them along the entire border of Yisroel.
From the Yardein toward the rising sun, the entire land of Gilod, the [territories of] Gad, Reuvein, and Menashe; from Aroeir by the Arnon River, and the Gilod and the Boshon.
The rest of Yeihu’s events, and all that he did, and all of his might, they are indeed written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Yisroel.
And Yeihu lay with his forefathers and they buried him in Shomron. His son, Yehoachaz, reigned in his place.
The days that Yeihu reigned over Yisroel were twenty-eight years in Shomron.

Chapter 11

When Asalyoh, Achazyohu’s mother, saw that her son was dead, she got up and destroyed all the descendants of the royal family.
But Yehosheva, daughter of King Arom, took she was the sister of Achazyohu— Yoash son of Achazyoh, and she stole him away from among the children of the king who were being killed. [She smuggled] him and his nurse into the bed-chamber, and she concealed him from Asalyohu, and he was not killed.
And he remained with her in the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy, hidden for six years, and Asalyoh ruled over the land.
In the seventh year, Yehoyoda summoned, and he took the officers of the hundreds [who were over] the mighty warriors and the runners, and he brought them to him in the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy. He made a covenant with them and beswore them in the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy, and then he showed them the king’s son.
He commanded them saying, “This is what you are to do: one third of you, of those who come on Shabbos, will keep the watch of the king’s palace.
One third [will be] at the Sur Gate, and one third [will be] at the gate behind the runners; and you will keep the watch of the palace, without taking your mind off it.
The two groups of you, [with] all who depart on Shabbos, will guard the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy, for the king.
You will encircle the king all around, each man with his weapons in his hand, and whoever breaks the ranks will be killed. You will be with the king when he goes out and when he comes in.”
The officers of hundreds did everything that Yehoyoda, the <i>kohein</i> commanded. Each one took his men, those that were coming in for Shabbos, and those that were departing on Shabbos; and they came to Yehoyoda, the <i>kohein</i>.
And the <i>kohein </i>gave the officers of the hundreds the spear[s] and the shields of King Dovid, that were in the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy.
The runners stood, each one with his weapons in his hand, from the right side of the Beis [Hamikdosh] to the left side of the Beis [Hamikdosh] at the Altar and the Sanctuary, surrounding the king.
He [Yehoyoda] brought out the king’s son and placed the crown on him, and [gave him] the Testimony [the <i>Seifer Torah</i>]. They proclaimed him king and anointed him. They applauded and declared, “[Long] live the king!”
Asalyoh heard the sound of running people, and she came to the people in the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy.
She looked and behold, the king was standing on the pedestal as was the custom, and the officers and the trumpets were next to the king, and all the people of the land were rejoicing and blowing the trumpets. Asalyoh tore her clothing, and shouted, “A revolt! A revolt!”
Yehoyoda the <i>kohein </i>commanded the officers of the hundreds, who were appointed over the army and he said to them, “Remove her by way of the ranks, and anyone who follows her kill with the sword.” For the <i>kohein</i> had said, “Let her not be killed in the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy.”
They made place for her and she came by way of the horses’ entrance to the king’s palace, and she was executed there.
Yehoyoda made a covenant between Adonoy and the king, and the people to be a people of Adonoy; and between the king and the people.
And all the people of the land came to the temple of the Baal and tore it down; its altars and its statues they broke completely. Matan, the priest of the Baal, they killed in front of the altars. Then [Yehoyoda] the <i>kohein</i> set up assignments for the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy.
He took the officers of the hundreds, the mighty warriors and the runners, and all the people of the land, and they escorted the king down from the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy. They came by way of the Gate of the Runners to the king’s palace, and he sat on the royal throne.
All the people of the land rejoiced and the city was tranquil. They killed Asalyohu with the sword in the king’s palace.

Chapter 12

Yehoash was seven years old when he became king.
In the seventh year of Yeihu, Yehoash became king, and he reigned forty years in Yerusholayim. His mother’s name was Tzivia from B’eir Sheva.
Yehoash did what was proper in the eyes of Adonoy all his days, as Yehoyoda, the <i>kohein</i>, instructed him.
Except that the individual altars were not removed; the people were still sacrificing and burning incense on [their] individual altars.
And Yehoash said to the <i>kohanim</i>, “All the sacred money that is brought to the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy, the half-shekel [given by every male over twenty, and] donations representing the value of one’s age, all monies that a person’s heart inspires him to bring to the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy.
Let them take [the money] for themselves— the <i>kohanim</i>— each one from his friend; and they will support the restoration of the Beis [Hamikdosh] wherever the need for restoration is found.”
In the twenty-third year of king Yehoash, the <i>kohanim </i>had [still] not supported the restoration of the Beis [Hamikdosh].
King Yehoash summoned Yehoyoda the <i>kohein</i>, and the [other] <i>kohanim</i>, and said to them, “Why are you not supporting the restoration of the Beis [Hamikdosh]? And now, do not take the money from your friends [for yourselves], but for the restoration of the Beis [Hamikdosh]— you should give it over
The <i>kohanim</i> agreed not to take money from the people, and not to support [from their own funds]  the restoration of the Beis [Hamikdosh].
And Yehoyoda the <i>kohein</i> took one box and bored a hole in its lid; he placed it near the altar to the right, as a person enters the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy. And they put in there— the guards of the threshold— all the money that was brought to the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy.
Whenever they saw that there was much money in the box, the king’s scribe would go up— and the <i>Kohein Gadol</i>— and bag and count the money that was found in the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy.
They gave the counted money to those who oversaw the work, who were [thus] appointed over the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy. They paid the carpenters and the builders who worked in the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy.
And [they] also [paid] the masons and the stone cutters, and [also used the money] to buy lumber and quarried stones [that were needed] to restore the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy, and for whatever expenditures [were necessary] to restore the Beis [Hamikdosh].
However, there would not be made for the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy, silver pitchers, musical instruments, basins, trumpets, or any gold or silver utensils, from the money brought to the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy.
For to those who supervised the work, did they gave it and with it they supported [the restoration of] the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy.
They did not demand an accounting from the men into whose hands they gave the money to pay those who supervised the work; for they worked on trust.
Money for guilt-offerings and money for sin-offerings was not brought to the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy; it was for the <i>kohanim</i>.
Then Chazoeil king of Arom went up, and fought with Gas and conquered it; then Chazoeil set his face to go up against Yerusholayim.
Yehoash king of Yehudah, took all the sacred things that were sanctified by Yehoshophot, Yehorom and Achazyohu, his forefathers the kings of Yehudah, and his own sacred things, and all the gold that was found in the treasuries of the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy and in the king’s palace; and he sent it to Chazoeil, king of Arom, and he turned back from upon Yerusholayim.
And the rest of Yoash’s events and all that he did, are indeed written in the book of the chronicles of Yehudah’s kings.
His servants rose up and revolted, and they killed Yoash at Beis Millo which leads down to Selo.
Yozochor, son of Shimos, and Yehozovod, son of Shomeir, his servants, struck him and he died. They buried him with his forefathers in the City of Dovid. His son Amatzyoh reigned in his place.

Chapter 13

In the twenty-third year of Yoash, son of Achazyohu king of Yehudah, Yehoachaz son of Yeihu, reigned over Yisroel in Shomron for seventeen years.
He did what was evil in the eyes of Adonoy, and persisted in the sins which Yerovom, son of Nevot, had caused Yisroel to commit, he did not turn away from them.
Adonoy became angry with Yisroel, and He delivered them into the hand of Chazoeil king of Arom, and into the hand of Ben-Hadad, son of Chazoeil, throughout the days [of Yehoachaz].
Yehoachaz prayed to Adonoy, and Adonoy listened to him for He saw Yisroel’s oppression, for Arom’s king oppressed them.
And Adonoy provided Yisroel with a savior, and they escaped from Arom’s rule; the Bnei Yisroel settled in their dwelling places as [they had] in the past.
But they did not turn away from the sins of the house of Yorovom that he caused Yisroel to commit, he persisted in [committing] them; and also the Asheiroh [still] stood in Shomron.
For he had not left Yehoachaz with any people except for fifty horsemen, ten chariots and ten thousand troops, for Arom’s king destroyed [the rest] and trampled them like dirt.
The rest of Yehoachaz’s deeds and all that he did, and his might, are written in the book of chronicles of Yisroel’s kings.
Yehoachaz lay with his forefathers and they buried him in Shomron; his son Yoash reigned in his place.
In the thirty-seventh year of Yoash king of Yehudah, Yehoash son of Yehoachaz, became king over Yisroel in Shomron [for] sixteen years.
He did what was evil in the eyes of Adonoy, he did not turn away from all the sins which Yorovom, son of Nevot, caused Yisroel to commit, he persisted in [committing] them.
The rest of Yoash’s deeds, and all that he did, and his might, and his battle with Amatzyoh king of Yehudah, are written in the book of chronicles of Yisroel’s kings.
Yoash lay with his forefathers and Yorovom sat on his throne; Yoash was buried in Shomron with the kings of Yisroel.
Elisha became sick with an illness of which he would die; Yoash king of Yisroel went down to [visit] him. He wept before him and said, “My father, my father! The chariot of Yisroel and its horsemen!”
Elisha said to him, “Bring a bow and arrows.” And he brought him a bow and arrows.
He said to the king of Yisroel, “Put your hand on the bow,” and he put his hand [on the bow]. Elisha put his hand on the king’s hands.
He then said, “Open the window towards the east,” and he opened it. And Elisha said, “Shoot!” And he shot. And he said, “An arrow of salvation from Adonoy, and an arrow of salvation against Arom, you are to attack Arom in Apheik until their total destruction.”
And he said, “Take the arrows,” and he took them. He then said to the king of Yisroel, “Strike [the arrows] at the ground.” He struck [the arrows at the ground] three times and stopped.
The man of God became angry at him, and said, “[If only] you had struck [the arrows at the ground] five or six times, then you would have struck Arom to its total destruction, but now three times [only] will you strike [and defeat] Arom.
Elisha died and they buried him. Bands from Moav would invade the land at the beginning of each year.
They were in the midst of burying a man and behold, they saw a band [approaching] so they threw the corpse into Elisha’s grave; the corpse rolled and touched Elisha’s bones, and it came back to life and stood up.
Chazoeil king of Arom oppressed Yisroel all the days of Yehoachaz[’s reign].
But Adonoy was gracious and had pity on them, and He turned back to them because of His covenant with Avrohom, Yitzchok and Yaakov; he did not want to destroy them, and He did not cast them off from His Presence until now.
Chazoeil, Arom’s king, died; his son, Ben-Hadad, reigned in his place.
Yehoash, son of Yehoachaz, returned and took back the cities from the hand of Ben-Hadad, son of Chazoeil, who had taken [them] from the hand of his father Yehoachaz in battle; Yoash struck him three times and recovered the cities of Yisroel.

Chapter 14

In the second year of Yoash, son of Yoachaz king of Yisroel, Amatzyoh, son of Yoash became king— king of Yehudah.
He was twenty-five years old when he became king, and for twenty-nine years; he reigned in Yerusholayim  his mother’s name was Yehoadon of Yerusholayim.
He did what was proper in the eyes of Adonoy, but not like his forefather Dovid; he did everything as Yoash his father had done.
However, the private altars were not removed, the people continued slaughtering and burning incense on the private altars.
And when the kingdom became firmly established, he killed his servants who had murdered the king, his father.
But he did not kill the murderers’ children, for it is written in the Book of the Torah of Moshe, which Adonoy had commanded, saying, “Fathers shall not be put to death because of sons, and sons shall not be put to death because of fathers, rather, a person shall be put to death for his own sin.
He struck of Edom in the Salt Valley— ten thousand and he captured the Rock in battle, and named it Yokseil [as it is known] to this day.
Amatzyoh then sent messengers to Yehoash, son of Yehoachaz, son of Yeihu, king of Yisroel saying, “Come, let us battle each other.”
And Yehoash sent [back a message]— king of Yisroel. to Amatzyohu, king of Yehudah, saying, “The thistle that was in Levanon sent [a message] to the cedar [tree] that was in Levanon, saying, ‘Give your daughter to my son for a wife,’ and the wild beast that was in Levanon passed by and trampled the thistle.
You have soundly defeated Edom so you have become arrogant; keep your honor and stay home. Why should you provoke evil and be defeated, you, and Yehudah together?”
But Amatzyohu did not listen, so Yehoash, king of Yisroel, went up, and they confronted each other, he and Amatzyoh[u] king of Yehudah, in Beis Shemesh which [belongs] to Yehudah.
Yehudah was soundly defeated before Yisroel, and each man fled to his dwelling.
And Amatzyohu king of Yehudah, son of Yehoash, son of Achazyahu, was captured by Yehoash king of Yisroel, in Beis Shemesh; he then came to Yerusholayim and breached the wall of Yerusholayim [from] the Ephrayim Gate to the Corner Gate, [a distance of] four hundred <i>amohs</i>.
And he took all the gold and silver, and all the vessels that were found in the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy and in the palace treasuries, and the children [held] hostage; and he returned to Shomron.
The rest of Yehoash’s deeds which he did, and his might, and how he fought against Amatzyohu king of Yehudah, are indeed written in the book of the chronicles of Yisroel’s kings.
And Yehuoash lay with his forefathers, and he was buried in Shomron with the kings of Yisroel; and Yorovom his son reigned in his place.
Amatzyohu, son of Yehoash, king of Yehudah lived, after the death of Yehoash son of Yehoachaz king of Yisroel fifteen years.
And the rest of Amatzyoh’s deeds are indeed written in the book of chronicles of Yehudah’s kings.
They conspired a revolt against him in Yerusholayim, and he fled to Lakish; and they sent after him to Lakish and assassinated him there.
They carried him [back] on the horses, and he was buried in Yerusholayim with his forefathers, in the City of Dovid.
The entire people of Yehudah took Azaryoh, who was sixteen years old, and made him king in place of his father Amatzyohu.
He built up Eilas and restored it to Yehudah, after the king lay with his forefathers.
In the fifteenth year of Amatzyohu, son of Yehoash, king of Yehudah, Yerovom, son of Yoash became king, he ruled Yisroel in Shomron forty-one years.
He did what was evil in the eyes of Adonoy; he did not turn away from all the sins which Yerovom, son of Nevot, had caused Yisroel to commit.
He restored the boundary of Yisroel from Levo Chamos until the Aravah Sea, according to the word of Adonoy, God of Yisroel, which He spoke through His servant, Yonah son of Amitai, the prophet, who was from Gas Hachepher.
For Adonoy saw the suffering of Yisroel intensifying increasingly, with no one surviving and no one remaining, and no one helping Yisroel.
But Adonoy did not say to eradicate Yisroel’s name from under the heavens, and He saved them through Yerovom, the son of Yoash.
And the rest of Yerovom’s deeds and all that he did, and of might, how he fought, and how he restored Damesek and Chamos to Yehudah through Yisroel, are indeed written in the book of the chronicles of Yisroel’s kings.
And Yerovom lay with his forefathers, with the kings of Yisroel, and his son Zecharyoh reigned in his place.

Chapter 15

In the twenty-seventh year of Yorovom king of Yisroel, Azaryoh son of Amatzyoh the king of Yehudah, became king.
He was sixteen years old when he became king and he reigned fifty-two years in Yerusholayim; his mother’s name was Yechulyohu of Yerusholayim.
He did what was right in the eyes of Adonoy; like all that Amatzyoh his father had done.
However, the high places were not removed; the people were still offering sacrifices and burning incense on the high places.
Adonoy brought a plague upon the king and he was stricken with <i>tzora’as</i> until the day of his death, and he lived in a retirement house. Yosum, the king’s son, who was [appointed] over the palace judging the people of the land.
The rest of Azaryohu’s deeds and all that he did are written in the book of chronicles of Yehudah’s kings.
Azaryoh lay with his forefathers and they was buried him with his forefathers, in the City of Dovid; and his son Yosum reigned in his place.
In the thirty-eighth year of Azaryohu king of Yehudah, Zecharyohu son of Yorovom became king over Yisroel in Shomron six months.
He did what was evil the eyes of Adonoy as his forefathers had done; he did not turn away from the sins of Yorovom son of Nevot, who had caused Yisroel to sin.
Shalum son of Yoveish revolted against him, and struck him before the people and killed him; and he reigned in his place.
The rest of Zecharyoh’s deeds are written in the book of chronicles of Yisroel’s kings.
This was the word of Adonoy that He had spoken to Yeihu, saying, “Your fourth generation’s descendants will sit on Yisroel’s throne,” and so it was.
Shalum son of Yoveish, became king in the thirty-ninth year of Uzziyoh king of Yehudah, and he reigned a full month in Shomron.
Menachem son of Gadi went up from Tirtzoh and came to Shomron, he struck down Shalum son of Yoveish, in Shomron, and killed him; he reigned in his place.
The rest of Shalum’s deeds and his revolt that he organized, are written in the book of the chronicles of Yisroel’s kings.
Then Menachem attacked Tiphsach, and all that were in it and its boundaries from Tirtzoh, because it would not open, he attacked it, and he ripped open all its pregnant women.
In the thirty-ninth year of Azaryoh king of Yehudah[’s reign], Menachem, son of Gadi became king over Yisroel ten years in Shomron.
He did what evil in the eyes of Adonoy; he did not turn away from the sins of Yorovom son of Nevot, who had caused Yisroel to sin, all his days.
Pul, the king of Ashur invaded the land, and Menachem gave Pul one thousand silver talents that he be his ally, to strengthen the kingdom in his hand.
Menachem exacted the money from Yisroel from all the mighty warriors to give to the king of Ashur, fifty silver shekel per person. The king of Ashur returned [to his country] and did not remain there in the land.
The rest of Menachem’s deeds and all that he did are indeed written in the book of the chronicles of Yisroel’s kings.
Menachem lay with his forefathers, and his son Pekachyoh reigned in his place.
In the fiftieth year [of the reign] of Azaryoh king of Yehudah, Pekachyoh son of Menachem became king over Yisroel for two years in Shomron.
He did what was evil in the eyes of Adonoy; he did not turn away from the sins of Yorovom son of Nevot, who had caused Yisroel to sin.
Pekach son of Remalyohu, his mighty warrior, revolted against him, and he struck him down in Shomron in the inner chamber of the king’s palace, [near] the palace and [near] the lion, and fifty men of Gilod were with him; he killed him and reigned in his place.
The rest of Pekachyoh’s deeds and all that he did, are indeed written in the book of the chronicles of Yisroel’s kings.
In the fifty-second year of Azaryoh king of Yehudah, Pekach son of Remalyohu became king over Yisroel in Shomron twenty years.
He did what was evil in the eyes of Adonoy; he did not turn away from the sins of Yorovom son of Nevot, who had caused Yisroel to sin.
In the days of Pekach king of Yisroel, Tiglas Pileser king of Ashur invaded and took Iyon, Aveil Beis Ma’acho, Yano’ach, Kedesh, Chatzor, Gilod, Goliloh, the entire land of Naftali, and he exiled them to Ashur.
Hoshei’a son of Eiloh revolted against Pekach son of Remalyohu, and he struck him and killed him, and he reigned in his place, in the twentieth year of Yosum son of Uzziyoh.
The rest of Pekach’s deeds and all that he did, are indeed written in the book of the chronicles of Yisroel’s kings.
In the second year of Pekach son of Remalyohu king of Yisroel, Yosum son of Uzziyohu king of Yisroel became king.
He was twenty-five years old when he became king and he reigned sixteen years in Yerusholayim; his mother’s name was Yerusha, daughter of Tzadok.
He did what was right in the eyes of Adonoy, he did like all that his father had done.
However, the high places were not removed, the people continued offering sacrifices and burning incense on the high places. He built the upper gate of the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy.
The rest of Yosum’s deeds and all that he did are indeed written in the book of chronicles of Yehudah’s kings.
In those days Adonoy began to incite against Yehudah, Retzin king of Arom and Pekach son of Remalyohu.
Yosum lay with his forefathers, and he was buried with his forefathers, in the City of Dovid, his forefather. His son Achaz reigned in his place.

Chapter 16

In the seventeenth year of Pekach son of Remalyohu, Achaz son of Yosum king of Yehudah, became king.
Achaz was twenty years old when he became king and he reigned sixteen years in Yerusholayim; he did not do what is right in the eyes of Adonoy his God, like his forefather, Dovid.
He followed in the way of the kings of Yisroel, even his son he passed through the fire, like the abominations of the nations whom Adonoy had driven out before the Bnei Yisroel.
He offered sacrifices and burned incense on the high places and on the hills, and under every leafy tree.
Then Retzin king of Arom went up with Pekach son of Remalyohu king of Yisroel, to Yerusholayim to wage war; they besieged Achaz, but were unable to overcome him.
At that time Retzin king of Arom restored Eilas to Arom, and he drove out the <i>Yehudim</i> from Eilos, and the people of Edom then came to Eilas and settled there until this day.
Achaz sent messengers to Tiglas Pileser, king of Ashur, saying, “I am your servant and your son; come up and save me from the grasp of Arom’s king and from the grasp of Yisroel’s king who have risen against me.”
Achaz took the silver and gold that was found in the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy, and in the treasuries of the king’s palace, and sent [them] as a bribe to Ashur’s king.
The king of Ashur listened and went to Damesek and seized it; he exiled [its people] to Kir, and he killed Retzin.
King Achaz went to greet Tiglas Pileser, king of Ashur in Damesek and he saw the altar that was in Damesek. King Achaz sent to Uriyoh the <i>kohein</i> a model of the altar and its design detailing to all its workmanship.
Uriyoh the <i>kohein</i> built the altar according to all [the details] that king Achaz sent from Damesek, so did Uriyoh the <i>kohein</i> make [it] before king Achaz came from Damesek.
When the king came from Damesek and saw the altar, the king approached the altar and offered [sacrifices] upon it.
He burnt his burnt offering and his meal offering and he poured his libation; he sprinkled the blood of his peace offering upon the altar.
And the Copper Altar that was before Adonoy, —he brought [the new altar] closer to the entrance of the Sanctuary, [placing it] between the Altar and the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy, and he placed it on the northern side of the Altar.
King Achaz commanded Uriyoh the <i>kohein</i>, saying, “Upon the great altar burn the morning burnt offering and evening meal offering, and the king’s burnt offering and his meal offering, and the burnt offering of all the people of the land, and their meal offering and their libations, and the blood of every burnt offering and the blood of every offering you should sprinkle on it, and the Copper Altar will be for me to visit.”
Uriyoh the <i>kohein</i> did according to all that King Achaz commanded.
King Achaz cut off the frames of the basins and he removed the basin from them, and he took down the Sea from the copper oxen that were under and put it on a stone floor.
The canopy for Shabbos that they built in the Beis Hamikdosh and the king’s outside entrance, he switched to the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy because of the king of Ashur.
The rest of Achaz’s deeds that he did, behold, they are written in the book of chronicles of Yehudah’s kings.
Achaz lay with his forefathers and he was buried in the City of Dovid; his son, Chizkiyohu reigned in his place.

Chapter 17

In the twelfth year of Achaz king of Yehudah, Hoshei’a son of Eiloh became king over Yisroel in Shomron for nine years.
He did what was evil in the eyes of Adonoy, but not like the kings of Yisroel [who ruled] before him.
Shalmaneser king of Ashur went up against him, and Hoshei’a became his vassal, and paid him tribute.
The king of Ashur discovered a conspiracy involving Hoshei’a, for he had sent messengers to So king of Egypt, and he did not pay tribute to the king of Ashur. Thus, the king of Ashur arrested him and confined him in prison.
The king of Ashur then invaded the entire land; he went up to Shomron and besieged it for three years.
In the ninth year of Hoshei’a, the king of Ashur conquered Shomron and exiled Yisroel to Ashur; he settled them in Chelach, Chavor, [by] the Gozan River, and [in] the towns of Mudie.
And it was, when the Bnei Yisroel sinned against Adonoy their God, Who brought them up from the land of Egypt, from under the hand of Paroh king of Egypt; and they feared gods of others.
They followed the statutes of the nations whom Adonoy had driven out before the Bnei Yisroel, and [the customs that] the kings of Yisroel had practiced.
Bnei Yisroel contrived improper rites which were not so, about Adonoy their God, and they built for themselves high places in all their towns, from watchtower to fortified city.
They erected for themselves monuments and <i>asheirim</i> on every high hill and under every leafy tree.
They burned incense there on all the high places, like the nations whom Adonoy had driven out before them, and they did evil things to anger Adonoy.
They worshiped idols of which God had instructed them, “Do not do this thing.”
And Adonoy warned Yisroel and Yehudah through all prophets of all visions, saying, “Repent from your evil ways; observe My commandments and My statutes, in accordance with the entire Torah that I had commanded your forefathers, and that I sent to you through My servants, the prophets.”
But they did not listen, and they stiffened their neck like their forefathers’ neck, who did not have faith in Adonoy their God.
They despised His statutes and His covenant that He had enacted with their forefathers, and His warnings that He had given them. They followed worthless things and became worthless; and [imitated the customs of] the nations surrounding them, concerning whom Adonoy had commanded them not to imitate.
They abandoned all the commandments of Adonoy their God, and made for themselves two molten calves; they made an <i>asheiroh</i>, and they prostrated themselves to all the host of heaven, and they worshiped the Baal.
They passed their sons and daughters through the fire, and they practiced witchcraft and divination; and they devoted themselves to do what was evil in the eyes of Adonoy, to anger Him.
Therefore, Adonoy became very incensed against Yisroel, and He banished them from His Presence; no one was left except for the tribe of Yehudah alone.
Yehudah, too, did not observe the commandments of Adonoy their God; they followed the customs of Yisroel that they practiced.
Adonoy despised all offspring of Yisroel, and He afflicted them, He delivered them into the hands of oppressors, until He banished them from His Presence.
For Yisroel had torn away from the House of Dovid and had made Yorovom son of Nevot king; and Yorovom led Yisroel away from following Adonoy and caused them to sin gravely.
The Bnei Yisroel followed all the sins that Yorovom had committed; they did not turn away from them.
Until Adonoy banished Yisroel from His Presence, as He had spoken through all His servants, the prophets; and Yisroel went into exile from its land to Ashur until this day.
The king of Ashur brought [people] from Bavel, Kusah, Avo, Chamos and Sepharvayim, and he settled [them] in the towns of Shomron in place of the Bnei Yisroel; they took possession of Shomron and settled in its towns.
When they first settled there, they did not fear Adonoy; so Adonoy incited lions against them, which were killing some of them.
They said to Ashur’s king, saying, “The nations that you exiled and settled in Shomron’s towns do not know the law of the God of the land, and He has incited lions against them, and behold they are killing them, because they do not know the law of the God of the land.”
Ashur’s king commanded, saying, “Bring back to there one of the <i>kohanim</i> whom you have exiled from there, and let them go and settle there, and teach them the law of the God of the land.”
And one of the <i>kohanim</i> came— whom they had exiled from Shomron—and settled in Beis Eil, and he would direct them how they should worship Adonoy.
Each nation made its own gods, and they placed [them] in the high place temples that the citizens of Shomron had made, each nation in their towns where they had settled.
The people of Bavel made Succos Benos, the people of Chus made Neirgal, the people of Chamos made Ashimo.
The Avim made Nivchaz and Tartok, and the Sepharvim burned their children in fire to Adramelech and Anamelech, the gods of Sepharvayim.
They feared Adonoy, but they made some of them priests for the high places, and they practiced their [rites] in the high place temples.
They feared Adonoy, but [also] worshiped their gods, as was the custom of the nations from which they had been exiled.
To this day, they act according to their earlier practices; they do not fear Adonoy, and they do not act according to their statutes, laws, or according to the Torah and the commandment[s] that Adonoy commanded the Bnei Yaakov, whose name He changed to Yisroel.
And Adonoy enacted a covenant with them, and commanded them, saying, “Do not fear gods of others, do not prostrate yourselves to them, you do not worship them, and do not slaughter sacrifices to them.
Only Adonoy Who brought you up from the land of Egypt with great might and with an outstretched arm, Him shall you fear, and to Him shall you prostrate yourselves and to Him shall you slaughter sacrifices.
And the statutes, laws, the Torah and the commandment[s] that He wrote for you, you shall observe to perform all times, and you shall not fear gods of others.
And the covenant that I enacted with you, you shall not forget, and you must not fear gods of others.
But, only Adonoy your God you shall fear, and He will save you from the hand of all your enemies.”
[But] they did not listen, rather, they observed their original practices.
These nations feared Adonoy, but worshiped their graven images; also their children and grandchildren, as their forefathers had done, so they do to this day.

Chapter 18

In the third year of Hoshei’a son of Eiloh king of Yisroel, that Chizkiyoh son of Achaz king of Yehudah, became king.
He was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned twenty-nine years in Yerusholayim; his mother’s name was Avi daughter of Zecharyoh.
He did what was right in the eyes of Adonoy, like all that his forefather Dovid had done.
He removed the high places, smashed the monuments, and cut down the <i>asheiroh</i>; he crushed the copper serpent that Moshe had made, because until those days, the Bnei Yisroel were burning incense to it, and he called it <i>Nechushton</i>.
He trusted in Adonoy the God of Yisroel; after him there was none like him among all Yehudah’s kings, nor were there [among those] before him.
He clung to Adonoy, and did not turn away from [following] Him; he kept His commandments, which Adonoy had commanded Moshe.
Adonoy was with him; he succeeded in all his endeavors. He rebelled against the king of Ashur and did not serve him.
He attacked the Pelishtim up to Azoh and its borders, from watchtower to fortified city.
And it was in the fourth year of king Chizkiyohu, which was the seventh year of Hoshei’a son of Eiloh king of Yisroel, that Shalmaneser king of Ashur went up to Shomron and besieged it.
They conquered it at the end of three years; in Chizkiyoh’s sixth year, which is the ninth year of Hoshei’a king of Yisroel, Shomron was conquered.
The king of Ashur exiled Yisroel to Ashur, and he settled them in Chelach, Chavor, [by] the Gozan River, and in the towns of Mudie.
[This happened] because they did not obey Adonoy their God, and they transgressed His covenant, everything that Moshe, the servant of Adonoy had commanded; and they neither listened nor obeyed [His will].
In the fourteenth year of king Chizkiyohu’s [rule], Sancheiriv king of Ashur attacked all the fortified cities of Yehudah and seized them.
Chizkiyoh king of Yehudah sent [a message] to the king of Ashur to Lakish, saying, “I have sinned, retreat from me; I will bear whatever you impose upon me.” And the king of Ashur imposed upon Chizkiyoh king of Yehudah, [a levy of] three hundred talents of silver and thirty talents of gold.
Chizkiyoh gave all the silver that was found in the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy, and in the treasuries of the king’s palace.
At that time, Chizkiyoh removed the doors of the Temple of Adonoy, and the thresholds which Chizkiyoh king of Yehudah had overlaid, and he gave them to Ashur’s king.
The king of Ashur sent Tarton, Rav Soris, and Ravshokei from Lakish to king Chizkiyohu with a great army to Yerusholayim; and they went up and came and stood near the channel of the upper pool, which is on the road of the washer’s field.
They summoned the king— and they came out to him— Elyokim son of Chilkiyohu who was appointed over the palace, and Shevnoh the scribe, and Yoach son of Asaph the recorder.
Ravshokei said to them, “Tell Chizkiyohu, ‘Thus said great king, the king of Ashur, “What is this confidence that you have relied upon?
You have said but words of the lips; counsel and might are needed for war; now, on whom do you depend that you have rebelled against me?
Now, behold, you have depended upon the support of this splintered reed, upon Egypt, upon whom [if] a man will lean, it will go into his palm and puncture it; so is Paroh king of Egypt to all who trust in him.
And if you tell me, ‘We trust in Adonoy our God,’ is He not the One Whose high places and altars hizkiyohu has removed?  He said to Yehudah and to Yerusholayim, ‘Before this altar in Yerusholayim shall you prostrate yourselves.’
And now, provide a security to my lord the king of Ashur, and I will give you two thousand horses, if you are able to supply riders on them.
How can you turn away one captain of the smallest of my master’s servants, and depend on Egypt for chariot[s] and horsemen.
Now, is it with other than Adonoy that I have come up against this place to destroy it?”’”
And [they] said,— Eliyokim son of Chilkiyohu, Shevnoh and Yoach— to Ravshokei, “Please speak Aramaic to your servants for we understand it; do not speak Hebrew to us within the hearing of the people on the wall.”
Ravshokei said to them, “Did my master send me to your master and to you to speak these words? Is it not to the people who sit on the wall to eat their own excrement and drink their own urine with you?”
Ravshokei then stood and called out in a loud voice in Hebrew, and he spoke and said, “Listen to the word of the great king, the king of Ashur.
So has the king said, ‘Do not let Chizkiyohu deceive you, for he will not be able to save you from his hand.
And do not let Chizkiyohu make you rely on Adonoy, saying, “Adonoy will surely save us, and this city will not be given into the hand of Ashur’s king.”
Do not listen to Chizkiyohu, for so has the king of Ashur said, “Make peace with me and come out to me, and each man will eat of his vine, and each man [will eat] of his fig tree, and each man will drink the water of his cistern.
Until I come and take you to a land like your land, a land of grain and wine, a land of bread and vineyards, a land of oil yielding olives and honey, and you will live and not die; and do not listen to Chizkiyohu for he will mislead you, saying, ‘Adonoy will save us.’
Have the gods of the nations saved any person in his land, from the hand of the king of Ashur?
Where are the gods of Chamos and Arpod, where are the gods of Sepharvayim? He exiled them and twisted them. Did they save Shomron from my hand?
Who, among all the gods of the lands, saved their land from my hand, that Adonoy will save Yerusholayim from my hand?’”
The people remained silent and did not answer him even one word, for it was the king’s order, saying, “Do not answer him.”
And [they] came— Elyokim son of Chilkiyoh who was in charge over the palace, Shevno the scribe, and Yoach son of Asaph the recorder— to Chizkiyohu, with torn garments, and they told him Ravshokei’s words.

Chapter 19

And it was when king Chizkiyohu heard [this], that he rent his garments and covered himself with sackcloth, and he came to the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy.
He sent Elyokim who was in charge of the palace, and Shevno the scribe, and the elders of the <i>kohanim</i>, covered with sackcloth, to Yeshayohu the prophet, the son of Amotz.
They said to him, “So has Chizkiyohu said, ‘This is a day of distress, debate, and blasphemy; for the children have come as far as the birth stool but there is no strength to give birth.
Perhaps Adonoy your God will hear all the words of Ravshokei, whom the king of Ashur, his master, sent to blaspheme the living God, and he brought proof with the words that Adonoy your God heard; and may you offer a prayer for the remnant [of Yisroel] that is still here.’”
King Chizkiyohu’s servants came to Yeshayohu.
Yeshayohu said to them, “So shall you say to your master, ‘Thus has Adonoy said, “Do not be frightened by the words that you have heard, that the servants of Ashur’s king blasphemed Me.
Behold, I will imbue him with a desire, and he will hear a rumor and return to his land, and I will strike him down by the sword in his land.”’”
Ravshokei returned and found Ashur’s king waging war against Livnoh, because he heard that he had left Lakish.
He heard about Tirhokoh king of Cush, saying, “He has gone out to wage war against you.” He again sent messengers to Chizkiyohu, saying,
“So shall you say to Chizkiyohu king of Yehudah, saying, ‘Do not let your God in Whom you trust, delude you, saying, “Yerusholayim will not be given into the king of Ashur’s hand.
Behold, you have heard what the kings of Ashur have done to all the lands, to destroy them. [Now] will you be saved?
Did they save them— the gods of the nations whom my forefathers destroyed, Gozan, Choron, Retzeph and the children of Eden which is in Selassor?
Where are the king of Chamos, the king of Arpod, and the king of the city of Sepharvayim? He exiled and twisted them.”’”
Chizkiyohu took the letters from the messengers and read them; he went up to the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy, and Chizkiyohu spread them out before Adonoy.
Chizkiyohu prayed before Adonoy and said, “Adonoy, God of Yisroel, Who dwells [between] the <i>Cheruvim,</i> You alone are the God of all the kingdoms of the earth. You created heaven and earth.
Adonoy, incline Your ear and listen, Adonoy, open Your eyes and see; hear the words of Sancheiriv, who sent him to blaspheme the living God.
Indeed, Adonoy, the kings of Ashur have destroyed the nations and their land.
They have placed their gods into the fire, for they are not gods but the work of man’s hands wood and stone, and they destroyed them.
And now, Adonoy our God, please save us from his hand, so that all the kingdoms of the world will know that You alone are Adonoy, God.”
Yeshayohu son of Amotz sent to Chizkiyohu, saying, “So has Adonoy, God of Yisroel said, ‘Regarding what you prayed to me concerning Sancheiriv, king of Ashur, I have heard.’
This is the word that Adonoy has spoken about him, ‘She has despised you and has mocked you the virgin daughter of Tzion. She has shaken her head at you the daughter of Yerusholayim.
Whom have you insulted and blasphemed, and against Whom have you raised [your] voice? And you have lifted your eyes on high against the Holy One of Yisroel.
Through your messengers you have insulted the LORD, and said, “With my multitude of chariots I have ascended the highest mountains, to the ends of the Levanon, and I will cut down its tallest cedar [trees], its choice cypress [trees], and I will come to its remotest lodge, to its fruitful forest.
I dug and drank strange water, and I dry up with the soles of my feet all rivers of the siege.”
Have you not heard from afar what I did in days of yore, and what I formed? Now I have brought it about and it shall be to make desolate, blossoming hills, and fortified cities.
Their inhabitants were short of strength, crushed and ashamed; they were [like] the grass of the field, and green herbage, like grass on the rooftops, and wind blast before [becoming] standing grain.
Your sitting and your going out and your coming in I know, and your raging against Me.
Because you have raged against Me, and your tumult has ascended into My ears, I will place My ring into your nose and My bit in your lips, and I will make you return by the road on which you came.
And this shall be the sign for you, this year you will eat what grows by itself, and next year, what grows from the tree stumps, and in the third year, sow, harvest, plant vineyards and eat their fruit.
The remaining survivors of the house of Yehudah will continue to take root below, and they will produce fruit above.
For from Yerusholayim shall come out a remnant, and survivors from Mount Tzion; the zeal of Adonoy of Hosts shall do this.
Therefore, so has Adonoy said concerning the king of Ashur, “He will not enter this city, and he will not shoot there an arrow, he will not advance upon it with a shield, and he will not pile up a ramp against it.
By the way he comes he will return, and he will not enter this city,” says Adonoy.
I will protect this city to save it, for My sake and for the sake of My servant, Dovid.’”
And it was that very night, that an angel of Adonoy went out and killed in Ashur’s camp, one hundred and eighty-five thousand [men]. They arose in the morning, and behold, they were all dead corpses.
He left and went away, and he returned—Sancheiriv king of Ashur— and dwelt in Nineveh.
It happened that he was prostrating himself in the temple of Nisroch his god, and Adramelech and Sharetzer, his sons, slew him with a sword, and they fled to the land of Ararat; his son Eisar Chadon reigned in his place.

Chapter 20

In those days Chizkiyohu became deathly ill; Yeshayohu son of Amotz, the prophet, came to him, and said to him, “So has Adonoy said, ‘Instruct your household, for you are going to die, and you will not live.’”
He turned his face to the wall and prayed to Adonoy, saying, 
“Please Adonoy, remember how I walked before You faithfully and wholeheartedly, and I did what is good in Your eyes.” And Chizkiyohu wept profusely.
And it was when Yeshayohu had not gone out of the middle courtyard, and the word of Adonoy came to him, saying.
“Return and say to Chizkiyohu the ruler of My people, ‘So has Adonoy, God of your forefather Dovid said, “I have accepted your prayer; I have seen your tears. Behold, I will heal you; on the third day you will go up to the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy.
I will add fifteen years to your life, and I will save you from the hand of the king of Ashur and this city; I will protect this city for My sake and for the sake of My servant Dovid.’”
And Yeshayohu said, “Take a cake of pressed figs.” They took [it] and placed it on the boil, and it was healed.
Then Chizkiyohu said to Yeshayohu, “What is the sign that Adonoy will heal me, and that I will go up to the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy on the third day?”
And Yeshayohu said, “This is the sign for you from Adonoy, that Adonoy will do what He spoke. Should the shade advance ten steps or should it go back ten steps?”
Chizkiyohu said, “It is easier for the shade to advance ten steps. No, let the shade return ten steps.”
And the prophet Yeshayohu called to Adonoy, and He brought back the shade on the steps that it had gone down on the steps of Achaz, backwards ten steps.
At that time Brodach Baladon son of Baladon king of Bavel, sent letters and a gift to Chizkiyohu for he heard that Chizkiyohu was ill.
Chizkiyohu listened to them, and he showed them his entire treasure house, the silver, the gold, the spices, the fine oil, and the house in which he kept his vessels, and everything that was found in his treasuries; there was nothing that Chizkiyohu did not show them in his palace and in his entire kingdom.
Yeshayohu the prophet came to king Chizkiyohu and said to him, “What did these men say, and from where did they come to you?” And Chizkiyohu said, “They came from a distant land, from Bavel.”
He said, “What did they see in your palace?” And Chizkiyohu said, “They saw everything that is in my palace; there was nothing that I did not show them in my treasuries.”
Yeshayohu said to Chizkiyohu, “Hear the word of Adonoy.
Behold, days are coming when everything will be carried off— that is in your palace and that which your forefathers have accumulated until this day to Bavel; nothing will remain,” said Adonoy.
And some of your sons, who will issue from you, whom you will beget, they will take, and they will be officers in the king of Bavel’s palace.”
Chizkiyohu said to Yeshayohu, “The word of Adonoy that you have spoken is good,” for he said [to himself], “It is not so, that there will be peace and truth in my days?”
The rest of Chizkiyohu’s deeds and all his might, and how he made the pool and the conduit, and brought water into the city, they indeed are written in the book of the chronicles of Yehudah’s kings.
Chizkiyohu lay with his forefathers, and Menashe his son reigned in his place.

Chapter 21

At the age of twelve years Menashe became king, and he reigned in Yerusholayim fifty-five years; his mother’s name was Chephtzi Boh.
He did what was evil in the eyes of Adonoy; like the abominations of the nations that Adonoy had driven out from before the Bnei Yisroel.
He rebuilt the high places that Chizkiyohu, his father, had destroyed, and he erected altars to the Baal; he made an <i>asheiroh</i> as Achov king of Yisroel had made, and he prostrated himself to the entire host of the heavens and worshiped them.
He built altars in the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy, concerning which Adonoy had said, “I will establish My Name in Yerusholayim.”
He built altars for the entire host of the heavens in the two courtyards of the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy.
He passed his own son through fire; he practiced soothsaying and divination, and he consulted necromancers and those who divine by the Yidoa bone; he did much that was evil in the eyes of Adonoy, to provoke [Him].
He placed the graven image of the <i>asheiroh</i> that he made, in the Beis [Hamikdosh] concerning which Adonoy said to Dovid and to his son Shlomo, “In this Beis [Hamikdosh] and in Yerusholayim, which I have chosen from all the tribes of Yisroel, I will establish My Name forever.
And I will not continue to cause Yisroel’s feet to wander from the land that I have given to their forefathers; only if they will observe to act according to all that I have commanded them, and according to the entire Torah that Moshe, My servant, commanded them.”
But they did not listen, and Menashe led them astray, to do more evil than the nations that Adonoy had destroyed from before the Bnei Yisroel.
Adonoy spoke through His servants, the prophets, saying.
“Because Menashe king of Yehudah has committed these abominations, he has acted more wickedly than all the Amorite[s] who were before him, and he caused Yehudah also to sin with his idols.
Therefore, so has Adonoy God of Yisroel said, ‘Behold I am bringing calamity upon Yerusholayim and Yehudah, concerning which the two ears of all those who hear it will ring.
I will stretch over Yerusholayim the measuring line of Shomron and the plumb line of the house of Achov, and I will wipe Yerusholayim as one wipes a dish thoroughly and turns it upside down.
I will forsake the remnant of My heritage, and I will deliver them into the hands of their enemies, and they will become plunder and prey for all their enemies.
Because they did what was evil in my eyes, and they provoked Me, from the day that their forefathers left Egypt until this day.’”
Also, Menashe shed very much innocent blood, until he filled Yerusholayim from one end to the other, besides his sin of causing Yehudah to sin, to do what was evil in the eyes of Adonoy.
The rest of Menashe’s deeds and all that he did, and his sin[s] that he committed, are written in the book of the chronicles of Yehudah’s kings.
Menashe lay with his forefathers and was buried in the garden of his palace, in the garden of Uzza; his son Amon reigned in his place.
Amon was twenty-two years old when he became king, and he reigned two years in Yerusholayim; his mother’s name was Meshulemes daughter of Charutz of Yotvoh.
He did what was evil in the eyes of Adonoy, as Menashe his father had done.
He went in the same way as his father had gone, and he worshiped the pagan deities that his father had worshiped, and he prostrated himself to them.
He forsook Adonoy God of his forefathers, and did not follow in the way of Adonoy.
Amon’s servants conspired against him and assassinated the king in his palace.
The people of the land executed all the conspirators against king Amon; the people of the land appointed his son Yeshayohu in his place.
And the rest of Amon’s deeds that he did, are indeed written in the book of chronicles of Yehudah’s kings.
He buried him in his grave in the garden of Uzza, and his son Yeshayohu reigned in his place.

Chapter 22

Yoshiyahu was eight years old when he became king, and he reigned in Yerusholayim thirty-one years; his mother’s name was Yedidoh daughter of Adoyoh of Botzkas.
He did what was right in the eyes of Adonoy, and he followed in all the way[s] of Dovid his father; he turned away neither right nor left.
And it was in the eighteenth year of king Yoshiyahu, that the king sent Shophon son of Atzalyohu son of Meshullom, the scribe, to the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy, saying, 
“Go up [and tell] Chilkiyohu the <i>kohein</i> <i>gadol</i> that he should gather all the silver that was brought to the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy, which the custodians of the utensils collected from the people.
Let them deliver it into the hands of the supervisors of the work, who are appointed in the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy, and they should give it to the workers who are in the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy, to repair the damage of the Beis [Hamikdosh].
To the carpenters, to the builders, and to the masons; to buy wood and quarried stones to repair the Beis [Hamikdosh].
However, no reckoning should be made with them of the silver that is given into their hand, for they deal honestly.”
Chilkiyohu the <i>kohein gadol</i> said to Shophon the scribe, “I have found the Torah Scroll in the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy,” and Chilkiyoh gave the Scroll to Shophon, and he read it.
Shophon the scribe came to the king and brought back word to the king, and said, “Your servants have melted the silver that was found in the Beis [Hamikdosh], and they have given it into the hand[s] of the supervisors of the work who were appointed over the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy.
Shophon the scribe told the king, saying, “Chilkiyoh the kohein gave me a Scroll; and Shophon read it before the king.
And it was when the king heard the words of the Torah Scroll, that he rent his garments.
The king commanded Chilkiyoh the <i>kohein</i>, Achikom son of Shophon, Achbor son of Michoyoh, Shophon the scribe, and Asoyoh the king’s servant, saying,
“Go, inquire of Adonoy on my behalf, on behalf of the people, and on behalf of all of Yehudah regarding the words of this Scroll which has been found; for great is the wrath of Adonoy which is kindled against us because our fathers did not observe the words of this Scroll, to do according to all that is written for us.”
And they went— Chilkiyohu the <i>kohein</i>, Achikom, Achbor, Shophon and Asoyoh to Chuldoh the prophetess, the wife of Shallum son of Tikvoh son of Charchas, the keeper of the garments, and she was sitting in Yerusholayim in the study house, and they spoke to her.
She said to them, “So has Adonoy, God of Yisroel said, ‘Say to the man who sent you to me.
So has Adonoy said, ‘Behold, I am bringing a calamity upon this place and upon its inhabitants, all the words of the Scroll that the king of Yehudah read.
Because they have forsaken Me and have burned incense to the gods of others, in order to provoke Me with all their deeds, My wrath is kindled against this place, and it will not be extinguished.’
And concerning the king of Yehudah who has sent you to inquire of Adonoy, so shall you say to him, ‘So has Adonoy God of Yisroel said, “The words are what you heard.
Because your heart has become soft, and you have humbled yourself before Adonoy when you heard what I spoke concerning this place and its inhabitants, to become a desolation and a curse, and you rent your garments and wept before Me; I, too, have heard,’ says Adonoy.
Therefore, behold, I gather you in to your forefathers, and you will be gathered into your grave in peace; your eyes will not see any of the calamity that I am bringing upon this place.” And they brought back word to the king.

Chapter 23

The king summoned, and they assembled before him all the elders of Yehudah and Yerusholayim.
The king went up to the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy, and all the people of Yehudah and all the inhabitants of Yerusholayim were with him, and the <i>kohanim</i> and the prophets, and all the people from small to great, and he read in their ears all the words of the Scroll of the Covenant that was found in the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy.
The king stood at his place, and enacted the Covenant before Adonoy, to follow Adonoy and to observe His commandments, His testimonies, and His statutes with all [their] heart and soul, to fulfill the words of this Covenant, which are written in this Scroll; and all the people accepted the Covenant.
The king instructed Chilkiyohu the <i>kohein gadol</i>, the <i>kohanim </i>of the second rank and the gatekeepers, to remove from the Temple of Adonoy all the utensils that were made for the Baal, for the <i>asheiroh</i>, and for the entire host of the heavens; and he burned them outside Yerusholayim in the plains of Kidron, and he carried their ashes to Beis Eil.
He abolished the pagan priests who the kings of Yehudah had appointed and who had burned incense on the high places in the cities of Yehudah and the surrounding areas of Yerusholayim, and those who burned incense to the Baal, to the sun, to the moon, and to the constellations, and to all the host of the heavens.
He removed the <i>asheiroh</i> from the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy to the Kidron Valley outside of Yerusholayim, and he burned it in the Kidron Valley and he ground it into dust; he threw its dust on the graves of the people.
He demolished the houses devoted to pagan worship that were in the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy, where the women would weave coverings for the <i>asheiroh</i>.
He brought all the priests from the towns of Yehudah, and he defiled the high places where the priests burned incense, from Geva to Be’er Sheva; he demolished the high places near the gates that were at the entrance of the gate of Yehoshua the governor of the city, which was on a person’s left [upon entering] the city gate.
However, the priests of the high places were not [permitted] to ascend the altar of Adonoy in Yerusholayim; they would eat <i>matzohs</i> among their brethren.
He defiled the Tophes which was in the Valley of Ben Hinom, so that no man would pass his son or daughter through the fire to the Molech.
He abolished the horses that the kings of Yehudah had dedicated to the sun, from the entrance of the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy to the chamber of Neson Melech, the eunuch who was in the outskirts, and he burned the chariots of the sun in fire.
The altars that were on the roof of the upper chamber of Achaz which the kings of Yehudah had made, and the altars that Menashe had made in the two courtyards of the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy, the king demolished; he quickly removed them from there and threw their dust into the Kidron Valley.
And the high places that were facing Yerusholayim, that were on the right of Har Hamashchis, which Shlomo king of Yisroel had built for Ashtores the abomination of the Tzidonim, and for Chemosh the abomination of Moav, and for Milkom the abomination of the children of Amon, the king defiled.
He smashed the monuments, and cut down the <i>asheirim</i>, and he filled their place with human bones.
Also, the altar that was in Beis Eil, the high place that Yorovom son of Nevot made, with which he caused Yisroel to sin, also that altar and the high place he demolished, and he burned the high place; he ground it into dust and burned the<i> asheiroh</i>.
Yoshiyahu turned and saw the graves that were there on the mountain, and he sent [people] and took the bones out of the graves, and he burned them on the altar and defiled it; according to the word of Adonoy that the man of God had proclaimed, who had foretold these events.
And he said, “What is this marker that I see?” And the people of the city said to him, “It is the grave of the man of God who came from Yehudah and foretold things that you have done on the altar of Beis Eil.”
And he said, “Leave it alone. Let no one move his bones.” They spared his bones with the bones of the prophet who came from Shomron.
And also all the temples of the high places in the cities of Shomron, that Yisroel’s kings had made to anger [Adonoy], Yoshiyahu removed, and he did to them like all the deeds he had done in Beis Eil.
He slaughtered all the priests of the high places who were there on the altars, and he burned human bones upon them, and then he returned to Yerusholayim.
The king commanded all the people, saying, “Offer a Pesach sacrifice to Adonoy you God, as written in the Book of the Covenant.”
For such a Pesach sacrifice had not been offered since the time of the Judges who judged Yisroel, and all the days of the kings of Yisroel and the kings of Yehudah.
Except in the eighteenth year of king Yoshiyahu, this Pesach sacrifice was offered to Adonoy, in Yerusholayim.
Also, the necromancers and those who divine by the Yidoa bone and the <i>teraphim</i> and the idols, and all the abominations that were seen in the land of Yehudah and in Yerusholayim, Yoshiyahu abolished, in order to fulfill the words of the Torah which were written in the Scroll that Chilkiyohu the <i>kohein</i> had found [in] the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy.
Before him there was never a king like him, who returned to Adonoy with all his heart, with all his soul, and with all his possessions, according to the entire Torah of Moshe, and after him no one arose like him.
However, Adonoy did not turn back from His great wrath, His wrath that was kindled against Yehudah, because of all the provocations with which Menashe had provoked Him.
Adonoy said, “Yehudah, too, I will remove from My Presence, as I have removed Yisroel, and I will reject this city which I have chosen, Yerusholayim, and the Beis [Hamikdosh] of which I said, ‘My Name will be there.’”
The rest of the deeds of Yoshiyahu and all that he did, are written in the book of the chronicles of Yehudah’s kings.
In his days, Paroh Neko king of Egypt went up against the king of Ashur by the Euphrates River; King Yoshiyahu went toward him, and he [Paroh Neko] killed him in Megiddo when he saw him.
His servants transported him; dead, from Megiddo, they brought him to Yerusholayim, and buried him in his grave. The people of the land took Yehoachaz son of Yoshiyahu, anointed him, and made him king in place of his father.
Yehoachaz was twenty-three years old when he became king, and he reigned three months in Yerusholayim; his mother’s name was Chamutal daughter of Yirmiyahu of Livnoh.
He did what was evil in the eyes of Adonoy, like all that his forefathers had done.
Paroh Neko imprisoned him in Rivloh in the land of Chamos, [to prevent him] from reigning in Yerusholayim; he imposed a fine on the land [consisting] of one hundred talents of silver and a talent of gold.
Paroh Neko crowned Elyokim son of Yoshiyahu in place of his father Yoshiyahu, and he changed his name to Yehoyakim. He took Yehoachaz [captive], and came back to Egypt; and [Yehoachaz] died there.
Yehoyakim gave the silver and gold to Paroh, but he assessed the land in order to give the silver that Paroh had demanded; each one according to his assessment, he exacted the silver and gold from the people of the land to give to Paroh Neko.
Yehoyakim was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned eleven years in Yerusholayim; his mother’s name was Zevudoh daughter of Pedoyoh of Rumoh.
He did what was evil in the eyes of Adonoy, like all that his forefathers had done.

Chapter 24

In his days, Nevuchadnetzar king of Bavel went up, and Yehoyakim became his vassal for three years, then he turned against him and rebelled.
Adonoy incited against him bands of Kasdim, bands of Aromeans, bands of Moavites, and bands of the children of Ammon, and he incited them against Yehudah to destroy it, according to the word of Adonoy which He had spoken through His servants, the prophets.
Indeed, it was by the order of Adonoy against Yehudah to remove [them] from His Presence, because of the sins of Menashe, according to all that he had done.
And also [because of] the innocent blood that he had shed, and he had filled Yerusholayim with innocent blood, and Adonoy did not want to forgive.
The rest of the deeds of Yehoyakim and all that he did are written in the book of the chronicles of Yehudah’s kings.
Yehoyakim lay with his forefathers, and Yehoyachin his son reigned in his place.
The king of Egypt no longer left his land, for the king of Bavel had taken from the River of Egypt until the Euphrates River all [the territory] that belonged to the king of Egypt.
Yehoyachin was eighteen years old when he became king and he reigned three months in Yerusholayim; his mother’s name was Nechushta daughter of Elnoson of Yerusholayim.
And he did what was evil in the eyes of Adonoy like all that his father had done.
At that time, Nevuchadnetzar’s servants went up against Yerusholayim and the city came under siege.
Nevuchadnetzar king of Bavel came to the city, while his servants were besieging it.
Yehoyachin, king of Yehudah came out to the king of Bavel, he, his mother his servants his officers and his warriors; and Bavel’s king took him [captive] in the eighth year of his reign.
He removed from there all the treasures of the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy and the treasures of the king’s palace; and he stripped off all the golden decorations that Shlomo king of Yisroel had made in the Temple of Adonoy, as Adonoy had spoken.
He exiled all of Yerusholayim, all the officers, and all the mighty warriors, ten thousand exiles, and all the craftsmen and gatekeepers; no one remained except for the poorest of the people of the land.
He exiled Yehoyachin to Bavel; and the king’s mother, the king’s wives, his officers and the dignitaries of the land, he led into exile from Yerusholayim to Bavel.
All the military men, seven thousand, and the craftsmen and the gatekeepers, one thousand, all mighty warriors, the king of Bavel brought them into exile, to Bavel.
The king of Bavel crowned Matanyoh his [Yehoyachin’s] uncle in his place, and changed his name to Tzidkiyohu.
Tzidkiyohu was twenty-one years old when he became king, and he reigned twenty-one years in Yerusholayim; his mother’s name was Chamutal daughter of Yirmiyahu from Livnoh.
He did what was evil in the eyes of Adonoy, like all that Yehoyakim had done.
Indeed, the wrath of Adonoy was against Yerusholayim and Yehudah until He cast them away from before His Presence; Tzidkiyohu rebelled against the king of Bavel.

Chapter 25

It was in the ninth year of his [Tzidkiyohu’s] reign, in the tenth month, on the tenth of the month, that Nevuchadnetzar king of Bavel came, he and his entire army, against Yerusholayim and encamped near it, built siege towers around it.
The city came under siege until the eleventh year of king Tzidkiyohu.
On the ninth of the [fourth] month, the famine in the city became severe, and the people of the land had no food.
The city [wall] was breached, and all the men of war [fled] at night by way of the gate between the two walls that was near the king’s garden; the Kasdim were surrounding the city, and he [Tzidkiyohu] went by way of the Arovoh.
The army of the Kasdim pursued the king, and they overtook him on the plains of Yericho, and his entire army scattered [and left] him.
They seized the king and brought him up to the king of Bavel, at Rivloh, and called him to account.
They slaughtered Tzidkiyohu’s children before his eyes, and they blinded Tzidkiyohu’s eyes, and bound him in chains and brought him to Bavel.
In the fifth month, on the seventh of the month, which was the nineteenth year of Nevuchadnetzar king of Bavel, Nevuzaradon came—the chief executioner, servant of the king of Bavel—to Yerusholayim.
He burned the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy and the king’s palace, and all of Yerusholayim’s houses, and all the houses of the dignitaries he burned in fire.
The walls surrounding Yerusholayim were demolished by the entire army of Kasdim that was with the chief executioner.
The remnant of the people who remained in the city, and the defectors who defected to the king of Bavel, and the rest of the population, Nevuzaradon the chief executioner sent into exile.
Some of the poorest of the land were left over by the chief executioner to be workers in vineyards and farmers.
The copper pillars that were in the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy and the bases and the copper sea that was in the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy, the Kasdim shattered, and they carried off their copper to Bavel.
The pots, shovels, musical instruments, spoons, and all the copper vessels with which they served, they took away.
The firepans and the bowls, whether of gold or of silver, the chief executioners took away.
The two pillars, the one sea, and the stands that Shlomo had made for the Beis [Hamikdosh] of Adonoy; there was no weight for the copper of all these vessels.
The height of one pillar was eighteen <i>amohs</i>  and there was a crown of copper upon it, the height of the crown was three <i>amohs</i>, and a netting and pomegranates on the crown around, all was of copper; the second pillar had the same [ornaments] on the netting.
The chief executioner took Seroyoh the chief <i>kohein</i>, and Tzephanyohu the deputy <i>kohein</i>, and the three gatekeepers.
And from the city he took one officer who was in charge of the men of war, and five men of those who saw the king’s face, who were found in the city, and the scribe of the general of the army, who would muster out the people of the land, and sixty men of the people of the land who were found in the city.
Nevuzaradon the chief executioner took them and brought them to the king of Bavel, to Rivloh.
The king of Bavel struck them down and killed them in Rivloh in the land of Chamos, and Yehudah was exiled from its land.
And [for] the people who remained in the land of Yehudah whom Nevuchadnetzar king of Bavel had left over, he appointed over them Gedalyohu son of Achikom, son of Shophon.
And all the officers of the armies heard, they and the men, that the king of Bavel had appointed Gedalyohu, and they came to Gedalyohu to Mitzpoh, with Yishmoeil son of Nesanyoh, Yochonon son of Koreiach, Seroyoh son of Tanchumes of Netophes, and Yaazneyohu son of the Maachasi, they and their men.
Gedalyohu swore to them and to their men, and said to them, “Do not fear the servants of the Kasdim; settle in the land and serve the king of Bavel and it will be well for you.”
And it was in the seventh month that there came Yishmoeil son of Nesanyoh, son of Elishomo of the royal family, with ten men, and they struck down Gedalyohu and he died, along with the Jews and the Kasdim who were with him at Mitzpoh.
All the people got up young and old, and the army officers and came to Egypt, because they were afraid of the Kasdim.
And it was in the thirty-seventh year of the exile of Yehoyachin king of Yehudah, in the twelfth month, on the twenty-seventh day of the month, that Evil Merodach king of Bavel elevated in the year of his coronation Yehoyachin king of Yehudah [and released him] from prison.
He spoke kindly with him, and placed his throne above the throne of the kings who were with him in Bavel.
He changed his prison clothing, and he ate meals before him regularly, for the rest of his life.
His food allowance was a regular allowance, given to him from the king, each day’s need on its day, for the rest of his life.