Shemot Rabbah
שמות רבה
merged
http://www.sefaria.org/Shemot_Rabbah
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-http://www.sefaria.org
-Soncino Midrash Rabbah
-book

Chapter 1

...And these are the names of the Sons of Israel that came into Egypt with Yaakov, every man came with his household – There it is written (Mishlei 13, 24): “He who spares the rod hates his son; but he who loves him discipline shim in his youth.” Ordinarily in the world, if a person says to his friend:  “So-and-so hit your son”, he would be ready to reduce his livelihood. And why is it taught “ He who spares the rod hates his son”?! In order to teach you, that anyone who refrains from disciplining his son in the end causes him to fall into evil ways and will hate him.  This is what we have found with Yishmael, who behaved wickedly on Avraham his father but did not rebuke him, with the result that he fell into evil ways and he hated him and he left from his house with nothing. What did Yishmael do when he was fifteen years old? He started to bring idols from the market and he would play with them and worship them as he had seen others do, immediately (Bereishit 21, 9) “And Sarah saw the son of  the Egyptian Hagar that she had given birth for Avraham was fooling around etc…”  And there is no fooling except for idol worship, like that it says (Shemot 32,6): And they rose up to fool around. Immediately (Bereishit 21,10): And she said to Avraham , Send out this maid-servant and her son, perhaps my son will learn from him. Immediately, (Bereishit 21,11) And this thing was very bad in the eyes of Avraham etc...on account of his son because he had become evil. (Bereshit 21,12) And G-d said to Avraham, do not let it be evil in your eyes etc... From here you can learn, that Avraham was secondary to Sarah in prophecy, following on, (Bereishit 21,14): And Avraham got up in the morning and he took bread and a bottle of water, to teach you, that he hated Yishmael because of his evil ways, and sent him and his mother Hagar empty-handed and expelled them from his house because of this. Do you really think that Avraham, of whom it is written (Bereishit 13,2): And Avraham was very rich in cattle etc... that he would send his wife and his son from his house empty-handed, without clothes or means of a livelihood?! Rather, this is to teach you, since he turned evil, he stopped thinking about him. What was his end? After he had been expelled, he sat at the cross-roads and was a bandit, as it says (Bereishit 16,12): And he was a wild man. And similar to this (Bereishit 25,28): And Yitzchak loved Esav, therefore he turned to evil ways, because he was not rebuked, like we were taught: Five transgressions the evil Esav transgressed on that day: He seduced an engaged lady, and killed a man, denied resurrection, and rejected the fundamentals of religion and spurned his birthright, that he desired the death of his father, and sought to kill his brother, as it says (Bereishit 27,41):May the days of mourning for my father be brought close etc.. And he forced Ya'acov to flee from his father. And he even went with Yishmael, to learn from his evil ways and to add to his wives, as it says (Bereshit 28,9): And Esav went to Yishmael. Similarly with David, that he did not rebuke or chastise his son Avshalom, he turned to evil ways and sought to kill his father, and he lay with concubines, and becoming the cause if his wandering, bare-footed and crying, and many thousands and myriads of Israelites were slaughtered, and he caused much suffering upon them which did not end. As it is written (Psalms 3,1): A song of David, when he fled from Avshalom his son, just as it was written after (Psalms 3,2) How great in number have my enemies become etc...
.....
And these are the names of the Children of Israel who came to Egypt, Jacob and his sons, each man and his household came - Israel is comparable to the multitude of the heavens, here it is said names, and it is said of stars names, as it is said (Psalms 147:4): "He counteth the number of the stars; He giveth them all their names," even the Holy One Blessed is He, when Israel descended to Egypt, counted how many they were, and because they are compared to the stars, He gave them all names, as it is written: "And these are the names of the Children of Israel, etc."







...And when the Israelite women conceived, they would return to their homes. When they were about to go into labor, the women would go out into the fields and give birth in the apple orchards, as it is written: "I woke you under the apple [tree]" (Song of Songs 8:5). And the Lord Blessed be He would send an angel from the heavens who cleaned them and made them beautiful, just as a new mother grooms her infant, as it is written: "And as for your birth, on the day you were born..." (Ezekiel 16:4), and He grants them two round cakes, one of oil and the other of honey, as it is written: "And He [God] suckled Him [ The Children of Israel] with honey from the rock..." (Deuteronomy 32:13). And as soon as the Egyptians would become aware of this, they sought to kill them. And a miracle happened, and the cihldren were swallowed up by the earth, and bulls would come and plow the ground above them, as it is written: "Upon my back the plowers plowed" (Psalms 129:3). And once the Egyptians would pass, the infants would rise up from the mud like grass from the field, as it is written: "I have made you grow like the plantlings in the field..." (Ezekiel 16:7) And when the babes grew, they would flock to their homes in great droves, as it says: "And you came in all your finest and dressiest," (Ezekiel 16:7) - do not read "finest and dressiest" but rather "flocked in droves." And when the Lord Blessed be He revealed Himself at the Sea of Reeds, they were the first to recognize Him instantly, as it says: "THIS is my God, and I will praise Him." (Exodus 15:2). 




"And there went a man of the house of Levi" - Where did he go? R. Judah b. Zebina said: "He went with his daughter's advice." We are taught: Amram was the greatest man in his generation, etc. (above). "And took a daughter of Levi" - It did not say "and took back," but rather, "and took." R. Judah b. Zebina said: "This means that he acted toward her as if it was their first marriage; he placed her upon the litter, and Miriam and Aaron danced before them, and the ministering angels said (Ps. 113:9): 'The joyful mother of children.'" "A daughter of Levi" - How can this be? She was one hundred thirty years old and he calls her "a daughter"?! As R. Hama b. Hanina said: "She was Jochebed; she was conceived on the way [to Egypt] and born between the walls, as it says (Num. 26:59): 'Who was born to Levi in Egypt' - born in Egypt but not conceived. Thus he calls her "a daughter." R. Judah b. Zebina said: "Because the signs of virginity were reborn in her."


"And his sister stood back" - Why did Miriam stand back? Rabbi Amram said in the name of Rav: "Because Miriam had prophesied: 'In the future, my mother will give birth to a son who will save Israel'.  When Moses was born, the whole house was filled with light; her father rose and kissed her on the head.  He said to her: 'My daughter! Your prophecy has come to pass' - as it is written [Exodus 15:20]: 'And Miriam the prophetess, sister of Aaron, took up the timbrel.'  [Why was she called] 'Sister of Aaron,' and not 'sister of Moses'?!  Because when she issued her prophecy, she was [only] the sister of Aaron - Moses had not been born yet.  When she cast him into the Nile, her mother rose and struck her on the head. She said: 'My daughter! What has become of your prophecy?!'  This is why it is written 'his sister stood back etc.': in order to know would become of her prophecy.  And our rabbis taught: This entire verse speaks [not of Miriam, but] of the Holy Spirit.  'And she stood...' refers to 'The LORD came and stood...' [I Samuel 3:10]; '[His] sister' refers to 'Say to Wisdom: "You are my sister"' [Proberbs 7:4].  'Back' refers to 'The Lord appeared to me from far back' [Jeremiah 31:3].  'In order to know what would happen to him' refers to 'For the LORD is a God of knowledge.' [I Samuel 2:3]".



"And the child (Moses) grew" - Twenty four months she nursed him, and you say "and the child grew"?! Rather he grew, not in the way of the [rest] land. “And she brought him to the daughter of Pharaoh…” The daughter of Pharaoh would kiss and hug and adore him (Moses) as if he were her own son, and she would not take him out of the king’s palace. And because [Moses] was so beautiful, everyone yearned to see him. One that would see him would not leave his presence. And it was that Pharaoh would kiss him (Moses) and hug him, and he would remove Pharaoh’s crown and place it on his own head, as he would do to him in the future when he was great. And just as the Holy One Blessed is He said to Hiram (Ezekiel 28:18), “…I have brought fire from within you, it will consume you…”, similarly the daughter of Pharaoh raised the one who would punish her father in the future. And even the anointed king, that is destined to punish Edom, sits among them in their [own] province, as it says (Isaiah 27:10) “…there shall the calf (the Messiah) graze and there lie down and destroy its branches.” And some of the observers sitting among them were the magicians of Egypt that said, “We are wary of this, that he is taking your crown and placing it on his head, that he not be the one we say (i.e. prophesy) that will take the kingship from you.” Some said to kill him, and some said to burn him. And Jethro was sitting among them and said to them, “This child has no intent [to take the throne]. Rather, test him by bringing in a bowl [a piece of] gold and a coal. If he outstretches his hand towards the gold, [surely] he has intent [to take the throne], and you should kill him. And if he outstretches his hand towards the coal, he [surely] does not have intent [to take the throne], and he does not deserve the death penalty.” They immediately brought the bowl before him (Moses), and he outstretched his hand to take the gold, and Gabriel came and pushed his (Moses’) hand, and he grabbed the coal. He then brought his hand along with the coal into his mouth and burned his tongue, and from this was made (Exodus 4:10) “slow of speech and slow of tongue.” “And she called his name ‘Moshe’” – From here you can learn about the merit of those that perform acts of kindness. Even though Moses had many names, the only name that was set throughout the Torah, was the name that Bathyah daughter of Pharaoh called him. Even the Holy One Blessed is He did not call him by another name.   

Chapter 2


Our teachers have said: Once, while Moses our Teacher was tending [his father-in-law] Yitro’s sheep, one of the sheep ran away. Moses ran after it until it reached a small, shaded place. There, the lamb came across a pool and began to drink. As Moses approached the lamb, he said, “I did not know you ran away because you were thirsty. You are so exhausted!” He then put the lamb on his shoulders and carried him back. The Holy One said, “Since you tend the sheep of human beings with such overwhelming love - by your life, I swear you shall be the shepherd of My sheep, Israel.”...

Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5

13. And Aaron spoke all the words (Ex. 4:30).  He did as God commanded.  And he will speak for thee unto the people (4:16).  And he did the signs in the sight of the people, which God had told him previously to do.  And the people believed.  They did as God had said: And they shall hearken to your voice (3:18).  Do not conclude that they believed after they had seen signs

Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Another explanation: For I have hardened his heart - Rabbi Yochanan said: Does this not provide heretics with an opportunity to open their mouths to say that he had no means of repenting, as it say "For I have hardened his heart". Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said to him: Let the mouths of the heretics be stopped up. Rather, (Mishlei 3:34) If it concerns the scorners, he scorns them. When the Holy One Blessed be He warns a man once, twice, thrice and he doesn't repent, and G-d will close his heart against repentance so that He should not exact vengeance from him for his sins. So to with the wicked Pharaoh, since Hashem sent five times to him and he took no notice, G-d then said: "You have stiffened your neck and hardened your heart; well, I will add impurity to your impurity". Hence, "For I have hardened his heart". What does "I have hardened" imply? That G-d made his heart like a liver (כבד) into which even if boiled a second time no juice enters; so also was the heart of Pharaoh made like a liver, and he did not receive the words of G-d. Hence, "For I have hardened his heart". 

Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18

In trying to reconcile the statement "At midnight the Lord smote all the first born in the land of Egypt" with the contradictory statement "On that day I smote all the first born of Egypt" (numbers 3:13) Rabbi Yohana construed that the latter verse as theEgyyptian god in heaven by day and the former verse as the earthly Egyptians at night. 
Bitiah, the daughter of Pharoah was a first born. By what merit did she escape death? Through the merit of Moses' prayer for her. She perceived that Moses was a shield to her and her lamp did not go out at the night of watching.

Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21










"And the Children of Israel came into the Sea on the Land" - If they were in the sea, why "on the Land," and if on land why "into the Sea?" Rather, from here you learn that the sea was not split for them [, the Children of Israel] until they came into it [, the Sea,] up until their noses, and only afterwards [the Sea was torn asunder and] they had dry land [in the middle]. Explained Rabbi Nehorai: If a Daughter of Israel was crossing [in the dry land created by the absence of the] Sea, and her child was in her hand, and she cried and stretched out her hand, she could reach into the Sea and grab an apple or pomegranate to give to him, as it says: (Tehillim 106:9) "And he led them in the depths as he did in the desert" - just as in the desert, they lacked nothing, so too in the "depths" they lacked nothing. And this [, that God provided for them in the desert], is the meaning of what Moshe told them (Devarim 2:7): "These forty years, God has been with you, and you have not lacked a single thing" - Nothing was lacking as all they had to do was call out for an object, and it appeared in front of them. Rabbi Shimon said: Even speech was not required, rather one simply had to think of an object, and it appeared for him, as it says (Tehillim 78:18): "And they tested God in their hearts to ask food to their cravings." Another derivation: They did not lack anything, except for one thing: Repentance [for testing God] as it says (Hoshea 14:3): "Takes for yourselves things and return to God."

Chapter 22



Chapter 23




Another interpretation: "And then [az] Moses sang" (Ex. 15:1). As it says: "Her mouth opened in wisdom and the law of kindness is on her tongue" (Proverbs 31:26). From the day that the Holy Blessed One created the world until the Israelites stood on the Sea, we do not find any human offer a song to the Holy Blessed One except Israel. God created Adam, and he did not offer a song; God saved Abraham from the fiery furnace and the kings, and he did not offer a song; and Isaac from the knife and he did not offer a song; and Jacob from the angel and from Esau and from the people of Shechem and he did not offer a song; when the Israelites came to the Sea, and it split for them, they immediately sang a song before the Holy Blessed One, as it says "And then Moses and the Israelites sang" which is "Her mouth opened in wisdom." The Holy Blessed One said: for these I have been waiting. And there is not 'az' [then] except happiness, as it says: "Then was our mouth filled with laughter" (Psalms 126:2). Rabbi Yehuda son of Pazi said: What did the Israelites see to sing a song with an 'az'? Rather they said: originally the Sea was dry land, and the generation of Enoch arose and angered God with an 'az', as it says: "Then men began to call upon the name of God" (Gen. 4:26). And the Holy Blessed One made it a see, and plundered them, as it says: "That calls for the waters of the sea, And pours them out upon the face of the earth" (Amos 5:8, 9:6), and then it was a sea and became dry land for us, as it says: "And the Israelites walked upon dry land in the midst of the sea" (Ex. 14:29), we will praise God with an 'az' for God switched the sea to dry land, this is "Then [az] Moses and the Israelites sang," and there is no 'az' except the meaning of trust, as it says: "Then [az] you shall walk in your way securely" (Proverbs 3:23).

Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29



Chapter 30

"These are the laws..." - That's is what is written, (Psalms 99:4) "The King is mighty, He loves justice (lit. law)." When is might given to the Holy One, blessed be He? When He does justice to the gentiles. For so was it manifest at Nebuchadnezzar the wicked, because he became haughty and said, (Daniel 4:27) "Is this Babylon not great?" The Holy One, blessed be He, said to him, "Wicked one! You, putrid spit, become haughty and say, (ibid.) "The strength of my power and the honor of my majesty"? [Do you] not know that all is Mine? Greatness is mine! Power is Mine! Honor is Mine! Majesty is Mine! So did David say, (I Chronicles 29:11) "To You, O God, is greatness, and strength, and majesty..." And he says, (Psalms 104:1) "God, my God, You are very great..." Said the Holy One, blessed be He to Nebuchadnezzar, "The little kingship given to you is Mine." And so Daniel said to him, (Daniel 2:37) "For the God of heaven has given you a kingdom, power, strength, and glory." - And you say 'the strength of my power and the honor of my majesty'?! Really, "the King is mighty, He loves justice", the might of the king of all kings, the Holy One, blessed be He, Who loves justice and gave it to Israel Whom He loves. And that which is written, (Psalms 99:4) "You have established fairness" - you have established fairness for your those who love you. For through the laws you gave them, they fight each other, and come for judgement, and then they make peace. Israel said before the Holy One, blessed be He: Master of the world! Until when will You withhold judgment from the gentiles? [God] said to them: When their iniquities fully ripen, as it says (Isaiah 27:2) "In that day, chant about the fruitful vineyard!" Does anyone pick his vineyard before it is fully ripe?! Rather after it is ripe, he picks it and puts it into the vat, and then he treads on it [to press it] and sings, and they chant responsively. So did the Holy One, blessed be He, say to Israel: Wait for Me, until Edom's iniquities become [ripe], and I will tread on it, as it states, (Psalms 60:10) "On Edom I toss My sandal." I will open for you and you will respond after me. Therefore it says (Isaiah 27:2) "In that day, chant about the fruitful vineyard!" and (Isaiah 27:3) "I the Lord guard it, I water it every moment." I am the one who watches over her to make her drink many cups, as it says, ‘I water it every moment.’ If I but come and glance at them, I obliterate them from the world, but "Anger is not in Me," (Isaiah 27:4) but they are filled with anger against My children. But what will I do to them? "I step forward and set them all on fire" (ibid.). Rabbi Levi said: God said to the idolators: ' Israel is Mine, as it says, "For the children of Israel are Mine as servants  (Leviticus 25:55), and anger is Mine, as it says, "God avenges and is the master of wrath" (Nahum 1:2), and you are filled with what is Mine against Mine?!’ As it says, Who will give me thorns and thistles will be at war! (Isaiah 27:4) Our Rabbis said that God said to them: ' If I were to change My measured way of Judgment, I would obliterate  them in a single flash of lighting, as it says, "If I sharpen (or, 'change') the flash of My sword" (Deut. 32:41) But what do I do? "My hand grabs hold of Justice'  (ibid). It also says, "Or let him take hold of My strength (Isaiah 27:5), and 'My strength' means Judgment, as it says, "And strength to the king who loves Justice." (Psalms. 99:4) God said to Israel, ‘Just as I could overstep the bounds of judgment on the idolators, but I do not overstep them but hold on to judgment, so too, you must not go out of the bounds of judgment,’ as it says, "And these are the laws."

Chapter 31



Chapter 32



Chapter 33



Chapter 34



Chapter 35



Chapter 36



Chapter 37



Chapter 38




Another explanation for zeh hadavar: “Take with you words. . .”(d’varim, Ho 14:3). This is what is meant by what is written: “I wash my palms with cleanliness and circle your altar, Yahh, to voice thanks aloud and to tell of all your miracles.” (Ps 26:6f) One might also offer bulls and rams, but exegesis says to voice thanks aloud. Accordingly, Jews say, “Ribon HaOlam (“master of the universe”), leaders sin and bring and bring a korban (“offering”) and it atones for them. The mashiach sins and brings a korban and it atones for him. We, we have no korban.” He said to them: “And if all the congregation of Yisrael stray–and the matter is hidden from the eyes of the community–and they are guilty of doing one of the negative commandments of Yahh, then, if the sin guilt for which they sinned becomes known, the community shall offer a bull of the herd as a sin offering.”(Lev 4:13f) They say to him, “We are poor and we have not what to bring for korbanot.” He says to them, “Words, I request, as it is said, ‘Take with you words and return to Yahh’ and I annul all your misdeeds.” These words are none other than divrey Torah, as it is said, “These are the d’varim that Moshe spoke to all Yisrael.(Dt 1:1) They said to him, “We do not know.” He said to them, “Weep and pray before me and I accept it. Your ancestors, when they were enslaved in Mitsrayim, it wasn’t for prayer that I redeemed them, as it is said, ‘The B’neiYisrael groaned from the work and cried out.’(Ex 2:23)In the days of Y’hoshua it wasn’t for prayer that I made miracles for them, as it is said, ‘Y’hoshua tore his garment and fell on his face before the ark of Yahh till evening.’(Jos 7:6) So what did I say to him? ‘Hold out the spear which is in your hand towards The Ai, for I give it into your hand.’(Jos 8:18) In the days of the Judges, with weeping I heard their outcry, as it is said, ‘It happened, when the B’neiYisrael cried out to Yahh on account of Midyan.’(Ju 6:7) In the days of Sh’muel it was not in prayer that I heard them, as it is said, ‘Sh’muel cried out to Yahh on behalf of Yisrael and Yahh responded to him.’(Sam 7:9) And similarly the men of Y’rushalayim, even though they had angered me, because they wept before me I had mercy on them, as it is said, ‘For thus said Yahh, “Sing out joy to Ya’akov. . .”(Jer 31:7) Oh, I request from you not sacrifices and not korbanot but words, as it is said, ‘Take with you words. . .’ This is why David said, ‘I wash my hands with cleanliness’ not intending to make an offering but to voice thanks aloud, for I am thankful to you for divrey Torah.