Jerusalem Talmud Chagigah
תלמוד ירושלמי חגיגה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Jerusalem Talmud Chagigah



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Halakhah 1



Halakhah 2


Initially there was no dispute in Israel except regarding semicha [laying on of hands to an animal about to be sacrificed]. Hillel and Shammai made them four [disputes]. When the disciples of Shammai and Hillel became numerous, and did not attend to their masters as much as necessary, and disputes multiplied in Israel they divided into two groups, one declaring things impure and the other declaring them pure.  And this shall never return to its proper place until the arrival of the son of David. [i.e., the Messiah].

Halakhah 3





A story [with legal significance] is told of Hillel the Elder, who brought his [animal for a] burnt offering to the Temple and performed semicha upon it. Students of Beit Shammai gathered around him so he began swaying the animal's tail back and forth and said to them "look, it is a female and brought as a shelamim sacrifice!" He distracted them with words, and they went away. After several days, Beit Shammai gained the upper hand and wished to establish the law [of semicha] in accordance with their view, but there was one among them named Bava ben Butah, who was of the students of Beit Shammai, and he knew the law was in accordance with Beit Hillel. One time he entered the Temple courtyard [on yom tov] and saw it was desolate. He said "Both these houses should be come desolate for they have caused the House of Our Lord to become desolate." What did he do? He sent for and brought 3,000 sheep of Kedar and checked [to ensure they had no] blemishes, and he stood them in the Temple courtyard and said: "Listen my brothers, O House of Israel!Anyone who wishes to bring a burnt offering and place his hands on the head of an animal should come and place his hands there. And any who wish to bring a peace offering and perform semicha may do so. And on that day they established the halakha in this case in accordance with the opnion of Beit Hillel and no man said a word.