Mishneh Torah, Torah Study
משנה תורה, הלכות תלמוד תורה
Maimonides' Mishneh Torah, edited by Philip Birnbaum, New York, 1967
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH002108864

Mishneh Torah, Torah Study



Chapter 1

Women, slaves and minors are exempt from the duty of Torah study. It is, however, the father's duty to teach his young son Torah, as it is written: "You shall teach them to your children, speaking of them" (Deuteronomy 11:19). A woman is under no obligation to teach her son, since the duty of teaching applies only to one whose duty it is to learn.
Just as it is a man's duty to teach his son, so it is his duty to teach his grandson, as it is written: "Make them known to your children and your children's children" (4:9). This obligation does not refer only to one's son and grandson, but it is a duty resting upon every Jewish scholar to teach all those who seek to be his students, even though they are not hisown children, for it is written: "You shall teach them diligently to your children" (6:7). On traditional authority, the term "your children" in this verse has been interpreted to mean <i>your pupils</i>, since pupils are likewise called <i>children</i>, for it is written: "And the sons of the prophets came out" (II Kings 2:3). But if so, why then has a man's duty been specifically stated in the Torah with regard to his own son and grandson? To indicate that his son has priority over his grandson, and his grandson over the son of another person.



When should a father begin to teach his son Torah? As soon as the child begins to talk, he should teach him the biblical verses: "The Torah which Moses handed down to us" (Deuteronomy 33:4) and "Hear, O Israel" (6:4). Later on, he should teach him gradually more and more verses at a time, till he reaches the age of six or seven; it all depends on the health condition of the child; he should then take him to a teacher of young children.
If it is the custom of the country for a children's teacher to receive a fee, the father should pay the fee. He is under an obligation to teach his son even when he has to pay for his tuition till he has learned to read the entire written Torah. Where it is customary to charge a fee for teaching the written Torah, it is permissible to charge a fee for such instruction. It is forbidden, however, to teach the Oral Torah for payment, for it is written: "Behold, I have taught you laws and rules as the Lord my God has commanded me" (4:5). Moses, in other words, said: "Just as I received instruction from God freely, you have received instruction from me freely. And you, too, when teaching in future generations, give instruction freely, as you have learned from me." If, however, he cannot find someone to teach him freely, he should get instruction for a fee, as it is written: "Buy truth" (Proverbs 23:23). One might suppose that he, in turn, will be permitted to teach others for a fee, but the same biblical text adds: "Do not sell it." Hence you infer that he is not permitted to teach for a fee even though his teacher taught <i>him</i> for a fee.
Every Jew is required to study Torah, whether poor or rich, healthy or ailing, young or old and feeble. Even a beggar who goes from door to door, and a man who has a wife and children to support, must devote time to Torah day and night, for it is written: "You shall study it day and night" (Joshua 1:8).
Some of the great sages of Israel were wood-cutters and water-carriers, while others were blind. Nevertheless they studied Torah day and night, and are included among those who have transmitted the tradition in the direct line from Moses.
Until when is one required to study Torah? Until the day of his death, for it is written: "Lest they depart from your heart all the days of your life" (Deuteronomy 4:9). One keeps forgetting at any time he fails to study.

Chapter 2

Elementary teachers are appointed in each province, district and town. If a town is without an elementary school for children, its inhabitants are placed under a ban till they engage teachers for the young children. If they have failed to do so, the town is undone; for the world is maintained only by the breath of school children.
Children should be sent to school at the age of six or seven, according to the physical strength and development of the child. But no child should be entered under six years of age.— — The education of the young must not be interrupted even for the purpose of rebuilding the Temple.
An elementary teacher who leaves the children and goes out, or does other work with them, or teaches them sluggishly, falls under the category referred to by Jeremiah: "Cursed is he who does the work of the Lord with slackness" (48:10). It is improper, therefore, to engage a teacher unless he is a person of reverence and skilled in reading and in grammar.

Twenty-five children may be taught by one teacher. If there are more than twenty-five pupils, but fewer than forty, an assistant should be engaged to help with the instruction. If there are more than forty, two elementary teachers are appointed.
The child is transferred from one teacher to another who is more competent in both Bible and grammar.— —

Chapter 3

The people of Israel were given three crowns: the crown of Torah, the crown of priesthood, and the crown of royalty. Aaron acquired the crown of priesthood, as it is written: "It shall be to him, and to his descendants after him, the covenant of a perpetual priesthood" (Numbers 25:13). David acquired the crown of royalty, as it is written: "His line shall endure forever, his throne lasting like the sun before me" (Psalm 89:37). The crown of Torah, however, is designed for all Israel, for it is written: "The Torah which Moses handed down to us is the heritage of the community of Jacob" (Deuteronomy 33:4). Whoever desires it may come and get it.— —
The sages said: "A scholar, even if he is the son of unmarried parents, has priority over an ignorant high priest, for it is written: "She is more precious than jewels" (Proverbs 3:15); that is, more than the bejeweled high priest who entered the innermost sanctuary on <i>Yom Kippur</i>.
None of all precepts is equal in importance to Torah study; nay, Torah study excels all the precepts, for study leads to practice. Therefore, study has priority over practice in every respect.
Where one can either perform a specific precept or study Torah, he must not interrupt his study if the precept can be fulfilled by somebody else. Otherwise, let him first perform the <i>mitzvah</i> and then resume his study.

Anyone who has made up his mind to perform this <i>mitzvah</i> properly, and be invested with the crown of Torah, must not divert his attention to other objectives. He must not intend to acquire Torah, riches and glory at the same time. "This is the way of Torah study: eat bread with salt, drink water by measure, sleep on the bare ground, and live a life of hardship while you toil in the Torah" (Ethics of the Fathers 6:4).— —


The words of the Torah have been compared to water, as it is written: "Oh, every one who thirsts, come to the waters" (Isaiah 55:1). This means to say that just as water does not accumulate on a slope but flows away and gathers in a pond, so the words of the Torah are not to be found in the arrogant and the haughty but only in one who is contrite and humble, who sits at the feet of the wise in the dust and removes from his heart lusts and temporal pleasures, doing some work daily, enough to provide for his needs—if he would otherwise have nothing to eat—and devotes the rest of the day and night to the study of Torah.
Anyone, however, who makes up his mind to study Torah and not work but live on charity profanes the name of God, disgraces the Torah, obscures the light of religion, causes harm to himself, and deprives himself of life in the future world; for it is forbidden to derive temporal advantage from the words of the Torah. The sages said: "Whoever makes selfish use of the teachings of the Torah takes his own life." They further told us: "Do not make of them a crown wherewith to magnify yourself, nor a spade wherewith to dig." They urged us strongly moreover: "Love work, and hate arrogance. All Torah study which is not combined with some work must at length fail and occasion sin" (Ethics of the Fathers). The end of such a person will be that he will rob his fellow men.
Anyone who maintains himself by the work of his hands possesses a great virtue, a virtue of the early saints, whereby he will attain all the glory and happiness of both this and the future world, as it is written: "When you eat the fruit of the labor of your hands, you shall be happy and it shall be well with you" (Psalm 128:2). <i>You shall be happy</i> in this world, <i>and it shall be well with you</i> in the future world, which will be altogether good.
Knowledge of the Torah cannot be sustained by one who is indolent, nor can it be acquired by those who combine study with luxurious living and feasting; it can be attained only by one who renounces the world for Torah, and regularly submits to physical discomfort, giving no sleep to his eyes, nor slumber to his eyelids.— — Whoever studies audibly retains his learning, but one who reads silently forgets speedily.
Although it is a religious duty to study day and night, most of a person's knowledge is gained only during night-time.— — Whoever studies Torah at night, a touch of grace lights his face at daytime.— —

Chapter 4


How should a class be taught? The teacher sits at the head of the table and the pupils surround him as a wreath, so that all can see the teacher and hear what he says. The teacher must not sit on a chair while his pupils sit on the ground; either they all sit on the floor or they all occupy chairs. Originally, the teacher used to sit while the pupils were standing. Ever since the time preceding the destruction of the Second Temple, it has been a general custom to teach the pupils as they are seated.

If a teacher has taught a subject and the pupils failed to understand it, he must not be angry with them nor get excited, but should review the lesson with them many times until they finally grasp it. Neither should a pupil say <i>I understand</i> when he does not, but should keep on asking questions repeatedly. If his teacher gets angry and excited on account of him, he should say to him: "Teacher, this is the Torah! I must study it, even though my capacity is limited."
A student must not feel ashamed on account of his colleagues who have apprehended a subject at once, or soon after it was taught a second time, while it has taken him many times to grasp it. If he were to feel embarrassment because of this, he would be attending school without learning anything. For this reason, the early sages declared: "The bashful cannot learn, nor can the quick-tempered teach" (Ethics of the Fathers 2:5). This applies only to a case where the students have failed to understand a subject because of its depth or because of their limited capacity. If, however, the teacher is convinced that they are too lazy to study Torah, and that they have not grasped the subject on account of their indolence, he must show his anger, shaming them with words, in order to rouse them. With regard to this, the sages have declared: "Rebuke and overawe the students." Accordingly, it is improper for a teacher to act frivolously in front of his pupils; he should not jest in their presence, nor eat and drink with them, so that they should revere him and learn from him speedily.
A teacher should not be asked any questions immediately upon his coming into the classroom, until he gets clear-minded. Nor should a student ask a question when he comes in until he sits down and is at ease. Two students should not ask questions at the same time. The teacher should not be asked questions about a different subject, but only about the subject in which they are engaged, so that he should not get embarrassed.— —


We must not sleep in the house of learning.— — We should discuss only Torah topics in the house of learning. Even if one has sneezed, we must not wish him <i>good health</i> inside the house of learning.— —

Chapter 5

Just as a person is commanded to honor and revere his father, so it is his duty to honor and revere his teacher, even more than his father; for his father has secured for him life in this world, while the teacher who has taught him wisdom secures for him life in the future world.— — There is no honor higher than that which is due to the teacher, no reverence more profound than that which should be bestowed on him. The sages said: "The reverence for your teacher should be like the reverence for Heaven" (4:12).— —










Just as the pupils are required to honor the teacher, so the teacher ought to be courteous and friendly toward his pupils. The sages said: "Let the honor of your student be as dear to you as your own" (Ethics of the Fathers 4:15). One should be interested in his pupils and love them, for they are the spiritual children who give pleasure in this world and in the future world.
Students increase the teacher's wisdom and broaden his mind. The sages said: "I have learned much from my teachers, even more from my colleagues, but I have learned the most from my students." Even as a small piece of wood kindles a large log, so a pupil of small attainments sharpens the mind of his teacher, to the point that he elicits glorious wisdom by the questions he presents.

Chapter 6

It is a duty to treat every scholar with respect, even though he is not one's teacher, for it is written: "You shall stand up in the presence of the aged, and show respect for the old" (Leviticus 19:33). The word <i>zaken</i> (old) refers here to one who has acquired wisdom. When are we required to stand up in his presence? From the moment he reaches one within six feet till he has passed alongside him.

It is improper for a scholar to put the people to the trouble of standing up in his presence by passing before them deliberately. He should rather use a shorter route, tending to avoid notice, so that none will have to rise before him. The sages were in the habit of using circuitous bypaths, where those who knew them were not likely to be found, so as not to trouble them.





We should stand up before a very old man even if he is not a scholar. Even a scholar who Is young should rise before a very old man. He is not obliged, however, to rise to his full height but as much as is required to show him respect. Even a non-Jewish old man should be shown respect in words and be given a hand to support him, for it is written: "You shall stand up in the presence of the aged," which implies <i>every</i> old man.
Scholars are not called upon to go out themselves to take part with the rest of the community in such things as building and digging for the state, so as not to lose the respect of the common people. Nor are they assessed for the cost of building the walls, repairing the gates, paying the wages of the watchmen, and the like, or making a gift to the king. Nor are they required to pay a tax, whether it is assessed collectively on all the inhabitants of the town or individually.— — So too, if a scholar has goods for sale, he should be permitted to dispose of them first; no one in the market should be given the opportunity of selling till the scholar has first sold his merchandise. Also, if he has a lawsuit and is standing among many litigants, his case is taken first and, during the hearing, he is seated.
It is a grave sin to scorn the scholars or hate them. Jerusalem was destroyed only when its scholars were treated with contempt, as it is written: "They mocked God's messengers, despised his words, and derided his prophets" (II Chronicles 36:16); that is to say, they despised those who taught his words. Similarly, when the Torah says: "If you spurn my laws" (Leviticus 26:15), it means: if you spurn the teachers of my laws. Whoever despises eminent scholars has no share in the future world, "for he has despised the word of the Lord" (Numbers 15:31).