Mishneh Torah, Torah Study
משנה תורה, הלכות תלמוד תורה
merged
http://www.sefaria.org/Mishneh_Torah,_Torah_Study
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-http://www.sefaria.org



Mishneh Torah, Torah Study

Chapter 1

Women and slaves are exempt from studying Torah. But a male minor - his father is obligated to teach him Torah, as it says, "And you shall teach them to your children, to speak in them" (Deut 11:19). Women are not obligated to teach their sons, for [only] all who are obligated to study are obligated to teach.  
Just as a person is obligated to teach his son, so too he is obligated to teach his grandson, as it says, "And make them known to your children, and to your children's children" (Deut 4:9). And not just his son and his grandson: rather, there is a command upon each and every wise-man [heb. chacham] in Israel to teach all students, even though they are not his children. As it says, "And you shall tutor them to your children" (Deut 6:7) - from an [Oral] Tradition they learned that "your children" [here] refers to your students, for students can be called children, as in "And the children of the prophets left" (I Kings 2:3).
If so, why was it [i.e. the obligation to teach] commanded in regard to a son and grandson? To give priority to a son over a grandson, and a grandson over the son of a friend.  Also, one is obligated [if need be] to hire a teacher to teach his son, but is only obligated to teach his friend's son at no cost. 
One whose father never taught him is obligated, when he realizes [ed.: not sure how to translate that phrase], to teach himself. As it says, "and you shall study them, and observe them to do them" (Deut 5:1). And so you find in every place, that studying precedes doing; for studying leads to doing, but doing does not lead to studying. 
If he needs to study Torah and his son needs study Torah, he precedes his son. But if his son is clever and grasps what he studies better than [the father], than his son takes precedence.  But even though his son takes precedence, he may not refrain [from study] - for just as there is a commandment upon him to teach his son, so he is commanded to teach himself.
A man should always study Torah and then marry a woman.  For if he marries a woman first, his mind will not be available for study. But if his desire overcomes him, such that his heart is not available, he should marry a woman and then learn Torah. 
It is a custom in our country for the teacher of children to take money, the father is obligated to pay for his teachings until he knows how to read the whole written Torah. In a place where it is a custom to take money for teaching the written Torah then it is permitted to do so. But the oral Torah it is is forbidden to teach for money. As it is written: "Behold, I have taught you laws and statutes, as God commanded me." Just like I learnt for free, so to you will be taught for free. Teach the coming generations in a like manner. Teach them at no cost as you have learned from me. If a person cannot find someone to teach him at no cost, he must pay for his studies, as it is written: "Buy truth." May he charge to teach others? We learn: "but do not sell." Thus, it can be derived that it is forbidden to charge to teach Torah even though one's teacher charged to instruct him.
Every Jew is obligated to learn Torah, whether he is poor or rich, whether he has a full and healthy body or whether he is a person who has many trouble, whether he is young or whether he is very old and his strength is weak, even if he is a poor man which supports him self from charity and knocks on each door even if he is a husband of a wife and children he is obligated to have set time to learn Torah in the day and in the night as it is written "You shall think about it day and night." 
Until when is a person obligated to learn Torah? Until the day of his death, as the verse states:  "Lest you remove it from your heart, all the days of your life." The whole time when a person is not learning he is forgetting 
Until when is one obligated to study Torah? Until the day of his death. As it says (Devarim 4:10), "Lest they flee from your heart all the days of your life." And all times that one is not dealing with [Torah] study, he forgets [Torah].




Chapter 2

Teachers of young children should be appointed in every country and every region and every city.  And every city which does not have a school of Torah study for children, citizens of the city are placed under a ban until teachers for children are appointed.  And if they do not appoint them, ban (or destroy) the city because the world only exists because of the breath of children engaged in Torah study.
Children should be brought to study near the age of six or seven, according to the child's health and build. Below the age of six, one does not bring the child. A teacher may hit them to cast fear. However, he should not beat them  like an enemy nor cruelly: he should not beat them with a rod or a staff, but rather with a small strap. And he sits and instructs them the entire day and for a portion of the night so as to train them to study both during the day and during the night. The children should not neglect [their studies] at all, except for the eve of Shabbat and festivals and on the festivals themselves. On Shabbat, they should not begin new material. However, they should review what was learned already. The children should never be interrupted from their studies, not even for the building of the Temple.

Chapter 3

Yisrael (the Jewish people) is crowned with three crowns: the crown of Torah, the crown of Priesthood, and the crown of Kingship. Aharon merited the crown of Priesthood, as it says (Numbers 25:13), "And the covenant of the Priesthood became his (Aharon's) and his descendant's forever." David merited the crown of Kingship, as it says (Psalms 89:37), "His descendants will exist forever and his throne will be considered like the sun before me." [But] the crown of Torah... now, that is [ready] (lit. "placed, standing, and prepared") for all of Yisrael [to take], as it says (Deuteronomy 33:4), "The Torah was commanded by Moshe, [it is] an inheritance for the congregation of Yakov." [Meaning] anyone who desires can come and take it. Perhaps you will entertain the possibility (lit. "say") that the other crowns are more significant than the crown of Torah? Now, [regarding the crown of Torah] it says (Proverbs 8:15-16), "Through me (the Torah), kings will reign and nobles will legislate righteousness. Through me (the Torah), officers are granted authority." [From here] one learns that the crown of Torah is greater than the other two (the crown of Kingship and Priesthood).


If one has the opportunity to do some [other] mitzvah or to learn Torah, and the mitzvah could be done by someone else, he should not interrupt his learning. Otherwise, he should do the mitzvah, and return to his studies.





Anyone who believes in his heart that occupying oneself with Torah and not working, but supporting oneself with charity, behold, this one desecrates the Divine name, dishonors the Torah, extinguishes the light of faith, brings evil to oneself and forfeits life in the world to come because it is forbidden to benefit from the words of Torah in this world.  Our sages say, "All who benefit from the words of Torah forfeit life in the world."  And furthermore, they commanded and said, "Do not make a crown to make oneself great and do not make an ax to chop with it."  And furthermore they commanded and said, "Love work and hate authority and all Torah that is not accompanied by work in the end will be negated and will lead to sin.  The end of such a person will be that he steals from others.

Chapter 4



Chapter 5

As a person is commanded to honor his father and fear him, so is he obligated to honor his teacher and fear him. More than his father, for his father gave him life in this world, but a teacher who teaches him wisdom gives him life in the world to come. [Note: This is not a complete translation of halacha 1, it only covers the first few lines.]


And every student who has not reached the level required to instruct [on matters of Halakha] and instructs; is wicked, insane, and of foul spirit. And it is said about him (Proverbs 7, 26): "For she hath cast down many wounded". And so too a learned man who has reached the level required to instruct [on matters of Halakha] and does not instruct, he prevents Torah, and places obstacles before the blind, and it is said about him (Ibid): "Yea, a mighty host are all her slain." These are the young students who have not accumulated Torah appropriately. These young students that did not appropriately accumulate knowledge of Torah, and they seek aggrandizement before the common folk and the people of their city, and they pounce upon great positions to judge and teach in Israel, they exarcerbate disputes, and they are the destroyers of the world, and the extinguishers of the candle of Torah, and the vandals of the vineyard of Hashem the Lord of Hosts. And Solomon said about them in his wisdom (Song of Songs 2, 15) "Take us the foxes, the little foxes, that spoil the vineyards".







As the students are obligated to honor their teacher, so is the teacher required to honor his students and hold them close. Thus say the sages: The honor of your students should be as precious to you as your own. And a man should watch over his students and love them as they are his children to enjoy in this world and in the world to come.

Chapter 6

...It is a commandment to praise any disciple of the sages, even if they are not one's master, as it says "honor the face of an old person" (Leviticus 19:32). Zaken (old person) [is short for] this one that acquired wisdom (Zeh sheKaNah chochmah). And when are we obligated to stand in front of him? From the moment that he is within four cubits, until he passed in front.
... One does not stand in front of him in the bathhouse or the bathroom, as it says "stand" and "honor" - a standing where there is honor. And craftsmen are not obligated to stand for disciples of the sages at the moment when they are busy with their work, as it says ""standing" and "honoring" - just as honoring does not imply monetary loss, so too standing does not imply monetary loss" (Talmud Babylonian Kiddushin 32b)  and from where do we know that one does not avert one's eyes from a sage so one won't see him and will not have to stand? From what it says "'and you shall fear your God' - behold, on all actions that are dependent on one's intention we find written about them 'and you shall fear your God'.
... It does not befit a sage to be burdensome the people and direct them to stand before him, rather he should go through the shorter way and try to make others NOT see him
... One who is riding is similar to one who is walking, and just as we raise for those walking we do so for those riding.
... If three are walking on the way, the master (should be) positioned in the middle, the greater on the master's right side and the smaller on his left.
... One who sees a sage does not stand until he gets within four cubits of his proximity.
If a sage enters, whoever is within four cubits of his presence needs to stand, whether they were sitting or standing, until he comes in and sits.
... A student who always sits in front of his teacher is not permitted to stand in front of him - the exception being the morning and evening prayers, so his honoring [his teacher] won't be greater than his honoring God.
...One should stand in the presence of an extremely old person, even if he is not a scholar. Even a young scholar stands up in the presence of an extremely old person; however, he is not obligated to stand up to his full height, rather [enough] to show deference. We even show deference to an old non-Jew, with [kind] words and a helping hand, as it says: "You shall rise before the aged..." (Leviticus 19:32) - any sort of aged [person] is implied.