Mishneh Torah, Torah Study
משנה תורה, הלכות תלמוד תורה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Mishneh Torah, Torah Study



Chapter 1

Women and slaves are exempt from studying Torah. But a male minor - his father is obligated to teach him Torah, as it says, "And you shall teach them to your children, to speak in them" (Deut 11:19). Women are not obligated to teach their sons, for [only] all who are obligated to study are obligated to teach.  
Just as a person is obligated to teach his son, so too he is obligated to teach his grandson, as it says, "And make them known to your children, and to your children's children" (Deut 4:9). And not just his son and his grandson: rather, there is a command upon each and every wise-man [heb. chacham] in Israel to teach all students, even though they are not his children. As it says, "And you shall tutor them to your children" (Deut 6:7) - from an [Oral] Tradition they learned that "your children" [here] refers to your students, for students can be called children, as in "And the children of the prophets left" (I Kings 2:3). If so, why was it [i.e. the obligation to teach] commanded in regard to a son and grandson? To give priority to a son over a grandson, and a grandson over the son of a friend.  
Also, one is obligated [if need be] to hire a teacher to teach his son, but is only obligated to teach his friend's son at no cost. One whose father never taught him is obligated, when he realizes, to teach himself. As it says, "and you shall study them, and observe them to do them" (Deut 5:1). And so you find in every place, that studying precedes doing; for studying leads to doing, but doing does not lead to studying. 
If he needs to study Torah and his son needs study Torah, he precedes his son. But if his son is clever and grasps what he studies better than [the father], than his son takes precedence.  But even though his son takes precedence, he may not refrain [from study] - for just as there is a commandment upon him to teach his son, so he is commanded to teach himself.
A man should always study Torah and then marry a woman.  For if he marries a woman first, his mind will not be available for study. But if his desire overcomes him, such that his heart is not available, he should marry a woman and then learn Torah. 
When does his father begin to teach him Torah? When he begins to speak, he teaches him "Moses commanded us Torah" (Deut. 33:4) and "Hear O Israel" (Deut. 6:4); and after this teaches him little by little, verse by verse until he is 6 or 7 years old - all is according to his health -and brings him to the teacher of children's place.
It is a custom in our country for the teacher of children to take money, the father is obligated to pay for his teachings until he knows how to read the whole written Torah. In a place where it is a custom to take money for teaching the written Torah then it is permitted to do so. But the oral Torah it is is forbidden to teach for money. As it is written: "Behold, I have taught you laws and statutes, as God commanded me." Just like I learnt for free, so to you will be taught for free. Teach the coming generations in a like manner. Teach them at no cost as you have learned from me. If a person cannot find someone to teach him at no cost, he must pay for his studies, as it is written: "Buy truth." May he charge to teach others? We learn: "but do not sell." Thus, it can be derived that it is forbidden to charge to teach Torah even though one's teacher charged to instruct him.
Every Jew is obligated to learn Torah: whether he is poor or rich; whether he has a full and healthy body or whether he is a person who is suffering; whether he is young or whether he is very old and his strength is weak; even if he is a poor man who supports himself from charity and knocks on each door; and even if he is a husband of a wife and children. He is obligated to have a set time to learn Torah [both] during the day and the night as it is written "You shall think about it day and night." 
Among the great ones of the sages of Israel, there were wood-choppers and water-drawers, and blind men, and despite this, they engaged in Torah study during the day and night, and are included among the transmitters of the tradition from person to person from Moses, our teacher.
Until when is one obligated to study Torah? Until the day of his death. As it says (Devarim 4:10), "Lest they flee from your heart all the days of your life." And all times that one is not dealing with [Torah] study, he forgets [Torah].
And one is obligated to divide one's learning into thirds. One third in the Written Law. One third in the Oral Law. And one third one should understand the completion of one thing from its beginning and derive one thing from another and compare one thing to another and understand with the hermeneutical principles of derivation by which the Torah is interpreted until one completely grasps these rules and how that which is prohibited and permissible are derived and similar matters that one heard via tradition. This principle principle is called "Gemara."

A woman who learns Torah is rewarded but her reward is not the same as that of a man because she is not commanded. And anyone who does something for which he is not commanded the reward is not the same as for one who is commanded but less. And even though she is rewarded, the Rabbi have commanded that a man should not teach his daughter Torah for most women's thoughts are not focused on being taught rather they will extract from the Torah words lacking meaning, based on their limited interest. The Rabbis have said "whomever teaches his daughter Torah, it is as if he is teaching her Tiflut" - This only applies to the Oral law, however regarding the Written Law one should preferably not teach it , but if one did, it would not be as if he taught her Tiflut.

Chapter 2

Teachers of young children should be appointed in every country and every region and every city.  And every city which does not have a school of Torah study for children, citizens of the city are placed under a ban until teachers for children are appointed.  And if they do not appoint them, ban (or destroy) the city because the world only exists because of the breath of children engaged in Torah study.
Children should be brought to study near the age of six or seven, according to the child's health and build. Below the age of six, one does not bring the child. A teacher may hit them to cast fear. However, he should not beat them  like an enemy nor cruelly: he should not beat them with a rod or a staff, but rather with a small strap. And he sits and instructs them the entire day and for a portion of the night so as to train them to study both during the day and during the night. The children should not neglect [their studies] at all, except for the eve of Shabbat and festivals and on the festivals themselves. On Shabbat, they should not begin new material. However, they should review what was learned already. The children should never be interrupted from their studies, not even for the building of the Temple.
The teacher of young children who leaves the children and goes out, or who does other work with them, or who is negligent in their studies - behold, this is in the category of "cursed is the one who does the work of negligently" (Jer. 48:10). Therefore, it is not appropriate to appoint a teacher unless he is reverent and proficient in reading and grammar.
And one who does not have a wife does not teach young children because of their mothers who come with their children. And no woman teaches young children because of their fathers that come with the children.
25 young children learn with one teacher. If there are more than 25 - up to 40 - we appoint another person with him to assist him with their studies. If there are more than 40, we put two teachers of young children in place for them.
We bring the child from one teacher to another teacher who is more proficient than him, whether in Bible  or in grammar. Regarding what cases are we speaking? When there are two of them in one city, and there is no river that separates them; but from city to city or from one side of the river to its [other] side, even within the same side, we do not bring the child unless there is a [bridge] of solid-construction across the river - construction that does not seem like it will fall soon.

Chapter 3

Israel is crowned with three crowns: the crown of Torah, the crown of Priesthood, and the crown of Kingship. Aharon merited the crown of Priesthood, as it says (Numbers 25:13), "And the covenant of the Priesthood became his (Aharon's) and his descendant's forever." David merited the crown of Kingship, as it says (Psalms 89:37), "His descendants will exist forever and his throne will be considered like the sun before me." Behold, the crown of Torah stands ready for all of Israel [to take], as it says (Deuteronomy 33:4), "The Torah was commanded by Moshe as an inheritance for the congregation of Yaakov." [Meaning] anyone who desires can come and take it. Perhaps you will entertain the possibility (lit. "say") that the other crowns are more significant than the crown of Torah? Now, [regarding the crown of Torah] it says (Proverbs 8:15-16), "Through me (the Torah), kings will reign and nobles will legislate righteousness. Through me (the Torah), officers are granted authority." [From here] one learns that the crown of Torah is greater than the other two (the crown of Kingship and Priesthood).
The Sage said: a mamzer [one born through incest or adultery] who is a scholar takes precedence over a high priest who is ignorant, as was said: "she is more precious than jewels" (Prov. 3:15) - from a high priest who enters the innermost sanctuary.
You have no commandment among all the commandments that has a weight equal to Torah study; rather, Torah study is equal to all the commandments in that study brings one to deeds. Therefore, study takes precedence over deeds in every regard.
If one has the opportunity to do some [other] mitzvah or to learn Torah, and the mitzvah could be done by someone else, he should not interrupt his learning. Otherwise, he should do the mitzvah, and return to his studies.
...The beginning of man's judgement is only judged on his learning [Torah], and afterwards on the rest of his actions. And therefore, the Rabbi's said, man should always learn Torah, whether it is for it's sake or not for it's sake, because [if it is done] not for it's sake, it will come to be for it's sake.
... One who lifts his heart to fulfill this commandment appropriately and to  be crowned with the crown of Torah may not distract his mind with other things, and he must not intend to acquire Torah with wealth and honor as one. "This is the way of Torah: you will eat bread with salt, drink water in measure, upon the ground you shall sleep, and you will live a life of anguish, and you will toil in Torah (Avot 6:4). And it is not upon you to complete the matter, but you are not free to desist from it. And if you multiplied Torah, you multiplied reward, and the reward is according to the anguish.
Perhaps, one will say: "[I will interrupt my studies] until after I gather money, and then I will return and study, [I will interrupt my studies] until after I buy what I need, and then, when I can divert my attention from my business, I will return and study." If you consider such thoughts, you will never merit the crown of Torah. Rather, make your work secondary, and your Torah study a fixed matter. Do not say: "When I have free time, I will study," for perhaps you will never have free time.
It is written in the Torah [Deuteronomy 30:12, 13]: "It is not in the heavens....It is not across the sea...." [This implies:] "It is not in the heavens" - i.e., it is not found in the proud spirited. "It is not across the sea" - i.e., it is not found in those who travel across the sea. Therefore, our Sages said: "Not everyone who is involved in business will become wise." Our Sages also commanded: "Minimize your business activities and occupy yourself with Torah."
Words of Torah are compared to water, as it was said: "Oh, all who are thirst come to the water" (Isaiah 55:1) - to say to you: just as water does not accumulate in the place of a slope, but rather flow from upon it and gather in a low place, so too words of Torah are not found in boorish people, nor in the heart of any haughty person, but rather in the contrite and humble person who places himself in the dust at the feet of scholars and removes lusts and temporal pleasures from his heart and does some work every day - enough for his life if he would not have anything to eat - and occupies the rest of his day and his night with Torah.
Anyone who believes in his heart that occupying oneself with Torah and not working, but supporting oneself with charity, behold, this one desecrates the Divine name, dishonors the Torah, extinguishes the light of faith, brings evil to oneself and forfeits life in the world to come because it is forbidden to benefit from the words of Torah in this world.  Our sages say, "All who benefit from the words of Torah forfeit life in the world."  And furthermore, they commanded and said, "Do not make a crown to make oneself great and do not make an ax to chop with it."  And furthermore they commanded and said, "Love work and hate authority and all Torah that is not accompanied by work in the end will be negated and will lead to sin.  The end of such a person will be that he steals from others.
One who provides for himself from the work of his hands has a great virtue, and it is a quality of the early righteous ones. And in this, he merits all the honor and goodness in this world and the world to come, as it is written: "When you eat the toil of your hands, you shall be happy and it shall go well for you" (Psalms 128:2). "You shall be happy" in this world "and it shall go well for you" in the world to come, in which all is good.
Words of Torah are not sustained in one who is lax regarding them, and not in these who learn in the midst of enjoyment or eating and drinking, but rather in one who kills himself [figuratively] over them and cause his body distress constantly and does not give sleep to his eyes or slumber to his eyelids. The Sages said in the way of a hint: "This is the teaching (Torah) of the person who dies in a tent" (Numbers 19:14) - the Torah is not sustained other than in one who kills himself in the tents of the Sages. And so said Solomon in his wisdom: "If you faint in the day of adversity, your strength is small" (Proverbs 24:10), and he also said: "even my wisdom remained with me" (Ecclesiastes 2:9) -[which can be read as] the wisdom that I learned in anger is what remained with me. The Sages said: a covenant was established that any who exhausts himself with his Torah in the house of study  will not forget quickly and any who exhausts himself in his study in private is made wise, as was said: "but with the modest is wisdom". And any who makes his voice heard and the time of his study, his learning is sustained in his hand, but the one who reads quietly forgets quickly.
Even though it is a commandment to study during the day and the night, a person does not learn the majority of his wisdom other than at night. Therefore, anyone who wants to merit the crown of Torah will be careful with all his nights, and not lose even one of them in sleep or eating and drinking or conversation or anything similar to them other than study of Torah and matters of wisdom. The Sages said: there is no song of Torah other than at night, as was said: "Rise, sing in the night!" (Lamentations 2:19). And anyone who occupies himself with Torah at night, a strand of loving-kindness will remain upon him during the  day, as was said: "During the day the Lord commands His loving-kindness and during the night, his song is with me, a prayer to the God of my life." (Psalms 42:9). And any house that words of Torah are not heard in it at night, fire consumes it, as was said: "All darkness is hidden for his treasures; a fire not blown" (Job 20:26), for the word of the Lord in this - this is the one who did not look after words of Torah at all. And similarly anyone for whom it is possible for him to occupy himself with Torah and does not occupy himself or who studies Bible and Mishnah and diverts to the vanities of the world, laying down his study and abandoning it, behold this is included in [the category of] those who scorn the word of the Lord. The Sages said: any who neglects the Torah in wealth, his end is to neglect it in poverty, and any who sustains the Torah in poverty, his end is to sustain it in wealth. And this matter is explained in the Torah - behold it says: "because  you did not serve the Lord your God in happiness and with good heart from abundance in everything, you will serve your enemies." (Deut. 28:47-48) And it says "in order to afflict you" (Deut. 8:2) "to improve you at your end" (Deut. 8:16). 

Chapter 4

Torah should be taught only to a proper student - one whose deeds are attractive - or to a person whose behavior is unknown. However, [a potential student] who follows bad ways should be influenced to correct his behavior and trained to follow a straight path. [After he repents, his deeds] are examined and he is allowed to enter the house of study to be instructed. Our Sages said: Whoever teaches an improper student is considered as if he throws a stone to Mercury, as [Proverbs 26:8] states: "As one who winds a stone in a sling, so is he who gives honor to a fool." There is no "honor" other than Torah, as [Proverbs 3:35] states: "The wise shall inherit honor." Similarly, one should not study from a teacher who does not follow a proper path, even though he is a very wise man and his [instruction] is required by the entire nation, until he returns to a good path, as [implied by Malachi 2:7]: "For the priest's lips shall keep knowledge, and they shall seek Torah from his mouth, because he is a messenger from the Lord of Hosts." Our Sages said: If a teacher resembles "a messenger of the Lord of Hosts," seek Torah from his mouth. If he does not, do not seek Torah from his mouth.
How is [Torah] taught? The teacher sits at the head and the students sit around him, so that all can see the teacher and hear his words. The teacher should not sit on a chair, [while] his students [sit] on the ground. Rather, either everyone should sit on the ground or everyone should sit on chairs. Originally, the teacher would sit and the students would stand. [However,] before the destruction of the Second Temple, everyone followed the practice of teaching while both they and the students were seated.
If the teacher [desires] to instruct the students personally, he is entitled to do so. If he [desires to] teach through the medium of a spokesman, the spokesman should stand between him and  the students. The teacher speaks to the spokesman and he announces the teaching to all the students. When they ask the spokesman a question, he asks the teacher. The teacher, [in turn,] replies to the spokesman and the spokesman replies to the questioner. The teacher should not raise his voice above that of the spokesman. Similarly, when the spokesman asks a question of the teacher, he should not raise his voice above that of the teacher. The spokesman is not allowed to detract from, add to, or change [the teacher's words], unless he is the teacher's father or teacher. If the teacher tells the spokesman: "My teacher told me the following..." or "My father and teacher told me the following...," when the spokesman relates the teaching to the people, he should quote the statement in the name of the sage [who authored it], mentioning the name of the teacher's father or teacher, saying: "So and so, the sage, said the following..." [This is allowed] despite the fact the teacher did not mention the sage's name, because it is forbidden to refer to one's teacher or father by name. 
A Rabbi who teaches and his students don't understand, [should] not get mad at them and not be angry. Rather he should go back and teach the matter no matter (lit. even) how many times, until [he] understands the depth of the Halacha. And similarly, a student shouldn't say he understands if he doesn't understand. Rather he should go back and ask, even a few times. And if his Rabbi gets mad at him, and angry, he should tell him: My Rabbi, this is Torah, and I need to learn, and my knowledge is short.

Chapter 5

As a person is commanded to honor his father and fear him, so is he obligated to honor his teacher and fear him. More than his father, for his father gave him life in this world, but a teacher who teaches him wisdom gives him life in the world to come. [Note: This is not a complete translation of halacha 1, it only covers the first few lines.]


And every student who has not reached the level required to instruct [on matters of Halakha] and instructs; is wicked, insane, and of foul spirit. And it is said about him (Proverbs 7, 26): "For she hath cast down many wounded". And so too a learned man who has reached the level required to instruct [on matters of Halakha] and does not instruct, he prevents Torah, and places obstacles before the blind, and it is said about him (Ibid): "Yea, a mighty host are all her slain." These are the young students who have not accumulated Torah appropriately. These young students that did not appropriately accumulate knowledge of Torah, and they seek aggrandizement before the common folk and the people of their city, and they pounce upon great positions to judge and teach in Israel, they exarcerbate disputes, and they are the destroyers of the world, and the extinguishers of the candle of Torah, and the vandals of the vineyard of Hashem the Lord of Hosts. And Solomon said about them in his wisdom (Song of Songs 2, 15) "Take us the foxes, the little foxes, that spoil the vineyards".







As the students are obligated to honor their teacher, so is the teacher required to honor his students and hold them close. Thus say the sages: The honor of your students should be as precious to you as your own. And a man should watch over his students and love them as they are his children to enjoy in this world and in the world to come.

Chapter 6

...It is a commandment to praise any disciple of the sages, even if they are not one's master, as it says "honor the face of an old person" (Leviticus 19:32). Zaken (old person) [is short for] this one that acquired wisdom (Zeh sheKaNah chochmah). And when are we obligated to stand in front of him? From the moment that he is within four cubits, until he passed in front.
... One does not stand in front of him in the bathhouse or the bathroom, as it says "stand" and "honor" - a standing where there is honor. And craftsmen are not obligated to stand for disciples of the sages at the moment when they are busy with their work, as it says ""standing" and "honoring" - just as honoring does not imply monetary loss, so too standing does not imply monetary loss" (Talmud Babylonian Kiddushin 32b)  and from where do we know that one does not avert one's eyes from a sage so one won't see him and will not have to stand? From what it says "'and you shall fear your God' - behold, on all actions that are dependent on one's intention we find written about them 'and you shall fear your God'.
... It does not befit a sage to be burdensome the people and direct them to stand before him, rather he should go through the shorter way and try to make others NOT see him
... One who is riding is similar to one who is walking, and just as we raise for those walking we do so for those riding.
... If three are walking on the way, the master (should be) positioned in the middle, the greater on the master's right side and the smaller on his left.
... One who sees a sage does not stand until he gets within four cubits of his proximity.
If a sage enters, whoever is within four cubits of his presence needs to stand, whether they were sitting or standing, until he comes in and sits.
... A student who always sits in front of his teacher is not permitted to stand in front of him - the exception being the morning and evening prayers, so his honoring [his teacher] won't be greater than his honoring God.
...One should stand in the presence of an extremely old person, even if he is not a scholar. Even a young scholar stands up in the presence of an extremely old person; however, he is not obligated to stand up to his full height, rather [enough] to show deference. We even show deference to an old non-Jew, with [kind] words and a helping hand, as it says: "You shall rise before the aged..." (Leviticus 19:32) - any sort of aged [person] is implied.