Mishneh Torah, Torah Study
משנה תורה, הלכות תלמוד תורה
The Mishneh Torah by Maimonides. trans. by Moses Hyamson, 1937-1949
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH002108865

Mishneh Torah, Torah Study



Chapter 1

Women, slaves and the young (under the age of puberty) are exempt from the obligation of studying Torah. But it is a duty of the father to teach his young son Torah; as it is said, "And ye shall teach them, to your children, talking of them" (Deut. 11:19). A woman is under no obligation to teach her son, since only one whose duty it is to learn has a duty to teach.
Just as it is a man's duty to teach his son, so it is his duty to teach his grandson, as it is said, "Make them known unto thy children and thy children's children" (Deut. 4:9). This obligation is to be fulfilled not only towards a son and grandson. A duty rests on every scholar in Israel to teach all disciples (who seek instruction from him), even if they are not his children, as it is said, "And thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children" (Deut. 6:7). On traditional authority, the term "thy children" includes disciples, for disciples too are called children, as it is said "And the sons of the prophets came forth" ((II Kings 2:3). This being so, why does the precept (concerning instruction) specifically mention (Deut. 4:9) a man's son and son's son ? To impress upon us that the son should receive instruction in preference to a grandson, and a grandson in preference to another man's son.
A father (who cannot teach his son) is bound to engage a paid teacher for him. But the only obligation one owes to a neighbour's son is to teach him when it involves no expense. If a father has not had his son taught, it is the duty of the latter, as soon as he realises his deficiencies, to acquire knowledge for himself, as it is said, "That ye may learn them and observe to do them" (Deut. 5:1). And so too, you will find that study in all cases takes precedence of practice, since study leads to practice, but practice does not lead to study.
If a man needs to learn Torah and has a son who needs instruction, his own requirements are to be satisfied first. But if his son has better capacity and greater ability to grasp what he learns, then the son's education takes precedence. Still, even in this case, the father must not wholly neglect the study of the Torah. For, just as it is incumbent on him to have his son taught, so is he under an obligation to obtain instruction for himself.
A man should always first study Torah and then marry; for if he takes a wife first, his mind will not be free for study. But if his physical desires are so overpowering as to preoccupy his mind, he should marry and then study Torah.
When should a father commence his son's instruction in Torah ? As soon as the child begins to talk, the father should teach him the text "Moses commanded us a law" (Deut. 33:4), and the first verse of the <i>Shema</i> ("Hear O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is One") (Deut. 6:4). Later on, according to the child's capacity, the father should teach him a few verses at a time, till he attains the age of six or seven years, when he should take him to a teacher of young children.
If it is the custom of the country for a teacher of children to receive remuneration, the father is to pay the fee, and it is his duty to have his son taught, even if he has to pay for the instruction, till the child has gone through the whole of the Written Law. Where it is the custom to charge a fee for teaching the Written Law, it is permissible to take payment for such instruction. It is forbidden however to teach the Oral Law for payment, for it is said "Behold, I have taught you statutes and ordinances, even as the Lord, my God, commanded me" (Deut. 4:5). This means: "Even as I (Moses) learnt (from God) without payment, so have ye learnt from me, gratuitously. And throughout the generations, whenever you teach, do so gratuitously, even as you learnt from me". If a person cannot find any one willing to teach him without remuneration, he should engage a paid teacher, as it is said "Buy the truth" (Prov. 23:23). It should not however be assumed that it is permissible to take pay for teaching. For the verse continues "And sell it not", the inference being, that even where a man had been obliged to pay for instruction (in the Oral Law), he is nevertheless forbidden to charge, in his turn, for teaching it.
Every Israelite is under an obligation to study Torah, whether he is poor or rich, in sound health or ailing, in the vigour of youth or very old and feeble. Even a man so poor that he is maintained by charity or goes begging from door to door, as also a man with a wife and children to support, are under the obligation to set aside a definite period during the day and at night for the study of the Torah, as it is said "But thou shalt meditate therein day and night" (Joshua 1:8).
Among the great sages of Israel, some were hewers of wood, some, drawers of water, while others were blind. Nevertheless, they devoted themselves by day and by night to the study of the Torah. They are included among the transmitters of the tradition in the direct line from Moses.
Until what period in life ought one to study Torah ? Until the day of one's death, as it is said, "And lest they (the precepts) depart from thy heart all the days of thy life" (Deut. 4:9). Whenever one ceases to study, one forgets.
The time allotted to study should be divided into three parts. A third should be devoted to the Written Law; a third to the Oral Law; and the last third should be spent in reflection, deducing conclusions from premises, developing implications of statements, comparing dicta, studying the hermeneutical principles by which the Torah is interpreted, till one knows the essence of these principles, and how to deduce what is permitted and what is forbidden from what one has learnt traditionally. This is termed Talmud.
For example, if one is an artizan who works at his trade three hours daily and devotes nine hours to the study of the Torah, he should spend three of these nine hours in the study of the Written Law, three in the study of the Oral Law, and the remaining three in reflecting on how to deduce one rule from another. The words of the Prophets are comprised in the Written Law, while their exposition falls within the category of the Oral Law. The subjects styled <i>Pardes</i> (Esoteric Studies), are included in <i>Talmud.</i> This plan applies to the period when one begins learning. But after one has become proficient and no longer needs to learn the Written Law, or continually be occupied with the Oral Law, he should, at fixed times, read the Written Law and the traditional dicta, so as not to forget any of the rules of the Torah, and should devote all his days exclusively to the study of Talmud, according to his breadth of mind and maturity of intellect.
A woman who studies Torah will be recompensed, but not in the same measure as a man, for study was not imposed on her as a duty, and one who performs a meritorious act which is not obligatory will not receive the same reward as one upon whom it is incumbent and who fulfills it as a duty, but only a lesser reward. And notwithstanding that she is recompensed, yet the Sages have warned us that a man shall not teach his daughter Torah, as the majority of women have not a mind adequate for its study but, because of their limitations, will turn the words of the Torah into trivalities. The sages said "He who teaches his daughter Torah—it is as if he taught her wantonness" This stricture refers only to instruction in the Oral Law. With regard to the Written Law, he ought not to teach it to her; but if he has done so, it is not regarded as teaching her wantonness.

Chapter 2

Teachers of young children are to be appointed in each province, district and town. If a city has made no provision for the education of the young, its inhabitants are placed under a ban, till such teachers have been engaged. And if they persistently neglect this duty, the city is excommunicated, for the world is only maintained by the breath of school children.
Children are to be sent to school at the age of six or seven years, according to the strength of the individual child and its physical development. But no child is to be sent to school under six years of age. The teacher may chastise his pupils to inspire them with awe. But he must not do so in a cruel manner or in a vindictive spirit. Accordingly, he must not strike them with whips or sticks, but only use a small strap. He is to teach them the whole day and part of the night, so as to train them to study by day and by night. And there is to be no holiday except on the eve of the Sabbath or festival, towards the close of the day, and on festivals. On Sabbaths, pupils are not taught a new lesson, but they repeat what they had already learnt previously, even if only once. Pupils must not be interrupted at their studies, even for the re-building of the Temple.
A teacher who leaves the children and goes out (when he should be teaching them), or does other work while he is with them, or teaches lazily, falls under the ban "Cursed be he that doeth the work of the Lord with a slack hand" (Jer. 48:10). Hence, it is not proper to appoint any one as teacher unless he is God-fearing and well versed in reading and in grammar.
An unmarried man should not keep school for the young because the mothers come to see their children. Nor should any woman keep school, because the fathers come to see them.
Twenty-five children may be put in charge of one teacher. If the number in the class exceeds twenty-five but is not more than forty, he should have an assistant to help with the instruction. If there are more than forty, two teachers must be appointed.
A child may be transferred from one teacher to another who is more competent in reading or grammar, only however, if both the teacher and the pupil live in the same town and are not separated by a river. But we must not take the child to school in another town nor even across a river in the same town, unless it is spanned by a firm bridge, not likely soon to collapse.
If one of the residents in an alley or even in a court wishes to open a school, his neighbours cannot prevent him. Nor can a teacher, already established, object to another teacher opening a school next door to him, either for new pupils or even with the intention of drawing away pupils from the existing school, for it is said, "The Lord was pleased for His righteousness' sake, to make the Torah great and glorious" (Is. 42:21).

Chapter 3

With three crowns was Israel crowned — with the crown of the Torah, with the crown of the priesthood and with the crown of sovereignty. The crown of the priesthood was bestowed upon Aaron, as it is said, "And it shall be unto him and unto his seed after him, the covenant of an everlasting priesthood" (Num. 25:13). The crown of sovereignty was conferred upon David, as it is said, "His seed shall endure forever, and his throne as the sun before Me" (Ps. 89:37). The crown of the Torah however is for all Israel, as is it said, "Moses commanded us a law, an inheritance of the congregation of Jacob" (Deut. 33:4). Whoever desires it can win it. Do not suppose that the other two crowns are greater than the crown of the Torah, for it is said, "By me, kings reign and princes decree justice. By me, princes rule" (Prov. 8:15-16). Hence the inference, that the crown of the Torah is greater than the other two crowns.
The sages said "A bastard who is a scholar takes precedence of an ignorant High Priest; for it is said "More precious it is than rubies" (Prov. 3:15), that is (more to be honoured is the scholar) than the High Priest who enters the Innermost sanctuary.<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* A play upon the word <i>Peninim</i> (rubies), taken as <i>Lifny v’lifnim</i> (High priest who entered the Holy of Holies on the Day of Atonement.).</i>
Of all precepts, none is equal in importance to the study of the Torah. Nay, study of the Torah is equal to them all, for study leads to practice. Hence, study always takes precedence of practice.
If the opportunity of fulfilling a specific precept would interrupt the study of the Torah and the precept can be performed by others, one should not intermit study. Otherwise, the precept should be performed and then the study be resumed.
At the Judgment hereafter, a man will first be called to account in regard to his fulfilment of the duty of study, and afterwards concerning his other activities. Hence, the sages said, "A person should always occupy himself with the Torah, whether for its own sake or for other reasons. For study of the Torah, even when pursued from interested motives, will lead to study for its own sake.
He whose heart prompts him to fulfil this duty properly, and to be crowned with the crown of the Torah, must not allow his mind to be diverted to other objects. He must not aim at acquiring Torah as well as riches and honour at the same time. "This is the way for the study of the Torah. A morsel of bread with salt thou must eat, and water by measure thou must drink; thou must sleep upon the ground and live a life of hardship, the while thou toilest in the Torah" (Ethics of the Fathers 6:4). "It is not incumbent upon thee to complete the task; but neither art thou free to neglect it" (ibid 2:21). "And if thou hast studied much Torah, thou hast earned much reward. The recompense will be proportionate to the pains" (ibid 5:26).<sup class="footnote-marker">**</sup><i class="footnote">** The numbering of the paragraphs in the Ethics of the Fathers in the editions of the Mishna and in the editions of the liturgy does not always correspond.</i>
Possibly you may say: When I shall have accumulated money, I shall resume my studies; when I shall have provided for my needs and have leisure from my affairs, I shall resume my studies. Should such a thought enter your mind, you will never win the crown of the Torah. "Rather make the study of the Torah your fixed occupation" (ibid 1:15) and let your secular affairs engage you casually, and do not say: "When I shall have leisure, I shall study; perhaps you may never have leisure" (ibid 2:5).
In the Torah it is written, "It is not in heaven…. neither is it beyond the sea" (Deut. 30:12-13). "It is not in heaven", this means that the Torah is not to be found with the arrogant; "nor beyond the seas", that is, it is not found among those who cross the ocean. Hence, our sages said "Nor can one who is engaged overmuch in business grow wise" (Ethics of the Fathers 2:6). They have also exhorted us "Engage little in business and occupy thyself with the Torah" (Ethics of the Fathers 4:12).
The words of the Torah have been compared to water, as it is said, "O every one that thirsteth, come ye for water" (Is. 55:1); this teaches us that just as water does not accumulate on a slope but flows away, while in a depression it stays, so the Words of the Torah are not to be found in the arrogant or haughty but only in him who is contrite and lowly in spirit, who sits in the dust at the feet of the wise and banishes from his heart lusts and temporal delights; works a little daily, just enough to provide for his needs, if he would otherwise have nothing to eat, and devotes the rest of the day and night to the study of the Torah.
One however who makes up his mind to study Torah and not work but live on charity, profanes the name of God, brings the Torah into contempt, extinguishes the light of religion, brings evil upon himself and deprives himself of life hereafter, for it is forbidden to derive any temporal advantage from the words of the Torah. The sages said "Whoever derives a profit for himself from the words of the Torah is helping on his own destruction" (Ethics of the Fathers 4:17). They have further charged us "Make not of them a crown wherewith to aggrandise thyself, nor a spade wherewith to dig" (ibid 4:7). They likewise exhorted us "Love work, hate lordship" (ibid. 1:10). "All study of the Torah, not conjoined with work, must, in the end, be futile, and become a cause of sin" (ibid 2:2). The end of such a person will be that he will rob his fellow-creatures.
It indicates a high degree of excellence in a man to maintain himself by the labour of his hands. And this was the normal practice of the early saints. Thus, one secures all honour and happiness here and hereafter, as it is said "When thou eatest of the labour of thine hands, happy shalt thou be, and it shall be well with thee" (Ps. 128:2). Happy shalt thou be in this world, and it shall be well with thee in the world to come, which is altogether good.
The words of the Torah do not abide with one who studies listlessly, nor with those who learn amidst luxury, and high living, but only with one who mortifies himself for the sake of the Torah, constantly enduring physical discomfort, and not permitting sleep to his eyes nor slumber to his eyelids. "This is the law, when a man dieth in a tent" (Num. 19:14). The sages explained the text metaphorically thus: "The Torah only abides with him who mortifies himself in the tents of the wise." And so Solomon, in his wisdom, said "If thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small indeed" (Prov. 24:10). He also said "Also my wisdom stood unto me" (Eccles 2:9). This is explained by our wise men thus, "The wisdom that I learnt in wrath,<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* Play upon the word <i>aph</i> <span>אף</span>, meaning <i>also</i> and <i>wrath.</i></i>—this has remained with me." The sages said "There is a solemn covenant that anyone who toils at his studies in the Synagogue,<sup class="footnote-marker">**</sup><i class="footnote">** <span>בית הכנסת</span> Synagogue, where it was customary to study privately.</i> will not quickly forget." He who toils privately in learning, will become wise, as it is said "With the lowly (literally, <i>the reserved</i>) is wisdom" (Prov. 11:2). If one recites aloud while studying, what he learns will remain with him. But he who reads silently soon forgets.
While it is a duty to study by day and by night, most of one's knowledge is acquired at night. Accordingly, when one aspires to win the crown of the Torah, he should be especially heedful of all his nights and not waste a single one of them in sleep, eating, drinking, idle talk and so forth, but devote all of them to study of the Torah and words of wisdom. The sages said "That sound of the Torah has worth, which is heard by night, as it is said 'Arise, cry out in the night' (Lam. 2:19): and whoever occupies himself with the study of the Torah at night—a mark of spiritual grace distinguishes him by day, as it is said, 'By day the Lord will command His loving kindness, and in the night His song shall be with me, even a prayer unto the God of my life' (Ps. 42:9). A house wherein the words of the Torah are not heard at night will be consumed by fire, as it is said 'All darkness is laid up for his treasures; a fire not blown by man shall consume him" (Job 20:26). 'Because he hath despised the word of the Lord' (Num. 15:31)—this refers to one who has utterly neglected (the study of) the words of the Torah.". And, so too, one who is able to occupy himself with the Torah and does not do so, or who had read Scripture and learnt <i>Mishnah</i> and gave them up for wordly inanities, and abandoned and completely renounced this study, is included in the condemnation, "Because he hath despised the Word of the Lord". The sages said, "Whoever neglects the Torah because of wealth, will, at last be forced to neglect it owing to poverty. And whoever fulfills the Torah in poverty, will ultimately fulfill it amidst wealth" (Ethics of the Fathers 4:11, with order of sentences reversed). And this is explicitly set forth in the Torah, as it is said, "Because thou didst not serve the Lord thy God with joyfulness and with gladness of heart, by reason of the abundance of all things, therefore shalt thou serve thine enemy" (Deut. 28:47-48). It is also said "That He might afflict thee…. to do thee good at thy latter end…." (Deut. 8:16).

Chapter 4

Torah should only be taught to a worthy pupil whose conduct is exemplary or whose disposition is simple. One however who walks in a way that is not good should first be reclaimed, trained in the right way and tested (as to his sincerity); then he is admitted into the <i>Beth Hamidrash</i> (College) and given instruction. The sages say: "To teach a pupil who is unworthy is like casting a stone to Mercury (the idol), as it is said, "As one puts a stone in a sling, so is he that giveth honour to a fool"<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* The stone does not stay long in the sling; it is soon shot out, so honour given to a fool does not stay long with him.</i> (Prov. 26:8). There is no honour but the Torah, as it is said, "The wise shall inherit honour" (Prov. 3:35). So too, if a teacher does not walk in the right way—even if he is a great scholar and all the people are in need of him—instruction is not to be received from him till he reforms; as it is said, "For the priest's lips shall keep knowledge, and they shall seek the law from his mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts" (Mal. 2:7). Our sages applied this text thus: "If the teacher is like an angel of the Lord of Hosts, they may seek the Law from his mouth. But if he is not, then they shall not seek the Law from his mouth."
How is instruction to be imparted ? The teacher is seated in the schoolroom facing the class, with the pupils around him like a crown, so that they can all see him and hear his words. The teacher is not to sit on a stool while his pupils are seated on the floor. Either all sit on the floor, or all on stools. Formerly the teacher used to be seated, while the pupils stood. But before the destruction of the Second Temple, it already had become the universal custom that pupils, while being taught, should be seated.
If it was his custom to teach the pupils personally, he may do so. If however, he taught through a <i>Meturgeman</i> (an interpreter), the latter stands between him and his pupils. The teacher addresses the interpreter, who declaims what he has just heard to all the pupils. And when they put questions to the interpreter, he asks the teacher. The teacher replies to the interpreter who addresses the answer to the one who put the question. The teacher should not raise his voice above the interpreter's voice. Nor should the latter raise his voice above that of the teacher, when he addresses a question to him. The interpreter may not detract aught from the teacher's words, nor add to them nor vary them—unless he is the teacher's father or instructor. In addressing the interpreter, the teacher uses the introductory formula: "Thus my revered preceptor said to me" or "Thus my revered father said to me". But when the interpreter repeats the words to the listener, he recites them in the name of the sage quoted, and mentions the name if he were the teacher's father or teacher, and says "Thus said our Master so-and-so" (naming him). He does so, even if the teacher abstained from naming the sage on the ground that it is forbidden to mention one's teacher or father by name.
If the teacher taught and his pupils did not understand, he should not be angry with them or fall into a rage, but should repeat the lesson again and again till they have grasped the full meaning of the Halacha (rule) he is expounding. So also, the pupil should not say "I understand" when he has not understood, but should ask again and again. And if the master is angry with him and storms at him, he should say "Master, it is Torah. I need to learn, and my intellectual capacities are deficient."
A disciple should not feel ashamed before his fellow-students who grasp the lesson after hearing it once or twice, while he needs to hear it several times before he knows it. For if this makes him feel ashamed, he will go through college without having learnt anything. The ancient sages accordingly said, "A bashful man cannot learn, nor a passionate man teach" (Ethics of the Fathers 2:6). These observations only apply when the students' lack of understanding is due to the difficulty of the subject or to their mental deficiency. But if the teacher clearly sees that they are negligent and indolent in their study of the Torah and that this is the cause of their failure to understand, it is his duty to scold them and shame them with words of reproach, and so stimulate them to be keen. And in this regard, the sages said "Arouse awe in the pupils". It is thus improper for a teacher to indulge in frivolity before his pupils, or to jest in their presence, or eat and drink with them—so that the fear of him be upon them, and they will thus learn from him quickly.
Questions are not to be put to the teacher immediately on his entering the school, but only after his mind is composed. Nor should a pupil put a question as soon as he has come in, but only after he himself is composed and rested. Two pupils are not to put questions at one time. The teacher is not to be questioned on a topic not pertaining to the lesson, but only on the subject that is being treated, so as not to embarrass him. The teacher however should set "pitfalls" before his pupils, both in his questions and in what he does in their presence, in order to sharpen their wits, and ascertain whether they remember what he had taught them or do not remember it. Needless to add, that he has the right to question them on a subject other than that on which they are at the moment engaged, in order to stimulate them to be diligent in study.
No questions should be asked standing, nor answers given standing; nor should they be addressed by any one from an elevation, or from a distance, or when one is behind the elders. The teacher may only be questioned on the topic that is being studied. The questions are to be put in a respectful manner. One should not ask concerning more than three Halachoth (rules) in the topic.
Two individuals put questions. One of these questions is germane to the subject under discussion, while the other is not. Heed is given to the question that is germane. One question refers to a legal rule, the other to exegesis; the former receives attention. One question is exegetical; the other homiletical; the former is taken up. One question is homiletical <i>;</i> the other appertains to an inference a <i>fortiori;</i> the latter is answered. One question refers to an <i>a fortiori</i> inference, the other to an inference from similarity of phrases; the former is dealt with. Questions are put by two person, one of whom is a graduated scholar, the other a disciple; attention is paid to the scholar. One of them is a disciple, the other is unlettered; heed is given to the disciple. Where both are graduated scholars, disciples or unlettered, and the questions of both concern two legal rules, or two responses, or two practical issues, the interpreter may in these cases give the preference to either.
No one should sleep in the Beth Hamidrash (House of Study). If a student dozes there, his knowledge becomes a thing of shreds. Thus Solomon, in his wisdom, said, "And drowsiness shall clothe one in rags" (Prov. 23:21). No conversation may be held in the House of Study, except in reference to the words of the Torah. Even if one sneezes there, the others do not wish him 'good health'. Needless to add, other topics must not be discussed. The sanctity of a Beth Hamidrash is greater than that of synagogues.

Chapter 5

Just as a person is commanded to honour and revere his father, so is he under an obligation to honour and revere his teacher, even to a greater extent than his father; for his father gave him life in this world, while his teacher who instructs him in wisdom, secures for him life in the world to come. If he sees an article that his father had lost and another article that his teacher had lost, the teacher's property should be recovered first, and then the father's. If his father and his teacher are loaded with burdens, he should first relieve his teacher and then his father. If his father and teacher are in captivity, he should first ransom his father. But, if his father is a scholar, even though not of the same rank as his teacher, he should first recover his father's lost property and then his teacher's. There is no honour higher than that which is due to the teacher; no reverence profounder than that which should be paid him. The sages said "Reverence for thy teacher shall be like the fear of Heaven" (Ethics of the Fathers 4:15). They further said, "Whoever distrusts the authority of his teacher—it is as if he disputes with the <i>Shechinah</i> !; as it is said, "When they strove against the Lord" (Num. 26:9). Whoever starts a quarrel with his teacher, it is as if he started a quarrel with the <i>Shechinah;</i> as it is said, "Where the children of Israel strove with the Lord, and He was sanctified in them" (Num. 20:13). And whoever cherishes resentment against his teacher—it is as if he cherishes resentment against the Lord, as it is said, "Your murmurings are not against us, but against the Lord" (Ex. 16:8). Whoever harbours doubts about his teacher—it is as if he harbours doubts about the <i>Shechinah;</i> as it is said, "And the people spoke against God and against Moses" (Num. 21:3).
Who is to be regarded as disputing his teacher's authority ? One who sets up a college, holds sessions, discourses and instructs without his teacher's permission, during the latter's lifetime, and even if he be a resident in another country. To give decisions in his teacher's presence is forbidden at all times. Whoever gives a decision in his teacher's presence is deserving of death.
If there was a distance of twelve <i>mils</i><sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* A <i>mil</i> (Hebrew mile) is 2,000 cubits.</i> between him and his teacher and a question was put to him concerning a rule of practice, he may give the answer; and, to save a man from doing what is forbidden, he may give a decision even in his teacher's presence. For instance, if he sees one committing a violation of the Law, because that person did not know that it is prohibited, or out of sheer wickedness, it is his duty to check the wrongdoer and say to him "This is forbidden". He should do so, even in the presence of his master, and even if the latter has not given him permission. For to save God's name from being profaned, we forego the honour due to the teacher. This however is only permitted casually. But to assume the function of a decisionist and give decisions regularly to all enquirers, even if he and his teacher live at opposite ends of the earth, is forbidden to a disciple, during his teacher's lifetime, unless he has his teacher's permission. Nor even after his teacher's death, may any disciple regularly give decisions, unless he has attained a standard of knowledge qualifying him to do so.
A disciple who is not thus qualified and nevertheless gives decisions is "wicked, foolish and of an arrogant spirit" (Ethics of the Fathers 4:9). And of him it is said, "For she hath cast down many wounded" (Prov. 7:26). On the other hand, a sage, who is qualified and refrains from rendering decisions, withholds knowledge of the Torah and puts stumbling blocks before the blind. Of him it is said "Even the mighty are all her slain" (Prov. 7:26). The students of small minds who have acquired an insufficient knowledge of the Torah, and yet seek to aggrandise themselves before the ignorant and among their townsmen by impertinently putting themselves forward and presuming to judge and render decisions in Israel—these are the ones who multiply strife, devastate the world, quench the light of the Torah and spoil the vineyard of the Lord of hosts. Of such, Solomon, in his wisdom, said "Seize for us the foxes, the little foxes that spoil the vineyard" (Song of Songs 2:15).
A disciple is forbidden to call his teacher by his name, even when the latter is not present. This rule only applies if the name is unusual, so that any one hearing it knows who is meant. In his presence, the pupil must never mention his teacher's name, even if he desires to call another person who bears the same name; the same is the rule with his father's name. In referring to them even after their death, he should use a descriptive title, ("my honoured father", or "my honoured teacher"). A disciple may not greet his teacher or return his greeting in the same manner as people are wont to greet their companions and return their greetings. But he should bow to his teacher and address him with reverence and deference "Peace be unto thee, my teacher". If the teacher greeted him first, he should respond "Peace to thee, my teacher and master".
So too, he should not remove his phylacteries in his teacher's presence, nor recline in his presence, but should sit respectfully, as one sits before a king. He should not recite his prayers, while standing in front of his teacher, or behind him, or at his side; needless to add, that he must not step (backward or forward) side by side with the teacher, but should stand at a distance in the rear, not however, exactly behind his teacher, and then he can offer up his devotions. He must not go with his teacher into the same bath room. He must not sit in his teacher's seat. When his teacher and a colleague dispute with one another, he must not, in his teacher's presence, interpose his opinion as to who is right. He must not contradict his teacher's statements. He may not sit down in his teacher's presence, till he is told "be seated", nor stand up, till he is told to stand up, or till he obtains permission to stand up. And when he quits, he must not turn his back, but should retire with his face to his teacher.
It is his duty to rise before his teacher, from the moment he sees him at a distance, (and keep standing) till he disappears from view and is no longer visible; then the disciple may resume his seat. It is a person's duty to visit his teacher on the festivals.
Courtesy must not be shown to a pupil in the teacher's presence, unless the teacher himself is wont to show courtesy to that pupil. The various offices that a slave performs for his master, a pupil performs for his teacher. If however he is in a place where he is unknown, and has no phylacteries with him<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* Only worn by free Israelites.</i>, and fears that people will say that he is a slave, he does not help his teacher to put on or remove his shoes. Whoever refuses his pupil's services, withholds kindness from him and removes from him the fear of Heaven<sup class="footnote-marker">**</sup><i class="footnote">** Suggested by the exhortation in the Ethics of the Fathers “Let reverence for thy teacher be as the fear of Heaven”.</i>. A pupil who neglects any of the courtesies due to his master causes the <i>Schechinah</i> to depart from Israel.
If a pupil saw his teacher violating the ordinances of the Torah, he should say to him, "Our master, thus and thus, hast thou taught us". Whenever a pupil recites a dictum in his teacher's presence, he should say "Thus, our master, hast thou taught us". He should never quote a dictum that he has not heard from his teacher, without giving the authority for it. When his teacher dies, he rends all the garments he wears till he bares his breast. These rents he nver sews up. These rules only apply to the chief teacher from whom one has learnt most of what he knows. But his relation to one from whom he did not acquire most of his knowledge is that of a junior to a senior fellow-student. Towards such a senior student (who was at the same time his teacher), the disciple is not required to observe all the above-mentioned points of courtesy. But the junior has to stand up before him, and, on his demise, has to rend his garments, just as he does for a deceased relative for whom he mourns. Even if one learnt from a person one thing only, be it great or small, one has to stand up before that person and rend one's garments at his demise.
No scholar who possesses good manners will speak before his superior in knowledge, even if he has learnt nothing from him.
If one's chief teacher desires to excuse all his pupils or any one of them from all or any of these observances, he may do so. But even then, the disciple must show courtesy to him, even at the moment when he explicitly dispenses with it.
As pupils are bound to honour their teacher, so a teacher ought to show courtesy and friendliness to his pupils. The sages said "Let the honour of thy disciples be as dear to thee as thine own" (Ethics of the Fathers 4:15). A man should take an interest in his pupils and love them, for they are his spiritual children who will bring him happiness in this world and in the world hereafter.
Disciples increase the teacher's wisdom and broaden his mind. The sages said, "Much wisdom I learnt from my teachers, more from my colleagues; from my pupils, most of all". Even as a small piece of wood kindles a large log, so a pupil of small attainments sharpens the mind of his teacher, so that by his questions, he elicits glorious wisdom.

Chapter 6

It is a duty to honour every scholar, even if he is not one's teacher, as it is said, "Thou shalt rise up before the hoary head, and honour the face of the old man" (Lev. 19.32). The word <i>Zaken</i> (rendered "old man" refers to one who has acquired wisdom. When ought people to rise up before him ? At the moment that he has approached within four cubits, (and they should keep standing) till he has passed out of sight.
This courtesy is not to be observed in a bath-house nor in a latrine, for it is said, "Thou shalt rise up and <i>honour</i>" (Lev. 19:32); the courtesy of rising must be such as to express honour. Labourers, at the time when they are working, need not rise up before scholars, as it is said "Thou shalt rise up and honour"; even as the "honouring" enjoined does not involve a monetary loss, so the courtesy of rising before the scholar is only required when it does not involve a monetary loss. And whence do we know that one should not shut one's eyes when a scholar passes, so as not to see him and thus evade the obligation of standing up before him ? It is inferred from the text "And thou shalt fear thy God" (Lev. 19:32); wherever the fulfilment of a duty is left to the conscience, the exhortation is added "Thou shalt fear thy God".
It is improper for a sage to put the people to inconvenience by deliberately passing before them, so that they should have to stand up before him. He should use a short route and endeavour to avoid notice so that they should not be troubled to stand up. The sages were wont to use circuitous and exterior paths, where they were not likely to meet those who might recognise them, so as not to trouble them.
The same rule applies to riding as to walking. As it is a duty to rise up before the sage when he walks, so this courtesy should be shown when he rides by.
Where three are walking on a road, the teacher should be in the middle, the senior (of his disciples) at his right, the junior on his left.
On seeing a <i>Chacham</i> (a sage or religious authority), one does not rise till he has approached within four cubits; and as soon as he has passed, one resumes one's seat. On seeing the <i>Ab-beth-Din</i> (head of a Court; in ancient times, Vice-President of the Great Synhedrion), one stands up as soon as he comes within sight, and does not sit down till he has passed on to a distance of four cubits beyond the observer. On seeing the <i>Nasi,</i> (the Patriarch of Palestine, in ancient times, President of the Great Synhedrion), one rises as soon as he is seen, and does not sit down till he is seated in his place or has passed out of sight. If the <i>Nasi</i> desires to dispense with the courtesy due to him, he may do so. When the <i>Nasi</i> enters an assembly, all present rise and do not sit down till he says to them "sit". When the <i>Ab-beth-Din</i> enters, two rows are formed. Those forming these rows on either side stand up while he passes between them till he is seated in his place. The rest of the people remain seated in their places.
When a <i>Chacham</i> enters, each person stands up as he approaches him within four cubits, and then resumes his seat, and so does the next one till the <i>Chacham</i> has reached his place and is seated. Sons of sages and their disciples, when the public requires their services, make their way over the heads of the people, to reach their places. It is however not praiseworthy for the disciples of the sages to be the last to enter. If one needs to withdraw (from the room)—when he returns, he goes back to his place. Young children, of sages who have enough intelligence to follow the discourse, face their father (when he is lecturing). If they are too young to understand, they face the people.
A pupil, in regular attendance, may only rise before his teacher in the morning and in the evening, so that the honour paid to the teacher shall not be more than that shown to God.
One rises up before an old man, advanced in years, even if he is not a sage. Even a learned man who is young rises up before an old man of advanced age. He is not obliged however to rise to his full height but need only raise himself sufficiently to indicate courtesy. Even a gentile who is aged should be shown courtesy in speech; and one should extend a hand to support him, as it is said, "Thou shalt rise up before the hoary head", without qualification.
Scholars do not go out to take part with the rest of the community in building, digging or similar work for the state, so as not to lose the respect of the common people. Nor are they assessed for the cost of building the walls, repairing the gates, paying the watchmen's wages, etc., or making a gift to the king. Nor are they obliged to pay a tax, jointly or severally levied upon the inhabitants of a city, as it is said, "Yea, though they hire<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* Joseph Caro in his <i>Keseph Mishnah,</i> explains this verse thus “If they all study Torah (play upon <i>Yitnu,</i> which means in Aramaic, <i>they study</i>.), God will gather them; if only a few do so, they will be diminished”.</i> among the nations, now will I gather them up, and they begin to be diminished by reason of the burden of kings and princes" (Hos. 8:10). So too, if a scholar has goods for sale, he is to be given the opportunity of disposing of them first; and no one else in the market is to be permitted to sell, till the scholar has first sold his stock. Similarly, if he has a cause pending and he is standing among a large number of suitors, his cause is taken first, and (during the hearing) he is seated.
It is exceedingly iniquitous to contemn sages or hate them. Jerusalem was only destroyed when its scholars were treated with contumely, as it is said "But they mocked the messengers of God and despised His words, and scoffed at His prophets" (II Chron. 36; 16); this means that they "despised those who taught His words". So too, the text "And if ye shall abhor My statutes (Lev. 26:15) means "if ye abhor the teachers of My statutes". Whoever contemns the sages will have no portion in the world to come, and is included in the censure "For the word of the Lord hath he despised" (Num. 15:31).
Although one who contemns the sages forfeits his portion in the world to come, yet if witnesses came forward and testified that a certain individual reviled a sage, even if only in words, the offender has incurred the penalty of excommunication. The Court (if he is found guilty) publicly excommunicates him and also imposes upon him a fine of one <i>litra</i><sup class="footnote-marker">**</sup><i class="footnote">** <i>Litra</i> in gold = 25 gold denarii.</i> in gold, a penalty of uniform amount in all places, and this is given to the sage. Whoever reviles a <i>Chacham</i> in words, even after the latter's decease, is excommunicated by the Court, which lifts the ban after he repents. If the sage who has been reviled is living, the offender is only released with the concurrence of the person on whose account the ban had been imposed. To safeguard his honour, the <i>Chacham</i> may himself excommunicate a boor who treated him disrespectfully. For this, neither witnesses nor a previous warning are necessary. The ban is not removed till the offender has appeased the <i>Chacham.</i> If he died before this was done, three men constitute themselves a quorum and remove the ban. If the <i>Chacham</i> desires to forgive the offender, and does not excommunicate him, he is at liberty to do so.
When a teacher, to safeguard the honour due to him, excommunicated any person, it is the duty of all his disciples to treat that person as under the ban. But when a disciple excommunicated anyone, for his own honour's sake, the teacher is not bound to respect the ban, but the people must do so. Similarly, anyone whom the <i>Nasi</i> (Patriarch of Palestine) excommunicated is to be treated by all Israel as under the ban. But if all Israel excommunicated a person, the <i>Nasi</i> need not treat him as excommunicated. Whoever has been placed under a ban of excommunication in his own city, is to be so regarded in another city. But one, who has been placed under such a ban in another city than his own, is not under a ban in his own city.
The foregoing rules only apply to one who was excommunicated because he reviled scholars. But if one was excommunicated for other transgressions, the penalty for which is excommunication, even if the ban was pronounced by the humblest individual in Israel, the <i>Nasi</i> and all Israel are bound to respect it till the offender repents of the transgression for which he had been excommunicated and is released from the ban. There are twenty-four offences for which the ban is pronounced on an individual, irrespective of sex. The category is as follows: 1) Whoever reviles a <i>Chacham,</i> even after his decease; 2) Insults the messenger of a Court; 3) calls another person, a slave; 4) receives a citation from a Court to appear at its sessions, on a date fixed by the Court, and fails to attend; 5) slights any ordinance instituted by the Scribes, or, needless to add, any precept of the Torah; 6) whoever refuses to accept the decision of a Court, is placed under the ban of excommunication till judgment is satisfied; 7) whoever keeps on his premises anything noxious, such as a vicious dog or an unsafe ladder, is put under a ban till he removes the nuisance; 8) whoever sells any of his real property to an idolater, is excommunicated till he assumes liability for all injuries that may accrue from the idolater to his Israelite neighbour who owns adjacent property; 9) whoever testifies concerning an Israelite before the idolaters' courts and the effect of his testimony is to force the Israelite to make a payment for which, he would not, according to Jewish Law, have been liable, is placed under a ban till he makes restitution; 10) a butcher, who is a <i>Cohen</i> (priest descended in the male line of Aaron), and who does not separate the portions of a slaughtered beast due to the priest and give them to another priest, is placed under a ban till he does so; 11) whoever violates the sanctity of the second days of the Festivals, notwithstanding that the observance of these days is due to custom; 12) whoever does manual labour on the Eve of Passover, after midday; 13) takes God's name in vain; or takes it with an oath, in matters of no importance; 14) causes the public to profane God's name; 15) causes the public to eat sacrifices outside the prescribed bounds; 16) calculates, outside of Palestine, the annual calendar, and appoints dates for the beginning of the month; 17) causes the blind to stumble; 18) keeps the public from fulfilling a religious duty; 19) a slaughterer who permits forbidden meat to leave his premises as fit for Jewish consumption; 20) or who has not examined his slaughtering knife in the presence of the <i>Chacham</i> (religious head of the community); 21) whoever deliberately practises priapism; 22) whoever divorces his wife and then enters into a partnership with her, or engages in other commercial transactions which bring them into close relations—when they come into Court (i.e. when they come under the notice of the Court) they are placed under a ban; 23) a religious leader of evil repute; 24) whoever unjustly excommunicates one who has not incurred the ban.

Chapter 7

If a sage grown old in wisdom, a <i>Nasi,</i> or <i>Ab-beth-Din,</i> committed a grave offence, he is, under no circumstances, to be publicly excommunicated, unless he acted like Jeroboam, the son of Nebat and his confederates. But if he committed other sins less heinous, he is punished with stripes privately, as it is said "Therefore shalt thou stumble in the day, and the prophet also shall stumble with thee in the night" (Hosea 4:5); this means that even if he stumbled, conceal it as in the darkness of the night. And we also say to him "Save your self-respect and stay at home" (II Kings 14:6). So too, if any scholar rendered himself liable to excommunication, the Court is forbidden to act precipitately and hastily put him under the ban. The members of the Court should flee from such a procedure, and take no part in it. The saints among the sages gloried in the fact that they never sat in a quorum of judges, to excommunicate a scholar, though they might sit as judges in a court that sentenced a scholar to be punished with stripes, if he had incurred that penalty, and even if the sentence was for contumacy.
What is the form used for <i>Niddui</i> (the lighter ban of excommunication)? (The authority who excommunicates) says "So-and-so (naming him) shall be under a ban". If the excommunication took place in the offender's presence, he says to him "This person, (naming him) is under a ban. For <i>Cherem</i> (the severer excommunication), he says to him "So-and-so (naming him) is under <i>Cherem</i> and accursed; he is under an imprecation with Oath and Ban".
How is the lighter or severer excommunication removed ? The authority says to the person excommunicated "Thou art released; thou art forgiven". If the person is released in his absence, the formula is "So-and-so (naming him) is released and forgiven".
How should a person under the milder ban conduct himself, and how should others conduct themselves towards him ? During the whole of the term for which he has been excommunicated, he is, like a mourner, forbidden to have his hair cut or to bathe. He is not counted in the quorum of three or ten, required for reciting the special introduction to the Grace after Meals. He is not included in the congregation of ten men for any function that requires that number. No one may sit down within four cubits of where he is. He may however teach and be taught. He may be hired and hire others. If he dies, while under the ban, the Court orders a stone to be put on his coffin, as much as to say that he is stoned because he is separated from the community. Needless to state that no funeral eulogy is delivered, and his bier is not followed.
One who is in <i>Cherem</i> (under the severer ban of excommunication) suffers the additional severities that he may neither instruct nor receive instruction, but he studies privately, so as not to forget what he had learnt. He may neither be hired nor may he hire others. No one engages in commercial transactions with him, except to a slight extent, as much as is sufficient to provide him with a livelihood.
If a person has been for thirty days under <i>Niddui</i> (the milder ban) and made no request to be released, the ban is imposed for a second term of thirty days. If this period also passed without his seeking to have the ban removed, he is placed under the severer ban.
How many persons are needed to remove the milder or severer ban ? Three, even if they are private individuals. A qualified scholar can by himself remove the lighter or graver ban. A disciple has the right to do so, even in the locality where his teacher resides.

If three persons pronounced a ban of excommunication and left the place, and the offender renounced the practice for which he had been excommunicated, three others may proceed to release him.
If one does not know who it was that imposed the ban upon him, he should go to the <i>Nasi</i> and he will release him from the ban.
A ban that is conditional, even if self-imposed, requires annulment. A scholar who excommunicated himself, may himself annul the ban, even when he had added to it the clause, "According to the view of So-and-so", and even though the excommunication was for a transgression for which he had incurred that penalty.
A man who dreamt that he had been excommunicated, even if he knows who it was that had (in his dream) excommunicated him, requires ten men who study <i>Halachoth</i> (legal rules) to release him from the ban. If he does not find them, he must go as far as a <i>Parsah</i> (four <i>mils</i>) to seek them. If he fails to find ten men with these qualifications, ten men who study <i>Mishna</i> may release him. Failing these, he may be released by ten who can read Scripture. If such are not accessible, he may be released by ten men even if they are unable to read Scripture. If he cannot find ten men in his locality, three individuals may release him.
If the ban was imposed on a person in his presence, it can only be removed in his presence. If it was imposed in his absence, it may be removed in his presence or absence. No interval of time need elapse between the imposition of a ban and its annulment, but the pronouncement of a ban may be immediately followed by its removal if the individual under the ban reforms. The Court may, at its discretion, leave a man under the ban for many years, according to the extent of his wickedness. If the Court see fit straightway to impose upon a person the <i>Cherem</i> (severer ban), and the same ban on any one who eats or drinks with him or stays near him within the distance of four cubits, they may do so in order to punish the offender and build a fence round the Torah, so that sinners shall not break bounds. Although a  <i>Chacham</i> has the right to pronounce the ban to safeguard his honour, it is not creditable for a scholar to accustom himself to this procedure. He should rather close his ears to remarks of the illiterate and take no notice of them, as Solomon, in his wisdom, said "Also pay not heed to all the words that are spoken" (Eccles. 7:21). Such too, was the way of the ancient saints. They heard themselves reviled and made no reply. Yet more, they forgave the reviler and pardoned him. Great sages, glorying in their commendable practices, said that they never, for the sake of personal honour, imposed on any one the lighter or severer ban. This is the way of scholars, which it is right to follow. It however only applies to cases where one has been reviled in private. But a scholar, who has been treated with contumely or been reviled in public, may not forgive the wrong done to his honour. If he does so, he is punished, for this is contempt of the Torah. We should relentlessly pursue the matter, till the offender begs his pardon, after which he should be forgiven.