Duties of the Heart
חובות הלבבות
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Duties_of_the_Heart
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Duties of the Heart, trans. by Rabbi Moses Hyamson, New York, 1925
-http://dafyomireview.com/article.php?docid=417
-Duties of the Heart, trans. Rabbi Yosef Sebag
-http://dafyomireview.com/398

Duties of the Heart

Introduction of the Author

Blessed be the L-ord, G-d of Israel, to Whom true Unity can be fittingly ascribed, whose existence is Eternal, whose beneficence is unceasing, who created all that is found as a sign of His Unity, who formed beings to serve as witnesses of His power and brought new things into existence to testify to His wisdom and great benevolence, as written "one generation shall praise your works to another, and shall declare Your mighty acts" (Ps. 145:4), and "all Your works shall give thanks to You, O L-ord; and Your saints shall bless You; they shall speak of the glory of Your kingdom, and talk of Your power; To make known to the sons of men His mighty acts, etc" (Ps.145:10-12).
The greatest gift which the Creator bestowed on His servants, human beings, after bringing them out to full perception and complete (mature) understanding - is wisdom, which is the life of their spirit and the candle of their intellect; It brings them to the favor of G-d and saves them from His wrath in this world and the next, as Scripture says "for the L-ord gives wisdom: out of His mouth comes knowledge and understanding" (Prov.2:6); And Elihu said: "but there is a spirit in man, and the breath of the Almighty that gives them understanding" (Job 32:8); And Daniel said: "He gives wisdom unto the wise, and knowledge to them that know understanding" (Daniel 2:21), and "I am the L-ord your G-d who teaches you for your benefit, who leads you by the way that you should go" (Isaiah 48:17). 
Wisdom falls into three divisions:
The first division is the science of nature, called in Arabic, "Al-Ilm al-tibi". This branch of knowledge deals with the essential and incidental properties of material bodies.
The second division consists of the practical sciences, called in Arabic, "Al-Ilm al-riazi". These comprise arithmetic, engineering, astronomy, and music. 
The third division, called in Arabic, "Al-Ilm al-ilahi". is the science of theology, which deals with the knowledge of G-d, knowledge of His torah, and other [spiritual] things, such as the soul, the intellect, and spiritual beings.
All these divisions of wisdom, and their respective branches, are gates which the Creator has opened for men through which they may attain [a comprehension] of religion and of the world. Only that some sciences are more needed for religious matters while others are more needed for secular interests.
The sciences whose use is closest to worldly matters is the science of nature, which is the lowest science and the practical science, which is second. These two sciences instruct on all the secrets of the physical world, its uses and benefits, its industries and trades and is conducive to physical and material well-being.
The science which is most needed for religion is the highest science - Theology. We are under duty to study it in order to understand and obtain a knowledge of our religion. But to study it in order to attain worldly benefits is forbidden. Our teachers said (Nedarim 62a): "[expounding the verse:] 'to love the L-rd your G-d, to hearken to His voice, and to cleave to Him' [This means] that one should not say, 'I will read Scripture that I may be called a scholar.' I will study [mishna], that I may be called Rabbi, I will study [Talmud], to be an Elder, and sit in the assembly [of elders]; but learn out of love, and honor will come in the end.". And "Do [good] deeds for the sake of their Maker, and speak of them [words of torah] for their own sake. Make not of them a crown wherewith to magnify yourself, nor a spade to dig with" (ibid). And "'Fortunate is the man that fears the L-ord, that delights greatly in His commandments' (Ps. 112:1), R. Eleazar expounds thus: 'In His commandments' but not in the reward of His commandments. This is just what we have learnt. 'He used to say, Be not like servants who serve the master on the condition of receiving a reward; but be like servants who serve the master without the condition of receiving a reward.'" (Avodah Zara 19a). 
The avenues which the Creator has opened for the knowledge of His law and religion are three:
The first is a [sound] intellect which is free of any damage.
The second, the book of His law revealed to Moses His prophet. 
The third, the tradition which we have received from our ancient Sages who in turn received them from the prophets, peace be unto them. The great Rabbi Saadia of blessed memory already discussed on this avenue to a sufficient extent. 
Furthermore, the science of the Torah falls into two divisions:
The first aims at the knowledge of the duties of the limbs (practical duties) and is the science of external conducts.
The second deals with the duties of the heart, namely, its sentiments and thoughts, and is the science of the inner life. 
The duties of the limbs likewise fall into two divisions.
The first consists of precepts which reason would have dictated even if the torah had not made them obligatory.
The second, precepts received on the authority of Revelation which reason neither obligates nor rejects such as the prohibition of milk with meat, shaatnez (garments woven of wool and flax), kilaim (sowing diverse seeds together), and similar precepts whose reason for being prohibited or obligatory is unknown to us. 
The duties of the heart, however, are all rooted in rational principles, as I will explain with G-d's help.
All the precepts are either positive commandments or negative commandments. We do not need to explain this for the duties of the limbs because these are universally known. I will, however, with G-d's help, mention of the positive and negative commandments of the duties of the heart to serve as examples of those not cited.
Among the positive commandments of the duties of the heart: to believe that the world has a Creator who created it from naught, that there is none like Him, that we acknowledge His Unity, that we serve Him in our hearts, that we reflect on the wonders of His works, that these may serve as evidences of Him, that we place our trust in Him, that we humble ourselves before Him, that we revere Him, that we fear and feel abashed when we consider that He observes our outer and inner being, that we long to do His will, that we devote our acts to His Name, that we love Him and those that love Him in order to come close to Him, that we hate His enemies, and similar duties which are not visible by the senses. 
Negative commandments of the duties of the heart are the converse of those just mentioned. Also included among them: to not covet, avenge, nor bear a grudge; as written "you shall not avenge nor bear a grudge" (Levit. 19:18). 
Among them, that our minds not muse on [doing] transgressions, nor desire them, nor resolve to do them and other similar things which are hidden in a man and observed by none but the Creator, as written "I the L-ord search the heart, I test the mind" (Jer. 17:10) and "the candle of G-d is the spirit of man, searching all the inner depths of the heart" (Prov. 20:27). 
As the science of the torah deals with two parts, external and inward commandments, I studied the books of our predecessors who lived after the [compilers of the] Talmud. They composed many works dealing with the precepts. In the expectation of learning from them the science of inward religion, I found, however, that all that they intended to explain and clarify fall into three categories:
The first, to explain the Torah and the books of the prophets, and this is in one of two ways, either explaining the words and subject matter, as did Rabeinu Saadya, of blessed memory, in his commentaries of most of the books on Scripture. Or to explain the language and grammar, grammatical forms and usages in all their varieties, as well as paying heed to accuracy of the text, like the books of Ibn Ganach, the Massorites, and their school.
The second, to compile the explanation of the commandments into summary form, such as the work of Rav Chefetz ben Yatzliach of blessed memory. Or of only the commandments which apply today such as Halachot Pesukot, Halachot Gedolot, and similar collections; or of special topics as the Geonim did in their Responsa on practical duties and in their decisions.
The third, to confirm our faith in the matters of torah in our hearts through logical proofs and refutation of heretics like the book of Emunot (of Rabbi Saadia), the Sharashei Hadat, the Sefer Mekametz and similar works. 
I examined these writings but failed to find among them a book specially devoted to the inner wisdom. I found that this wisdom, which is the duties of the heart, had been entirely neglected. No work had been composed, systematically explaining its roots and branches.
I greatly wondered about this, and thought to myself, perhaps this class of duties is not obligatory from the torah but is only an ethical obligation the aim of which is to teach us the proper and just way. Possibly it belongs to the class of extra practices that are optional, for which we will not be held accountable for them nor will we be punished for neglecting them. And therefore, our predecessors omitted to write a special book on them. I investigated the Duties of the Heart from Reason, Scripture, and Tradition (talmud,midrash,etc.) to inquire whether or not they are obligatory and found that they form the foundation of all the precepts, and that if there is any deficiency in their observance, no external duties whatsoever can be properly fulfilled. 
First the arguments from Reason. It is already familiar that man consists of body and soul. Both are among the benefits G-d has bestowed on us. One of these elements of our being is visible and the other is invisible. Therefore, we are accordingly under duty to render the Creator visible and invisible service. The outward service is the observance of the duties of the limbs such as praying, fasting, giving charity, learning the torah and teaching it, making a Sukka, waving a willow branch (on the festival of Sukkot), Tzitzit, Mezuza, Maake, and similar precepts whose performance is completed by the physical limbs.
Inward service, however, consists of the fulfillment of the Duties of the Heart such as: to acknowledge the Unity of G-d in our hearts, believe in Him and His torah, to undertake His service, that we revere Him and humble ourselves before Him, that we love Him, trust in Him, and give over our lives to Him, that we abstain from what He hates, devote our actions to His Name, that we reflect on the benefits He bestows, and similar things which are performed by the thoughts and sentiments of the heart but do not associate with activity of the visible limbs of the body. 
I am certain that [even] the duties of the limbs cannot be performed properly unless they are accompanied by will of the heart, longing of the soul to do them, and desire of the heart to perform them. If it should enter our mind that we are under no obligation to choose the service of G-d and to yearn for it, then we would be exempt from the duties of the limbs for no act can be complete without the agreement of the soul. And since it is clear that the Creator has put us under obligation to perform the duties of the limbs, it would not be reasonable for us to suppose that our soul and heart, the choicest parts of our beings, should have been exempted from serving Him according to the extent of their ability, because their cooperation is required for the complete service of G-d. Therefore, it is clear that we are under obligation to perform outward and inner duties so that our service to the blessed Creator will be whole and complete, including both our inner and outer being. 
After their obligation has become clear to me from the grounds of Reason, I said to myself "perhaps this matter is not written in the torah, therefore they refrained from writing a book which instructs on it and demonstrates it." 
But when I searched in the torah, I found that it is mentioned frequently. For example (Deut. 6:5-6): "you shall love the L-ord your G-d with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your might; And these words, which I command you this day, shall be on your heart", and "so that you may love the L-ord your G-d, and that you may hearken to His voice, and that you may cling to Him" (Deut. 30:20), and "to love the L-ord your G-d and to serve Him with all your heart and with all your soul" (Deut. 11:13), and "You shall walk after the L-ord your G-d and fear Him" (Deut. 13:5), and "you shall love your fellow as yourself" (Levit.19:18), and "now, Israel, what does the L-ord your G-d ask of you, but to fear the L-ord your G-d" (Deut. 10:12), and "Therefore love the stranger, for you were strangers in the land of Egypt" (Deut. 10:19). And reverence for G-d and love for Him are among the duties of the heart. 
Regarding the negative commandments [of the duties of the heart], the torah wrote: "nor shall you covet etc" (Deut. 5:18), "You shall not avenge, nor bear any grudge" (Levit. 19:18), "You shall not hate your fellow in your heart" (Levit. 19:17), "and so that you do not seek after your own heart and your own eyes" (Numbers 15:39), "you shall not harden your heart nor shut your hand from your poor fellow" (Deut. 15:7), and many other similar passages.
Afterwards, the Torah reduced all [religious] service to the service of the heart and tongue in saying "For this commandment which I command you today is not hidden from you, neither is it far off; It is not in Heaven...But the matter is very near you, in your mouth and in your heart, that you may do it" (Deut.30:11). And in the other books of the prophets, they spoke extensively on the matter and mentioned it in several places. I do not need to mention them because they are numerous and well-known. 
After it had become clear to me that the duties of the heart are obligatory from the Torah and from reason, I searched the matter in the writings of our Sages. I found it to be even more explicit in their words than what is explained in the Torah and derived from reason. Some of them are stated as general principles such as "G-d wants the heart" (Sanhedrin 106b), and "the heart and the eyes are the two agents of sin" (Yerushalmi Berachos 1:5). Some of them in Tractate Avos, which there is no need to elaborate. I also found many in their traits and habits when they were asked about them as written regarding "to what do you attribute your long life?" (Megila 27b).
I found in the Torah regarding one who kills someone unintentionally, no capital punishment is incurred. Likewise, one who performs a sin unintentionally which if intentional would incur either capital punishment or the penalty of Karet (excision), the person had only to bring for them a sin-offering or an asham offering. All this is a clear proof that the essential condition of liability for punishment is the association of mind and body in a forbidden act, the mind by its intention, and the body by its movement.
So too our wise men said: "whoever performs a religious duty but did not intend to do it for the sake of G-d - he will not receive reward for it." 
And since the hinge and pillar of all deeds rests on the foundation of intention and hidden sentiment of the heart, a system of the duties of the heart should precede, by nature, a system of the duties of the limbs. 
After it had become clear to me through Reason, Scripture, and Tradition that the inner science is indeed an obligation, I said to myself, "perhaps this class of commandments are not obligatory at all times and at all places, similar to shmita, yovel (jubilee year), and [temple] offerings".
But when I delved deeper into the subject, I found that we are obligated in them constantly, without pause, throughout our lives, and that we have no claim (excuse) whatsoever for neglecting them. This applies to such duties, for example, as acknowledging the Unity of G-d in our hearts, to serve Him inwardly, to revere Him and to love Him, to yearn to fulfill the commandments obligatory upon us, as Scripture says "O my hope is that my ways are directed to observe Your statutes" (Ps. 119:5); to trust in Him and surrender ourselves to Him, as written "trust in Him at all times, pour out your heart before Him" (Ps.62:9); to remove hatred and jealousy from our hearts, to separate from the superfluous worldly matters which preoccupy us away from the service of G-d - we are under constant duty in all of these things, at all times and in all places, every hour, every second, and under all circumstances, as long as we have life and reason. 
The analogy of this is to a slave whose master charged him with two jobs. One in the house and the other in the field. The latter consisted of cultivating the ground and its care at definite periods and times. When those times are past or if he is unable to work there due to some thing which impedes him, he is then to be relieved of his responsibility for the work in the field. But he is never exempt for the work which he is commanded to do in the house, provided there is no impediment or other matter he must tend to. Hence, he is constantly charged to work the house when he is free to do so. 
Such too is the case for the duties of the heart which are always binding upon us. We have no excuse for their neglect, and there is nothing which impedes us in their fulfillment, except for love of this world, and lack of understanding in regard to our Creator, as written "they do not consider the work of G-d" (Isaiah 5:12). 
I said to myself, "perhaps this class of commandments does not branch out to many commandments. Therefore, they abandoned them and did not compose a book specially devoted to them". 
But when I investigated, on their number and derivatives, I found their derivatives to be exceedingly numerous until I thought that what David, peace be unto him, said "I have seen a limit to all perfection, but Your commandment is exceedingly broad" (Ps. 119:96) was referring to the Duties of the Heart. Because, the Duties of the Limbs are a known number, namely, 613. But the Duties of the Heart are exceedingly numerous until their derivative branches are countless. 
I further said: "perhaps they are so clear and familiar to everyone, and every person clings to them that a book on the subject is unnecessary". When, however, I studied the conduct of human beings throughout the ages as recorded in books, I found that they are far from [the knowledge or practice of] this class of commandments, with the exception of some zealous individuals, special elect of them, according to what is recorded about them. But as for the rest, how much were they so in need of exhortation and instruction! And all the more so, for most of the people in our generation, who neglect even the commandments of the limbs, not to mention the commandments of the heart. And if any one of them is roused to devote himself to the study of the Torah, his motive in this is to be called a "wise man" by the masses, and to gain for himself a name among the great. And thus he strays from the way of the Torah to things which will neither aid him in ascending spiritually, nor save him from spiritually stumbling. And he studies unnecessary things the ignorance of which he would not be punished for, while he omits to investigate the roots of the religion and the foundations of the Torah, which he should not have ignored nor neglected and without the knowledge and practice of which, no commandment can be properly fulfilled. For example, regarding acknowledging the Unity of G-d, (the question arises) whether we are under duty to examine this by the light of reason or whether it is sufficient if we accept it by tradition alone, namely, that we declare like the simpleton and the fool that "G-d is One" without argument or proof. Or, if we are under duty to investigate through rational inquiry the distinction between true Unity versus relative unity, so as to distinguish [the Unity of G-d] from other existing unities which we call "one". 
Of this the believer is not permitted by our religion to remain in ignorance, for the Torah exhorts us on this in saying "Therefore, know this day and consider within your heart, that the L-ord is G-d in Heaven above and on the earth below. There is none other" (Deut. 4:39).
The same is the case for other commandments of the heart which we have mentioned already or will mention. The believer's faith will not be complete until he knows these duties and practices them. They are the inner science, the light of the heart, and the shining of the soul. On this Scripture says: "Behold, Thou desirest truth in the inward parts; make me, therefore, to know wisdom in mine inmost heart" (Ps. 51:8). 
It is said of a Sage who would pass the first half of the day in the company of other people. But when he was alone, he would call out "O for hidden light", by which he referred to duties of the heart.
One of the wise men was consulted regarding a strange case on the laws of divorce. He replied to the inquirer: "you are asking on what will not harm you if you do not know it. Do you already know all that you are under duty to know of the commandments, and that you are not allowed to neglect, and that you should not be negligent of, that you turn to speculate on remote questions which will not avail you of any advancement, nor fix any crookedness in your soul. Behold, I swear, it has been 35 years that I have occupied myself with what is essential to the knowledge and practice of the duties of my religion. You are aware of my great in-depth study and the great library of books I possess. And yet, I have never turned my mind to the matter to which you have directed your attention and about which you inquire." And he continued to rebuke and shame him concerning the matter. 
Another Sage said "I learned to purify my deeds for 25 years." 
A third Sage said "there is wisdom which lies hidden in the hearts of the wise, like secret treasure. If they conceal it, man cannot discover it. If they reveal it, man cannot deny the correctness of their words regarding it. And this is as Scripture says "wisdom in the heart of man is like deep water, but a man of understanding will draw it out" (Prov. 20:5), i.e. wisdom is innate in a man's being, in his nature and faculties of perception, like water that is hidden in the depths of the earth. The intelligent and understanding individual will strive to investigate what is in his potential and inward faculties in order to discover and expose this wisdom, and will draw it forth from his heart, just as one searches for water that is in the depths of the earth. 
I once asked a man who was considered among the Torah Sages concerning some of the topics we mentioned regarding the inner wisdom and he replied that on this and similar things, the tradition is sufficient to stand in place of rational inquiry.
I said to him: "This applies only to those who lack the ability to inquire due to low powers of perception and weakness of understanding, such as women and children, or feeble minded persons (Translator: women used to be much less educated than in our times). But a man who has sufficient power of intellect and perception to attain certainty on the truth of Tradition, and he neglected to investigate this due to laziness or due to holding in light esteem the commandments of G-d and His Torah - certainly he will be punished for this and he sins for having neglected them. 
This matter is similar to [the following illustration]. An officer was charged by the king to receive money from the officials of his kingdom. The king gave him special instructions to count the coins, weigh them, and verify their quality. The officer was sufficiently intelligent and skilled to fulfill all that the king had commanded him. But the royal servants cunningly befriended him with words until he trusted in them. They brought the money to him and assured him that it was correct in amount, weight, and quality. He believed them and was too lazy to verify for himself the truth of their words thereby transgressing the king's orders. When the matter reached the king, he ordered that the money be brought before him. When the king questioned the officer as to the total count and weight of the money, he could not answer. Though the amount of money may have been correct, the king condemned him for having been lax in his command in relying on the words of the servant in something he could have obtained certainty for himself. Only if he was not skilled enough to make an accounting, would he not have been found guilty for relying on the servants.
So too, if you were not capable of grasping this subject with your reasoning faculties, as is the case regarding reasons for received commandments, then your excuse for refraining from this inquiry would be valid. Likewise, if your mind falls short and your perception is too weak to understand it, you would not be punished for your neglect, and you would be considered like children and women, who accept it from the Tradition. But if you are a man of intellect and understanding, who is capable of obtaining certainty on what you have received from the Sages and prophets regarding the roots of the religion and the pivots of the deeds, you are then commanded to use your intellect until you comprehend the matter so that it will be clear to you from both tradition and Reason. But if you ignore this and are negligent in it, you will be considered as falling short in your duties to the blessed Creator. 
This will be explained in two ways:
Firstly, from what Scripture says "if there arise a matter too hard for you in judgment, between blood and blood, between plea and plea, between affliction and affliction...and you shall do according to the sentence which they declare to you" (Deut. 17:8-10). If you examine what subjects are included in the first verse, you will find they are things which need to be detailed, distinguished, and discussed by the method of Tradition, and not by that of logical demonstration from Reason alone. You can see, the verse does not include matters which can be attained through Reason. For he did not say, for example, "when you have a question on the Unity of G-d"; or regarding the Names and attributes of the Creator, or as to any of the roots of the religion, such as the service of G-d, trusting in Him, submission before Him, devoting activities to Him, purifying conduct from the damage of detrimental things, repentance from sins, fear and love of Him, being abashed before Him, making a spiritual accounting, and similar duties which can be fulfilled through reason and recognition. He did not say to accept them on the authority of the Torah Sages and to rely only on the Tradition. On the contrary, Scripture says in regard to these to reflect on them to your heart and to apply your intellect on them after having first accepted them from the Tradition, which covers all the commandments of the Torah, their roots and branches. You should investigate them with your intellect, understanding, and judgment, until you will sift the truth of it from the false [notions], as written "therefore, know this day and consider it within your heart, that the L-ord, He is G-d" (Deut. 4:39). 
Likewise, we will say regarding all that we are capable of grasping by Reason, as our Sages said (Rabbi Yishmael's 7th rule of expounding the Torah) "if anything included in a general proposition is made the subject of a special statement, whatever is proclaimed of that special statement is not to be understood as limited to itself, but is applied to the whole of the general proposition". Knowing the Unity of G-d is but one branch of the topics which can be understood by Reason. And as it is our duty to use this method on this topic (of G-d's Unity), it is equally our duty to do so with all of them. 
The second argument is drawn from Scripture says: "Have you not known? Have you not heard, that the everlasting God" (Isaiah 40:28). It says "known" which implies knowledge from rational proofs, and afterwards "heard" which implies from the Tradition. And likewise, "Have you not known? Have you not heard? Has it not been told you from the beginning?" (Isaiah 40:21). The prophet preceded mentioning knowledge from rational proof to knowledge which is from received tradition. And likewise Moses, our teacher, said: "Do you thus requite the L-ord, Oh foolish and unwise people? Is He not your Father who acquired you? Has He not made you and established you? Remember the days of old; consider the years of many generations. Ask your father, and he will show you; your elders, and they will tell you." (Deut. 32:6). This is a proof to what we mentioned, that despite that the Tradition should be preceded by nature, for the students must learn it first, nevertheless, it is not right to rely solely on it for one who is able to comprehend it by the method of rational demonstration. It is therefore proper, that everyone who is capable of this, is under duty to investigate with his intellect and to bring logical proofs of it by the demonstration which deliberate judgment would support. 
After I had become convinced that the commandments of the heart are indeed obligatory, and that, on grounds we mentioned, we are obligated in them, I found that these duties had been neglected and that no book had been composed specifically on them. I contemplated on the condition of low observance of them from my contemporaries due to their inability to comprehend them, and hence, all the more so, were they unable to perform them or toil in them. I was stirred by the grace of G-d to inquire into the inner science. 
I also noticed from the practice of our Sages, and from their sayings that we have received, that they were more zealous and engaged in their personal duties than in developing inferences of laws and remote, doubtful questions. 
Their efforts were first spent on determining the general principles of judgment, to make clear what is permitted and what is forbidden. 
Afterwards, they busied and strove to clarify their active obligations and inward duties. If a strange case came before them that belonged to the class of inferences from existing laws, they investigated it at the time it was presented to them, and deduced the law from the principles known to them. But they never troubled their minds for these things before this for they regarded secular matters lightly. 
And when they needed to render a ruling on that matter, if the ruling was clear to them from the Tradition transmitted to them by the prophets, they would rule on that basis. If it was a question which required expounding the Tradition, they would investigate it with the light of reason. If they all agreed together, they would give a ruling. But if there was a disagreement on the ruling, they would rule according to the majority opinion, as written by the Sanhedrin (Talmud Sanhedrin 88b): "when a question was posed to them, if they had a tradition on it, they gave the decision right away. If they differed, they took a vote. If the majority ruled the thing was clean, it was declared clean. If the majority ruled it unclean, it was declared unclean. This was according to the principle they received 'the decision follows the majority'". They composed in Tractate Avot, the traditions of the moral principles and ethical standards of the Rabbis as taught by each of them in his time and place. 
The reports of the men of the Talmud regarding their teachers, are enough to demonstrate the depth of their wisdom and great toil in purifying their deeds. For instance (Berachot 20a): "Said R. Papa to Abaye: How is it that for the former generations miracles were performed and for us miracles are not performed? It cannot be because of their [superiority in] study, because in the years of Rab Judah the whole of their studies was confined to Nezikin (the mishna order of monetary damages), while we study all six Orders...And yet when Rab Judah drew off one shoe, rain used to come, whereas we torment ourselves and cry loudly, and no notice is taken of us! He replied: The former generations used to be ready to sacrifice their lives for the sanctity of [G-d's] Name; we do not sacrifice our lives for the sanctity of [G-d's] Name", and (Avodah Zara 17b): "he who only studies the Torah, is like a man who is without a G-d, as it is said (Chronicles II 15:3) 'Now for long seasons, Israel was without the true G-d'. Hence, Torah study must be combined with acts of kindness". 
Thus it became clear to me that all the roots of deeds which one intends for His Name are founded on purity of heart and mind and singleness of mind. Where the motive is tainted, good deeds, however numerous and diligent, are not accepted; as Scripture says "even when you make many prayers, I will not hear. Wash yourselves, make yourselves clean; put away the evil of your doings from before My eyes; cease to do evil" (Isaiah 1:16). And, "but the matter is very near to you, in your mouth and in your heart, that you may do it" (Deut. 30:14), and "give Me your heart, and let your eyes keep My ways" (Prov. 23:26). And our wise men have said: "if you give Me your eyes and heart, I know that you are Mine" (Yerushalmi Berachos 1:5); and Scripture says "you shall not wander after your hearts and after your eyes" (Numbers 15:39), and "with what shall I come before the L-ord and bow myself before G-d on high? Shall I come with Olah offerings?" (Micha 6:6), and the answer given was "He has told you, O man, what is good, and what the L-ord demands of you; but to do justice, to love kindness, and to walk humbly with your G-d" (ibid 6:8); and "but let him that glories glory in this, that he understands and knows Me, that I am the L-ord doing kindness, justice, and righteousness" (Jer. 9:23). The explanation is that a man who glories should glory in comprehending G-d's ways, recognizing His beneficence, reflecting on His creation, realizing His might and wisdom, as manifested in His works. All these verses which I have brought are proofs on the obligatory character of the commandments of the heart and the discipline of the soul. 
You should realize that the aim and value of the duties of the heart is that our exterior and interior be equal and consistent in the service of G-d, so that the testimony of the heart, tongue, and limbs be alike, and that they support and confirm each other instead of differing and contradicting each other. This is what Scripture calls "tamim" (innocent/perfect), in saying: "You shall be perfect with the L-ord your G-d" (Deut. 18:13), and "Noah was a righteous man and perfect in his generations" (Gen. 6:9), and "he who walks uprightly, and works righteousness, and speaks the truth in his heart" (Ps. 15:2), and "I will give heed unto the way of integrity..I will walk within my house with a perfect heart" (Ps. 101:2).
On the other hand, one whose inner [being] is not consistent with his outer [life] is condemned by Scripture, as written: "his heart was not whole with the L-ord, his G-d" (Kings 11:4), and "but they flatter Him with their mouths and lied with their tongues. For their heart was not steadfast with Him" (Ps. 78:36).
It is well known, that whoever exhibits conflicting or contradictory behavior in word or deed - people do not believe in his integrity and have no confidence in his truthfulness. Likewise, if our exterior conflicts with our interior, if our heart's intent conflicts with our words, if our physical activities are not consistent with the convictions of our soul - our service to our G-d will not be whole, for He will not accept from us fraudulent service, as written "I cannot [bear] iniquity with assembly" (Isaiah 1:13), and "For I am the L-ord, Who loves justice, hates robbery in a burnt offering" (Isaiah 61:8), and "if you offer a blind [animal] for sacrifice, is it not evil? And if you offer the lame and the sick, is it not evil? Bring it now to your governor. Will he accept you, or lift up your face" (Malachi 1:8), and "Behold, to obey is better than a peace-offering; to hearken (is better) than the fat of rams" (Samuel 15:22). 
Hence, one commandment, according to the heart and intent with which it is performed, can outweigh many commandments, and likewise one transgression can outweigh many transgressions. Even the thought to do a commandment and the yearning to do it out of reverence for G-d, despite that one was unable to actually perform it, may, nevertheless, outweigh many commandments performed without this reverence, as G-d said to David: "because it was in your heart to build a house for My Name" (Chronicles II 6:8), and "then the G-d fearing men spoke to one another, and the L-ord hearkened and heard it. And a book of remembrance was written before Him for those who feared the L-ord and for those who thought upon His Name" (Malachi 3:16), and our Sages expounded the last words (Shabbat 63a): "what is meant by 'thought upon His Name?' - [answer:] "if one intended to fulfill a commandment but was prevented from doing it, it is accounted to him as if he had done it." 
When these arguments from Reason, Scripture, and Tradition dawned on me, I began to train myself in them, and I undertook on myself the task of knowing and practicing them. The discovery of one principle revealed another related to it, which in turn led to a third, until the matter became broad and it was difficult for me to retain it always in mind. I feared that I might forget what I had already thought out, and that what had become solid shaped in my mind might dissolve, especially since in our times there are so few helping on this wisdom. I decided to compose a book on them which would include their roots and surrounding divisions, and much of their derivatives; and so I would always urge myself to know them and obligate myself to do them.
Where my practice was consistent with my words, I thank G-d who helped me in this, and taught me His ways. But where my practice was inconsistent with my words and fell short of attaining this, I blame and rebuke my soul, and argue with it, so that from the standard of righteousness set forth in this work, my soul might realize its own iniquity, and from its standard of justness, its own deviation, and from its uprightness, its own perverseness, and from the perfection there taught, its own short-comings. 
I saw proper to make the book one of permanent value, a hidden treasure, a lamp to illuminate men's paths and teach them the path in which they should go. I hoped that the book would be of still greater use to others than to myself, and of greater beneficial instruction to others than to my own benefit of fulfilling my wish.
I said to myself that I will compose a book on this subject that would be systematically divided according to the roots of the duties of the heart and the inner commandments; be comprehensive and adequate to the matters, point out the good and right way; serve as a guide to the customs of the earlier Sages and the discipline of the pious; awaken men from their senseless sleep; delve in detail into the depths of this wisdom; recall to men the knowledge of G-d and of His Torah, promote the salvation of the soul; encourage the observant, stir up the negligent, set the eager on the right road, straighten the early, guide beginners and show the way to the perplexed. 
But when I thought of proceeding to carry out my decision to write this book, I saw that a man like myself is not fit to compose a work like this. I estimated that my strength was insufficient to properly divide its parts, the subject appearing too vast to my eyes, my knowledge too inadequate, and my intellectual faculties too weak to grasp the topics. Furthermore, I am not proficient in the subtleties of the Arabic language which it would need to be in, due to this being the easiest language for most of my contemporaries to grasp. I feared that I would be toiling at a task which would only serve to demonstrate my deficiencies and that I would thus be exceeding proper bounds of discretion. I therefore, told my soul to retract the thought and to draw back from what it had resolved on. 
When I then decided to relieve myself of the burden of this undertaking and give up my plan of composing this work, I again suspected my soul of having chosen tranquility, to dwell in the abode of laziness, in peace and quiet. I feared that perhaps this decision to abandon the project stemmed from the lust for pleasure, and that this is what had inclined me to the way of peace and tranquility, to decide to abandon this in order to sit in the company of laziness. 
I knew that many great works were lost due to fear, and many losses were caused by concern. I remembered the saying: "it is part of prudence not to be overly prudent". I told myself, if every person who ever composed a good work or who ever taught the upright and proper path had waited until all his wishes were fulfilled, no person would have ever uttered a word after the prophets, whom G-d had chosen as His agents and strengthened with His divine help. If every person who had wished to attain all good qualities but was unable to attain them, had abandoned whatever he could attain of them, then all human beings would be devoid of all good and lacking all excellencies. They would have been perpetually pursuing after false hopes, the paths of righteousness would have been desolate, and the abodes of kindliness would have been abandoned. 
I understood that while men's souls lust greatly to attain evil ends, they are sluggish to toil in the pursuit of what is noble. They are lazy in seeking the good, and always walk in the paths of laughter and rejoicing. 
If a vision of lust appears to them and beckons to them, they invent falsehoods so that they may turn to it. They bolster up its arguments to make its deception seem upright, to strengthen its lies, to make firm its looseness. But when the light of truth invitingly shines before them, they make up idle pretexts to refrain from turning to it. They argue against it, declare its courses misleading and contradict its assertions, so as to make it appear inconsistent and thus have an excuse to part from it. Every man's enemy is between his own ribs. Unless, he has an aid from G-d, a rebuker always ready for [rebuking] his soul, a powerful governor, that will harness his soul with the saddle of service, and will muzzle it with the bridle of righteousness, strike it with the stick of discipline; and when he resolves to do good, he should not delay, and if his heart entices him to a different path, he should scold it and overpower it. 
Therefore, I found myself obligated to force my soul to bear the task of composing this book, and resolved to expound its topics with whatever language or analogy would make the matters readily understandable. Among all the duties of the heart, I will only mention those which suggest themselves to me, and will not trouble to expound all of them, so that the book will not be too long. I will, however, cite among the things necessary for the clarification of each of its roots in the section allocated to it. And from G-d, the true Unity, may I receive aid. On Him, I place my trust and to Him I ask to teach me the right path which He desires, and which is pleasing and acceptable to Him, in word and deed, in inner and outer conduct. 
When my deliberation was complete, and I finally resolved to write it, I laid its foundations. I built it on a basis of ten principles, which cover all of the Duties of the Heart and accordingly divided the book into ten parts, each part designated for one principle, discussing its scope and divisions, the things it depends on, and the things detrimental to it.
I propose to take the most direct (easiest) method of arousing, teaching, and instructing, using language clear, direct, and familiar, so that my words will be more easily understood. I will refrain from deep language, unusual terms, and the arguments in the way of "defeat" (nitzuach), which the logicians call in arabic "Algidal", and likewise for remote inquiries which cannot be resolved in this work, for I only brought such arguments as are satisfactory and convincing according to the methods proper to the science of theology. 
As the philosopher said "it is not proper to seek of every inquiry a conclusion in the way of mofet (irrefutable proof), since not every topic in rational inquiry can be demonstrated to this extent. Likewise, we should not be satisfied in the science of nature with the method of 'sufficient' (since a full "raya" proof can be achieved). Nor in the science of theology should we strive to apprehend with the senses or draw comparisons with physical phenomena." Nor should we require logical demonstration of the first principles in nature. Nor should we require logical demonstration of the first demonstrations of the first principles.
If we carefully avoid these things, it will be easier for us to achieve our aims. If we do not do so, we will stray from our subject, and it will be difficult for us to achieve our intended purpose.
Since this work is of theological character, I have refrained from the methods of demonstration usual in the sciences of logic and mathematics except in the first gate, where possibly the subtlety of the inquiry compels resort to these methods.
I have drawn most of my proofs from propositions which are accepted as reasonable and these I have made clear by familiar examples about which there can be no doubt. I supported them with what I found written in Scripture and afterwards with the words of tradition received from our Sages. I quoted also the pious and wise of other nations whose words have come down to us, hoping that my readers' hearts would incline to them and give heed to their wisdom, as for example, the words of philosophers, the ethical teachings of the ascetics, and their praiseworthy customs. Our Rabbis have already said regarding this (Sanhedrin 39b):
"One verse says: 'after the ways of the surrounding nations you have done' (Ezek. 11:12), while in another verse it says [in contradiction] 'after the ways of the surrounding nations you have not done' (Ezek. 5:7). How can this be reconciled? As follows - their good ways you have not copied; their evil ones you have followed."
Likewise, the Rabbis said (Megila 16a): "whoever says a wise thing, even among the gentiles is considered a Sage". They also said regarding bringing analogies to make difficult concepts easier to understand: "he taught it by signs and explained it by analogies" (Eruvin 21b); and the wise man said: "to understand a parable and figure, the words of the wise and their riddles" (Prov. 1:6).
When I accepted to undertake the task of composing this book on the divisions of the duties of the heart, I set my mind to select those which were most comprehensive and which would lead to the rest.
I set their chief root, and great foundation to be the wholehearted acceptance of G-d's Unity. Afterwards, I examined which of the duties of the heart are most fitting to be joined to the [wholehearted acceptance of the] Unity of G-d. I fully realized that as the Creator is the true Unity, and is subject to neither essence nor incident, it is impossible for us to grasp Him from the aspect of His glorious essence. We are therefore forced to know and grasp Him from the aspect of His creations. This is the topic of the second treatise, the Gate of Examination of G-d's works. I therefore made this examination the second root of the general principles of the duties of the heart.
I then reflected on the sovereignty belonging to the true Unity, and what service is correspondingly due to Him from His creatures. I therefore set the assuming of His service as the third root of the general principles of the duties of the heart. 
It then became clear to me, what is proper regarding the true Unity, that as He alone rules all things and all the benefits and harms we receive come from Him and are under His permission, we are in duty bound to put our trust in Him and to surrender ourselves over to Him. I therefore made Trust in G-d as the fourth root of the general principles of the duties of the heart. 
Afterwards, I pondered on the conception of absolute Unity, that as G-d is unique in His glory, has nothing in common with anything, nor resembles anything else, we must therefore join to this that we serve Him alone, and that we devote all activities to Him, since He does not accept worship which is associated with other than Him. Therefore, I placed the devoting of acts to G-d as the fifth root of the general principles of the duties of the heart. 
Afterwards, when my thoughts continued pondering as to what we owe to the true Unity regarding proclaiming His glory and greatness. Since there is none like Him, therefore we decided to join to this - humbling ourselves before Him to the utmost of our ability. Hence, I made Humility/Submission the sixth root of the general principles of the duties of the heart. 
When I reflected on what happens to human beings, that they neglect and fall short of what service they owe to the blessed Creator, and the path with which they can rectify their crookedness and shortcomings, namely repentance and beseeching for forgiveness, I therefore placed Repentance as the seventh root of the general principles of the duties of the heart.
When I sought to grasp what our inner and outer duties to G-d truly are, and realized that it is impossible for us to fulfill them until we bring ourselves to an accounting on them before G-d and are meticulous in this, I made the spiritual accounting the eighth root of the general principles of the duties of the heart.
When I meditated on the matter of the true Unity, I saw that the wholehearted acknowledgement of His Unity cannot possibly endure even in the soul of the believer, if his heart is drunk with the wine of love of this world and he inclines to the material pleasures. But if he strives to empty his heart and liberate his mind from the superfluities of this world and separate himself from its luxuries, only then will he completely accept G-d's Unity and rise to its level. I therefore set Abstinence as the ninth root of the general principles of the duties of the heart.
Afterwards, I inquired on what we are obligated to the blessed Creator, who is the goal of all our desires and the purpose of all our hopes and with whom all things begin and end, and as to what is due to Him from us in regard to the love of His favor and fear of His retribution, the former being the highest good and the latter being the greatest evil, as Scripture says "For His anger is only a moment; in His favor is life; Weeping may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning" (Ps. 30:6), I therefore placed love of G-d as the tenth root of the general principles of the duties of the heart. 
After I arrived at these principles by Reasoning, I searched our Scriptures and traditions and found them indicated in many places. I will explain each of them in their respective treatise with G-d's help. I named the book, with a title which reflects my aim in writing it. It is called the Instruction of the Duties of the Heart.
My goal in this book is to obtain wisdom for myself and at the same time, to stir the simple and the negligent among the followers of our Torah and those who have inherited the precepts of our religion, by bringing sufficient proofs which reason can testify as to their soundness and truth and which will only be disputed by the hypocritical and false people, because to such people truth is a burden on them and their desire is to make things easier on themselves. I will not trouble myself to answer them because my purpose in this book was not to refute those who dispute the fundamentals of our faith. My aim is rather to bring to light what is already fixed in our minds and embedded in our souls of the fundamentals of our religion and the cornerstones of the Torah. When we arouse our minds to ponder them, their truth becomes clear to us inwardly and their lights will illuminate even our exterior.
The following is an analogy for this: An astrologer entered the courtyard of his friend and divined that there is a hidden treasure in it. He searched for it and found masses of silver that had turned black due to a crust of rust which had formed on it. He took a small portion, scrubbed it with vinegar and salt, washed and polished it until it had regained its original luster, splendor and shine. Afterwards, the owner [of the courtyard] gave orders that the rest of the treasure should be treated so.
My intent is to do the same with the hidden treasures of the heart, namely, to reveal them, and demonstrate their shining excellence, in order that anyone who wishes to draw close to G-d and cling to Him may do the same.
When, my brother, you have read this book, and comprehended its theme, take it for a remembrance. Bring your soul to a true judgement. Ponder it over, develop its thoughts. Cling it to your heart and mind. If you find an error in it, correct it; any omission, complete it. Have intent [when reading it] to follow its instruction and guidance. Do not have the aim of acquiring a name or to gain glory through its wisdom. Judge me leniently if you find any mistake, flaw, or whatever other shortcoming in its topics and words. For I hurried to compose it and did not tarry because I feared that death would overcome me and prevent me from my goal of completing it. You know how weak is the power of flesh to attain anything, and how deficient is man from fully grasping, as Scripture says: "Surely the sons of men are vanity; the sons of men are a lie; if they go up in the scales; they are altogether lighter than vanity" (Ps. 62:10). I have already confessed from the outset on my insufficient strength. Let this admission atone for the errors and flaws in it. 
You should know that all the Duties of the Heart and all disciplines of the soul, whether positive or negative, fall within these ten roots which I have composed in this book, just like many of the commandments fall under the precepts of "love your fellow as yourself" (Levit. 19:18), and under "he did no evil to his fellow" (Ps. 15:3), and under "turn from evil and do good" (Ps. 34:15).
Fix them to your mind. Return them to your thoughts continuously. Their derivatives will be made known to you, with G-d's help, when He will see your heart desiring in them and inclining to them, as written: "Who is the man who fears the L-ord? Him will he instruct in the way that he should choose" (Ps. 25:12). 
I saw fitting to conclude the introduction of this book with a wondrous parable, which will stimulate you to study its content, and arouse you to realize the special importance of this class of commandments over the others, as well as the difference between the level of the physical, philosophical, and linguistic wisdoms to the level of the wisdom of the Torah. Try to understand this parable when you read it. Recall it to your thoughts. You will find what you seek with G-d's help.
A king distributed balls of silk to his servants to check their intelligence. The industrious and sensible one sorted from the balls of silk allotted to him and selected the best quality ones. He then did the same with the remaining ones until he divided all of his portion into three grades - fine, medium, and coarse. He then made from each grade the best that could be done with it and had the material done by skilled craftsmen into expensive garments of various colors and styles, which he wore in the presence of the king, selecting garments suitable to the occasion and place.
The foolish among the king's servants used all the balls of silk to make that which the wise servant had made with the worst sort. He sold it for whatever he could get for it, and hastily squandered the money in good food and drink or the like.
When the matter came to the king, he was pleased with the deeds of the industrious and sensible one, drew him closer, and promoted him to a position of one of his treasured servants. The deeds of the foolish servant were evil in his eyes, and the king banished him to the faraway desert lands of his kingdom to dwell among those who had incurred the king's anger.
Likewise, the blessed Al-mighty gave His Torah of truth to His servants to test them. The thinking, intelligent man, when he reads it and understands it clearly, will divide it into three divisions. The first is the knowledge of fine spiritual themes, namely, the inner wisdom, such as the duties of the heart, the discipline of the soul and will obligate his soul on them always. Afterwards, he will select the second portion, namely, the practical duties of the limbs, doing each one in its proper time and place. Afterwards, he will make use of the third division, the historical portions of Scripture, to know the various types of men and their happenings in historical order, and the events of past ages and their hidden messages. He will use every part according to its proper occasion, place, and need.
Just like the industrious servant provided skilled craftsmen's tools in order to carry out his intentions in the manufacture of the silk of the king, so too, in each of these divisions, the intelligent man will use the help of the practical sciences, the science of logic, the science of language, etc. which he will employ as introductory to the science of theology. For one who is not knowledgeable in them cannot recognize the wisdom of the Creator in nature, and will not know the physical workings of his own body, much less for what is outside himself. 
The foolish and distracted person when he occupies himself with the Book of G-d, uses it to learn riddles of the ancients or the historical accounts. He hastens to apply it for worldly benefits and will bring arguments from it to justify pursuing worldly pleasures, abandoning the way of abstinence (from the superfluous), going in his own way, and following the views and wishes of each type of person he meets, as written "he shall die without instruction; and in the greatness of his folly he shall go astray" (Prov. 5:23). 
Examine, my brother, this analogy. Ponder it in your thoughts. Deduce from the Book of G-d what I have called to your attention. Seek help in this by reading the books of Rabeinu Saadiah Gaon which enlighten the mind, sharpen the understanding, instruct the ignorant, and arouse the lazy. 
May the Almighty teach us the way of His service, as His anointed one beseeched Him: "You make known to me the path of life; in Your presence there is fullness of joy; in Your right hand bliss forevermore" (Ps. 16:11). 

First Treatise on Unity

Introduction

The author says: After investigating after what is the most necessary of the cornerstones and fundamentals of our religion, we found that the wholehearted acceptance of the unity of G-d is the root and foundation of Judaism. It is the first of the gates of the Torah, and it differentiates between the believer and the heretic. It is the head and front of religious truth, and one who strays from it - will not be able to perform religious deeds and his faith will not endure.
Because of this, G-d's first words to us at Mount Sinai were: "I am the L-ord your G-d...you shall not have other gods before Me", and later on He exhorted us through His prophet saying: (Shema Yisrael..) <i>"Hear O Israel the L-ord, is our G-d, the L-ord is One"</i> (Deut. 6:4)
You should study this chapter of Shema Yisrael until its close, and you will see how its words move from one matter to another, encompassing 10 matters, that number corresponding to the Ten Commandments. The explanation is as follows:
First there is the command to believe in the Creator, when it says <i>"Hear O Israel the L-ord"</i>. His intent was not for hearing of the ear, but rather for belief and acceptance of the heart, as the verse says <i>"we will do and we will hear" </i>(Ex. 24:7), and <i>"Hear therefore, O Israel, and observe to do it" </i>(Deut. 6:3), and similarly for all other verses which come in this way using a term denoting "hearing", the intent is only to bring to belief and acceptance.
After He placed us under obligation to believe in the reality of His existence (through rational investigation for those capable as in ch.3), we are then called upon to believe that He is our G-d, as indicated in the word "our G-d", and afterwards He commanded us to believe that He [alone] is truly one, in saying: "G-d is one" .
After He bid us to believe and accept these three principles we mentioned, He proceeded to what is incumbent on us to follow them with, namely, to love G-d wholeheartedly, in private and in public, with our life and with our might, as He said: <i>"And you shall love the L-ord your G-d with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your might" </i>(Deut. 6:5). I intend to clarify this matter in the Gate of Love of G-d (Gate #10), with the Al-mighty's help.
Afterwards, He moved on to exhort on the duties of the heart, in saying: <i>"And these words, which I command you this day, shall be on your heart"</i>, which means to cleave them to your heart, and believe them in your inner being.
Afterwards, He proceeded to the commandments of the limbs which require both thought and action, as He said: "you shall teach them to your sons".
And so that if you don't have a son, you will not mistakenly think that the (commandment of) verbally reading depends on having a son, He said: "You shall speak in them".
Afterwards, He continued: <i>"and you shall speak in them when you sit in your house, and when you walk by the way, and when you lie down, and when you rise up"</i>, because the heart and tongue are never prevented from fulfilling the duties which apply to them, unlike the other limbs (which depend on various times and circumstances). In the introduction of this book, we have already pointed out that the duties of the heart are a constant duty.
And the purpose of all of this is to exhort on what He said previously: <i>"And these words, which I command you this day, shall be on your heart"</i>, which means that habitually having them on one's tongue always, brings to remembrance of the heart, and to never turn one's heart away from always remembering G-d, and this is similar to what King David, peace be unto him, said: <i>"I have set the L-ord always before me" </i>(Tehilim 16:8). And scripture says: <i>"But the word is very near unto you, in your mouth, and in your heart, that you may do it" </i>(Deut. 30:14)<i>.</i>
Afterwards, He proceeded to the duties of the limbs which consist of action only, and gave three examples, as He said: <i>"And you shall bind them for a sign upon your hand; And they shall be as Totafot between your eyes; And you shall write them upon the doorposts of your house, and on your gates"</i>, which refers to the Tefilin of the hand and of the head, and the Mezuza, all of whom cause one to remember the Creator, and to wholeheartedly love Him, and yearn to Him, and as scripture says regarding how lovers keep their love in mind: <i>"Set me as a seal upon your heart, as a seal upon your arm"</i> (Songs 8:6), and <i>"Behold, I have engraved you upon the palms of my hands"</i> (Isaiah 49:16), and <i>"In that day, says the L-ord of hosts, will I take you, O Zerubavel, my servant, the son of Shealtiel, says the L-ord, and will make you as a signet ring: for I have chosen you"</i> (Chagai 2:23), and <i>"A bundle of myrrh is my beloved unto me; it </i>(the myrrh)<i> shall lie between my breasts"</i> (Songs 1:13). G-d ordained three signs in order that they be stronger and more enduring, as the wise man said: <i>"a threefold cord is not quickly broken"</i>(Eccles. 4:12).
Hence, this chapter contains ten matters, five of them concern the spiritual (mind/heart), and five of them the physical (the body).
The 5 spiritual: (1) That the Creator exists. (2) He is our G-d. (3) He is the true Unity. (4) That we love Him with all our heart. (5) That we serve Him wholeheartedly.
The 5 physical: (1) You shall teach them to your children. (2) You shall speak in them (3) You shall bind them as a sign on your hand (4) They shall be as Totafot between your eyes. (5) You shall write them upon the doorposts of your house and upon your gates.
And our Rabbis taught: "why does the reciting of the chapter 'Hear O Israel' precede the reciting of the chapter "And it shall be..."? (i.e.the second chapter. answer:) To teach that one must first acknowledge the sovereignty of G-d and afterwards assume the duty to fulfill His commandments" (Berachot 13a). Therefore, I deemed it proper to precede the Gate of Unity to the other gates of this book.
It will now be necessary for me to clarify on the subject of wholeheartedly acknowledging the unity (of G-d) ten matters:
1. What is the definition of the wholehearted acceptance of G-d's unity?
2. how many divisions does the subject of unity divide into?
3. whether or not it is our duty to intellectually investigate the matter.
4. what is the manner of investigating it and which introductions must we know before we investigate the unity?
5. To clarify the premises which demonstrate that the world has a Creator who created it from nothing.
6. how we apply them to establish the existence of the Creator.
7. to bring proofs that He is one.
8. to clarify the matter of a conventional (relative) unity versus a true unity.
9. demonstration that G-d alone is the true Unity and that there is no true Unity besides Him.
10. the Divine attributes, those deduced by reason and those written in scripture and the ways in which these should be ascribed to G-d or denied to Him.





Chapter 1

The author says:
The definition of the wholehearted acceptance of the unity of G-d is that the heart and the tongue are equal in acknowledging the unity of G-d, after understanding, in the way of logical proofs, the certainty of His existence and the truth of His unity. For acknowledgement of the unity of G-d among men differs according to their level of intelligence and understanding.
Among them: One who declares the unity (of G-d) with only his tongue, namely, that he hears people say something and he is drawn after them without understanding the meaning of what he is saying.
Among them: One who declares the unity of G-d with his heart and tongue, who understands the matter of what he is saying through the Tradition that he received from his ancestors, but he does not understand the clarification of what he received of this matter, and the truth of what he believes in this matter.
Among them: One who declares His unity after understanding through logical proofs the truth of the matter, but he will conceive G-d's Unity like other unities to be found, and he will come to form a material conception of the Creator and represent Him with a form and likeness because he does not understand the true nature of His Unity and the matter of His existence.
Among them: One who declares G-d's unity with his heart and with his tongue after understanding the concept of true unity versus relative unity, and he can bring proofs to demonstrate G-d's existence and true Unity - this class of men is the complete (unblemished) group regarding the matter of unity of G-d.
Therefore, I defined the wholehearted acknowledgement of the unity (of G-d) - that it is the equalizing of the tongue and the heart (mind)) in the unity of the Creator, after one knows how to bring proofs on it and understands the ways of His true Unity through rational investigation.

Chapter 2

The author says: Regarding how many ways the unity of the Creator is conceived, I will answer as follows: Since the word "unity" spread among men of the unity (Jews), they became accustomed to using it frequently in their tongue and speech, until it became an expression of amazement whether for good or for bad.
And they use it to express their dread of great calamity, and to exaggerate it and to express amazement on it, and they don't put to heart to understand the true matter of what passes through their tongue (when reciting the Shema), due to ignorance and laziness. And they consider the matter of Unity is done for them when they finish (reciting) its words, and they do not sense that their heart is devoid of His truth and that their mind is empty of its meaning because they declare His unity with their tongue and in words. They will conceive Him in their hearts to be more than One (i.e. with forms of "plurality" as will be explained) and represent Him in their minds with the likeness of other "unities" to be found, and they will speak of His attributes in a way that cannot belong to the true Unity, because they don't understand the matter of true Unity versus temporary unity, except for a treasured few who plumbed the depths of wisdom and understood the matter of the Creator versus the created, and the characteristics of true Unity and what G-d is singular in.
The philosopher spoke truth when he said: "no one can serve the Cause of causes and Beginning of beginnings except the prophet of the generation with his senses or the primary (perfect - TL) philosopher with the wisdom he acquired, but others serve other than Him, since they cannot conceive what exists, but rather can only conceive that which is composite.
Because of this the acceptance of the Unity falls into four divisions, corresponding to the different levels of recognition and understanding in men:
(1) Unity of G-d in the tongue only. This level is reached by the child and the simpleton who does not understand the matter of (true) religion, and in whose heart its truth is not fixed.
(2) Unity of G-d in the mind and in the tongue through Tradition, because he believes those who he received from, but he does not understand the truth of the matter through his own intellect and understanding. He is like the blind man who follows the seeing man, and it is possible that the one he follows received the Tradition from a receiver like himself, whereby it would be like a procession of blind men where each one places his hands on the shoulders of the fellow before him until at the head is a seeing man who guides them all. If the seeing man fails them or neglects them and is not careful to guard them, or if one of the blind men in the chain stumbles or some other trouble happens - all of them will share the same fate, and will stray from the path; and it is possible they will fall in a pit or ditch, or they will stumble in something which blocks their progress.
Similarly for one who proclaims the unity out of tradition, one cannot be sure he will not come to association, that if he hears the words of the Meshanim and their claims, it is possible that he will change his outlook, and will err without noticing. Because of this our Sages said: <i>"Be eager to study the Torah and know what to respond to an apikoros </i>(heretic)<i>"</i> (Pirkei Avos 2:14).
(3) The third group: Unity of G-d with the mind and the tongue after one can bring logical proofs demonstrating the truth of His existence, but without understanding the matter of true Unity versus temporary unity. This is like a seeing man who is travelling along the road, wishing to reach a faraway land. Even though he knows the general direction, but the road splits to many uncertain roads, and he does not recognize the correct road which leads to the city he wishes to reach.
He will greatly tire himself and will fail to reach his destination, because he does not know the (correct) road, as the verse says: "the toil of the fool will tire him who knows not to reach a city" (Eccles. 10:15).
(4) The fourth group: Acknowledgement of the Unity of G-d with the mind and the tongue after one knows how to bring proofs on it, and to comprehend the truth of His Unity through intellectual derivation and correct, sound reasoning - this is the complete and important group, and this is the level which the prophet exhorted us in saying: "Know therefore this day, and set it in your heart, that the L-ord He is G-d" (Deut. 4:39).

Chapter 3

Regarding whether or not it is our duty to rationally investigate on the unity of G-d, I will say as follows: For anyone who is capable of investigating on this and other similar matters through rational inquiry - it is his duty to do so according to his intelligence and perception.
I have already written in the introduction to this book sufficient arguments which demonstrate the obligation of this matter. Anyone who neglects to investigate into it is blameworthy and is considered as belonging to the class of men who fall short in wisdom and conduct. He is like a sick man (a doctor) who is an expert on the nature of his disease and the correct healing method, but instead relies on another doctor to heal him who applies various healing methods, while he is lazy to inquire using his own wisdom and reasoning into the methods employed by the doctor, to see whether or not the doctor is dealing with him correctly or not, when he was easily able to do this without anything preventing him. The Torah has already obligated us on this, as written: "know therefore today, and lay it to your heart[, that the L-ord is G-d in heaven above and on the earth beneath; there is no other]" (Deut. 4:39).
The proof that "lay it to your heart" refers to intellectual investigation, is from what the following verse says: "And none lays it to his heart, neither is there knowledge nor understanding" (Isaiah 44:19). So too David urged his son: "And you, Solomon my son, <i>know you</i> the G-d of your father, and serve him with a perfect heart and with a willing soul; for the L-ord searches all hearts" (Chronicles 28:9).
And David said: "<i>Know you</i> that the L-ord He is G-d" (Ps. 100:3).
And "Because he has set his love upon Me, therefore will I deliver him: I will set him on high, because he has <i>known</i> My Name" (Ps. 91:14), and "But let him that glories glory in this, that he understands and <i>knows</i> Me" (Yirmiya 9:23), and our Sages said: "be diligent in the study of Torah and know what to answer a heretic" (Avos 2:14), and the Torah says: "Keep therefore and do them; for this is your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the nations.." (Deut. 4:6).
And it is impossible for the nations to admit to our claims of superior wisdom and understanding unless there are proofs and evidences which can testify for us along with the testimony of the intellect on the truth of our Torah and our faith. And our Maker has already promised us that He will remove the veil of ignorance from their minds, and show His magnificent glory as a sign to us on the truth of our Torah when He said: "And the nations shall walk by your light" (Isaiah 60:3), and "And many peoples shall go and say, Come you, and let us go up to the mountain of the L-ord, to the house of the G-d of Jacob.." (Isaiah 2:3).
It is now clear from logic, scripture, and tradition that it is our duty to investigate into this of what we are capable of clearly grasping with our minds.

Chapter 4

Regarding what is the way to investigate on the truth of the unity, and what introductions we need to know before we investigate on this unity, I will say as follows.
Any matter which one would like to understand when one is in doubt of its very existence, must first ask "does it exist or not?" After one has established its existence, one must then enquire as to what it is, how it is, and why it is. But regarding the Creator, a man may only ask whether He exists. And when His existence is demonstrated through rational investigation, we may further enquire whether He is one or more than one. And when it is clear that He is one, we may enquire on the matter of unity, and on how many ways this term is used, and in this way we will establish for ourselves the complete recognition of the unity of G-d, as the verse says: <i>"Hear O Israel, the L-ord is our G-d, the L-ord is One"</i> (Deut. 6:4).
Therefore, we must first enquire whether or not this world has a Creator. When it becomes clear that the world has a Creator who created it as something new, we can then further enquire whether He is one or more than one. Then, when it will be established that He is one, we can investigate into the matter of true (absolute) Unity and temporary (relative) unity, and then consider what we can say of the Creator regarding His true matter, and through this we will have completed the matter of acknowledgement of the unity of G-d in our hearts and minds, with G-d's help.

Chapter 5

There are three premises which lead to the inference that this world has a Creator who created it from nothing:
1) A thing cannot make itself.
2) Beginnings (causes) are limited in number; therefore, they must have a First Beginning (First cause) which had no beginning (cause) before it.
3) Anything composite must have been brought into existence (cannot be eternal, i.e. without beginning).
When these three premises are established, the inference will be, for one who understands how to apply them and combine them - that the world has a Creator who created it from nothing, as we will demonstrate with G-d's help.
The proof of these three premises is as follows.
PROOF OF FIRST PREMISE<br>Anything that exists, after it had not existed, cannot escape one of two possibilities: Either it created itself or something else created it.
If it created itself, then, also it cannot escape one of two possibilities: Either it created itself before it existed or after it existed.
Both are impossible, because if we suppose that it created itself after it existed, then it did nothing, since it was not necessary to make itself because it already existed before doing anything, therefore, it did nothing.
If we suppose it made itself before it existed - at that time it was <i>"efes v'ofes"</i> (absolutely nothing - TL), and that which is efes (nothing) cannot perform any action nor preparation (potential) for action, because nothingness cannot do anything. Therefore, it is impossible for something to make itself in any way.
The first premise has been clarified.
PROOF OF SECOND PREMISE - (Beginnings are limited in number)<br>The proof of the second premise is as follows: (commentaries to follow)
Whatever has a limit/end (i.e. is finite) must have a beginning, because it is evident that something which has no beginning (i.e. existed eternally) has no limit/end (i.e. is finite), since it is impossible for man to fathom the limits of that which is without beginning.
Therefore, that which was found to have a limit/end, we know that it must have had a first beginning which had no beginning before it, and a starting with no starting before it. And when we consider the finite character of all the beginnings found in the world, we must conclude that they had a first Beginning with no beginning before it and a first starting with no start before it, since there cannot be an infinite chain of (non-eternal) beginnings.
SECOND PROOF THAT BEGINNINGS/CAUSES MUST BE FINITE IN NUMBER<br>Furthermore, it is evident that anything which has parts must have a whole, since a whole is merely the sum of its parts. It is not conceivable for something infinite to be comprised of parts, because a part, by definition, is an amount separated from another amount, and through the part the whole is measured, as Euclides mentioned in the fifth treatise of his book of measures.
If we consider in our thoughts something which is infinite in actuality, and we take a part from it, the remainder will undoubtedly be less than what it was before. And if the remainder is also infinite, then one infinite will be greater than another infinite, which is impossible.
Alternatively, if the remainder (of the whole) is now finite, and we put back the part that we took away - then the whole will be finite, but it was originally infinite, if so the same thing is finite and infinite which is a contradiction and impossible. And therefore, it is impossible to take out a part from something which is infinite, since whatever is comprised of parts is undoubtedly finite.
Now of all things (individuals) that have ever existed in the world, if we take out a part of this total number, such as all the individual things that came into existence from the days of Noah to the days of Moses. The total number of individual things of this part is finite, therefore the whole together is also finite. And since the whole of this world is finite in the number of its individual things, it must also be that the number of its beginnings (causes) is also finite, and perforce this world has a first Cause which had no previous cause, and it is necessary because of this, that the beginnings reach an end.
PROOF OF THIRD PREMISE<br>The demonstration of the third premise: Anything composite is evidently composed of more than one thing, and these things which it is composed of must precede it by nature. Likewise, whatever assembled the compound must also precede it by nature and by time.
The <i>kadmon</i> (that which always existed), is that which has no cause, and that which has no cause has no beginning, and that which has no beginning has no limit/end (as before). Consequently, that which has a beginning is not <i>kadmon</i>, and anything which is not <i>kadmon</i> is <i>mechudash</i> (created, brought into existence from nothing), since there is no third term that can be between eternal and created which is neither eternal nor created. If so, anything which is composite is not eternal, and therefore must have been created. Since the third premise has been demonstrated, all three premises have been established.

Chapter 6

The application of the previous premises we mentioned to demonstrate the existence of the Creator, is as follows.
When we contemplate on this world, we find it is composite and compound. There is no part of it that does not have the character of composition and coordination. For to our senses and intellect it appears like a built and furnished house, whereby all its needs are prepared. The sky above like a roof, the land below like a carpet, the stars in their array like candles. All the objects gathered in it like treasures - everything has its need. Man is like the master of the house who uses all that is in it. The various types of plants are prepared for his benefit; the various kinds of animals serve his use, as David said: "You have made man to have dominion over the works of Your hands; You have put all things under his feet; All sheep and oxen, and the beasts of the field; The birds of the air, and the fish of the sea, and whatsoever passes through the paths of the seas" (Ps. 8:7).
And the order of the sunrise and sunset - to establish the daytime and nighttime, and the rising and lowering of the sun to establish the heat and the cold, the summer and the winter, for the matters of the seasons and their benefits, and their continuous changing according to this order without interruption as written "Who commands the sun, and it rises not; and seals up the stars." (Iyov 9:7), and "You make darkness, and it is night" (Ps. 104:20).
And the orbits of the planets, with their various movements and periods, and the stars and constellations who follow precise movements and exact order, without straying and without changing, and the purpose of everything is for the benefit of mankind, as Solomon said: "To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven" (Eccles. 3:11), and "also He has set the world in men's hearts" (Eccles. 3:1).
And everything, whether in part or as a whole, can be observed to be composite and compound. When we examine a plant or a live creature, we find them composed of the four elements - fire, air, water, and earth, which are separate and different.
We do not have the capability to join the four elements, in the natural way we find them compounded in nature because they are different and even repel each other. If we attempt to artificially combine them, the result rapidly changes and disintegrates, while the synthesis brought about through nature is complete and endures until the (appointed) time of its end.
Some of the philosophers thought that the planets, stars, supernal Ishim are from the element of fire, and similar to this David said: "Who makes winds His messengers; Flames of fire His ministers" (Ps. 104:4), and this is a support for this view, and that they are not of a fifth element (quintessence) as Aristotle held.
Since all existing things that we find are from the elements, and composed of them, and we know that they were not combined on their own, and by their inherent nature do not join together because of their repelling characteristics, it is clear to us that something else must have joined them and bound them, and fused them together against their nature, by force - this is their Creator, who joined them and ordained their union.
If we investigate the four elements, we will find them to be composed of Matter (chomer) and Form (tzura) which are the Essence (etzem) and Incident (mikre).
The [formless] Matter of the elements is the primordial matter, which is the root of the four elements, the physical or "hiyuli" of them.
Their Form is the primordial form which comprises all forms, and which is the root of all forms, whether essence or incident such as heat, cold, wetness, dryness, heaviness, lightness, movement, rest, etc.
[To summarize], combination and union are apparent throughout the world, as a whole and in all of its parts, in its roots and in its branches, in that which is simple and in that which is complex, in that which is above and in that which is below. Therefore, based on our previous premises, it follows that the world is entirely <i>mechudash</i> (created), since it has been clarified that whatever is composite must have been brought into existence. Therefore it is proper for us to conclude that the world is <i>mechudash</i>, and since this is so, and that it is not possible for something to make itself, therefore it must be that there was a Maker who started it and brought it into existence.
And because we have demonstrated that it is not possible for there to be an infinite chain of causes, it must be that there was a first Cause without a previous cause and a Beginning without a previous beginning - and He is the one who formed it and brought it into existence from nothing, not with the help of anything nor for anything.
As the verse says on this matter: "I am the L-ord that makes all things; that stretches forth the heavens alone; that spreads abroad the earth by Myself" (Isaiah 44:24), and "He stretches out the north over the empty place, and suspends the earth over nothing" (Iyov 26:7). He is the Creator, Whom we have investigated and sought with our reasoning and intellect. He is the <i>Kadmon</i> (Eternal) which there is no beginning to His beginning, and the First, whose eternity is endless, as written: "I am first and I am last" (Isaiah 44:6), and "Who has performed and done it, calling the generations from the beginning? I the L-ord, the first, and with the last, I am He" (Isaiah 41:4).
There are some people who claim that the world came into being by chance, without a Creator who created it and without a Maker who formed it. It is amazing to me how a rational, healthy human being could entertain such a notion. If such a person heard someone else saying the same thing about a water wheel, which turns to irrigate part of a field or a garden, saying that it came to be without a craftsman who designed it and toiled to assemble it and placed each part for a useful purpose - the hearer would be greatly amazed on him, consider him a complete fool, and be swift to call him a liar and reject his words. And since he would reject such a notion for a mere simple, insignificant water wheel, which requires but little ingenuity and which rectifies but a small portion of the earth - how could he permit himself to entertain such a notion for the entire universe which encompasses the earth and everything in it, and which exhibits a wisdom that no rational human intellect is capable of fathoming, and which is prepared for the benefit of the whole earth and everything on it. How could one claim that it came to be without purposeful intent and thought of a capable wise Being?
It is evident to us that for things which come about without the intent of an intender (i.e. an intelligence) - none of them will display any trace of wisdom or ability. Behold and see, that if a man suddenly pours ink on clean paper, it would be impossible for there to be drawn on it orderly writing and legible lines like it would be with a pen, and if a man brought before us orderly writing from what cannot be written without use of a pen, and he would say that ink was spilled on paper, and the form of the writing happened on its own, we would be quick to call him a liar to his face. For we would feel certain that it could not have happened without an intelligent person's intent.
Since this appears impossible to our eyes for mere symbols (the alphabet) whose form is merely conventional, how could one entertain the notion for something whose engineering is far more fine, and whose formation is infinitely more fine, deep and beyond our comprehension, to say that it is without intent of an Intender, and without the wisdom of a wise and powerful Being.
What we have brought to establish the existence of the Creator from the aspect of His deeds should be enough for anyone who is intelligent and admits the truth, and it is a sufficient refutation to the group of kadmut, who claim the world is <i>kadmon</i> (always existed), and to disprove their claims. Know it well!

Chapter 7

The demonstration of the Creator is one is as follows. Since it has been clarified to us, through logical proofs, that the world has a Creator, it is incumbent on us to investigate on Him, whether He is one or more than one and we will demonstrate the truth of His unity from seven arguments.
FIRST ARGUMENT FOR THE UNITY OF G-D<br>The first, from our examination of the causes of existent things. When we investigate on them, we find that causes are always fewer than their effects, namely, the higher up one ascends into the chain of causes, the fewer the number of causes, and the more and more one ascends this chain, the fewer and fewer will be their number until eventually one reaches one Cause, which is the Cause of all causes.
The fuller explanation of this: Individual things (Ishim) that exist are countless. When we investigate the kinds (minim), which comprise them, we will find their number to be fewer than the individuals under them, because each kind includes many individuals, and they are not countless. And when we categorize the kinds into (broader category) "types" (sugim) which includes the kinds, we will find the number of types to be fewer than the number of kinds, since each type includes many kinds, and the more one ascends the fewer the number, until one reaches the primary types.
The philosopher (Aristotle) already said that the general types are ten: Etzem, Kama, Eich, Mitztaref, Ana, Matay, Matzav, Kinyan, Poel, and Nifal. (explanation in below commentaries)
The causes of these ten general types are five: Motion and the four elements - Fire, Air, Water, and Earth..
The causes of the four elements are found to be two: Matter (chomer) and Form (tzura), and if we further examine on the cause of these two, undoubtedly it will be less than them. This (cause) is the will of the Creator, and there is no number less than two but one, if so, the Creator is one.
And likewise David, peace be unto him, said: "Yours, O L-ord, is the kingdom and You are exalted as head over all" (Chronicles 29:11), which means that G-d is exalted above all that is exalted, lofty above all that is lofty. He is the First of all beginnings and the Cause of all causes.
THE SECOND ARGUMENT FOR THE UNITY OF G-D<br>The second argument is drawn from the perspective of the signs of wisdom manifested in the universe, whether above or below, in the inanimate, plants, and animals on it.
When we contemplate the world, it will become apparent that - it is the design of one Thinker, and the work of one Creator. We find its roots and foundations to be similar in its derivatives and uniform in its parts. The signs of wisdom manifested in the smallest of the creatures as well as the biggest testify that they are the work of one wise Creator. If this world had more than one Creator, the form of wisdom would exhibit different forms in the different parts of the world, and vary in its general character and divisions.
Furthermore, we find that it is interdependent for its maintenance and welfare, no part is completed without the help of another part, like the links in a coat of armor, the parts of a bed, the limbs of the human body, or other things which have interdependent parts for their functioning.
Can you see that the moon and the planets need the light of the sun, and the earth needs the sky and the water, and that the animals need each other, and some species feed on other species, such as predatory birds, fish, and beasts of the forest all need each other? And Man's need for everything, and the rectification of everything through man (man gives a higher purpose to everything). Countries, towns, sciences and trades are interdependent.
And the Divine wisdom appears in the tiny creatures as well as the large ones, because the wisdom manifested in the formation of an elephant, despite its huge body, is no more wondrous than the wisdom manifested in the formation of a tiny ant. On the contrary, the smaller the creature the more wisdom and power it appears to reflect, and the more it testifies to the wondrous ability of the Creator.
This teaches that they are all the design of one Designer and Creator, since they are similar and alike in furthering and completing the natural order and maintenance of the world in all of its parts. If there were more than one Creator, the form of wisdom exhibited would be different in some of its parts, and things would not be interdependent. Since the world, despite its being different in its roots and foundations, it is equal in its derivatives and compounds, one can see that its Creator who put it together, its Governor, and Designer is one.
A philosopher once said: "no part of what G-d created is more wondrous than another part". Which means the wisdom in a tiny creature of this world is similar and equal to that in a large one, as David, peace be unto him, said: "O L-ord, how manifold are Your works! with wisdom have You made them all: the earth is full of Your possessions" (Ps. 104:24), and "O L-ord, how great are Your works! Your thoughts are exceedingly deep" (Ps. 92:6).
THE THIRD ARGUMENT<br>The third argument, from the chidush (non-eternal nature) which applies to the entire universe. Since our previous proofs demonstrated that the world is created (see chapters 5-6), it follows from this that it must therefore have had a Creator. For it is impossible for something to come into existence by itself. And when we see that a thing exists, and we are certain that at some time it did not exist - we will know through the testimony of a sound intellect that something other than itself created it, brought it into being, and formed it.
Since we have established that the world has a Creator who created it and brought it into existence - we need not deliberate whether He is more or less than one since it is impossible for the existence of the world without at least one Creator. And if it were possible to conceive that the world could have come into existence with less than one Creator, we would consider this. But since we cannot conceive that something less than one can bring anything into existence, we conclude that the Creator must be one. Because in the case of things which were established through logical proofs, and the proof of their existence is impossible to deny - we do not need to assume more than what is necessary to account for the phenomena which the proof demonstrates.
The analogy of this: When we see a letter of uniform handwriting and style, it will immediately occur to us that one person wrote and composed it because it is not possible that there was not at least one person. If it were possible that it could have been written with less than one person, we would consider this possibility. And even though it is possible that it was written by more than one person, it is not proper to consider this unless there is evidence which testifies to this, such as different handwriting style in part of the letter or the like.
Since this is so, it is not necessary to know Him face to face, if this is not possible, and it will suffice for us to see the letter, accepting as proof the writer's acts, namely, the form of the writing, instead of seeing the writer himself. From this, we will know with certainty that there exists a writer, who knows how to write and is capable of writing, who wrote this letter. He did not partner with someone else in writing it. This we can see from its orderly form and uniform handwriting, since the work of two makers varies. It is not uniform and orderly in one manner, and it changes in quality and character.
Similarly we will say regarding the Creator, since the signs of wisdom in His creations are similar and uniform, we must conclude that one Creator created them, and that without Him they could not have come into existence, 
although the Creator is not something that can be perceived either in Etzem (essence) or Mikre (incident). And since He cannot be seen, it is impossible to find Him and know Him except through the proofs and observations of His handiworks which point to Him. Then will our belief stand firm that He exists and that He is One, that He is Kadmon (eternal), who was and will be, the First and the Last, Mighty, Wise, Living.
Since He is not among the things which can be seen, the proofs regarding Him will stand for us in place of seeing Him.
Therefore, it is necessary for us to conclude that one Creator created the world, because the existence of created things is impossible without Him. The assumption of more than one God is superfluous and unnecessary. Therefore, one who claims this - his claim cannot be considered legitimate unless he brings a sound logical proof other than that which we have brought. But it is impossible to establish such a proof, since two sound logical proofs do not contradict each other.
All the evidence thus testifies on His unity, and negates the attributing to Him of any plurality, association or similarity, as G-d Himself declares: "Is there a god besides me?" (Isaiah 44:8), and "I am the First and I am the Last" (ibid 44:6), and "My hand has laid the foundations of the earth, and My right hand has spread out the heavens" (Isaiah 48:13), and "a just G-d and a Savior; there is none besides Me" (Isaiah 45:21).
THE FOURTH ARGUMENT<br><small>(<i>Translator</i>: Important Note. In this argument, we are talking about spiritual matters which are exceedingly deep. You can't think on them the same way you think on physical things. The author already warned in chapter 2 that only a select few can grasp these very subtle arguments. commentaries to follow!)</small>The fourth argument: We will say to anyone who thinks the Creator is more than one as follows. It must be that the essence of all these (supposed creators) is either one or not one.
If you say, that in essence they are one, if so, they are one thing, and the Creator is not more than one.
If you say that each one of them is, in essence, different from the other, it must therefore be there is some distinction between them due to their difference and non-similarity. If so, whatever is distinct is limited/bound. And whatever is limited/bound is finite. And whatever is finite is composite - and whatever is composite was brought into existence, and whatever is brought into existence must have a Creator.
Therefore, one who thinks the Creator is more than one must also assume that this creator was brought into existence. We already demonstrated, however, that the Creator is Kadmon (without beginning), and that He is the Cause of causes and the Beginning of all beginnings. Therefore, He must be one and as the verse says "You are the L-ord, You alone" (Nechemia 9:6). (end of proof)
THE FIFTH ARGUMENT<br>The fifth argument, from the concepts of plurality and unity as follows. In his book, Euclides defined unity as: "Unity is that property through which we say of any thing that is one". This means that by nature, unity precedes the individual thing, just as we say that heat precedes a hot object. If there were no "unity", we could not say of anything that it is one.
The idea which we need to form in our mind of unity is of oneness that is complete, a uniqueness, that is absolutely devoid of composition or resemblance. Free, in every respect of plurality or number, that is neither associated with anything nor dissociated from anything.
The idea of plurality is that of a sum of unities. Plurality therefore cannot precede unity of which it has been formed. If we conceive something plural with our intellect or perceive it through our senses, we will know with certainty that unity preceded it, just like when counting things, the number one precedes the rest of the numbers. Whoever thinks the Creator is more than one, must therefore nevertheless concede that there was a preceding unity, just as the numeral one precedes the other numbers, and just like the notion of unity precedes that of plurality. Hence, the Creator is absolutely One, and Eternal (Kadmon), and none is Eternal but He as written: "Before Me no G-d was formed, nor shall any be after Me" (Isaiah 43:10).
THE SIXTH ARGUMENT<br>The sixth argument, from the Mikre (incidental) properties that attach to everything that is plural. Plurality is an incidental property ascribed to the Etzem (essence), and comes under the category of "Kamus" (quantity). Since He is the Creator of essence and incident, none of these attributes can be ascribed to His glorious Being. For, it having been clearly demonstrated through scripture and reason that the Creator is above and beyond all comparison with, and similarity to, any of His creations, and seeing that plurality which adheres to the essence of anything that is plural is an incidental property - this property cannot be fittingly ascribed to the Creator's glorious Essence. And if He cannot be described as plural, He must certainly be One because there is nothing in between the two possibilities, as Chana said: "There is none holy as the L-ord: for there is none beside You" (Shmuel I 2:2).
THE SEVENTH ARGUMENT<br>If the Creator were more than one, then either each one of these hypothetical creators is capable of creating the universe by itself or could not have done so without the help of the other.
If any one of them is capable - the other Creator is superfluous, since the first is capable without him and does not need (the help) of the other.
And if the creation of the world cannot be completed without their partnering together, then no single one of them had full and complete strength and capacity. Each lacked the necessary power and ability and was weak. What is weak is finite in strength and essence. What is finite is bound. Whatever is bound - is composite. Whatever is composite has been brought into existence, and anything brought into existence must have some one who brought it into existence (a Creator).
Hence, what is weak (finite) cannot possibly be Eternal since the Eternal does not fall short in any respect nor stands in need of another's help. Therefore, the Creator is not more than One.
If it were possible for the Creator to be more than one, it would also be possible that there would be disagreement between them in the creation of the world and that the matter would not have been completed. Since we find that all of this world follows one order, and a uniform movement for all of its parts, which does not change over generations nor does it seem to change in the nature of its conduct, therefore, we know that its Creator and Ruler is One, and that none besides Him alters His work or changes His rule, as scripture says: <i>"And who, as I do, shall call, and shall proclaim it, and set it in order for Me" </i>(Isaiah 44:7), and David said: <i>"Forever, O L-ord, your word is stands fast in heaven; Your faithfulness is unto all generations: You have established the earth, and it abides" </i>(Ps. 119:89-90)
The Creator's perfect governance which we observe in His creatures (also indicate His unity - Rabbi Hyamson). For government can be perfect and abidingly consistent, smoothly in one way only when there is a single individual making decisions and conducting the matter, as in the king ruling a country or in the soul controlling the body.
Thus Aristotle said in his book on the subject of unity: "it is not good to have many heads, but rather to have only one head". So too Solomon said: "For the transgression of a land many are the princes thereof" (Mishlei 28:2).
What we brought here should be enough for the understanding person, and this should suffice to answer the believers of dual gods or the trinity gods of the Christians, and others. For when we establish the unity of the Creator of the world, all those who claim that He is plural will be automatically refuted. Note it well.

Chapter 8

The distinction between true (absolute) unity and conventional unity is as follows.
The term "one" is derived from the concept of "unity". The term is used in two senses. One of them is mikri (incidental), which is the conventional unity. While the second is in essence and enduring - this is true (absolute) unity.
Incidental unity subdivides into two divisions. In one of these the character of multitude, collectivity, and aggregation is apparent in it, such as one genus which includes many species or like one species which includes many individuals, and like one man which is comprised of many parts or one army which includes many men.
Or like we say one Hin (measure), one Rova (measure) or one liter (ex. of rice or water) which contain smaller measures, each of which is also called "one". Every one of these things we mentioned are called "one" conventionally, because the things included under the one name are alike. Every one of them may also be called "plural" since it includes many things which when separated and isolated will each be called "one". Unity in all these manners we mentioned is <i>Mikre</i> (incidental). Each is a unit from one perspective and plural from another aspect.
The second division of incidental unity is the unity attributed to a single individual, who though seemingly not plural and not a collection of several things, yet is essentially plural, - being composed of matter and form, essence and incident, susceptible to "creation" and "destruction", division and combination, separation and association, change and variation. (see commentaries)
Plurality must be attributed to anything for which any of these things we mentioned applies to, for they are contradictory to unity. Unity ascribed to anything essentially plural and variable in any way is undoubtedly <i>Mikre</i> (an incidental property). It is unity conventionally, but not in a true sense. Strive to understand this.
True (absolute) unity is also of two kinds. The first in abstract thought and the second in actual reality.
The abstract thought version is numerical unity, namely, the root and beginning of all numbers. It is the sign and symbol of a beginning unprecedented by any other beginning. For every true beginning is termed "One", as for example: <i>"And there was evening and there was morning, one day" </i>(Gen. 1:5). Instead of saying "the first day", the verse uses the term "one (day)", because the term "one" refers to any beginning unprecedented by any other beginning. When repeated, it is called "the second", and when repeated again - "the third", and so on until the number "ten", "a hundred", "a thousand", which are also units of new series, and so on to infinity.
Therefore the definition of number is that it is a sum of units. The reason I called it "abstract thought" is because the notion of number is not perceived by the physical senses. Rather, it is grasped only in thought. It is the "numbered" object alone which is perceptible to the five senses or by some of them.
The second kind of true unity exists actually. It is that which is neither plural nor susceptible to change or variation, is not described by any of the corporeal attributes, is not subject to "creation", destruction or end. Does not move or waver, does not resemble anything nor does anything resemble it, and is not associated with anything. It is from all possible perspectives - true Unity and the root of everything plural. For as we already pointed out, unity is the cause of plurality.
The true unity has neither beginning nor finiteness because anything which has a beginning or finiteness necessarily must be subject to origination and destruction. And anything subject to these is also subject to change, and change is inconsistent with Unity. Hence, it would be more than one since it had existed as one thing and then changed into a different thing, and this necessarily implies plurality.
Similarity is also an incidental property (mikre) in anything which is similar (to something else), and whatever has an incidental property is plural. But absolute unity, in its glorious essence, is not subject to any incidental properties whatsoever in any respect.
If one will claim that the quality of "unity" is itself an incidental property in the Absolutely One.
We will answer this as follows: The ascribing of true unity is intended to express the exclusion of multitude and plurality. When we describe Him as One, we mean only the negation of any multitude or plurality. But the true Unity, cannot be described by any attribute that would connote in His glorious essence any plurality, change, or variation. With this we have completed our words, regarding the true unity and the relative unity. Note it well.

Chapter 9

The proof that the Creator is the true (absolute) Unity and that there is no true Unity besides Him is as follows.
Any composite thing only comes completely into existence when the parts of which it is comprised join together and unite. The association (of the parts) is the unity.
And likewise, the existence of something composite is not possible without the dividing (or disintegrating) the parts of which it is comprised, since composition necessarily implies more than one part. The divisioning of the parts is plurality.
And since the signs of composition, synthesis, and arrangement are found in the universe as a whole as well as in its details and parts, in its roots and derivatives, it is necessarily subject to synthesis and division, and must contain the basic principles of Unity and Plurality.
And since, in essence, Unity precedes Plurality, just like the number one precedes the other numbers, it follows that the First cause of everything that is plural, which was at the head of all beginnings is itself not plural since all things plural are preceded by unity.
And since causes must reach a limit at their beginning, and it is not possible for a thing to make itself, therefore it is impossible for the cause of unity and plurality to itself be of unity and plurality like them
And since the First Cause of the creations cannot itself be plural nor a combination of plurality and unity, it must necessarily be that the Cause is a true (absolute) Unity.
And we have already demonstrated that the more one ascends the succession of causes, the fewer the causes will be until eventually the root of all numbers is reached - this is the true Unity, and this true Unity is the Creator.
Furthermore, it is known that anything which is found in something as an incidental property must also exist in something else as its true essence and cannot be separated from that (something else) without destroying it. For example, hotness, an incidental property of hot water, is the permanent essence in fire. Or, moistness, an incidental property in various objects, is permanent essence in water.
And it is known that anything which is found in an object as an incidental property, that object must have received the incidental property from something else for which that incidental property is in its essence, such as hotness in hot water which is incidental in the water. It was given to the water from fire whose hotness is in its essence. And when we see moisture in moist things as an incidental property, we know that it was transferred to them from water whose wetness is in its essence. Similarly for all things, if we examine their matters.
Through this principle we can direct our words to the matter of unity. Since unity is found in every created thing as an incidental property, as we introduced, it necessarily follows that it must be a true and permanent essence in the Cause of all created things, and from it all created things derived the matter of unity as an incidental property, as we explained.
When we investigated the matter of true (absolute) unity among the created things, we did not find it to be absolute or permanent in any of them. If we try to apply it to any of the sugim (types, i.e. broad category such as animals), minim (kinds, categories of a type such as horses), ishim (individuals, subcategories of kinds such as one individual horse), Etzemim (essence of things), (mikre) incidental properties, planets, stars, spiritual bodies, numbers, numbered objects, (to summarize) anything which is finite and limited, and we try to call it one, and try to ascribe the term "unity" to it - this we cannot correctly do to call it "one" except in a passing (relative) sense. For each of them comprises things which are collectively called "one" due to their similarity and joining together in one respect.
But essentially, each of them is plural, being subject to multitude and change, division and separation, association and dissociation, increase and diminishment, motion and rest, appearance and form, and other incidental properties, whether specific to it or general that belongs to every creation.
Absolute Unity is not found nor truly ascribed in any created thing. And since unity exists among the created things as an incidental property, while all the evidence points to the Creator being One, we will deduce with certainty that the relative unity that we ascribed to any of the created things emanates from the true (absolute) One. And this true (absolute) unity can only be ascribed to the Creator of all. He is the true One. There is no true (absolute) Unity besides Him.
All the implications of absolute Unity we have mentioned befit Him alone. All the matters of plurality, incidental properties, change, motion, comparison, or any qualities which is not consistent with true Unity cannot be ascribed to Him, as David said: "Many, O L-ord my G-d, are Your wonderful works and Your thoughts towards us, there is no comparison to You" (Ps. 40:6), and "To whom then will you liken G-d? Or what likeness will you compare unto Him?" (Isaiah 40:18), and "Among the gods (angels) there is none like unto You, O L-rd; neither are there any works like unto Your works" (Ps. 86:8).
It has been clarified and demonstrated that the Creator of the world is the true Unity and that there is no other true Unity besides Him. For anything which is ascribed the term "one" besides the Creator, is a unity from one aspect but plural from another aspect. But the Creator is one from every respect as we explained. What we have brought in this matter should be sufficient for the intelligent person.

Chapter 10

Regarding the Divine attributes, whether known from reason or from scripture, which are ascribed to the Creator - the intentions in them are numerous according to the numerous creations and the kindnesses bestowed on them.
They (the Divine attributes) divide into two divisions: Essential (in essence) and Active (i.e. from His deeds).
The reason we call them Essential (in essence) is because they are permanent traits of G-d, belonging to Him before the creations were created, and after their creation these attributes continue to apply to Him and to His glorious essence.
These attributes are three:
1. That He (permanently) exists
2. That He is One
3. That He is Eternal, without beginning.
We ascribe to Him these three attributes and speak of them in order to indicate His Being and true existence, to call attention to His glory, to make human beings understand that they have a Creator whom they are under duty to serve.
We must ascribe to Him "existence", for His existence is demonstrated by proofs based on the evidence of His handiworks, as written: <i>"Lift up your eyes on high, and behold who has created these things? He that brings out their host by number: He calls them all by name. By the greatness of His might, and for He is strong in power; not one fails" </i>(Isaiah 40:26).
We must necessarily ascribe existence to Him because it is a principle accepted by our reason that for something which is non-existent no action or result can come. Since His works and creations are manifest, His existence is equally manifest to our intellect.
We ascribe to Him Eternity (no beginning), because rational arguments have demonstrated that the world must have a First (cause) which had no previous cause before it and a Beginning which had no prior beginning. It has been demonstrated that the number of causes cannot be infinite. It logically follows, that the Creator is the First Beginning before whom there is no Beginning, and this is what is meant by His Eternity, as written: <i>"From everlasting to everlasting, You are G-d" </i>(Ps. 90:2), and <i>"before Me there was no god formed, neither shall any be after Me" </i>(Isaiah 43:10).
Regarding declaring of Him that He is One, we have already sufficiently demonstrated this by well known arguments and it has been established by clear evidence, that true Unity is inseparable from His glorious essence. This unity implies absence of plurality in His Being, the absence of change, transformation, incident, origin or destruction, joining or removal, comparison or association or any other properties of things that are plural.
It is necessary for you to understand that these attributes do not imply any kind of change in His glorious essence, but only to denote a negation of their opposite. What the attribution of them should convey in our minds is that the Creator of the world is neither plural, nor non-existent, nor created
Likewise it is necessary for you to understand that each one of these three attributes we mentioned implies the other two, when we analyze them. The explanation of this is as follows:
When true Unity is the inseparable and permanent property of a thing, that thing must necessarily also be Eternally Existing (without beginning), since that which is non-existent cannot be ascribed neither unity nor plurality. Hence if true (absolute) Unity is the attribute of any thing and essentially belongs to it, it logically follows that the attribute of Existence with its implications also belongs to it. It must also be Eternal (eternally existing) because true (absolute) unity neither comes into existence nor passes out of existence, neither changes nor is transformed. Hence, it must be Eternal, for it has no beginning. Hence, that which the matter of true Unity belongs has also the attributes of Existence and Eternity.
So too, we say that the attribute of permanent Existence, attributed to a thing, implies the attribution to it of absolute Unity and Eternity (without beginning).
It implies absolute Unity since that which permanently Exists could not have come into existence from nothing, and cannot pass from the state of existence into that of non-existence. Such a thing is not plural since that which is plural is not permanently existent, as it must have been preceded by Unity. Therefore, that which exists permanently is not plural, and is accordingly, One.
The attribute of Eternity (without beginning) also belongs to it, since that which exists permanently has neither beginning nor end, and is accordingly Eternal.
So too, we assert that the attribute of Eternity, belonging to any Being, also implies in that Being, the attributes of absolute Unity and permanent existence.
It implies Unity, since that which is Eternal has no beginning, and that which has no beginning is not plural, since all things plural have a beginning, namely, a (parent) unity. Therefore, that which is plural is not Eternal, and that which is Eternal can only be One. Therefore, the attribute of absolute Unity is implied in the attribute of Eternity.
Likewise, the attribute of existence is implied in that of Eternity. For the non-existent cannot be described as either Eternal or created.
We have clarified that these three attributes are one in meaning and imply the same thing. They do not imply any change in the Creator's glorious essence, nor do they imply any incidental property or plurality in His being, because all that we are to understand by them is that the Creator is neither non-existent, nor created, nor plural. If we could express His being in a single word which would denote all three of these attributes as they are understood by the intellect so that these three attributes would arise in our mind when the one word was used, we would use that word to express it. But since we do not find such a word in any of the spoken languages which would designate the true conception of G-d, we are forced to express it with more than one word.
This plurality in the Creator's attributes does not, however, exist in His glorious essence but is due to inadequacy of language on the part of the speaker to express the conception in one term. You must understand that, regarding the Creator, there is none like Him, and whatever attributes we speak of regarding Him, you are to infer from them the denial of their opposite. As Aristotle said "negating attributes of G-d gives a truer conception of Him than affirming attributes". For all affirmative attributes ascribed to G-d must necessarily ascribe properties of Etzem (essence) or Mikre (incidental properties), and He who created etzem and mikre has not the properties of His creatures in His glorious essence. But the denial of such properties to Him is undoubtedly true and appropriate to Him. For He is above all attributes and forms, similarity or comparison. Therefore, you must understand from these attributes that they refer to the negation of their opposites.
THE ACTIVE ATTRIBUTES<br>The active attributes of G-d are those which we speak of the Creator with reference to His works. It is possible, when speaking of them, to associate Him with some of His creations. We were permitted, however, to ascribe these attributes to Him because of the forced necessity to acquaint ourselves with, and realize His existence, in order that we assume on ourselves the duty of His service.
We have already found that the Torah and the books of the Prophets extensively use these active attributes, as also in the Psalms of prophets and saints. They are used in two manners:
One, attributes which denote physical form such as in the verse "So G-d created man in His own image, in the image of G-d, He created man" (Gen. 1:27), "for G-d made man in His image" (Gen. 9:6), "by the word of G-d" (Numbers 9:18), "I, even My hands, have stretched out the heavens" (Isaiah 45:12), "in the ears of G-d" (Numbers 11:1), "under His feet" (Ex. 24:10), "the arm of G-d" (Isaiah 51:9), "who has not taken My soul in vain" (Ps. 24:4), "in the eyes of G-d" (Gen. 6:8), "G-d said in His heart" (Gen. 8:21), and other similar verses regarding physical limbs.
Two, attributes which denote bodily movements and actions, as written: "and G-d smelled the pleasing aroma" (Gen. 8:21), "And the L-ord saw...and the L-ord regretted" (Gen. 6:5-6), "and G-d came down" (Gen. 11:5), "and G-d remembered" (ibid 8:1), "and G-d heard" (Numbers 11:1), "Then the L-ord awakened as one out of sleep," (Ps. 78:65), and many more activities of human beings like these attributed to Him.
Our Rabbis, when expounding the scriptures, paraphrased the expressions used for this class attributes and were careful to render them in an honorable way, and ascribed them all to the "glory of the Creator". For example, the verse "behold G-d stood over him" (Gen. 28:13), they rendered - "the glory of G-d was present with him"; "and G-d saw" (ibid 6:5), they rendered - "it was revealed before G-d"; "and G-d came down" (ibid 11:5)- "the glory of G-d was revealed"; "and G-d went up" (ibid 35:13) - "the glory of G-d departed from him".
They rendered everything in a reverential way, and avoided attributing them to the Creator in order not to ascribe to Him any kind of physicality or incidental property.
The great master, Rabeinu Saadia, already expounded sufficiently at length on this in the Sefer Emunot Vedeot, in his commentary on parsha Bereishis, parsha Vaera, and in Sefer Yetzira, and we do not need to repeat his explanations in this book. What we are all agreed upon is that necessity forced us to ascribe physicality and to speak of Him with the attributes of His creations in order that human beings can have some way to grasp the existence of the Creator. The books of the prophets connoted Him with corporeal terms because these are closer to our mind and understanding.
If they had spoken of Him in a more accurate fashion, using words and matters connoting spiritual things, we would not have understood neither the words nor the matters, and it would have been impossible for us to worship something which we do not know, since it is not possible to worship an unknown. Therefore it was necessary that the words and concepts be according to the understanding ability of the listener so that the matter will first be grasped in the listener's mind in an understandable, corporeal sense from the concrete terms. Afterwards, we will enlighten him and explain to him that all this was only metaphorical, to bring the matter close and that the true matter is too fine, too sublime, too exalted, and too remote from the ability and powers of our mind to grasp. The wise thinker will endeavor to remove the husk of the terms and their corporeality and will ascend in his mind step by step until he will reach the true intended meaning according to the power and ability of his mind to grasp.
The foolish and simple person will conceive the Creator in accordance with the literal sense of the metaphor, and if he assumes the service of His Creator, and he endeavors to labor for His glory, he has in his simpleness and lack of understanding, a great valid excuse because a man is held accountable for his thoughts and deeds only according to his ability, intelligence, understanding, strength, and material means. But if the foolish is capable of learning wisdom and he neglects it - he will be held accountable for it and punished for his lacking and refraining from study.
If the scriptures had employed more accurate, truer terminology, then nobody would have understood it except the wise, understanding reader and most of mankind would have been left without religion and without Torah (guidance) due to their limited intellect and weak understanding in spiritual matters. But the word which may be understood in a material sense will not damage the understanding person because he recognizes its real meaning, and it is at the same time beneficial to the simple person so that it will fix in his heart and mind that there is a Creator which it is his duty to serve.
This is similar to a man who came to visit a friend who was of the wealthy class. His wealthy host felt a duty to provide his friend with a meal and also food for the animals which he brought with him. The wealthy man sent to him an abundant quantity of barley for his animals and a small quantity of food fitting for him but only enough for his need.
So too, the scriptures and the books of the pious abundantly employed material analogies when referring to the attributes of the Creator according to the understanding of the masses and according to the common language which the masses converse. Therefore, when referring to this, our Rabbis said "the Torah speaks like the common language of men" (Bava Metzia 31b). And the scriptures gave few hints of spiritual matters which are intelligible only to the (few) wise and understanding men.
In this way, even though all people have different views of G-d's glorious essence, nevertheless, all people are equal with regard to knowing the existence of the Creator.
Likewise we will say for all subtle matters found in the Torah such as the reward in the next world or its punishment.
And likewise we will say for the clarification of the inner wisdom (the duties of the heart) which was our intention to clarify in this book. The Torah was very brief in expounding their matters, relying on the intelligent men. The Torah only hinted at it to arouse one on it, such as mentioned in the Introduction of this book, so that anyone who is able to enquire and investigate them will be aroused to do so until he has understood and mastered them as written: "those who seek G-d will understand all things" (Mishlei 28:5).
The prophet (Moshe Rabeinu) has already warned us against thinking that G-d has a form or likeness as written "Take therefore good heed unto yourselves; for you saw no manner of form on the day that the L-ord spoke unto you in Horeb (Sinai) out of the midst of the fire" (Deut. 4:15), and "And the L-ord spoke unto you out of the midst of the fire: you heard the voice of the words, but saw no form; only you heard a voice" (ibid 4:12). When saying "take good heed", he warned us in our minds and thoughts to not represent the Creator under any form (tavnis) or to conceive Him under the likeness (demus) of anything or any comparison (dimyon) since your eyes never perceived any form or likeness when He spoke to you.
And it is written "To whom will you liken to G-d? What likeness will you compare to Him?" (Isaiah 40:18), and "to Whom will you liken Me that I will be equal to, says the Holy One" (ibid 40:25)
And it is written: "For who in the heaven can be compared unto the L-ord?" (Ps. 89:7), and "Among the mighty ones there is none like You, O L-ord" (Ps. 86:8), and many more like this.
Since it is impossible to form a representation of Him with the intellect or picture Him with the imagination, we find that Scripture ascribes most of its praises to the "Name" of G-d, as written: "And they shall bless Your glorious Name" (Nehemiah 9:5), and "that you may fear this glorious and revered Name" (Deut. 28:58), and "Let them praise Your Name, great and revered" (Ps. 99:3), and "of My Name he was afraid" (Malachi 2:5), and "But unto you that fear My Name shall the sun of righteousness arise with healing in its wings" (Malachi 3:20), and "Sing unto G-d, sing praises to His Name, extol Him that rides upon the skies, whose Name is the L-ord" (Ps. 68:5).
All this is in order to honor and exalt His glorious essence because, besides clarifying that He exists, it is impossible for us to clarify in our minds anything about His Being except for His great Name.
But as for His glorious essence and His true nature - there is no picture or likeness that we can grasp in our minds. Therefore, His Name is frequently changed in the Torah and likewise in the books of the prophets.
Because we cannot understand anything about Him except for His Name and that He exists. His glorious Name is also associated with heaven and earth and the Spirits, as Abraham said: "And I will make you swear by the L-ord, the G-d of heaven and the G-d of the earth" (Gen. 24:3), and Yonah said: "I fear the L-ord, the G-d of heaven" (1:9), and Moshe said: "the G-d of the spirit of all flesh" (Numbers 27:16). And the verse proclaims: "Behold, I am the L-ord, the G-d of all flesh" (Yirmiya 32:27).
The reason for this is that He is known to us in the way possible through the traditions of our forefathers from whom we have inherited the knowledge of His ways, as written "For I have known him (Abraham), to the end that he may command his children and his household after him, that they may keep the way of the L-ord, to do righteousness and justice" (Gen. 18:19).
Perhaps, G-d revealed Himself to them because they were the only ones in their generation who took on to serve Him since the people of their generation worshipped other "gods" (idols, sun, moon, money, etc.)
Similarly we will explain for His being called (in scripture) "the G-d of the Hebrews" (Ex. 3:18), "the G-d of Yisrael" (Gen. 33:20), as the verse says "not like these is the portion of Yaakov for He is the Creator of all" (Yirmiya 10:16).
And David said: "O L-ord, the portion of mine inheritance and of my cup" (Ps. 16:5). And if we were able to grasp His true nature, He would not be known to us through other things.
Since it is not possible for our intellects to grasp His true nature, when referring to His glorious essence the scripture describes Him as the G-d of the choicest of His creations, rational or otherwise. Therefore, when Moshe Rabeinu asked G-d "when the Israelites ask me what is His name, what should I answer them?", G-d answered him: "so shall you say to the descendants of Israel: 'Ehe-ye' sent me to you'". And since G-d knew that the Israelites would not understand the true nature of this name (Ehe-ye), He added an explanation and said: "thus should you say to the Israelites: "The L-ord, the G-d of your forefathers, the G-d of Abraham, the G-d of Isaac, and the G-d of Jacob sent me to you, this... (Ex. 3:15)".
G-d's intent (to Moshe) in this was that if the people did not understand these words and their implications through intellectual reason, then tell them that I am known by them through the tradition they received from their ancestors. The Creator did not establish any other way to know Him except through these two ways, namely, (1) that which intellectual reason testifies through the evidence of His deeds which are visible in His creations, (2) and that of ancestral tradition, as scripture says: "Which wise men have told from their fathers, and have not hid it" (Iyov 15:18).
And since our perception of all existing things is through one of three ways:
1. Physical perception, such as through sight, hearing, taste, smell, or touch.
2. Through our reason, by which the existence of something is demonstrated from its indications and effects, until the reality of its existence and nature are established to us as if we perceived it with our physical senses.
This is called in the book of proverbs "understanding and intellectual discipline" (Mishlei 1:2-3).
3. True reports and reliable tradition.
Since it is not possible for us to perceive the Creator through our senses, we can only know Him through true reports or from proofs on Him based on the evidence of His deeds.
And since the proofs drawn from the evidence of His deeds in the creations are established and greatly numerous, therefore the attributes ascribed to Him because of them are also numerous.
The saints and the prophets described His attributes in different ways. Moshe Rabeinu said "The Rock, His work is perfect, for all His ways are justice" (Deut. 32:4), and he also said: "He is G-d of gods, and L-ord of lords, the great G-d, the mighty, and the awesome" (Deut. 10:17), and also "He exacts justice for the fatherless and the widow" (Deut. 10:18). And G-d Himself described His own attributes as written: "And the L-ord passed by before him, and proclaimed: 'The L-ord, the L-ord, G-d, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy unto the thousandth generation, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, etc.'" (Ex. 34:6).
(That G-d possesses) these attributes we see from the evidence of His deeds towards His creations and also from the wisdom and power which His deeds reflect. And if we investigate this matter with our intellect and understanding, we will fail to grasp the smallest of the smallest of part of His attributes, as David said: "Many, O L-ord my G-d, are Your wonderful works which You have done, and Your thoughts which are toward us..." (Ps. 40:6), and "Who can utter the mighty acts of the L-ord? who can show forth all his praise?" (Ps. 106:2), and "And blessed be Your glorious name, which is exalted above all blessing and praise" (Nehemiah 9:5). And the Sages said in the Talmud (Berachos 33b):
A certain person led the prayer service before Rabbi Chanina and said: "the great, the mighty, the awesome, the powerful, the glorious, the potent, the feared, the strong, the powerful, the certain, and the esteemed G-d!". R' Chanina waited until he finished. When he finished, R' Chanina said to him: "did you complete all the praises of your Master? What need is there for all of this? even us, these three praises that we say (in the daily prayers), if not for the fact that Moshe Rabeinu said it in the Torah (Deut. 10:17), and the men of the great assembly came and established it in prayer, we wouldn't be able to say them! And you say all these praises and continue? It is analogous to a king of flesh and blood who had thousands upon thousands of golden coins, and they would praise him for possessing silver coins, isn't this a disgrace to him"?
And "to You silence is praise" (Ps. 65:2), to which our teachers said: "the best potion is silence, the more you praise a flawless pearl, the more you depreciate it" (Megila 18a).
Therefore, you should exert your mind until you know the Creator through the evidences of His works and not strive to know Him in His glorious essence. For He is exceedingly close to you from the side of His deeds but infinitely remote in any representation of His essence or comparison with it. As already stated, we will never be able to find Him in this way. When you arrive at the stage where you abandon (trying to find Him) through your thoughts and senses because He cannot be grasped in this way, and you instead find Him in the evidence of His deeds, as though He were inseparable from you - this is the pinnacle of knowledge of Him which the prophet exhorts us on in saying "Know therefore this day, and consider it in your heart, that the L-ord He is G-d in heaven above, and upon the earth beneath: there is none else" (Deut. 4:39).
One of the Sages said: "the more one increases knowledge of the Creator, the more one is awe-struck with regard to His nature".
Others said: "the truly wise person in the knowledge of G-d realizes his ignorance regarding His glorious essence while the ignorant person thinks that he understands G-d's glorious essence.".
One of the Sages was asked on the Creator: "what is He?". He answered: "One G-d". The asker then asked: "What is He like?". He answered "A great King". He then asked: "Where is He?" He answered: "in the mind".
The asker: "I did not ask you on this"
The sage answered: "You asked me on attributes which apply to created things, not to the Creator. And the attributes which can be ascribed to the Creator, I replied to you, the reason we ascribe them to Him is) because otherwise it would be impossible for us to know Him.
It is said of one of the Sages who would say in his prayer: "My G-d, where can I find You, yet where can I not find You. You are hidden and invisible yet everything is filled with You, similar to the verse "Do I not fill heaven and earth says the L-ord" (Yirmiya 23:24).
The pinnacle of knowing Him is to reach the stage where you admit and believe that you are completely ignorant of the truth of His glorious essence.
If you form in your mind a picture or representation of the Creator, strive to investigate His Being.
Then you will clarify His existence.
And you will reject any type of likeness of Him, until you will find Him only through the way of reasoning.
The analogy of this: we realize the truth of existence of the soul without perceiving of it any form or likeness, or appearance or smell, even though its effects are visible and its acts are recognizable in us.
Likewise the intellect whose effects and signs are evident and noticeable, yet the intellect has no form or likeness, nor can we compare it in our thoughts.
And all the more so - the Creator of everything, which there is none like Him. And a philosopher said: "if our efforts to fully know the soul are vain, all the more so for the matter of the Creator".
Since we have reached until here in our discussion, it is not necessary to proceed further.
The reason being, that it is our duty to be in fear and awe, and to guard from it, as some of the Sages said: "that which is beyond you, do not expound, that which is hidden from you, do not investigate. That which is permitted to you - contemplate. Do not have any business with hidden things" (Ben Sira in Megila 13a).
And our Sages said: "whoever is not concerned for the honor of his Creator it is better for him had he not been created" (Chagiga 11b). And they expounded on the verse "Shall it be told him that I speak? if a man speaks, surely he shall be swallowed up" (Iyov 37:20) - Whoever comes to speak the might of G-d will be destroyed (Talmud Yerushalmi Berachos 9a). And the verse says: "And he struck the men of Beth Shemesh, because they had looked into the ark of the L-ord" (Shmuel 6:19) (who stared at it with coarse hearts, without due awe- PL), and "It is the glory of G-d to conceal a thing" (Mishlei 25:2), which means to conceal His secret from men who are not wise, and "the secret of G-d is with them that fear Him" (Ps. 25:14).
Furthermore regarding the physical senses we mentioned and the mental faculties, namely, memory, thought, imagination, counsel/will, recognition, which all refer to one power, namely, the mind which gives them the ability to apprehend things.
THE PHYSICAL SENSES<br>Each one of the (physical) senses has a distinct ability to perceive certain types of sensations which the other senses lack. For example, form and color can only be perceived by the sense of sight. Voices and music can only be perceived by the sense of hearing. Scent and various odors - only by the sense of smell. Various tastable things - only by the sense of taste. Hot and cold and many matters of quality - by the sense of touch.
Each sense has a power to perceive its relevant sensation to a definite extent, beyond which it is incapable of perceiving further. For example, sight has the ability to perceive something close by, and the further away one goes, the weaker its ability to apprehend it, until eventually it ceases to apprehend it completely. Likewise for the sense of hearing, and also for the other senses.
And it is impossible to grasp a sensation without the appropriate sense designated for it. One who strives to grasp it with a different sense will fail to accomplish his desire. For example, one who strives to grasp a melody with the sense of sight or visible things with the sense of smell or taste with the sense of touch - he will not be able to find them or grasp them, despite that they exist, because one is trying to perceive them without the limbs designated for perceiving these sensations.
Likewise we will say for the mental faculties we mentioned. Each one of them has a distinct power to perceive a specific thing which the others cannot, and a limit to which it can grasp no further, as we mentioned for the physical senses.
Likewise we will say for the mind (in total) which grasps intellectual things by itself or through proofs. For things that are close to it, it will grasp its truth directly through itself, while for things which are remote and hidden, it will grasp it through building proofs which point to it.
And since the Creator is infinitely remote and hidden for us from the side of His glorious essence, the intellect can grasp only that He exists.
And if it strives to grasp His glorious essence or to imagine Him - even His existence will be hidden to it, because it strove to grasp something beyond its ability, as we mentioned for trying to grasp a sensation with the wrong sense.
Therefore, we must seek the existence of G-d through the evidence of His deeds in the creations - and these will be proofs on Him for us. And when His existence is established for us in this way, we must then cease and not seek to liken Him in our thoughts or to try to represent or figure Him in our imagination, or attempt to apprehend His glorious essence. For, if we do this, thinking we will understand Him more closely - even the realization of His existence will disappear from us, because anything we imagine in our minds will be other than Him. And scripture says: "Have you found honey? eat only as much as is sufficient for you, lest you be filled with it, and vomit it" (Mishlei 25:16).
I saw fitting to try to bring the matter close to you using two illustrations.
The First of the two will demonstrate that each physical sense perceives its class of sensations and then it reaches its limit whereby the next physical sense picks up where it left off. And afterwards, it will also reach its limit and the next sense will start, and so on for all the senses. When they all reach their limit of perception, the intellect will then start to perceive what is in its power to apprehend. This will be demonstrated by means of one object.
Imagine that a stone was thrown far away. It makes a whistling/crashing noise and strikes a man. The man perceived with his sense of sight the appearance of the stone and its form. Then he perceives with his sense of hearing the whistling/crashing noise, then he perceives with his sense of touch the coldness and hardness of it. Afterwards, the physical senses cease to apprehend any more of the stone. Then the intellect perceives that the stone must have had a thrower who threw it, since it is clear to it that the stone did not move from its place by itself.
That which is normally perceived through the physical senses cannot be apprehended by the intellect without the physical senses. And all the more so, that which is normally perceived by the intellect cannot be perceived by the physical senses.
The second illustration will demonstrate that for spiritual matters, once we are convinced of their existence, it is not proper to investigate their nature because this approach only ruins our intellect. This is like one who tries to understand the sun from observing its light, radiance, shine, and its power to dissipate darkness. If he accepts its existence, he will benefit from it, use its light, and attain all that he seeks from it. But one who strives to study its roundness and focuses his eyes to stare at it - his eyes will dim and (eventually) their sight will be lost and he will not benefit from the sun..
The same thing will happen to us. If we study the existence of the Creator from the evidence of His signs in the creations, the wisdom manifested in them, His power shown in all His creations - we will think and we will understand His nature. Then our minds will be illuminated with knowledge of Him and we will attain all that is possible for us to attain, as written "I am the L-ord your G-d who teaches you for your benefit, who leads you by the way that you should go" (Isaiah 48:17).
But if we exert our minds to understand the matter of His glorious essence, and to try to liken or represent Him in our minds - we will ruin/diminish our intellect and understanding, and we will not grasp even what was known to us, as would happen to our eyes if we stared at the sun. We must be careful in this matter, and remember it when we investigate on the matter of the existence of G-d.
Likewise, we must be careful regarding His attributes, whether those which describe His glorious essence or those the prophets ascribe to Him - not to take them literally or according to what would seem in a physical sense.
Rather, we must know clearly that they are in a metaphorical and incidental sense according to what we are capable of grasping with our powers of recognition, understanding, and intellect, due to our crucial need to know Him and His loftiness. But He is infinitely greater and loftier above all of this, and like the verse says "Blessed be Your glorious Name, that is exalted above all blessing and praise" (Nehemiah 9:5).
One of the philosophers said: "He whose mind is too weak to understand the matter of divesting, he holds fast to the terms in the Divinely given scriptures, and does not realize that the terms in scripture are adapted to the intelligence of those to whom they were addressed, not according to (the intelligence) of the One who addressed them. Rather they are like the whistling call to a herd of cattle at the time of water drinking, which brings them to drink far more effectively than clear and accurate words."
When you master this level of the Unity in your intellect and understanding, devote your soul to the Creator, strive to grasp His existence from (observing) His wisdom, His power, His grace, His mercy, and His abundant providence over His creations. Become pleasing to Him by doing His will. Then you will be among the seekers of G-d (and it is written: "those who seek G-d will understand all" (Mishlei 28:5) - <i>ML</i>), and then you will receive from Him the help and strength to understand Him, and to know His true nature, as David said: "The secret of the L-ord is with them that fear Him; and He will show them His covenant" (Ps. 25:14). I will clarify for you some illustrations in the second gate of this book. When you practice them, and go in their path, the matter will be easier for you with G-d's help.
THINGS DETRIMENTAL<br>The things detrimental to the (wholehearted acceptance of G-d's) unity are numerous. Among them, to association of other beings with the Creator. This occurs in several ways.
Among them, believing in multiple gods, worshipping forms, the sun, moon, constellations, fire, plants, animals. Among them, ascribing physicality to the Creator, while understanding the true intent of scripture.
Among them, hidden association, namely trying to find favor with other people with regard to religious matters. This occurs in several ways. I will clarify them in the fifth gate of this book, with G-d's help.
Among them, turning (excessively) to the physical pleasures. This is subtle association - that a man associates the service of his lusts with the service of the Creator. And the verse says: "There shall not be in you a strange god", to which our Rabbis expound: "what is the 'strange god' which is in the body of a man? - This is the evil inclination" (Talmud Shabbos 105b).
Perhaps the simple and foolish person, when he reads this book and considers what we wrote in this gate will say to himself: "will the matter of unity of G-d be unknown to anyone who reads even one page of the Torah whereby this author needs to stir us and instruct us it?"
I will answer this as the wise man answered: "Answer a fool according to his folly" (Mishlei 26:5). For one who asks this is too weak of understanding to grasp the extent of a universal topic which is addressed to different classes of people. Such a universal topic is grasped differently depending on whether the person understood much of it or little of it, and whether he is of strong intellect or of weak intellect.
The analogy to this - the benefit of the light of the sun which is universal to all men. We find this benefit divides into three classes:
The first class: Those whose eyes are healthy and free from all diseases. They benefit from the sun, use its light, and attain all types of benefit from it.
The second class: The totally blind, whose eyesight is completely lost. The light of the sun does not damage nor benefit them. Their benefit from it is through other people (who guide them).
The third class: People whose eyes are too weak to tolerate the light of the sun, and the sun's light will damage them if they don't avoid it. If they hasten to heal their eyes with medications, potions, and therapeutic diets, and at the same time are careful not to expose their eyes to the light of the sun - it is possible that they will become healthy and they will benefit from the sun which was previously damaging to them. But if they delay healing their eyes, they will quickly lose their eyesight completely and belong to the class of the totally blind.
Similarly, the classes of understanding G-d's unity taught in the Torah divides into three classes. The matter is taught to all rational beings, just like the light of the sun is available to all seeing beings.
The first class: Men of clear intellect and pure understanding.
The second class: Men whose intellect is completely too weak to understand anything of what is written in the Torah.
The third class: Men whose intellect is too weak to grasp what the first class is able to grasp but they have sufficient intelligence to comprehend most of the near and easy matters.
The first class, namely, the men of complete intellect, free from all detriment. When they put to heart to understand what they encountered in the Torah on the matter of the Unity, they will understand it, and its matter will enter their heart through their powerful understanding and pure intellect. They are of those who don't need this book, except to remind them of what has escaped their attention.
The second class do not know G-d's Torah, all the more so the matter of Unity in it. They hear its teaching but do not comprehend its matter. They will have neither benefit nor damage from this book.
The third class who understand the matter of the Unity mentioned in G-d's Torah with some understanding, but they don't have the intellectual power to understand its matter and realize its true meaning. If a teacher instructs them and makes them understand its matter through the way of true proofs and sound intellectual reasoning - its meaning will become clear to them, and its secret will be revealed to them, and they will reach the level of the first class.
But if they shirk from investigating and are lazy in examining in that which will strengthen their understanding and sharpen their intellect - they will sink to the level of the foolish.
To those of this class, this book will be of great and comprehensive benefit, because they are capable of investigating. It will benefit them just like potions benefit those with weak eyesight, who hope to be healed by their application.
Scripture already compared the foolish man - to a blind man, wisdom - to light, and foolishness - to darkness, in saying: "Then I saw that wisdom excels folly, as far as light excels darkness" (Eccles. 2:13), and "The wise man's eyes are in his head; but the fool walks in darkness" (Eccles. 2:14), and "Hear, you deaf; and look, you blind, that you may see" (Isaiah 42:18).
And they compared wisdom and mussar - to a tree of life, as written: "It is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon it" (Mishlei 3:18), and "For they are life unto those that find them" (Mishlei 4:22).
May the Almighty teach us the way to the knowledge Him, direct us to His service, and bestow on us His grace, in His mercy and compassion. Amen.

Second Treatise on Examination

Introduction

The author says: Since we began in the previous treatise, with the various ways in which the Unity of G-d can be demonstrated so that it shall be wholeheartedly acknowledged, and we found that the examination of the wisdom manifested in the universe is the nearest way to clarify His existence and the clearest path to know His reality. [Therefore] we deem it our duty to deal with this theme, so that to each treatise, the one most nearly resembling it should be joined, and each topic should be followed by the most appropriate topic - this being among the subjects which we have to deal with in regard to the Almighty's service, the purpose for which we were created, as the wise man said (Kohelet 3:14) "And G-d has so made it that man should fear before Him". 
First we have to note that though the benefits G-d bestows upon His creatures are all-embracing, as Scripture says "The L-ord is good to all" (Tehilim 145:9), nevertheless, the majority of mankind are too blind to recognize these benefits or comprehend their high excellence, and they do not think over their matters due to three reasons. 
1. One of these reasons: their absorption in matters of this world and its pleasures, their lusting for what they will not attain of it, their neglect to look onto the benefits G-d bestows upon them because their hearts are preoccupied with what they hope for, of satisfying their lusts and fulfilling their wishes. For whatever level they have attained of it, they proceed to seek what is higher than it, and strive for what is after it. The many benefits bestowed on them are, in their view, but few. The great gifts already given to them, they deem small. Until they consider any advantage possessed by another person as if it was taken away from them, and when others attain some benefits, it is as if evil befell them. They do not understand the works of G-d who bestows good to them, as Scripture says (Tehilim 10:4) "The wicked, in his high arrogance, does not enquire. G-d is not in any of his thoughts". 
2. The second reason is that human beings when they come into this world are like foolish beasts and a donkey's colt, as scripture says (Iyov 11:12) "Like a wild donkey's colt is man when born". They grow up with an abundance of continuous and recurring Divine favors which they experience constantly, and to which they become so used to and familiar with that they come to regard these as intrinsic parts of their being, not to be removed or separated from themselves during the whole of their lives. Though their intelligence develops and their mental faculties become strong they foolishly ignore the benefits the Creator has bestowed on them and do not consider the obligation of gratitude for Divine beneficence, for they are unaware of the immense degree of the benefit, and of the infinite greatness of the Benefactor who bestowed it upon them. 
In this respect, they resemble an infant, found in the desert by a kind hearted man. The man had pity on the infant, brought it into his home, raised it, fed it, clothed it, and generously provided all that was good for it until it grew up and understood the ways of the many benefits it had received. 
Afterwards the [same] kind hearted man heard about a man who fell in the hands of his enemy who for a long time treated him with utmost cruelty, starved, and kept naked. The prisoner's suffering aroused the kind hearted man's pity. He appeased the enemy until the enemy freed the prisoner and forgave his debt. The benevolent man brought the man into his home and benefited him to a lesser extent than that which he bestowed on the infant. Yet, the man recognized the good more and was more thankful than the infant who grew up with them. The reason is because he went from a situation of destitution and suffering to one of goodness and tranquility while his mental faculties were mature. Therefore, he fully recognized the goodness and the kindness of his benefactor. But the infant did not realize the great extent of the goodness even after his perception and understanding had matured because he was used to them since his childhood.
No person with intelligence will doubt that the kindness to the child was wider in scope and more clearly recognizable, and that consequently there was in its case a greater obligation of constant gratitude and praise to the benefactor. 
This is similar to what scripture says (Hosea 11:3) "And I carried Ephraim, taking them in my arms, but they knew not that I healed them." 
3. The third reason is that human beings are struck in this world with various mishaps and damages to their bodies and possessions and they do not understand the ways in which these misfortunes are a means to benefit them, nor the benefits of trial and suffering, as Scripture says "Happy is the man whom You, O L-ord, chastens and teaches out of Your Law" (Tehilim 94:12). 
They forget that they themselves and all they have are benefits which the Creator in His generosity and loving-kindness has bestowed on them, and that He decreed on them justly in accordance with His wisdom. They are resentful when His judgment is visited upon them and they do not praise Him when His mercy and loving-kindness are manifested to them. 
Their foolishness leads them to deny the benefits and the Benefactor. Their folly may even bring many of them to speculate that they know better concerning G-d's work and the various creations which He created for their well-being. 
In this regard, how like are they to blinded people who were admitted into an institution specially built for them and furnished with everything needed for their comfort. Every single thing was in its right place and arranged for their advantage in the way that might best serve the specific purpose of improving their condition. Useful healing potions had also been provided and a skilled physician appointed to heal them by the application of these potions so that their sight may be restored. They however neglected to toil in the healing of their eyes and did not heed the directions of the physicians who sought to cure them.
They wandered about aimlessly in the institution, miserable because of their blindness. Often as they were walking, they would stumble over objects that had been placed there for their benefit, and fall down on their faces. Some were bruised, others suffered broken limbs. Their pains and injuries increased and multiplied. Then they burst forth in complaints against the owner and the builder of the home, condemned his work, charged him with falling short in the fulfillment of his duty and condemned him as a bad manager. They persuaded themselves that his aim and purpose had not been to do them good and show them kindness, but to cause them pain and injury. This attitude of mind caused them at last to deny his goodness and kindliness, even as the wise man said (Koheles 10:3) "Yea also, when a fool walks by the way, his understanding fails him and he declares to everyone that he is a fool". 
Since this is so, men of wisdom and knowledge have deemed it their duty to arouse those who did not understand the Creator's beneficence and instruct human beings to realize through their own intellect the high degree. For many benefits fail to be enjoyed altogether or their enjoyment is marred because they are not realized and their high degree is not known. But when the attention of the beneficiaries is called to their high degree and what had been hidden from them is revealed to them, they will offer, in more abundant measure, laudation and thanksgiving to their divine Benefactor, and so will have pleasure and happiness in their life here and receive their good reward in the hereafter. 
The wise man already said on this subject: "The words of the wise are like goads; and like nails, firmly fixed, are the compilers (Baale Asufoth)" (Koheles 12:11). The words of the wise are compared by the sage to goads, because they arouse and stir up; they are also compared to nails firmly fixed, because they fix wisdom in their hearts always, and their wisdom endures in them.
The phrase "Baale Asufoth" means, according to the commentators, compilers of books. The term "Divre" in the first half of the verse also applies to its second half; which should be rendered: "and like firmly fixed nails are the words of compilers". For books authored on the branches of wisdom endure, their benefit is without interruption (for all generations) and therefore they are compared to nails firmly fixed. 
We must now discuss six topics on the subject of examination (of created things)
1. What is to be understood by the examination and its true meaning?
2. Is examination of created thing a duty or not?
3. What are the various ways in which it is to be conducted?
4. How many are the diverse marks of divine wisdom in created things which we should examine?
5. Which one of these is closest to us and should receive more attention than the rest?
6. The factors that are detrimental to the examination and its results.






Chapter 1

What is the examination? Contemplating the marks of the Creator's wisdom manifested in the created things and evaluating these marks according to one's mental capacity. 
For [divine] wisdom, though varied in its manifestations in created things, is fundamentally and essentially one - just as the sun is one body, while the appearance of its rays when passing through glasses that are white, dark, red or green, varies and assumes respectively the color of each medium, and just as water with which a park is sprinkled assumes the color of the blooms on which it falls. 
Therefore, contemplate G-d's creations, from the smallest of them to the largest, and reflect on those matters which are at present hidden from you; and, with the help of the Almighty, you will find that they are as I have told you. And because these marks of divine wisdom vary in created things, it is our duty to contemplate them and think on them until the whole matter becomes established in our souls and abides in our consciousness. 
If these marks [of divine wisdom] were the same in all created things, no man would have any doubt in them [that they all stem from one Source]. The wise and the fool would be equal in their recognition. The reason being that when one and the same thing is always being produced in the same way, it is clear that the maker is not a voluntary agent but a force acting according to the nature imposed upon it - compelling it to act in a definite way which it has no power to alter, just like fire whose sole function is to burn, or water whose nature is to cool. But one who has the power to do as his will prompts him will act in various ways at various times. 
Since the Creator has free will in whatever He does, is not forced, needs nothing and is not forced by any nature, therefore He created things diverse, according as His wisdom each time dictated; so that the variety shall point to His unity and His free-will in whatever He does, as it is said "Whatsoever the L-ord pleased, has He done in heaven and on earth" (Tehilim 135:6). 
G-d alone knows if it is on this account only that all creatures have not been made in one form and likeness; rationally it would seem that this is the purpose of the variety in the marks of wisdom exhibited in created things. But the Creator's wisdom is too exalted for us. What we have just mentioned is only one out of many other reasons to the knowledge of which we have not attained. Complete wisdom belongs to G-d alone, and there is no power beside Him. 

Chapter 2

Is it our duty to study created things or not? We reply that the examination of created things and deducing from them the wisdom of the Creator is a duty which can be demonstrated from Reason, Scripture, and Tradition (the oral torah).
From Reason: For our reason bears witness that a rational creature's superiority over an irrational one consists in the former's superior ability to perceive, understand and acquire knowledge of the marks of wisdom found throughout the universe, as Scripture said "Who teaches us more than the beasts of the field, and makes us wiser than the fowls of heaven" (Job 35:11).
And when a man thinks of, and reflects upon, these foundations of wisdom and examines its marks in the universe, his superiority over the animals rises in proportion to his understanding. But if he neglects to observe and reflect, he is not equal to the beast, but inferior to it, as Scripture said "The ox knows his owner, and the donkey his master's crib, but Israel does not know, my people do not consider" (Yeshaya 1:3). 
From Scripture: The same can be demonstrated from Scriptures, as it is said, "Lift up your eyes on high and behold, who created these?" (Yeshaya 40:26). And again "When I behold Your heavens, the work of Your fingers, the moon and the stars, which You have established" (Tehilim 8:4). Scripture also said "Have you not known? have you not heard? has it not been told you from the beginning? [have you not understood from the foundations of the earth?]" (Yeshaya 40:21) Further "Hear O deaf, look O blind, that you may see" (Yeshaya 42:18); "Better to go to the house of mourning than to go to the house of feasting, since that is the end of all men, and the living will take it to his heart" (Koheles 7:2); "The wise man, his eyes are in his head; but the fool walks in darkness" (Koheles 2:14). "But the path of the righteous is as the light of dawn that shines more till the day is perfect. The way of the wicked is as darkness; they know not at what they stumble" (Mishlei 4:18-19). 
From Tradition: The sages said (Sabbath 75a) "He who is capable of calculating the courses of the stars and planets and does not do so - of such a one, Scripture said (Yeshaya 5:12) 'And the harp, and the lyre, the timbrel, and flute, and wine, are in their feasts: but they regard not the work of the L-ord, nor do they contemplate the work of His hands'". And they say further (Sabbath 75a) "From where do we know that it is a duty to calculate the courses of the stars and planets?" Because it is said (Devarim 4:6) 'Observe therefore and do them, for this is your wisdom and understanding in the sight of the nations that, when they hear all these statutes, they shall say: 'Surely this great nation is a wise and understanding people'. This verse refers to the duty of making astronomical calculations."
Further they said (Pirkei Avos 2:1) "Consider the loss from doing a mitzvah (precept) against its reward and the gain from doing a sin against the loss it involves". 
And they further said (Eruvin 100b) "If the Torah had not been given to the Jews, we could have learned decency from the cat, chastity from the dove, etiquette from the rooster and honesty from the ant". 
Thus far it has been demonstrated that it is a duty to examine created things and draw the deductions from the marks of Divine Wisdom exhibited in them. Note it well!

Chapter 3

How are the several ways of examination to be conducted?
Examination of created things means a close study of the elements of which the Universe is composed; the products that result from the combination of these elements; the character of the constituents of each composite; the ways in which it is useful; the marks of wisdom exhibited in its production, form and shape, and in the purpose for which it was created; the beautiful spirituality of this world; its causes and effects; and the complete perfection for which it was created; to know its contents - spiritual and physical, rational and irrational, the immobile and the mobile (solid and fluid), minerals and plants; its higher and lower parts; and to realize that the Creator created the Universe in a perfect and orderly combination - each of its parts distinctly recognizable, - so that it hints and teaches on the Creator, as a work points to the workman, or a house indicates the builder. 
It is proper that you should know that the whole world is synthesized of the physical and the spiritual, so intimately mixed and fused, that each of them sustains the other, like body and soul in living creatures. 
The marks of wisdom exhibited in all of this are of three kinds.
(1) Those of the first kind are clear and apparent, and do not escape the notice even of the fool, and of course not of the thinking person. An example is the [relative] movement of the sun above the earth to illuminate the habitable portion of the globe, to benefit the creatures that live there; as Scripture said (Tehilim 104:22-24) "The sun arises, they assemble and crouch in their dens. Man goes forth unto his work and to his labor until the evening. How manifold are Your works, O L-ord! With wisdom have You made them all. The earth is full of Your possessions".
(2) The second kind consists of marks of wisdom, whose benefit and necessity is hidden from most people and known only to the intelligent person who comprehends that they are right. Such as death, the fate that overtakes all flesh and which is necessary for the welfare of the world. As our sages expounded the verse: (Bereishis 1:31) " 'And G-d saw everything that He had made, and behold it was very good'. 'Behold it was very good' - this refers to death." (Bereishis Raba 9:5). So, too, the wise king said "wherefore I praised the dead which are already dead more than the living which are yet alive" (Koheles 4:2). 
(3) The third kind consists of marks of wisdom that are partly obscure and partly clear. The man endowed with but little mental power will not recognize them unless he ponders them and studies them in minute detail. An example is the changes that take place in the year, its four seasons etc. 
The wise and intelligent man will choose from the world for study its fine and spiritual elements; use them as a ladder by which to obtain proofs of the existence of the Creator of all, to Whose service he will then cling to according to his heartfelt recognition of the greatness and exaltedness of the Creator, and his realization of the Almighty's gracious benevolence to all of His creations and that G-d has graciously bestowed abundant benefits to him, and has elevated him (above the animals, etc.) while he had done nothing nor possessed any moral quality that would entitle him to deserve any divine reward. 
Afterwards, he will select for himself, of the material things, only those that promote his physical benefit and material well-being, but only to the extent needful and sufficient. He will abandon the rest, of the superfluities and worldly desires which turn the heart away from G-d. He will rather busy himself with working for his final home, the place to which he will go after his death. The world and its possessions, he will regard as a means of providing for his appointed day, his latter end. He will take of this world only what can accompany him on his journey. 
But a person ignorant of the ways of the world and of its evidences of divine wisdom, regards it as his everlasting home and fixed abode. He busies himself with it strenuously, sets all his heart and concentrates all his energies upon it, thinking that he is rapidly furthering his own interests and does not realize that the fruits of his toil and the superfluity that he has gathered will go to others possibly during his lifetime and undoubtedly after his death. And thus he totally neglects his interests hereafter. 
How analogous these types are to two brothers who inherited from their father a piece of land that needed cultivation. They divided it between themselves. Neither of them possessed anything else. One of them was sensible and industrious; the other was the opposite.
The sensible brother realized that if he occupied himself solely with his plot of land, this would prevent him from earning his livelihood and attaining his immediate needs. So he hired himself out as a day-laborer in a field belonging to another person and was thus able to subsist on the wages he received. After he had finished his daily task he worked an hour every evening in his own field industriously and zealously. When he had saved enough out of his wages to keep him for one or more days, he stopped working for others and labored on his property with the utmost energy and zeal. In this course he persevered until his plot was in a proper state of cultivation. When the harvest time came he gathered the products of his field and orchard, stored them and had sufficient produce to support himself for the next year. Then he cultivated his land as he desired and planted more trees until it not only produced enough for his maintenance, but yielded a surplus with which he bought additional land.
The foolish brother, recognizing that working on his land alone would prevent him from earning a living, neglected his property completely, hired himself out to others as a field-laborer, spent the whole of the wages he received and saved nothing. Whenever he had enough left of his earnings to provide him with food for a single day, he turned it into a day of rest, idleness and amusement, never giving a thought to his property. The hours during which he was free on the days when he worked, he spent in the bath. His land remained waste and yielded nothing. It was all covered with thorns and thistles. Its fences were broken. Its trees were swept away by a flood. It was in the condition described by the wise man in the text (Mishlei 24:30-31) "I passed by the field of the slothful and by the vineyard of the man void of understanding and behold, it was all overgrown with thorns; nettles had covered the face thereof, and the stone wall thereof was broken down." 
The intelligent reader who reflects intently upon this parable will draw from it the lesson as to his final end, which is his true home, and he will work on it with all his might. While for his earthly needs, he will work as one does for others, in moderation and only to the extent absolutely necessary. The fool, however, acts oppositely in two ways. His interests here on earth he pursues with zeal and diligence while for his welfare in the hereafter he utterly ignores; even as the wise man said, when he observed the fool (Mishlei 24.32), "Then I saw and considered it well. I looked upon it and drew lessons". 


Chapter 4

How many are the marks of divine wisdom in created things which we can examine?
To this we reply that even though there are many kinds of created things and each kind has many constituents, the cornerstones of wisdom found in them are seven classes.
One of these is the mark of wisdom apparent in the primary and fundamental elements of the universe. The Earth, we observe is at the center; close to it and above it is water; close to the water is the atmosphere; above all is fire in a just and unchanging balance and measure. Everyone of these elements maintains its proper position appointed for it. The ocean bed, with the waters imprisoned therein, stays in its place and does not pass beyond its boundaries despite the roaring of the waves and the raging of the winds, as it is written "And I prescribed for it My decree, and set bars and doors; and said: 'Thus far you shall come, but no further, and here shall your proud waves be stayed'"(Iyov 38:9-11). 
Concerning the stability of heaven and earth, Scripture said (Ps. 119:89-91) "Forever, O L-ord, Your word stands fast in heaven, Your faithfulness is unto all generations; You have established the earth and it stands. They stand this day according to Your ordinances; for all things are Your servants". David also dwelt on this theme in his Psalm (104) beginning "O my soul, bless the L-ord. [He dons light like a garment, spreads the heavens like a curtain]". 
The second cornerstone is the mark of wisdom apparent in the human species, - a universe on a small scale that completes the ordered series of creation, and constitutes its crowning beauty, glory and perfection. David, peace be on him, referred to Man when he acclaimed "O Eternal, our L-ord, how glorious is Your Name in all the earth." (Tehilim 8:1). 
The third cornerstone is the mark of wisdom apparent in the formation of the individual human being, - his physical structure the faculties of his nefesh (lower soul) and the light of reason with which the Creator has distinguished him and thus given him superiority over other living creatures that are irrational.
Man resembles the large universe, being like it fundamentally and in its original elements. To this Job refers when he said (Job 10:10-12) "Have You not poured me out as milk and curdled me like cheese? With skin and flesh have You clothed me, and with bones and sinews have knit me together? Life and favor have You granted me, And Your providence has preserved my spirit". 
The fourth cornerstone is the mark of wisdom manifested in other species of living creatures, from the least to the greatest. Those that fly or swim or creep or move on four feet, with their various forms, traits, uses, benefits, and purpose in the world. This is mentioned in the speech in which the Creator rebuked Job in order to arouse him to his duty (Job 38:41) "who provides for the raven his prey?, etc." and the further references (Job 39) to various species of animals that live in the deserts and the seas. 
The fifth is the mark of wisdom displayed in plants and other natural products (ex. minerals) that have been provided for the improvement of the human race, because of their usefulness to man in various ways, according to their natures, constitutions and powers. The ancients already expounded this subject in their works, according to their conceptions. Thus it is said (Melachim 5:13) "And he (Solomon) spoke of trees from the cedar that is in Lebanon even unto the hyssop that springs out of the wall: he spoke also of beasts, and fowl, and of creeping things and of fishes". 
The sixth is the mark of wisdom discernible in the sciences, arts and crafts which the Creator, blessed be He, provided for man, to contribute to his improvement, to enable him to obtain a livelihood and gain other benefits of a general and particular character. To this mark of divine wisdom Scripture refers in the texts (Job 38:36) "Who has put wisdom in the inward parts? Or who has given understanding to the mind?" and again (Prov. 2:6) "For the L-ord gives wisdom; out of His mouth comes knowledge and discernment". 
The seventh is the mark of wisdom exhibited in the appointment of the Torah and its statutes, to teach us how to serve the Creator and secure for one who diligently lives according to their dictates, immediate happiness here, and reward in the hereafter, as it is written (Is.55:2-3) "Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good and let your soul delight itself in pleasantness. Incline your ear and come to Me; Hear and your soul shall live." To this should be added the customs by which the government of other nations is regulated together with their useful features. For those nations, these customs take the place of the Torah - but only in secular matters. 
It has been stated that the relation of nature to the Torah is that of a servant to his master. The forces of nature in the universe operate in harmony with the teaching of the torah, as it is said (Shemot 23:25) "And you shall serve the L-ord your G-d, and He will bless your bread and your water; and I will take away sickness from your midst". And again, (ibid. 15:26) "If you will diligently hearken to the voice of the L-ord your G-d, and will do that which is right in His sight and will give ear to His commandments and keep all His statutes, none of the diseases which I have brought upon the Egyptians will I bring upon you, for I am the L-ord that heals you", and many other passages like this. 
Some are of the opinion that when the wise man said (Mishlei 9:l) "Wisdom has built her house; she has hewn out her seven pillars", he had in mind the seven cornerstones which we have mentioned.

Chapter 5

Which class [of Evidences of Divine Wisdom] is nearest to us, so that it is our duty to examine it more? To this we reply that, while the close study of each and everyone of the [seven] classes previously enumerated is necessary and obligatory more, the evidence of divine wisdom which is nearest and clearest to us is that manifested in the human species, a microcosm of the universe, the closest cause (ultimate purpose) to the existence of the larger world. 
Hence, it is our duty to study the beginning of a human being, his birth, the compositions of his parts, the joining together of his limbs, the purpose of each limb/organ and the necessity which caused his being made in its present form. Next, we should study man's advantages, his various temperaments, the faculties of his nefesh (lower soul), the light of his intellect, his qualities - those that are essential and those that are incidental; his lusts, and the ultimate purpose of his being. When we have arrived at an understanding of the matters noted in regard to man, much of the mystery of this universe will become clear to us, since the one resembles the other. 
And thus some sages declared that philosophy is man's knowledge of himself, which means, knowledge of what we have mentioned regarding the human being, so that through the evidence of divine wisdom displayed in himself, he will become cognizant of the Creator; as Job said (Job 19:26) "From my flesh, I see G-d". 
Since this is so, it is proper that we should call a bit of attention to each of the topics noted in regard to man, in order to arouse the negligent person to what it is his duty to always have in mind; and thus he will be induced to investigate further into matters that I have not mentioned. And then, realizing the abundance of G-d's loving kindness and goodness toward him, he will be filled with the spirit of humility and submission towards the Creator, and his gratitude towards his Maker will abound, as David, peace be upon him, said: "I will give thanks to You for I am fearfully and wonderfully made; wonderful are Your works; and that, my soul knows right well. My frame was not hidden from You, when I was made in secret, and wrought in the lowest parts of the earth. My unformed substance Your eyes did see; and in Your book were they all written, in the days when they would be fashioned, while as yet there was none of them." (Tehilim 119:14-16) 
The first topic to which it is right that you direct your attention is the origin of a human being and the earliest processes of his development. You will then see that it is the divine loving-kindness that has brought him into existence out of nothing. The fundamental elements of the world, out of which he is formed, pass into the vegetable state which becomes nourishment and changes into seed and blood. This is transformed into general life which finally assumes the form and nature of a human being - living, rational and mortal - who travels through life, experiencing changes and metamorphoses and continually varied conditions and circumstances that are connected according to a properly thought out and coordinated plan. 
When you will contemplate this and will see the evidence of the Creator's goodness, wisdom and power manifested in everything, consider and reflect upon the visible constituents of man's being, namely his body and his soul. You will observe that his body is composed of various elements with dissimilar qualities. These the Creator put together by His Almighty power, combined by His wisdom, and formed out of them a stable organism which in appearance has the character of unity but his body is composed of various elements with diverse natures. To this human body, G-d has joined a spiritual and intangible essence akin to the spirituality of the higher beings (angels). This essence is his soul, bound up in him with the body by means adapted to serve both these extremes. These means are the Ruach Chaim (spirit of life), natural heat (life force), the blood, the veins, nerves, and arteries. To protect and guard them against injuries, G-d has provided flesh, bones, sinews, skin, hair and nails. All these are shields and defenses to ward off injuries. 
After this, reflect on the favor shown by the Creator in His providential guidance of man.
At the beginning of a human being's existence, the Creator appointed the mother's body to serve as a crib for the fetus so that it might abide in a safe place, a strongly guarded fortress, as it were, where no hand can touch it, where it cannot be affected by heat or cold, but is shielded and sheltered and where its food is ready for it. Here it continues to grow and develop, even becomes capable of moving and turning, and receives its nourishment without any effort or exertion. This nourishment is provided for it in a place where no one else can in any way reach it, and is increased as the fetus develops until a definite period. 
Then it goes out from its mother's belly through a narrow track without any contrivance or help on its part, but solely by the power of the wise, merciful and gracious One who shows compassion to His creatures; as He said to Job (39:1-2) "Do you know the time when the wild goats of the rock-bring forth? Or can you mark when the hinds do calve? Can you number the months that they fulfill? Or do you know the time when they bring forth?" 
Afterwards, the infant emerges into this world - all its senses, except those of touch and taste, being weak - the Creator provides for it food from its mother's breast. The blood which had been its nourishment before it was born, is now converted into milk in the mother's breast, pleasant and sweet, flowing like a gushing spring whenever needed. The milk is not so abundant that it might become burdensome on the mother and drip out without suction, nor so scarce as to tire the child when taking the breast. 
Divine grace is also manifested in His having made the orifice of the nipple like the eye of a needle, not so wide that the milk would run out without suction, in which case the child might be choked while being suckled, nor so narrow that the infant would have to exert itself in drawing its nourishment.
Afterwards, the infant's physical faculties grow stronger, so that it is able to distinguish sights and sounds. G-d inspires the parents' hearts with kindness, love and compassion for their offspring, so that raising it is not overly burdensome to them. They are more sensitive to its needs in regard to food and drink than to their own requirements. All the labor and trouble involved in bringing it up, bathing and dressing it, gently leading it, and warding off everything harmful, even against its will, is of little account in their sight. 
Afterwards, the offspring passes from infancy to childhood. His parents do not tire of him nor become angry at his numerous needs and little recognition of the burden which they bear in caring and providing for him. On the contrary, the concern they feel on his behalf increases until he reaches adolescence, when he has already learned to speak correctly and properly, and his physical senses and mental faculties have become strong enough to acquire wisdom and knowledge. Then he apprehends some physical phenomena with his senses, and some intellectual ideas with his mental faculties, as the wise King said (Prov. 2:6) "For the L-ord gives wisdom: out of His mouth comes knowledge and discernment." 
Among the many benefits to a human being is that during his childhood he is not a thinker and is unable to distinguish good from evil. For had he, while growing up, been endowed with a ripe intellect and mature powers of perception and had he been able to discern the superiority of adults, in their ability to manage for themselves, move freely and keep clean, and realized the opposite case presented by his condition in all these respects, he would have died of worry and sorrow. 
Remarkable too it is that crying, according to what learned physicians state, is beneficial to an infant. For in the brains of infants there is a humor (mucous), which, if it remained there undischarged, would produce evil results. Weeping dissolves this humor and drains it away from the brain, and thus the infants are saved from its injurious effects.
The Creator's abounding grace to man is also manifested in that the new teeth come out singly, one after another, and so the gradual falling out of the old teeth during the process of replacement does not interfere with his ability to chew.
Later on he is subjected to illnesses and meets with painful incidents so that he recognizes the world, and that its nature is not concealed from him. Thus he is put on his guard against trusting in this world thereby permitting his lusts to rule over him, in which case he would become like the animals that neither think nor understand; as it is written "Be ye not as the horse or as the mule which have no understanding" (Tehilim 32:9). 
One should then consider and reflect upon the usefulness of the limbs and organs and the ways of his rectification through them - the hands serving for taking and giving; the feet for walking the eyes for seeing; the ears for hearing; the nose for smelling; the tongue for speaking; the mouth for eating; the teeth for chewing; the stomach for digestion; the liver for purifying the food; the tubes for removing superfluities; the bowels for retention. The heart is the sanctuary of the natural heat and the well-spring of life. The brain is the seat of the spiritual faculties, the well-spring of sensation, and the root from which the nerves begin.
The womb (in a woman) serves to preserve and develop the seed. And so it is with the rest of the bodily organs. They all have their specific functions, of which more are unknown than are known to us. 
So too, one who reflects on these matters will take notice of the natural processes by which the nourishment received by the body is apportioned to every one of its parts. These marks of wisdom observed by him will stir him to thank His Creator and praise Him for them, as David said "All my bones shall cry out: 'O G-d, who is like You' " (Tehilim 35:10). Thus the food passes into the stomach through a tube that is utterly straight, without bend or twist. This tube is called the esophagus. The stomach grinds the food more thoroughly than the teeth had already done Then the nutriment is carried into the liver through fine intermediate veins which connect these two organs (bile ducts), and serve as a strainer for the food, permitting nothing coarse to pass through to the liver. The liver metabolizes the nutrient it receives into the blood which it distributes all over the body, sending the vital fluid to all parts of the body through conduits formed for this purpose, and resembling water-pipes.
The waste substances that are left are eliminated through canals specifically adapted to that purpose. What belongs to the green gall goes to the gall bladder. What belongs to the black gall goes to the milt (spleen); other substances and fluids are sent to the lungs. The refuse of the blood passes into the bladder.
Reflect, my brother, on the wisdom of the Creator manifested in the formation of your body; how He set those organs in their right places; to receive the waste substances, so that they should not spread in the body, and cause it to become sick.
Then consider the formation of the vocal organs, and instruments of speech. The trachea, hollow for the production of sound; the tongue, lips, and teeth serving for the clear enunciation of consonants and vowels. These organs have other uses also. The air enters the lungs through the trachea; the tongue is the organ which enables one to taste things, and aids also in the moving around of the solid and liquid food. The teeth serve to chew solid food. The lips enable one to retain liquids in the mouth, and swallow the quantity desired, and only when one wishes to do so. In regard to the other organs, the uses of some are known to us while others are unknown.
Then, my brother, reflect on the four bodily faculties with their respective functions: (1) the drawing faculty by which food is received and carried into the stomach; (2) the faculty of retention by which food is retained in the body till nature has done her work on it; (3) the digestive faculty which digests the food, extracts the finer elements, separates it from the useless refuse, and distributes the former to all parts of the body; (4) the excretory faculty which ejects the refuse that remains after the digestive processes have taken from the food all that the body needs. 
Observe how all these faculties have definite functions, whose purpose it is to promote physical well-being. It is just like a King's court where there are servants and officers appointed over the royal household. One of them is charged with the duty of supplying the servants' need and delivering these to the king's steward. The second official has to receive the necessaries brought in by the first, and place them in the store-room, until they are prepared. The business of the third official is to prepare the stores and, after rendering them fit for use, distribute them among the servants. The task of the fourth servant is to sweep and cleanse the palace of all dirt and refuse, which he has to remove. 
Afterwards, reflect on the faculties of the soul and their place among the benefits bestowed on man - the faculties of thought and memory, the power of forgetting, the feeling of shame, the faculties of understanding and speech. Picture to yourself, what would a man's condition be if even one of these were lacking. Take memory, for instance. How much loss a person would suffer in all his affairs if he were unable to remember what he owned and what he owed; what he had taken and what he had given; what he had seen or heard; what he had said and what had been said to him; if he could not remember the one who had done a benefit to him and the one who had brought him harm; the one who had rendered him a service, or inflicted upon him an injury. Such a person would not recognize a road even if he had frequently traversed it, nor remember any wisdom though he had studied it all his lifetime. Past experience would not be of any benefit to him. He would not weigh any matter by what had happened in the past. Nor could he estimate future events by what was taking place in the present. Such a person would be almost entirely outside the class of human beings.
Among the benefits of forgetting: Were it not for the ability to forget no man would ever be free from sorrow. No joyous occasion would dispel his sadness. The events that should bring him joy would give him no pleasure, when he recalled the troubles of life. Even from the realization of his hopes he could not hope to derive rest and peace of mind. He would never refrain from grieving. Thus you see how memory and forgetfulness, different and contrary to each other as they are, are both benefits bestowed upon man, and each of them has its uses. 
Afterwards, reflect on the feeling of shame with which man alone has been endowed. How high is its value! How numerous are its uses and advantages. Were it not for this feeling, men would not show hospitality to strangers. They would not keep their promises, grant favors, show kindness, nor abstain from evil in any way. Many precepts of the Torah are fulfilled only out of shame. A large number of people would not honor their parent if it were not for shame, and certainly would fail to show courtesy to others. They would not restore a lost article to its owner, nor refrain from any transgression. For whoever commits any of the disgraceful acts which we have mentioned, does so only when he has cast off the garment of shame. As Scripture said: "Yea they are not at all ashamed, neither know they how to blush" (Yirmiyahu 6:15), and "The sinner knows no shame" (Tzefania 3:5). 
It is a great amazement that G-d has implanted man with shame in the presence of other human beings due to the advantages we mentioned and others we did not mention, and yet G-d did not implant man with shame in the presence of his Creator who observes him continually. The reason for this is so that a human being would not be forced in the service of G-d whereby its reward would not be deserved. It is, however, our duty to feel shame in the presence of the Creator, as a result of reflection, realization of the service we owe to Him, and our consciousness that He observes every thing that we do openly or secretly; as Scripture said "Be ashamed and humiliated of your ways, O House of Israel" (Yechezkel 36:32). 
The abounding goodness of G-d to us is manifested in, the capacities of thought and perception with which he has uniquely endowed us and distinguished us from other living creatures. The value of these faculties in the care of our bodies and ordering of our activities is known to all, with the exception of those who have suffered a loss of these faculties due to brain damage.
The traits which we can attain through the understanding are many. Through the understanding we know that we have a Creator, wise, everlasting, [absolutely] One, who has existed from all eternity; infinite in power, unbound to time and space; exalted above the qualities of His creatures and beyond the conception of all existing beings; merciful, gracious and beneficent; resembling nothing nor does anything resemble Him. 
It is through the understanding that we realize the Creator's wisdom, power and mercy, of which the universe provides clear evidence. It is the understanding which shows us that we ought to serve Him, because service is rightly due to Him, and because of His beneficence, bestowed upon all universally and on each one specifically. Through the understanding we are confirmed in our faith in the truth of the Book of G-d's Law given to Moses, His prophet, peace be upon him. Because of a human being's faculty of reason and perception, he is an accountable creature whom his Creator will hold to a strict reckoning. A person who has lost his understanding, loses all the excellencies of a human being and is exempt from the mitzvot (precepts), and reward and punishment. 
Among the benefits of the understanding: through understanding man obtains his knowledge of all things perceived by the senses or apprehended by the intellect.
By the understanding he discovers aspects of visible objects, unrevealed to the physical senses, as for instance, the movement of the shadow (on a sun-dial), or the action of a single drop of water on the hard rock. 
By the understanding man distinguishes between truth and falsehood, between excess and deficiency, between good and evil, between the praiseworthy and the disgraceful, between the necessary, the possible and the impossible. 
By his understanding, man makes other living creatures work for his benefits and pleasures. By the use of this faculty, he recognizes the position of the planets, determines their distances and their movements in their orbits, comprehends the relations and comparisons treated in the sciences of mathematics and engineering, the figures and modes of demonstration [syllogisms] set forth in logic, and other sciences and arts too numerous to mention.
So too, all the other faculties of man, if you study them, you will find, display the utmost perfection and are of the utmost benefit to him, as we have shown, regarding the understanding. 
Afterwards, reflect further on the benefits G-d has bestowed on man by the gift of speech and the orderly arrangement of words, whereby he gives expression to what is in his mind and soul and understands the conditions of others. The tongue is the heart's pen and the mind's messenger. Without speech, there would be no social relations between one person and another; a human being would be an animal. Through speech, the superiority of an individual among his fellows becomes apparent. The pacts between man and his fellow are made through speech, and likewise between G-d and His servants. By means of speech, a man turns away from his perverseness and seeks forgiveness for his iniquities. Speech is the greatest evidence of a man's nobility or ignobility. Man, it has been said, is heart and tongue. And this completes the definition of a human being. For a human being is defined as a "living, speaking, mortal creature" and by speech, he is differentiated from the brute animals.
Then consider the advantages derived from written characters and the art of writing. By their aid, the deeds and affairs of those who have passed away and of those who are still existing are recorded for the benefit of those who will come after them; communications reach the absent, and information is received concerning those far away and concerning relatives in another country; and it is possible that the receipt of this information may save their lives or deliver them from misfortune and mishaps. By this means, knowledge of the sciences is preserved in books; dispersed thoughts are gathered together. Men write down their dealings with each other in commercial transactions, in loans, purchases, marriages, divorces. The subject is too wide to be dealt with completely.
Among the completing benefits bestowed on man is that he has been provided with hands and fingers, with which he can draw, write, embroider, kindle fire and perform other acts and fine operations that are beyond the capacity of other living creatures, because these are not needed by them. 
I assert that there is not one of these organs the uses of which I have mentioned that does not show to one who reflects on them marks of divine wisdom in its structure, form and combination with other organs. They display strong evidence and clear proof of the Creator's mercy towards us. Galen, in numerous treatises, has expounded the functions of the bodily organs. Were we to do so in the case of one of these, we would depart from our goal of conciseness. What we have brought with G-d's help, is sufficient to arouse any one to whom the Creator will teach the way of His salvation. 
The study of the other species of living creatures, their habits and their sustenance will not be concealed by one who observes them and reflects upon the marks of divine wisdom manifest in them. Hence, the scriptures repeatedly refer to them when mentioning G-d's wonders: "Who provides for the raven his prey when his young ones cry unto G-d" (Job 38:41), and "He gives to the beast his food, and to the young ravens which cry" (Tehilim 147:9). There are many other similar passages. 
And so too, when one studies the course of the heavenly spheres, distinguished by their various movements and the individual luminaries all contributing to the order of the Universe - he will see in them evidences of power and wisdom, such as the human mind cannot grasp and would become weary in attempting to describe. As David, peace be upon him, said, "The heavens declare the glory of G-d, and the firmament show forth His handiwork" (Tehilim 19:2), and "When I behold Your heavens, the work of Your fingers, the moon and the stars which You have established" (Tehilim 8:4) .
It is a wonder that among all the great works of the Creator, which the human eye beholds, the heavens are always present For wherever on earth a man stands, he sees above his head a hemisphere of firmament encompassing the earth. And when he contemplates it thoughtfully, he will realize that the One who created it by His Will is infinite in power, wisdom and greatness. 
For the sight of any example of architecture of the ancients arouses in us wonder at their ability to make anything like it, and indicates to us the physical strength and fine souls of those who constructed a strong fortress for themselves. Now if such very small and petty work that transcends our capacity by only little, looms so large in our sight, how exceedingly indeed should we marvel at the infinite greatness of Him who created the heavens and the earth and all that therein is, without effort or exertion, labor or fatigue, out of nothing, with [the aid of] nothing, solely by His will and wish. As it is said "By the word of the L-ord were the heavens made; and all the host of them by the breath of His mouth" (Tehilim 33:6). 
Among the benefits bestowed upon man, the following is to be noted. When you contemplate the marks of divine wisdom in created things, you will find that, besides testifying to the divinity and might of the Creator they all without exception are in various ways useful to man and contribute to his improvement. Only that some of these uses are evident, while others are obscure. Take light and darkness for instance. The benefits of light are obvious and evident, but those of darkness are hidden. For human beings are weary in the dark; their activities and movements are interrupted at its arrival. But were it not for the darkness of night, the bodies of most living beings would be worn out by their incessant toil and protracted movements. Through the recurrence of night, one interval of time is separated from another. It gives knowledge of periods which would otherwise be unknown, (e.g. counting days and weeks;) and makes known the respective length or brevity of human lives.
If time were uniform (i.e. without alternation of day and night,) there would be no commandments for special seasons, such as Sabbaths, festivals or fasts; no appointments could be made for a definite date; most of the sciences related to time would be unknown. Even food would not be perfectly digested by any living creature.
As man however needs light at night to do some of his work, and to nurse the sick, the Creator has provided him with a substitute in the light of fire which he can kindle at any time and extinguish whenever he pleases. 
Wondrous too it is that the hue of the sky belongs to the colors that strengthen the sight, For it inclines to black which has the special quality of gathering together and strengthening the light that enters the eyes Had the color of the sky been white, it would have injured the eyes of living creatures and weakened them. Similarly, other marks of wisdom are exhibited by other created things.
Out of G-d's abounding goodness to mankind, He put the fear of man into other creatures that are dangerous, as it is said (Bereishis 9:2) "And the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth," so that an infant is secure against hurt by a cat or rat or similar creature, while a grown-up man, after death, is not safe from their attacks; even as our sages said: "A living child, a day old, need not be guarded against rats; Og, [the giant] king of Bashan, dead, needs such protection." 
What you should also realize is the exalted [or mysterious] property in all things created - the higher and the lower, from the smallest to the greatest - by which the entire universe is ordered and perfected, and which is not apprehended by the physical senses. This is the quality of motion (change), inherent in everything composite. None of the bodily senses can grasp it, but the intellect grasps it by inference from the moving/changing object which the senses detect. Had there been no motion, not one of existing things would have been brought into complete being, nor could any of them suffer destruction. A philosopher said that the majority of physical things are in a state of motion. 
When you will understand the mystery of motion, comprehend its true essence and spiritual character, realize that it is one of the marvels of divine wisdom and recognize in it the Creator's abundant compassion towards His creatures, it will become clear to you that all your movements are tied to the Creator's desire, guidance and will, whether these movements be great or small, visible or invisible, with one exception only, namely those movements that He has left to your free will, in the choice of good or evil. 
And when this will have become clear to you, watch yourself in every movement that you make. Be ever conscious of the bond by which the Creator has attached you to Him; always feel abashed in His presence; fear Him; submit to His judgment; accept His decrees. And so you will attain His favor, and your final end will be good, as it is said (Tehilim 32:10) "... But he that trusts in the L-ord, will be surrounded by kindness." 
In regard to secular matters, it is proper that you should always look to the final outcome of hard experiences. You will discover the surprising fact that many seemingly adverse events turn out in the end to be to our advantage, and vice versa. A story is told of a company of travelers who lay down near a wall to rest overnight. A dog, passing by, wetted one of them. The man awoke and got up to wash off the uncleanliness. After he had gone some distance from his fellows, the wall fell down on his companions and killed them, while he alone escaped. Events frequently happen in similar fashion and vice versa. 
One of the most important subjects on which you should reflect is the wonderful gift of G-d to living creatures and plants - the rain, which besides falling in its due season, descends in showers when needed. As Scripture said, (Yirmiya 14:22) "Are there any among the vanities of the nations that can cause rain? or can the heavens give showers? are You not He, O L-ord our G-d? therefore we will hope unto You: for You have made all these things" (Yirmiya 5:24) "Neither say they in their heart: Let us now fear the L-ord, our G-d, that gives rain, both the former and the latter, in due season; that reserves for us the appointed weeks of the harvest." The importance of the rain, you will find also emphasized in the text (Job 5:9-11) "Who does great things and unsearchable; marvelous things without number: Who gives rain upon the earth and sends water upon the fields; so that He sets upon high those that are low, and those that mourn are exalted to safety."
How astonishing too is the growth of foods from seeds. A single grain that has been saved from mishaps, produces a thousand grains and more. It has even been stated that out of one grain of wheat, as many as three hundred ears will spring up, each containing over twenty grains. We also come across gigantic trees whose roots have sprung out of a single seed or a single shoot and have increased many times as much as those mentioned. Praised be the All-Wise and Gracious One who brings into existence such vast effects from causes so small and weak, as Scripture said (Shmuel 2:3) "And by Him actions are weighed." The foods assigned to different living creatures are too numerous to specify. The wise man, when he reflects on them and understands their causes, will recognize the supreme wisdom of the Creator's plan. Concerning these things David said (Tehilim 124:27-28) "All of them wait for You, that You may give them their food in due time. You give it unto them they gather it; You open Your hand, they are satisfied with good". He says further (Tehilim 145:16) "You open Your hand, and satisfy every living thing with favor". I will clarify this topic further in the "Gate of Trust" with G-d's help. 
The greatest of the benefits that the Creator has bestowed upon man and the strongest proof of His existence is the Torah that was delivered to Moses, His prophet, peace be upon him, and the manifestation of [supernatural] signs by him - changes in the normal natural phenomena, and exhibition of awe-inspiring miracles to bring faith in the Creator, blessed be He, and in His prophet; as it is said (Shemot 14:31) "And Israel saw the great work which the L-ord wrought upon the Egyptians, and the people: feared the L-ord, and they believed in the L-ord and in Moses, His servant. (Deut. 4:35-36) "Unto you it was shown, that you may know that the L-ord, He is G-d; there is none else beside Him. Out of Heaven He made you to hear His voice, that He might instruct you; and upon earth He made you to see His great fire; and you did hear His words out of the midst of the fire." 
If any one seeks evidence at the present day similar to those just mentioned, let him look with candid eyes at our position among the nations since the Exile began and our orderly condition in their midst, notwithstanding that we do not agree with them in belief or practice - of which disagreement they are aware. Observe that even so, our financial situation is close to theirs, and perhaps even better than theirs. You will see that an average person among them must toil more for his livelihood than an average or even a below-average among us. This is like our Creator promised us: "And yet for all that, when they are in the land of their enemies, I will not reject them neither will I abhor them, utterly to destroy them and to break my covenant with them for I am the L-ord their G-d" (Vayikra 26:44), and "For we are bondmen; yet our G-d has not forsaken us in our bondage" (Ezra 9:9). "If it had not been the L-ord who was for us, let Israel now say, if it had not been the L-ord who was for us, when men rose up against us, then they had swallowed us up alive, when their wrath was kindled against us" (Tehilim 124:1), and the rest of the Psalm. In the Gate of the "Service of G-d", I will expand on the exceeding favor G-d has bestowed upon us in His Torah which he gave to us. 
What you should also attentively consider and examine is the fact that despite the wide diversity of dispositions among human beings there is whole-hearted agreement among them in the appointment of one of their number to rule over them (a king); they assume the option to serve him, and render him obedience in all that he commands and charges them. He on his part protects them, treats them with sympathy, judges their causes righteously, governs them for their common good, so that their interests shall not suffer and no enemy prevail against them. If every individual only cared for himself and only troubled to ward off hurt from his own person, men would never agree or build a tower or wall, and their common interests would be unprotected. This also is to be noted that the ruler himself observes the statutes, governs his people in accordance with righteous judgments and in good and upright ways, and overall is a servant of the law and observes righteousness. So conducting himself, his dominion will be established and his sovereignty endure, as it is said (Mishlei 20:28) "Mercy and Truth preserve the king." Our sages also have said "Pray for the welfare of the government; since if not for the fear thereof, men would swallow each other alive" (Pirkei Avot 3:2). 
Another subject that you need to examine, and understand from it marks of the divine wisdom and beneficence, is the agreement of human beings to buy and sell goods for gold and silver which, through G-d's mercy they endeavor to accumulate and thus improve their positions, though their actual needs cannot be satisfied with gold or silver. For when any one is afflicted with hunger and thirst through want of food or lack of water, an abundance of gold and silver will not avail him or cure his lacking. And if any one suffers pain in any of his limbs, he will not be cured by silver and gold; for while other minerals are largely used for medicinal purposes, this is less so in the case of gold or silver. 
A wondrous evidence of wisdom is also that, while a few individuals possess large amounts of these precious metals, the majority of mankind have but little of them. If all human beings possessed them in abundance they could not use them as a medium for obtaining what they desire. Some people have much and others have little. They are precious from one point view and of little account from another, because intrinsically they are useless. This too is within the plan of the Creator's supreme wisdom. 
Then consider carefully the things on which depend the life of human beings and continuance of their normal state and condition until the end of their lives. You will find that all things are more or less plentiful in proportion to the need for them. Whatever is greatly needed is readily at hand. Whatever, on the other hand can be dispensed with, or one can for a time do without, is scarcer and harder to obtain. 
For example, the air that is breathed - since one cannot possibly exist without air for any length of time, the Creator has so provided, that at no time and in no place shall a human being be deprived of it. And since human beings, while also needing water, can exist without it for a longer period than they can without air, the Creator distributed it over the entire surface of the earth, collecting it however in particular places to which creatures go and from which they are not excluded. But such places where water is collected are not found everywhere as is the case with air. Water has to be bought with money by some people. This is not the case with air. Water is more readily obtained by some than by others, air exists for all and is obtained by all equally and in the same way.
Food is also a necessity from which however we can abstain and for which we can find a substitute for a longer time than is possible in regard to air or water. Hence food is scarcer and harder to procure than water. But normally it is abundant and human beings are not deprived of it altogether.
So too with regard to garments of skin, wool and vegetable fiber. Substitutes for some of these can be more easily obtained than in the case of food; and clothes take time to make up, the reason being that for a short period a person can dispense with a new supply of clothing, and content himself with a scanty wardrobe for a longer period than he can with a small supply of food. 
But precious stones, gold and silver and other minerals are essentially little needed. Their occasional use is due to convention. Hence a smaller quantity of these minerals is found among a multitude of human beings than of the food possessed by a single individual. The reason is, as we have stated, that a human being can do without these things. 
Praised be the All-Wise and Compassionate Creator who shows mercy to His servants towards whom He directs His beneficent regard for all that is for their improvement. Even as He said to Yona (4:10), "you have had pity on the gourd, for which you have not labored, neither made it to grow, which came up in a night, and perished in a night; and should not I have pity on Nineveh, that great city...?" And David said "The L-ord is good to all and His mercies are upon all His creatures." 

Chapter 6

As to the detriments to the examination of created things and matters connected therewith, I would say that all the factors noted in the first treatise as detrimental to the study of the Unity of G-d are equally injurious to the study of His works. In addition, there are the three circumstances mentioned at the beginning of this treatise. Another detrimental factor is the arrogant attitude towards the Creator's favours which the simple fool thinks are his due, and yet more beside. He does not examine these favours nor recognize any obligation on his own part to render praise and thanks to the Creator for them. Of such a person, the wise man said (Prov. 16:5) "Every one that is proud in heart is an abomination to the L-ord." The results of this examination will be that a person will understand the benefits he receives from G-d and will assume the obligation of serving Him that follows from that recognition. He will constantly recall the marks of divine wisdom and will never cease to think of them and investigate them-both those that can be apprehended by the senses and those comprehended only by the intellect And so he will discover every day a new mark of divine wisdom, as David said (Ps. 19.3) "Day unto day uttereth speech. You should know that what I have called your attention to in this treatise, is but a small portion of the vast knowledge concerning the mysteries of wisdom you can acquire by your own understanding-mysteries which will be revealed to you if you preserve cleanliness of heart and purity of soul. When you have attained in these matters the utmost knowledge of which you are capable, you should realize that all this knowledge which you have acquired of the Creator's wisdom and power, as manifested in this universe, is as nought compared to His real power and wisdom For only that is apprehended, which it is necessary for a human being to know for his own benefit. But such knowledge has no relation whatever to the extent of divine power, which is infinite. Hence you should think of the awe-inspiring nature of G-d and His infinite might as they essentially are, not as you with your limited intelligence can conceive them. Imagine rather that your condition here on earth is like that of a child born in a prison belonging to a king. The monarch took pity on the infant and ordered that it should be provided with everything good for it and needed for its well-being till it grew up and attained mature intelligence. But the child had knowledge of nothing except the prison and its contents. A royal officer visited the lad regularly, brought him all necessaries-light, food, drink, clothing; and informed him that he was a servant of the king, and that the prison and all it contained as well as the food brought him, belonged to the king; and that therefore he was under an obligation to thank his royal benefactor and laud him. The lad replied, "I praise the owner of this prison who has accepted me as his servant, singled me out for all his bounties and favoured me with special notice and regard." Said the officer, "Do not say so lest you sin. For the royal domain does not consist of this prison alone; but his widely extended lands infinitely exceed its limited area. Nor are you his only servant, for his subjects are countless. And the benefactions and kindnesses you have received are insignificant compared to those he has bestowed on others. The care that he has taken of you is of no account beside his care of others." "I know nothing of what you mention, the lad replied. "As to the king, I can only understand what I have myself experienced of his goodness and authority." The officer then said to the lad: "Say, I praise the august sovereign to whose dominion there are no bounds and whose goodness and kindness are without limit. Among his multitudinous hosts, I am of no account, and in the greatness of his might my affairs are nought.' " The lad now obtained some understanding - such as he had never had before - of what the king was, and thus his respect for the sovereign's exalted state increased. Reverence for the ruler penetrated his consciousness. Owing to the lads realization of the king's high position and his own utter insignificance, the royal goodness and benefits extended to him as well as the gifts bestowed upon him were magnified in his eyes. O my brother, pay attention to this tale when you consider the sphere that encompasses the earth. What exists in a small area on earth we cannot comprehend. How much less can we understand the whole of the earth and what is beyond this globe. Consider, brother, the parable. Study it thoroughly, and then think of the Creator as He is, and His goodness and loving-kindness with which He has favoured you will be more appreciated by you. From among all His creatures, He has taken special notice of you for your benefit. Look to His Scriptures, His commandments and statutes with a broad vision. Consider the great awe and respect you feel towards any man who has acquired more of worldly goods than you have. For the higher his position is compared with yours, and the less he stands in need of you, the more will you esteem his greatness and his beneficence; the more will you respect his commandments and prohibitions; the more energetically will you strive and labour in his affairs. Think and reflect and, with the divine help, you will find. And may G-d set us among those who are in His service and who realize His goodness, mercies and kindnesses. AMEN.

Third Treatise on Service of God

Introduction

Having, in the previous treatises, expounded the obligation of wholeheartedly acknowledging the unity of G-d and the obligation of examining the various modes of His benefits to mankind, we have next to indicate what a human being's conduct should be, once the foregoing has become clear to him - and that is to assume the obligation of the service of G-d, as reason would require from a beneficiary to his benefactor.
It is proper to open this treatise with an exposition of the various kinds of benefits human beings render each other, and the corresponding obligations of gratitude. We shall then ascend to the consideration of what we owe to the exalted Creator in praise and thanksgiving for His abounding kindness and great goodness to us. 
We assert, as a truth generally recognized, that if anyone benefits us, we are under an obligation of gratitude to him in accordance with his intent to help us. Even if he actually falls short, owing to some mishap which prevents his benefiting us, we are still bound to be grateful to him, since we are convinced that he has a benevolent disposition towards us and his intention is to be of benefit to us. On the other hand, should we obtain any benefit through one who had no such intention, the duties of gratitude to that person would cease and we are under no such obligation. 
When we consider the benefits human beings render each other, we find that these fall into five classes:
(1) a father's beneficence to his child;
(2) a master's to his servant;
(3) a wealthy man's beneficence to the poor for the sake of heavenly reward;
(4) the beneficence rendered by human beings to each other in order to gain a good name, honor and worldly reward;
(5) the powerful man's beneficence to the weak, induced by pity for the latter and sympathy with his condition. 
Let us now consider the motive in each of the classes mentioned:
Is it disinterested, the sole aim being to help the beneficiary, or is it not so?
First, a father's beneficence to his child: It is obvious that the father's motive in this is to further his own interest. For the child is a part of the father, whose chief hope is centered in his offspring. Do you not observe that in regard to its food, drink, clothing and in warding off all hurt from it, a father is more sensitive about his child than about himself? To secure ease for it, the burden of toil and weariness is lightly borne by him, the feelings of tenderness and pity for their offspring being naturally implanted in parents. 
Nevertheless, the Torah and reason impose upon children the duty of serving, honoring and revering their parents, as Scripture says: "Ye shall, everyone, revere his father and his mother" (Vayikra 19:3); "Hear, O my son, the instruction of your father and forsake not the law of your mother" (Mishlei 1:8) ; further, "A son honors his father, and a servant his master" (Malachi 1:6). (And these duties are enjoined) despite that the father is impelled by a natural instinct and the benefaction comes from G-d, while the parent is only the agent. 
The kindness of a master to his servant: It is obvious that the master's intent is to improve his property by an outlay of capital, since he needs his servant's work, and his motive in this is to further his own interest. Nevertheless, the Creator, blessed be He, imposes upon the servant the duties of service and gratitude, as it is said, "A son honors his father and a servant his master" (Malachi 1:6). 
The rich man's beneficence to the poor man for the sake of a heavenly reward: He is like a merchant who acquires a great and enduring pleasure which he will enjoy at the end of a definite time by means of a small, perishable and inconsiderable gift which he makes immediately. So the rich man only intends to win glory for his soul at the close of his earthly existence by the benefaction which G-d entrusted to him, in order to bestow it upon anyone who will be worthy of it. Yet it is generally recognized that it is proper to thank and laud a benefactor. Even though the latter's motive was to gain spiritual glory hereafter, gratitude is, nevertheless, due to him, as Job said: "[because I delivered the poor who cried for help, and the fatherless who had none to help him;] the blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me" (Job 29:13); and further, "did not his heart bless me, when he warmed himself with the fleece of my sheep?" (Job 31:20). 
Kindness men show each other for the sake of praise, honor and worldly rewards: This is as if one were to deposit an article in another's care or entrust him with money, because of the depositor's apprehension that he may need it later on. 
Although, in benefiting another person, the aim is to further his own interests, the benefactor is nevertheless entitled to praise and gratitude for his kindness, as the wise king said, "Many beseech the generous man, and everyone is a friend to him that gives gifts" (Mishlei 19:6) ; and he also said, "A man's gift makes room for him and brings him before great men" (Mishlei 18:16). 
The kindness of one who has compassion on a poor man in pain: The benefactor's motive is to get rid of his own distress that results from depression and grief for the one he pities. He is like one who cures a pain which has attacked him by means of the bounties that G-d bestowed upon him. Nevertheless, he is not to be left without praise, as Job said, "Could I see any perish for want of clothing or any poor without covering? Did not his heart bless me, when he warmed himself with the fleece of my sheep?" (Job 31:19-20). 
From what has here been advanced, it is clear that anyone who bestows benefits on others has first his own interest in mind - either to secure an honorable distinction in this world or hereafter, or relieve himself of pain, or improve his material possessions. Yet all these considerations do not absolve the beneficiaries of their duty of praising, thanking, respecting and loving their benefactors and making them some return. And this, despite that the benefit was only loaned to the benefactors; that they were compelled to dispense it, as we have pointed out; and that their beneficence is not permanent, their generosity not prolonged, and their benevolence is mixed with the intent either to further their own interest or to ward off harm. If so, how much more then does a human being owe service, praise and gratitude to Him who created the benefit and the benefactor, whose beneficence is unlimited, permanent, perpetual, without any motive of self-interest, or purpose of warding off injury, but only an expression of grace and loving-kindness emanating from Him towards all human beings. 
We should furthermore come to understand that any human being who renders a kindness to another in any of the modes above specified is not superior to the person whom he benefits, except in some incidental detail, while in their humanity and essence they are alike and akin to one another, in substance and form, in physical construct and figure (or mentality - Gen. 1:27) in their natures and in a larger part of what happens to them. Nevertheless the beneficiary, as we have set forth, is under an obligation of service to his benefactor.
And if we thought that the beneficiary was extremely defective and imperfect in his physical conformation, figure and appearance [we would conclude that], the obligation of service on his part would be so much the greater. So also, if we should deem the benefactor the best and most perfect of all beings, while the beneficiary was the most defective of all things and the weakest of all creatures, reason would require that the service to the benefactor should be increased to an infinite degree.
Following this analogy, when we investigate, through reason, the relation of the Creator, blessed be He, to human beings, we will find that the Creator, blessed be He, is infinitely exalted and glorified above everything existing, above all that can be apprehended by the senses or conceived by the intellect as has been expounded in the first treatise of this book; and that a human being, in comparison with other species of animals, is the most defective and weakest of them all.
This can be demonstrated in three respects:
(1) In respect to his infancy and early childhood: For we find that other species of living creatures are stronger than he is, better able to endure pain and move independently, and do not trouble their parents in their period of growth to the same extent as a human being does.
(2) In respect to the filth and foulness within the human body and the similar appearances on the skin when one has neglected to wash and cleanse himself for a length of time, as also in respect to the state of the body after death-the discharge of a human corpse being more nauseating than that of the carcasses of other creatures, and a human being's excrement more offensive than that of other creatures. Likewise for his other waste matter. 
(3) In respect to a human being's incompetence when, due to a brain injury, he loses the rational faculty which G-d bestowed upon him and which constitutes his superiority to the other creatures that are irrational. For at such times he is stupider and more senseless than other animals. He may inflict serious injuries on himself and even kill himself. Most animals, too, we find, possess an apprehension of what will be to their advantage, and show an ingenuity in obtaining their food, while many intellectual men fall short in this regard, not to speak of one who has lost his intellect. 
When we comprehend in our thoughts on the greatness of the Creator, exalted be He, on His infinite might, wisdom and wealth [i.e. resources]; and then turn our attention to a man's weakness and deficiency, in that he never attains perfection; when we consider his poverty and lack of what he needs to supply his wants and then investigate the numerous benefits and favors which the Creator has bestowed on him; when we reflect that the Creator has created man as he is with deficiencies in his very being - poor and needing for his development all necessities which he can only obtain by exerting himself - this too stems from the Creator's mercy to him, so that he may know himself, examine all his conditions and cleave, under all circumstances, to the service of G-d, and so receive for it the reward of the world to come, for the attainment of which he was created, as we have already set forth in the second treatise of this book - how much indeed then does a human being owe to the blessed Creator, in service, thanksgiving and continuous praise, in view of the demonstration already given of the obligation of praise and gratitude that human beings owe to each other for favors rendered them. 
Should anyone be so foolish as to contest this obligation of a human being towards the Creator - when he examines and closely studies the subject, and acknowledges the truth to himself, the sleeper will surely awake, the negligent will be aroused, the ignorant will investigate, the intelligent will understand, the demonstration of the obligatory character of the service of G-d, through the clear proofs, well known testimony, and true signs; as the prophet, peace be unto him, said concerning one who neglects to reflect upon the obligation of the service of G-d, "Do you thus repay the L-ord, O foolish and unwise people? [is not he your Father that has acquired you? has He not made you, and established you?]" (Devarim 32:6).
Thus the obligation to assume the service of G-d, incumbent on human beings in view of the continuous benefits He bestows on them, has been demonstrated.
In dealing with the subject-matter of this treatise, we have now to expound ten topics:
(1) the necessity of arousing men to G-d's service, and the methods to be employed to this end;
(2) the need for each of these methods;
(3) definition of the service (of G-d); its divisions and degrees;
(4) the form which the Torah takes to arouse us; its divisions; and the excellencies which men attain through knowledge of the Torah and comprehension of its contents;
(5) the way in which the exercise of our reasoning faculties prompts us in this regard, set forth in the form of questions and answers;
(6) the various classes of obligations to the service of G-d, corresponding to the various kinds of benefits received, and their divisions;
(7) exposition of the minimum of service which the recipient of any benefit owes to the benefactor;
(8) the difference in the views of the learned in regard to (the problem of) necessity and (divine) justice, and which of these views is nearer the truth;
(9) the mystery of the purpose for which the human species was created on earth, concisely set forth;
(10) an account of the use we should make of all our capacities, each in its right place. 





Chapter 1

Arousing man to G-d's service and its various branches are necessary on the following grounds. The understanding and the faculty of perception both instruct on human beings the duty of serving G-d. But between the time when the benefits that man receives and the time when he has sufficient intelligence to realize the services he should render in return for them, a long period intervenes. Hence, it is a duty to arouse human beings to their obligations of deeds and inward faith which make the service of G-d complete, so that a human being should not be without religion up to the time when his mental powers have become fully developed. 
(now he will explain the 2 divisions of this arousing:) <br> This calling attention is twofold.
(1) One of them is inherent in the understanding, implanted in the human faculty of cognition, innate from the beginning of his existence. 
(2) The other is acquired through instruction, namely, the torah, which the prophet conveys to human beings, so as to teach them the mode of service which it is their duty to render to the Creator, blessed be He. 

Chapter 2

Both methods of calling attention to the service of G-d are necessary because the innate urge of the understanding is weak in three respects; and we are therefore under duty to strengthen it by religious instruction.
First, man is made up of diverse entities, natures conflicting and mutually antagonistic. These entities are his soul and his body. 
The Creator has implanted in his soul qualities and forces which make him yearn for things, the use of which will promote his physical well-being, so that he will develop vigor to populate the earth, in order that the race may continue while individuals perish. This quality is the desire for bodily pleasures common to all living creatures that propagate their species. 
The Creator has also engrafted in the human soul other qualities and forces, which, if he uses them, will make him loathe his position in this world and yearn to separate himself from it. This is the desire for perfect wisdom. 
Since, however, bodily pleasures come to a man's soul first, already in early youth, and the attachment to them is, from the outset, strong, great and extremely urgent, the desire for sensual pleasure overcomes his other faculties, until it overpowered the intellect, for the sake of which man was created. And so his spiritual sight fails and the indications of his desirable qualities disappear. 
Man therefore needs external means, by the aid of which he may resist his despicable instinct - the lust for animal enjoyments - and vitalize the marks of his noblest endowment - the intellect. These aids are the contents of the Torah, whereby G-d, through His messengers and prophets, taught His creatures the way to serve Him. 
Secondly, the intellect is a spiritual entity, originating in the higher, spiritual world. It is a stranger in this world of gross material bodies. Sensual lust in man is the product of natural forces and of a combination of his physical elements. Its foundation is in this world, its root in this abode. Food gives it strength. Physical pleasures add to its vigor, while the intellect, because it is a stranger here, stands without support or ally, and all are against it. Hence it follows that it must become weak and that it needs an external means to repel the mighty power of lust and overcome it. The Torah is the remedy for such spiritual maladies and moral diseases. 
The Torah therefore prohibits many kinds of food, clothing, sexual relations, certain acquisitions and practices, all of which strengthen sensual lust; it also exhorts us to use those means which resist lust and are its opposite. These are prayer, fasting, charity-giving, [acts of] kindness; by which the intellectual faculties are revived and man is aided in this world and for the world to come, as David said: "Your word is a lamp to my feet and a light to my path" (Tehilim 119:105) ; "For the commandment is a lamp and the torah is light" (Mishlei 6:23) ; "I saw that wisdom is preferable to folly as light is preferable to darkness" (Koheles 2:13). 
Third, the sensual desire, constantly employed in feeding the body, never ceases working by day or night. The intellect, on the other hand, is only called into activity to help one gratify his passions. Now it is well known that physical faculties which are constantly exercised in accordance with their nature, improve and become more efficient, while those that are less frequently used deteriorate and become inefficient. It logically follows therefore that the sensual desire would become stronger because it is continually exercised, while the intellectual faculty would weaken, because it is so seldom used, and so little for its proper purpose. 
Hence it was necessary for there to exist something, whose true (proper) use would not involve man's physical organs nor the animalistic lusts, but only the exercise of his intellect, freed from the predominance of lusts. This aid is the Torah, the study of which will make the intellect stronger, purer, and more luminous and will drive away from man the folly that masters his soul and prevents him from seeing things as they really are and placing them in their proper relations. As the Psalmist said, "The law of the L-ord is perfect, restoring the soul; the testimony of the L-ord is faithful, making wise the simple; the ordinances of the L-ord are right, rejoicing the heart; the commandment of the L-ord is pure, enlightening the eyes" (Ps. 19:8-9). 
From what has been said, it is clearly established how necessary it is that a human being should be aroused to the service of G-d by the Torah, which includes rational precepts as well as those accepted on authority (prophecy), so that through these we may rise to the service of G-d which, our reason demonstrates, is man's duty and the main purpose for which the human species has been called into existence in this world.

Chapter 3

Definition of the Service of G-d; explanation of its parts; the merits of each of these parts.
Service may be defined as a beneficiary's submission to his benefactor, expressed in rendering good that is within his power to the latter in return for the favor received . This submission is of two kinds. The first is submission induced by fear, hope, necessity or compulsion. The second is submission arising from a sense of duty, from the conviction that it is right to aggrandize and exalt the person to whom submission is rendered. 
Of the first kind is that submission to G-d which has been induced by an external stimulus (the torah), as we have mentioned, and the obligation of which arises from hope of reward or fear of punishment in this world and the next. But the second kind is the submission which arises from an inward urge in the intellect (conscience), innate in the nature of a human being in whom body and soul are joined together. 
Both kinds of submission are praiseworthy and lead to salvation in the life hereafter, the world of eternal rest. But one of these leads to the other and is a step by which we ascend to it. The former is the submission induced by the study of the Torah. The [latter] submission which is induced by the urge of the understanding and based on rational demonstrations, is nearer to G-d and more acceptable on seven grounds: 
(1) First, For the service (of G-d) induced by the study of the Torah, it may be that the person will be l'shem shamayim (devoted to G-d alone). It may, however, be hypocritical; the aim may possibly be to obtain praise for it and honor among one's fellow-men, since this kind of service is rooted in, and founded on, hope (of reward) and fear (of punishment). But the service of G-d induced by the intellectual urge is wholly and solely devoted to G-d. No hypocrisy is mingled with it, nor any false pretense for the sake of self-glorification, since this service is not founded on hope or fear, but is based on wisdom and knowledge of what service a created being owes to its Creator. 
(2) Secondly, service of G-d induced by the Torah is only rendered as the result of hope of reward or fear of punishment; but the service urged by the understanding comes from volunteering of the soul and and its desire to strive with all its might to serve its G-d for His own sake after knowledge and comprehension. For the soul will not freely give all it has, unless it is convinced that what it receives in exchange is greater than what it gives, and this [reward] is that G-d is pleased with it. 
Third, the service due to the urge of the Torah is manifested in external good deeds rather than in inward thoughts and feelings, hidden in the heart. But in the service induced by the understanding, that which is hidden in the heart, namely, the duties of the heart, is many times as much as what is seen in the external activity of the bodily limbs. 
Fourth, the service induced by the Torah is to be regarded as a path to the service prompted by the understanding. The former is like seed planted in the ground. The study of the Torah is as cultivation is to the soil - ploughing and clearing it. The aid that comes from G-d is like the rain that waters the field. And the fruit that is produced and brought forth is what establishes in the heart - the service of G-d for His sake only, and not prompted by hope (of reward) or fear (of punishment). So our wise men have exhorted us, "Be not like servants who minister to their master upon the condition of receiving a reward . . . and let the fear of Heaven be upon you." (Ethics of the Fathers 1:3). 
Fifth, the commandments of the Torah are limited. They are a known number, 613 precepts. But the duties imposed by the understanding are almost countless, for a person daily increases his knowledge of them; and the more his faculty of perception develops and the more he comprehends G-d's beneficences, mighty power and sovereignty, the more will a man submit and humble himself before Him. Hence you find that David (peace be upon him), besought G-d to arouse him to the knowledge of these duties and remove the curtain of folly from his eyes; as it is said, "Open my eyes that I may gaze at the wonders of Your Torah" (Tehilim 119:18); "Teach me, O L-ord, the way of Your statutes..." (ibid. 119:33); "Incline my heart unto Your testimonies, and not to covetousness" (ibid. 119:36). Furthermore it is said "To all perfection have I seen an end; but Your commandment is exceedingly broad" (ibid. 119:96); that is to say, our obligation of service to You for Your continual benefits to us is without limit because there is no limit to the varieties of Your favors to us. 
It is also related of some ascetics that they spent the whole of their lives in repentance. Each day they were moved to renewed repentance, because every day their recognition of G-d's greatness increased, and they realized how much they had fallen short in the fulfillment of their obligation of service in the past, as David said, "Day communicates knowledge unto day" (Ps. 19:2). Furthermore, it is said, "Streams of water run down mine eyes, because they kept not Your laws." (Ps. 119:136). 
Sixth, the service instructed by the Torah is within the range of a human being's capacity. Provided he is intent upon it and sets about it, it is not withheld from any one who seeks to fulfill it. But the service prompted by the understanding can only be performed with great strength and with the help of G-d, since human power is insufficient to attain it. Hence you find that David repeatedly imploring G-d in Psalm 119 to give him this aid. 
Seventh, when service is only derived from the Torah, a person can never be sure that he will not stumble. For in that kind of service, the force of evil passion is always lurking in ambush, waiting for the time when he will neglect it. But when the service is prompted by the understanding, a man can be sure that he will not stumble and sin, for the soul is attracted to service of G-d only after physical lust has been slayed (overcome) and the intellect has obtained the victory over it, and controls it according to his will and desire. Hence, this type of service affords a guarantee against stumbling, and one who has attained it, is guarded from sin, as Scripture says, "There shall no evil happen to the righteous" (Mishlei 12:21). 
It is necessary, however, that I should expound some of the advantages of instruction in the Torah, as these occur to me. The grounds that necessitate the urge of the Torah to service of G-d are also seven. 
First, man is composed of soul and body. Among his tendencies there are some that tempt him to surrender himself to physical pleasures, indulge in lowly desires, and break the restraining bonds of the understanding. There are also other tendencies that will make him abhor this world and renounce society, because of reverses that he has sustained and continued troubles and sorrows that have befallen him, and so he would turn to the higher spiritual life. 
Neither of these plans is praiseworthy. The latter (if generally followed) would bring about destruction of the societal order. The former would lead to his ruin in this world and in the next. The exalted Creator, in His compassion and infinite goodness to man, favored him with a means by which he may improve his condition and direct aright his ways, leading to happiness here and hereafter. This means, which points out the middle road between the understanding and physical desire, is the Torah which is faithful, preserves righteousness outwardly and inwardly, keeps man away from his lusts in this world and reserves for him his reward at his latter end, as Scripture says, "Incline your ear and hear the words of the wise ... or it is a pleasant thing if you keep them within you . . . That your trust may be in the L-ord, I have made known to you this day . . . Have not I written to you excellent things in counsels and knowledge, That I might make you know the certainty of the words of truth; that you might answer the words of truth to them that send unto you" (Mishlei 22:17-21).
Second, the inducing by the understanding does not lead to the recognition of active obligations in the service of G-d such as prayer, fasting, tzedaka (charity), maaser (tithing), acts of kindliness. Nor does one attain knowledge of the types of punishments incurred by one who is negligent in the service. In all this, there is need of a framework and a boundary in the way set forth by the Torah and the prophet's instruction, so that by their combination the Divine purpose may be explained in orderly fashion - that purpose being the service of G-d, exalted be He, as it is said, "And G-d made it, so that man should fear before Him" (Koheles 3:14) ; that is to say, G-d gave us a law to teach us His service. 
Third, the intellectual urge cannot include equally all who are under the obligation of service, because some human beings are of limited intelligence, while some are superior in understanding. But the urge of the Torah applies equally to all who have reached the status subjecting them to this service, even though they vary in their understanding of it, as we have noted at the close of the first treatise of this book. 
It sometimes also happens that an individual falls short in some duties and exceeds in others. The intellectual stimulus varies in different individuals in accordance with their capacity of recognition. But the urge of the Torah is not subject to variation. Its form is the same for the child, the youth, one advanced in years and the old man, the wise and the foolish, even though the resulting practice varies in different classes of individuals. And so Scripture says in regard to the all encompassing character of the instruction of the Torah for all the people, "Gather the people together, men and women, and children, and the stranger that is within your gate, (that they may hear and that they may learn and fear the L-ord your G-d . . .)" (Devarim 31:12). Further, it is said, ". . . you shall read this law before all Israel in their hearing." (Devarim 31:11). 
Fourth, it is recognized that the obligations of human beings to render service are proportionate to the degrees of benefits bestowed upon them. In every period there have been events which occasioned one people to be singled out from all other peoples for special benefits that G-d bestowed on it. It follows that individuals belonging to that people are on that account under special obligation to render additional service to the Creator beyond that required of other peoples. There is no way of determining by the intellect alone what this service should be. Thus G-d chose us from among other nations by bringing us out of the land of Egypt, dividing the Red Sea and bestowing other benefits subsequently, too well known to be mentioned. Furthermore, the exalted Creator specially distinguished us from all other nations by designating us for the service for which we are under an obligation of gratitude to Him; and, in return for our acceptance of this service, He has assured us a reward in this world and in the next, - an abundance of grace and goodness, emanating from Him, that is indescribable. All this can only be clearly made known to us by the Torah, as Scripture says, "You have seen what I did unto the Egyptians and how I bore you on eagles' wings, and brought you unto Myself. Now, therefore, if you will obey My voice indeed, and keep My covenant, (then you shall be a treasure unto Me above all people) and you shall be unto Me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation" (Ex. 19:4-6).
Fifth, the stimulus of the Torah is a preparation for, and introduction to that of the Understanding, the reason being that a man in his youth needs training and guidance, and restraint from yielding to his passions, until the time comes when his understanding has become strong and firm. So, too some women and frivolous (superficial) men do not follow the intellectual lead, because its control over them is weak and loose. This condition made it necessary to provide guidance of a medium character which they can endure and which will not be impossible for them to stand. Hence, the instructions of the Torah revolve around hope and fear - the poles of its axis. 
Whoever does not fall short in fulfilling the obligations of this service belongs to the class of the pure pious ones and is worthy of reward in this world and in the next. But one who rises from this stage to the service of G-d, induced by reason, reaches the degree of the prophets and the elect of the Supreme - the saints. His reward here on earth is joy in the sweetness of the service of the L-ord, as the prophet said, "Your words were found, and I did eat them; and Your word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of my heart; for I am called by Your name, O L-ord G-d of hosts" (Jeremiah 15-16); furthermore, "The righteous shall be glad in the L-ord and trust in Him; and all the upright in heart shall glory" (Ps. 64:11) ; furthermore, "light is sown for the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart" (Ps. 97:11). His reward in the world to come will consist in his attaining the highest illumination which we are unable to describe or picture, as it is said, "If you will walk in My ways and if you will keep My charge... I will give you a place to walk among these that stand by" (Zachariah 3:7); further, "How great is Your goodness which You have laid up for them that fear You, which You have done for them that trust in You before the children of men" (Ps. 31:20). Furthermore, "Eye has not seen, O G-d, beside You, what He will do for one that waits for Him" (Isaiah 64:3).
Sixth, the Torah includes matters, the obligation of which reason cannot explain, namely, the received commandments and the general principles, of the roots of rational precepts. This is because the people to whom the Torah was given were at that period in such a condition that animal lusts dominated them and they were too weak in their knowledge and perceptive faculties to understand many of the rational precepts. The Torah, therefore, used one method only for both the rational precepts and the received commandments. The people were stimulated in the same way in regard to both classes of duties. An individual whose understanding and perception are strong, will exert himself and undertake the obligation of fulfilling them on both grounds that they are rational and received. And one whose intellect is too weak to perceive their rational ground will accept them because the Torah exhorts him, and will treat them as received precepts. Thus all classes will be benefited, as it is said, "Its ways are ways of pleasantness, and all its paths are peace" (Mishlei 3:17). 
Seventh, we come to the Torah through a human intermediary (Moses) by whom were shown signs and miracles equally perceived by all the people with their senses, the evidence of which they could not deny. Hence, the message which he brought with him in the name of G-d was demonstrated to them through the senses as well as the intellect. The demonstration through the senses was an addition to the intellectual stimulus which human beings naturally possess. 
Whoever considers G-d's bounties, bestowed upon him, which are in common with all other human beings, will faithfully accept the obligation of the service of G-d in the ways indicated by his intellect. Whoever reflects on the Creator's special bounties to him by which his nation has been distinguished from other nations, will faithfully accept the special obligation to obey the precepts that are binding on his people, on the authority of the Torah (i.e. the received commandments in the torah) and which are not binding on other peoples (except the 7 commandments of Bnei Noach).
And when one considers G-d's bounties to him, by which his tribe has been distinguished from the remaining tribes of his people, such as, priesthood (for a Kohen) or the Levitical degree (for a Levi), he will faithfully accept the obligation to fulfill precepts by which G-d has distinguished his tribe. Hence you find twenty four priestly ordinances corresponding to twenty-four special benefits which the Creator bestowed upon the priests. These are the twenty-four priestly dues.
Analogously, any individual whom G-d has distinguished by special favors beyond those enjoyed by other human beings, should undertake a special service not incumbent on them, striving at the same time, according to his capacity and perception, to fulfill the duties in the obligation of which he is included with them and thanking G-d, blessed be He, for the benevolence with which G-d specially favored him. Thus will he insure its continuance and increase, and will also receive his reward in the world to come. 
A person should not behave like the one of whom it is said, "And silver I gave her in abundance and gold which they prepared for Baal (idols)" (Hosea 2:10). One who falls short in the special service which he has to render for the bounty with which he has been specially favored, will be induced to fall short in the service specially incumbent upon his tribe and afterwards in that incumbent upon his people, and at last he will renounce the Torah altogether. Not accepting the Torah, he will not even accept the obligation of the precepts that reason dictates.
And when he does not accept the obligations dictated by the understanding with which he is endowed, and its rebuke, he loses the character of a rational creature; and the cattle understand how to improve their condition better than he does, as it is said, "The ox knows his owner, and the donkey his master's trough; but Israel does not know; My people does not consider" (Isaiah 1:3). Such a person's fate will be like that of one, concerning whom it is said, "But the wicked shall perish; and the enemies of the L-ord shall be as the fat of lambs, they shall be consumed; into smoke shall they be utterly consumed" (Psalm 37:20). 

Chapter 4

It is now proper for us to explain the form in which the Torah urges one to the service of G-d, and its divisions; the various levels attained by those who study the Torah, their characters, their faith in the Torah and their acceptance of it. 
I assert that the urge of the Torah is a revelation from G-d, through the medium of a certain individual who, among them, was good in G-d's eyes, a revelation which makes known to human beings the service to be rendered by them to Him, so that, out of His kindness, generosity, and goodness, He may bestow upon them, for their acceptance of it, a reward in this world and in the world to come. 
The Torah divides human actions into three classes: (1) those that are commanded, (2) prohibited and (3) permitted.
These commanded fall into two divisions.
(1) One of these consists of duties of the heart. These, which are grounded in genuine faith are: acceptance of the Unity of G-d; being whole-heartedly with Him, trusting in Him, surrendering to Him, accepting His decrees, believing in His prophets and in His law, revering Him, keeping His commandments, meditating on His wondrous deeds, examining His beneficence and many more duties of the same character too numerous to set forth in detail. 
(2) The second, those duties that involve devotion of the heart together with physical activities, such as consistency in speech and thought, reading and studying the book of the Torah; praying, fasting, giving tzedaka (charity); rest from labor on Sabbaths and Festivals, building a Tabernacle (Sukkah), taking the Lulav (palm-branch, and the three other plants on the festival of Sukkot); wearing Tzitzit, and similar precepts. 
Prohibitions also fall into two divisions. 
(1) One division consists of duties of the heart. (2) The other comprises active duties. 
Prohibitions in the category of duties of the heart are, for example, associating with G-d either secretly or by flattery, loving to do that which G-d has forbidden; pride, haughtiness, arrogance contempt for human beings, mocking the prophets and the messages they utter which come from G-d; abhorring good and those who do good; finding pleasure in evil doers; jealousy, covetousness, desiring to hurt human beings; resentment at the Creator's decrees, and many sentiments and emotions of a similar character. 
The following are examples of prohibitions of actions: revealed association of anyone with G-d, false swearing, lying, tale bearing, eating forbidden food, forbidden relations, bloodshed, and many offenses of similar character. 
Things permissible also fall into three divisions, namely, the sufficient, the excessive and the deficient. The sufficient is that which is indispensable for preservation of the body or management of one's affairs, in food and drink, clothing and covering; necessary speech in conducting one's business, activities and commercial transactions; all kinds of physical movements and their proper employment to the extent needed for the proper maintenance of one's welfare, as Scripture says, "Good is a man who is gracious and lends; he measures his affairs with measure?" (Tehilim 112:5). 
The second division applies to cases where one crosses the border of the sufficient to the domain of the superfluous which one has no need for, such as excess in food and drink, against which the sage warned us when he said, "Be not among winebibbers; among gluttonous eaters of meat" (Mishlei 23:20). So, too, extravagance in personal adornment, dress, luxurious homes, and superfluity in speech, in regard to which there is no assurance that one will not stumble because of them, as the wise man said, "In the multitude of words there lacks not sin" (Mishlei 10:19). Furthermore, excess in sexual relations, concerning which the sage said, ". . .He that keeps company with harlots destroys his substance" (Mishlei 29:3), and "do not give your strength to women" (Mishlei 31:3). It is also said concerning kings, "Neither shall he multiply wives unto himself" (Devarim 17:17).
Striving for large possessions and accumulation of money, of which it is said, "Labor not to be rich, cease from your own wisdom" (Mishlei 23:4). Concerning the king, it is said, "Neither shall he greatly multiply to himself silver and gold" (Devarim 17:17). All these superfluous things we mentioned which are for the improvement and enjoyment of the body transform in the end to evil because they mislead one to that which the Creator warned us against, and forbade (as written: "But Jeshurun grew fat, and kicked: you are grown fat, you are grown thick, you are covered with fatness; then he forsook G-d who made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his salvation" (Devarim 32:15). 
The third division in the use of things permitted is the deficient. 
This is the case when a person denies himself what is sufficient in food and drink, clothing, sexual relations, speech, sleep, or in the occupation by which he will obtain what he needs for his maintenance in food and other requisites. Deficiency falls into two subdivisions. It may be motivated by piety or by worldly considerations.
If the motive is a pious one, proceeding from a longing for nearer and closer communion with G-d by asceticism, it is laudable and will be rewarded, as the sage said, "The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning; but the heart of fools is in the house of merrymaking" (Koheles 7:4). 
If the motive is worldly, namely, to increase his money, or be praised as one who abstains from what is permitted and takes from the world less than he needs in food, it is reprehensible, for a person who acts thus departs from the path of the middle way, and robs his body of its needs. All this comes from excessive love of this world, in reference to which a sage said, "He who separates himself from the world, out of love for the world, is like one who would extinguish a flame with straw." 
But to be sparing in speech and in sleep is praiseworthy; in speech, because in the end silence is better, as the wise man said, "Be not rash with your mouth, and let not your heart be hasty to utter anything before G-d; for G-d is in heaven and you are on earth; therefore let your words be few" (Koheles 5:1). 
Similarly, in regard to sleep, it is said, "Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep. [So shall your poverty come as a traveler, and your want as an armed man (who arrives suddenly)]" (Mishlei 6:10).
In what has been mentioned, it has thus been demonstrated that all human activities belong either to those (1) commanded, (2) forbidden or (3) [permitted which is] sufficient. For whatever is not in the category of [permitted which is] "sufficient", and is either superfluous or deficient, must necessarily belong to the category of what is commanded, if done for the sake of G-d; or it belongs to the category of the forbidden, if it is not done for His sake. 
Enquiring more closely into what is "sufficient", for example, in obtaining a livelihood, we find this too in a commandment, set forth in the account of Creation, "And G-d blessed them, and G-d said unto them: 'Be fruitful and multiply, fill the land and conquer it.'" (Genesis 1:28). And it continues, "Behold, I have given you every herb bearing seed, which is upon the face of all the earth [.. to you it shall be for food]" (ibid. 1:29). Hence, to seek a sufficiency in food belongs to the class of the commanded. 
This being the case, it has been demonstrated that all human activities are either in the category of what is commanded or in the category of what is prohibited. If what is done is in the category of the commanded, it is a good deed. If one is able to do it but neglects his obligation, he falls short in his duty. So, too, if one does one of the things that are prohibited, he is a sinner. If he abstains from doing it, he is a righteous man, provided that he abstains out of fear of G-d, as Scripture says, "They also do no iniquity. They walk in His ways." (Tehilim 119:3).
And so, if one does one of the things permitted, in the right and proper way, he is righteous, as the Psalmist said, "A good man is gracious and lends; he conducts his affairs with measure" (Tehilim 112:5). If he, however, exceeds and goes beyond what is sufficient, he falls short in his duty, because this will mislead him to what G-d warned against. So, too, if he denies himself what is sufficient when he is in a position to obtain it, his aim being to train himself in the service of G-d and to reign over his lusts, so as to come nearer to G-d or separate himself from this world and direct his attentions to the better world hereafter, he is righteous and his conduct is good. But if he does this not for the sake of G-d, he falls short in the fulfillment of his duty, and his conduct is reprehensible.
Hence, human actions fall into the categories of good and bad. The intelligent person is one who weighs his actions before he does them, as is here set forth, examines them carefully with his mind and recognition, chooses what is good among them and abandons what is not good, as David, peace be unto him, said: "I thought on my ways and turned my feet unto Your testimonies. I made haste and did not delay to keep Your commandments" (Tehilim 119:59-60). 
That this division of deeds into good and evil is correct is proved in the wise man's statement: "For G-d will bring every deed into judgment with every secret thing, whether it be good or evil" (Koheles 12:14). The sage thus places all actions under two categories, good and bad; this coinciding with what we call praiseworthy and reprehensible. 
Hence it has been demonstrated that all human actions fall into only the two categories of the torah, namely, commandments and prohibitions.
And since the Torah consists of words and matters, individuals, in respect to their understanding of its wisdom, fall into ten graded classes. 
The beginner's class consists of those who have learnt the Torah (five books of Moses) and the rest of the Scriptures and are satisfied with their ability to read the text without any understanding of the contents. They do not know the meaning of the words nor have they any acquaintance with the grammar of the language. They are akin to a donkey laden with books. 
The second class consists of those who have tried to learn to read correctly, pay heed to the vowels and specially concentrate their attention on the right position of the accent. They [may be said to] belong to the class of Punctuators and Massorites. 
The third class consists of those who have noted the insufficiency of the previous classes and have striven to know the principles of punctuation and musical accentuation (neginoth). They have in addition sought to acquire knowledge of the correct use of the language and its grammar, nouns and verbs, modifying parts of speech (prepositions, conjunctions and adverbs) absolute and construct forms (of nouns and adjectives) ; use of the future to express the past and of the infinitive to express the imperative; the various classes of verbs: complete (all three letters sounded), defective (one letter omitted), silent (one or two letters not sounded), duplicate (verbs with the second and third letters the same) ; the apparent and the hidden. (i.e. Closed and open syllables; the former ending in a consonant, the latter in a vowel sound.) 
The fourth class consists of those individuals who have advanced beyond the preceding classes in their ability to explain words of doubtful meaning in the Holy Scriptures, and in their understanding of the plain sense of the text. They have also investigated the figurative and the literal meaning of words in the Hebrew language; homonyms and synonyms; derivative nouns (derived from other words), primary nouns, foreign nouns; and so with adjectives and verbs. 
The fifth class consists of those who have advanced beyond the preceding classes in their knowledge of the subject-matter of the Holy Scriptures, have sought to understand its fundamental principles and have endeavored to investigate the metaphorical sense and the true meaning of its contents with regard, for instance, to the anthropomorphic expressions in the Bible. They are those who attempt to explain the Scriptures of G-d according to the plain meaning without relying on the received Tradition (Oral Torah). 
The sixth class consists of those who rely on the ancient Tradition as contained in the Mishnah, so that they have attained knowledge of some of the duties, commandments and laws of the torah without studying the Talmud.
The seventh class comprises those who have added to what we have just mentioned an intense study of the Talmud and devoted themselves to a knowledge of its text, reading its decisions without attempting to answer its questions and clearing up its difficulties.
The eighth class consists of those who were not satisfied with the knowledge of the Torah, which had been sufficient for the previous class, but exerted themselves to comprehend the words of the Talmudic sages, resolve the doubtful points and elucidate the obscurities, with the purpose of winning a name and glory. But they ignore the duties of the heart. They pay no attention to what would be detrimental to their religious and moral activities. They spend their days in the study of singular deductions from the legal principles and of what is strange and difficult in the final decisions; they cite the conflicting views of the Talmudic authorities on novel points of law while they neglect topics which they have no permission to do - topics that affect their spiritual interests which it is their duty to investigate, such as the truth of the prophet's signs and of tradition, and the modes by which it can be demonstrated; the obligation which the Creator has imposed upon us to bring proofs with our reasoning faculties of His existence and to serve Him with a perfect heart, and many similar points that can be intellectually understood and which I will explain in this treatise. 
The ninth class consists of those who have exerted themselves to know the duties of the heart as well as the active duties and also what is detrimental to right conduct; who understand the plain sense of the Holy Scriptures as well as their inner meaning, and have arrived at a conviction of the truth of tradition, based on Scripture and on reason; have arranged the laws into an orderly system, divided the practical duties in accordance with circumstances of time and place, as a result of their understanding of the fundamental principles of the Pentateuch; scrupulously observe the duties and exhort others (to do likewise); cherish truth inwardly and outwardly, and follow it wherever it may lead them. They are the Talmudic teachers and the Geonim who continued their predecessors' customs.
The tenth class consists of those who received the wisdom of the Torah from the prophets, with all its interpretations and detailed results of fundamental principles. They are the men of the Great Assembly and their successors (the Tanaim) who received the traditions from them, the authorities named in the Mishnah and Beraithoth (additional teachings and views not incorporated in the Mishnah) as set forth in the Ethics of the Fathers: "Moshe received the Law from Sinai and delivered it to Yehoshua; Yehoshua to the elders; the elders to the prophets; the prophets to the men of the Great Assembly; the men of the Great Assembly to Shimon the Just; Shimon the Just to Antigonos; Antigonos to Joseph son of Joezer and Yosi son of Jochanan the Jerusalemite; they delivered it Joshua, son of Perachiah and Nittai the Arbelite; they delivered it to Judah son of Tabbai and Shimon son of Shetach; they delivered it to Shemaiah and Avtalion; from them it passed to Shammai and Hillel; from them to Rabban Yochanan ben Zakai; from him to Rabbi Eliezer, Rabbi Yehoshua, Rabbi Gamaliel, Rabbi Elazer ben Arach, Rabbi Yosef the Priest: and Shimon, son of Nathanel; from them it passed to Rabbi Akiba, Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah, Rabbi Tarfon, Rabbi Shimon ben Gamaliel; from them to Rabbi Meir, Rabbi Judah, Rabbi Yosi, Rabbi Shimon [bar Yochai], Rabbi Judah the Prince". The last is our sainted teacher who gathered together the dicta of the Mishnah, arranged them in order, divided them into chapters and compiled them in a work. This compilation is the essential element of the whole tradition on which we rely in our Torah.
The outlooks of those who owe allegiance to the Torah fall into ten classes of varying degrees in their faith and in their acceptance of the service of G-d. 
Of the lowest degree are those who are misled by foolishness and the overwhelming force of evil passions to reject the Torah which they consider to be similar to the laws by which other peoples are guided and the simple kept in check. This attitude results from the powerful hold that sensual lust has obtained over their understanding, and from their gross nature; they do not submit to the yoke of the Torah, nor will they be bound by the restraints of reason, due to their longing for unrestrained license. Of people of this sort the sage says, "A fool has no delight in understanding but only that his heart may discover itself (follow its impulses)" (Mishlei 18:2). 
Of the second degree are those who cannot deny the signs and wonders that were manifested by the prophets, because of their publicity, but they doubt the truthfulness of the Torah, and express views that approach those of the foregoing class, namely, that G-d only wished to point out to His creatures a way by which they would improve their condition in this world, and therefore stirred the prophet (Moses) to guide them with statutes that they needed, and granted him signs and wonders, so that they should listen to his words and accept his ordinances. The members of this second class do not believe in reward and punishment. 
I will give here briefly the answers to these views by refutation and also alternatively by agreement, (for argument's sake).
By refutation: The Creator is too exalted to alter the course of nature for the sake of one who resorts to falsehood in regard to Him and utters in His name things which He had not said, even if that person aims, by means of these falsehoods about G-d, to direct people in the right way. For the vision of the truth manifested to the prophet is not more wondrous or harder to apprehend than a change in the order of nature that takes place for the prophet's sake. 
By agreement (for argument's sake): If it were clearly demonstrated by an irrefutable proof that the fact was as these people say (that the Torah was not revealed to the prophet, but was the prophet's own invention), it would even then be right to follow him, for the exalted Creator would not change the order of nature and manifest a wonder through one who does not know the good and right way. And if the exalted Creator has chosen one to teach us the good and right way and guide us, after wondrous signs had been manifested by him, he is sufficiently worthy that we should rely upon him in our behavior and way of life. Seeing that we owe this to a king or governor, even if he is not endowed with wisdom, as it is said, "O, my son, fear the L-ord and the king" (Mishlei 24:21), how much more is this our duty toward one through whom a wonder has been shown. Thus, from both points of view, we are under an obligation to accept the Torah. Concerning people of this class, the wise man says, "O, ye simple, understand wisdom: and ye fools, be of an understanding heart" (Mishlei 8:5). 
Of the third degree are those who are convinced of the truthfulness of the Torah but think that it was given as a favor of G-d, to direct aright His creations and guide them exclusively in this world, but not for the sake of reward in the world hereafter. Their reason for this view is that in the prophetical books, reward and punishment in this world are frequently mentioned but there is no mention of retribution in the next world. Our teacher, Saadyah, in his commentary on the weekly portion Behukothai (Vayikra, Chapters 26 and 27) expounded on this topic and clearly demonstrated the nullity of the views expressed by these people.
The prophetical books contain clear indications of reward and punishment in the world to come. The following are examples: "For G-d shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good or evil" (Koheles 12:14). "And you shall tread down the wicked; for they shall be ashes under the sole of your feet" (Malachi 3:21). "[behold a day is coming, it burns as a furnace and all the wicked shall be as stubble...] then shall you return and discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serves G-d and him that serves Him not." (Malachi 3:18). "And they shall go forth and look upon the carcasses of the men that have transgressed against Me; for their worm shall not die. neither shall their fire be quenched, and they shall be an eternal abhorrence unto all flesh" (Yeshaya 66:24). "How great is Your goodness, which You have laid up for them that fear You, which You have wrought for them that trust in You before the children of men" (Tehilim 31:20). "Thus says the L-ord of Hosts, if you will walk in My ways . . .I will give you places to walk among these that stand'" (Zach. 3:7). "Eye has not seen, O G-d, beside You, what He had prepared for him that waits for Him" (Yeshaya 64:3). "And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt" (Daniel 12:2). "Your righteousness shall go before you; the glory of the L-ord shall be your reward" (Yeshaya 58:8). And there are many passages to the same effect, too numerous to mention.
Of the fourth degree are those in whose consciousness the genuineness of the Torah and the truthfulness of reward and punishment in the world to come are firmly established. But their disposition inclines them to love of the world and its lusts; and they use the practices of the service of G-d as snares with which to obtain worldly advantages. They accept the Torah outwardly but not inwardly, with their tongues and not with their hearts. Of such people it is said, "One speaks peaceably to his neighbor with his mouth, but in his heart he waits in ambush for him" (Yirmiya 9:7). Further, "With mouth and lips, they honor Me; but their heart is far from Me" (Yeshaya 29:13). 
Of the fifth degree are those who are convinced on all the points we have mentioned in regard to the Torah and of the truth of reward and punishment in the world to come. But their disposition inclines them to love of the world; they indeed accept the Torah; but in their acceptance their intent is to obtain reward from G-d as well as praise and honor from human beings. This is one of the branches of hypocrisy, namely, the concealed joint worship [of G-d and something else]. 
Of the sixth degree are those who in their religious practice aim at a reward from the Creator solely in this world, because of their love for it, and because they prefer its delights. They do not comprehend the reward hereafter and its bliss. 
Of the seventh degree are those who are convinced of all that we have mentioned. But their motive in the service of G-d is the expectation of reward in this world and in the world to come. They have no conception whatever of service of the Almighty for His own sake, to magnify, honor and exalt Him, as alone befits the worship of Him. Of these, our wise men have said, "Be not like servants who serve the master upon the condition of receiving a reward; but be like servants who serve the master without any condition of receiving a reward; and let the fear of Heaven be upon you" (Ethics of the Fathers: 1:3). 
Of the eighth degree are those who are convinced of all that has been mentioned, but they accept the service of G-d out of fear of His punishment in this world and the next. We have already pointed out how reprehensible these two views are 
Of the ninth degree are those who believe in the Torah and in reward and punishment in both worlds. In serving G-d, their intent is to do so for His Name's sake and in the way befitting Him alone, but they are not careful to avoid whatever is detrimental to this service, and when detriments have caused injury they do not know from where the trouble came. This is suggested in the verse: "Dead flies make the apothecary's oil to ferment and send forth a foul odor; so a little folly outweighs the rarest wisdom and honor" (Koheles 10:1). Further, "One sinner destroys much good" (ibid. 9:18). 
One of the pious once said to his disciples, "If you would be absolutely free of sins, I would be anxious about you and fear something worse than sins." They said to him: "What is worse than sins?" He replied: "Haughtiness and pride," as Scripture says, "An abomination unto the L-ord is everyone that is proud in heart" (Mishlei 16:5). 
The tenth degree, those people for who it has become clear to them the truth of the Torah and all the rewards and punishments which they will incur on account of it in both worlds, and who have become aroused out of their neglect [of it]. Their hearts have seen what they owe to their Creator in return for His great benevolence and loving kindness towards them. They do not fix their hearts on reward or punishment, but hasten to fulfill the service of G-d for His Name's sake, to aggrandize and exalt Him with longing and wholehearted devotion, because they know Him and recognize His matter. 
This is the highest degree to be attained by the men of the Torah. This is the degree that was attained by the prophets and chasidim (pious ones) who devoted themselves to G-d, made a covenant with Him, were always communing with Him, accepted His ruling, gave up to Him themselves, their children, their possessions, and firmly kept their faith in all that they undertook, even to the surrender of their lives. Concerning these, Scripture says, "Gather My saints together unto Me; those that have made a covenant with Me by sacrifice" (Tehilim 50:5). 
This is the form of the inducing of the Torah in urging the service of G-d, and these are the degrees of those men of wisdom who devote themselves to the study of the holy books of the Torah and the excellencies of those who believe in it. It is possible that there may be other degrees among men of understanding in the Torah, other than those that we have set forth. But we only mentioned those degrees that are found among the large majority of the people. Still, the list of degrees that we have given will be of use to one who seeks the right way, for, when he finds in this list a degree to which he is near, he will know what is the next higher degree and will strive to rise to it, then notes the distance between the degree that he has attained and the highest of the degrees, and strives to ascend to it gradually, one degree after another-he will find the ascent easier to accomplish. 


Chapter 5

It is now proper for us to proceed to explain the mode in which the intellect urges us to the service of G-d in the form of questions and answers - this method being most suitable to a clear presentation of the topic we are investigating. 
We will assert that the urge of the intellect means that G-d reminds a human being through his intellect, of his duty to know Him, and to become cognizant of the marks of His divine wisdom. This call of G-d comes to one who has taken the Torah as the light of his path, attained intellectual maturity and capacity for clear perception, yearns to gain the Almighty's favor and rise to the spiritual heights of the saints, and turns his heart away from worldly cares and anxieties. 
The things through which a person will experience the intellectual urge are as follows: that a person should come to realize what the Creator has implanted in the human mind, namely: to esteem truth and detest falsehood,  to choose righteousness and avoid injustice. to repay benefactors with good deeds and express gratitude to them, and to punish the wicked and condemn them. to keep at peace with all human beings and act beneficently towards them, estimate good deeds [in comparison] with the resulting praise, righteous deeds with their reward, wrongdoings with their punishment, the superiority of one reward over another, the severity of one punishment compared with another and forgiveness of transgressors when they truly repent. 
After these concepts have been clearly established in a man's soul through his reasoning ability and power of perception, his intellect will have become sound and his perception strong. And when G-d will remind him of the way of His goodness, that person will arouse his mind and soul to appreciate G-d's kindnesses to him, and his recognition of them will become stronger. And when he will attempt to recount them and realize them with his understanding and will find himself unable to do so, because of their universality, multitude, continuity and permanence, he will make demands upon his soul in regard to his duty of gratitude towards benefactors, as pointed out to him by his intellect, and his duty to act righteously. He will then resolve to make a return to the exalted G-d for the multitude of benefits he has received from Him. 
And when he perceives with his mind's eye that he does not have the ability to do so, for the Creator has no need of him, then he will feel the obligation to humble himself and become conscious of his lowliness and insignificance, and he will then insist of his understanding concerning what he has to do, that it may be possible for him to approach and draw near to G-d in order that communion with Him may serve as a substitute for the return due to G-d, and his understanding will aid him to the right path in this regard. 
It (the Understanding) will say to his soul (nefesh):
Is it clear to you and firmly fixed in your mind that you are pledged to your Creator for His goodness and belong to Him because of the multitude of His kindness and His great favors?
The Soul (nefesh): Yes. 
The Understanding: Is it your intention to repay a portion of what you owe to the Creator? 
The Soul: Yes. 
The Understanding: How is this possible when your longing for this is so weak. Only a person who longs for health will put up with the bitterness of a medicine; but one who does not long for health will not submit to bearing the severity of the treatment. 
The Soul: My yearning is strong and my pain is great, to repay as much as I can of what I owe to my G-d; therefore continue to exhort me. 
The Understanding: If you are telling the truth in what you are saying, the treatment may possibly be successful in your case. But if it is not the truth, why should you deceive yourself? For a sick person who lies to his physician only cheats himself, wastes the physician's efforts and aggravates his sickness.
The Soul: And how can it be determined whether my longing is strong or weak. 
The Understanding: If your longing stems from a clear realization how great is your debt to repay G-d, how little it is in your power to fulfill it and that your neglect of it is your downfall, while your striving to fulfill it is your salvation and life - your longing is genuine and your want is urgent; if not, it is false. 
The Soul: My want was never other than lax, and my longing was always false, from the time when my only inducements (to the service of G-d) were the records of former ages that have passed away up to the time when the truth of what you have stated has become rationally clear to me, first through the exhortation of the Torah, and later by rational demonstration, so that my longing now is genuine and my want is clear. 
The Understanding: If what you say is true, then prepare yourself to bear the pain of the treatment, and endure the bitter taste of the medicine and its unpleasantness, after you will have first given up the bad diet to which you were accustomed. 
The Soul: What is the bad diet to which I was accustomed ? 
The Understanding: It is the bad disposition (trait) which has mastered you from your beginning and the forces which have maintained it, from the earliest years of your growth. 
The Soul: What disposition is this, and what are the forces that maintain it? 
The Understanding: The reprehensible dispositions in you are many. But the root and stock from which they spring are two. One of them is love of physical pleasures - eating, drinking, marital relations and other bodily needs. This disposition you have acquired from your bad neighbor, the body. 
The second disposition is love of domination and superiority - pride, haughtiness, jealousy. This brings you to refrain from making a return to your Benefactor. This disposition you have acquired from your associates, among whom you have grown up, namely, your siblings and [other] relatives.
The Soul: What are the forces that I need to keep far from me? 
The Understanding: The forces that maintain the former evil disposition are superfluity in eating, drinking, dress, sleep, rest, tranquility and other similar things. The forces that uphold the latter evil disposition are superfluity of speech, excessive socializing, approval seeking [of human beings], love of praise and honor, jealousy of others because of their material possessions, even if what they possess consists only of sheer necessaries; contemptuousness, picking on the faults of others, and so forth. If what you have said of your strong desire and yearning to make a return for the benefits G-d has bestowed upon you is true, keep far from you, with all your strength, the forces and dispositions that I have mentioned to you, and I will then bring you to the first gate leading to recovery. 
The Soul: To renounce these faults would be very hard for me, on account of the long time that I have been habituated to them; therefore be kind enough to show me in what way I can do so more easily. 
The Understanding: Surely you know that a sensible man will consent to the cutting off of one piece of flesh or to the loss of one of his limbs, if it is attacked by some disease which he fears will spread and affect the remaining limbs, as soon as he considers the difference between the two states and realizes the inequality of the two evils. So, too, if you wish that the separation which is so hard should seem easy to you, concentrate your mind and employ your intelligence in weighing the good you will derive from the separation and the evil which will befall you if you continue your association with it; and then separation from your reprehensible disposition, which seems so hard, will be easy. 
The Soul: What is the good that separation from it will bring me, and what is the evil that will befall me if I continue to keep it?
The Understanding: The good will consist in your spiritual tranquility and relief from the darkness of this gloomy world, the pleasures of which are mixed with grief, while its lusts soon cease; also, that your strengthened power of perception will finally lead you to realize your destiny in the place of your rest (the life hereafter) and that therefore you should busy yourself and be concerned about it. This is one of the gates on which depend your salvation and your life. 
The evil [resulting from not renouncing your bad tendencies] is recurrence of your anxiety, multiplication of your grief, continuance of your mourning at the non-fulfillment of your desires in this world which, if they were satisfied, would only bring you something that is vain, without permanence or continuance, and which will undoubtedly pass to someone else; so that nothing will remain to you of this world nor will you secure the world hereafter; and, what is more obvious, you will not fulfill your wishes, however long you strive for them.
The Soul: I understand what you have said. I hope that the separation which previously was so hard will now become easier for me. Continue now to lead me to the second part of the healing methods which will teach me what I desire to learn of the service of G-d. 
The Understanding: The ruling principle and sum of the matter is that you assume towards Him who is above you all those obligations which you would desire should be assumed towards yourself by one beneath you-presupposing that relations in both cases are equal. What seems to you good and what displeases you as evil in the conduct of the latter, do and refrain from doing, towards the former.
The Soul: Be more explicit.
The Understanding: Think of the benefits bestowed by G-d that you share with others, and of those benefits with which you are specially favored. Then imagine that you have bestowed similar favors on your slave whom you acquired by purchase; and the kind of behavior on his part towards you that would be pleasing to you, undertake to show to your Creator, and what seems to you evil, on his part, you too must regard as evil on your part to your Creator. 
The Soul: I have understood in general what you have just said. But kindly explain all this to me in detail.
The Understanding: The duties of good conduct of any servant towards his master, who bestowed upon him even a tiny portion of the bounties your Creator has bestowed upon you, consist in honoring the master in word and deed, in faithfulness to him, exerting himself in his master's affairs, openly and inwardly, and showing reverence and fear when standing in his presence. As a pious man said, "Do not rebel against your master when he observes you." 
Among these duties are also included that he should be humble and submissive to his master, in his visible behavior and innermost secret thoughts; that he should conduct himself with humility before him, in his attire and habits. 
That he should honor and exalt him, in his speech and thought, that he should praise and laud him by day and by night; that he should recall his good deeds privately and publicly; recount his praises according to what befits him; run to do his service joyously and goodheartedly out of love that he will find favor in his master's eyes; strive to draw nearer in his behavior to his master's will; ever beseech his master to be pleased with him and forgive him; to love him; to be afraid that he may be falling short in doing what he had been commanded; 
That he should heed the master's command, keep far from that against which the master had warned him, think of the many iniquities which he has committed in the past, appreciate the benefits he has received on account of their great number and importance and diminish the value of what he has done in comparison with what he should have done; that he should regard his efforts as petty, compared with what is befitting him. 
He should admit his own insignificance compared to the greatness of his master. He should bow to him frequently, in deep humility and lowliness. He should put his trust in his master for all his needs and be satisfied with whatever position his master assigns him to. If the master provides for him fully, he should thank and praise him. If the master leaves him hungry, he should accept and bear his condition patiently. He should never suspect the master of unfairness in his judgment of him, nor charge him with perverseness in his decree. He should be contented with what the master favors him with, and justify the master when he has punished him. 
Other things which are proper on his part: that in every movement of his limbs and in all his traits, he should exhibit evidence of his servitude and of his master's ownership. 
He should ponder only on remembrance of his master. 
Look nowhere else than to the master's ways. 
Listen only to his master's words, eat only the food that his master provides for him, think only of his master's greatness, render no service except to please his master. 
Rejoice only in serving his master. 
Seek only his master's will. 
Hasten only on his master's errands, abstain only from whatever might be against the master's will. 
Stay nowhere except in his master's house, remain ever faithful to him alone. 
Only read his books, wear only the garment of reverence for his master. 
Sleep only on the couch of love for him, keeping ever in his mind the master's likeness. 
Awaking with the sweetness in thinking of him. 
Finding no pleasure except in being with him, fleeing from naught except disobedience to him, never mourning except when his master is angry, feeling no fear except fear of his master, hoping for naught but his master's kindness, never angry except at that which his master obliges him to be so. He will only be pleased with one who does his master's will; take nothing but with his master's permission; only give to one to whom his master orders him to give. 
And so with all his movements. He will not move a foot, nor raise an eyelid except to fulfill his master's will.
The habits that are bad in a servant are the opposite of those that are good in his master's sight. When these good habits are reversed, they are easily recognized. 
I have assembled for you a sufficient number of examples to indicate to you the rest of the duties and their opposites. And as the conduct of servants, regarded by their masters as good is as we have described it, and you know how insignificant is the kindness of masters to their servants, how much more in reduplicated measure to what we have mentioned do you owe in service to the blessed G-d in return to Him for the multitude of bounties He has bestowed upon you. 

Chapter 6

The Soul: I have understood what you have stated and your explanation is sufficient. Now explain to me the various aspects of favors for which I am under an obligation of increased service to the blessed G-d. 
The Understanding: The obligation of increased service incumbent on human beings varies according to the benefits - general and specific - bestowed on them. These benefits fall into four divisions. 
The first is the universal goodness of G-d which embraces all mankind, in having brought human creatures into existence when previously they were naught; in keeping them in life and bestowing on them bounties which we have cited in the second treatise of this work. They are accordingly under a universal obligation of service to the blessed Creator. This consists of obedience to all the rational laws observed by Adam, Enoch, Noah and his sons, Job and his companions, up to the days of our teacher Moses, peace be upon him. If one adheres to all these laws for the sake of G-d's service, the Almighty will bestow on him favors beyond those enjoyed by other men, and give him a higher degree in this existence and a great reward in the World to Come, as was the case with Abraham, to whom G-d said, "Do not fear, Abraham; I am your shield; your reward is exceedingly great" (Bereishis 15:1). But one who rebels against G-d, despite His beneficence, will fall from the degree of rational beings and their excellencies, sink to the low condition of irrational creatures and share the fate of the beasts of the earth, as it is said: "And the enemies of the L-ord shall be as the fat lambs (they shall be consumed; into smoke shall they be consumed)" (Tehilim 37:20). And in the next world they will be sentenced to an evil of which there is none greater, as it is said: "As to your spirit - fire shall devour you" (Yeshaya 33:11). 
The second division consists of G-d's special goodness to one people among the peoples, one nation among the nations, as for example, the favors He showed the children of Israel, in taking them out of Egypt and bringing them to the land of Canaan. Thus He put them under an obligation of service, additional to the universal service which we have mentioned. This consists in obedience to the authoritative commandments (Divine precepts received by Moses, the reason of which is not clear), after He had exhorted them and aroused them concerning the rational moral duties (which reason can deduce such as honor your mother and father, don't steal, etc). 
Whoever assumed the service for the glory of G-d was favored by the Almighty with special bounties, for which he was under an obligation of additional service beside the service due from his nation and the rest of his tribe, as Moses said: "Whoever is on the L-ord's side? Let him come unto me. And all the descendants of Levi gathered themselves together unto him" (Shemot 32:26). G-d showed them additional favor and then chose from among them Aaron and his sons to minister to His glory. He charged the Levites with special precepts in addition to those he gave to the rest of the nation, and promised them a great reward in the life hereafter. But whoever of them rebels against the exalted Creator, will fall from both these degrees of excellence and be punished in both worlds; as the wise man says: "But it shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong his days" (Koheles. 8:13). 
The third division is the special goodness of G-d to a certain family among the families of the nations, such as the appointment of the priesthood and the Levites, as also the succession of sovereignty conferred upon the house of David. In return for this, He charged them with additional duties, of which those assigned to the priests and Levites are known and clearly set forth in the book of G-d's law, the Pentateuch. The specific law applying to the House of David is thus set forth: "O house of David, thus says the L-ord, execute judgment in the morning; and deliver him that is spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor" (Jeremiah 21:12). One who completely fulfills these duties, because he loves to please G-d, will be singled out by the Almighty for happiness here and a great reward hereafter. He will be a distinguished nobleman or a teacher of righteousness, as the Scripture says concerning Pinchas, "Then stood up Pinchas and executed judgment and the plague was stayed. And that was counted unto him for righteousness unto all generations for evermore" (Ps. 106:30-31). Further, "But the priests, the Levites, the sons of Zadok that kept the charge of My sanctuary...[They shall come near to Me to minister unto Me]" (Ezek. 44:15). But whoever among them rebels against G-d falls from those highest degrees in this world, and will suffer severe pain in the world to come, as you know from what befell Korach and his company. 
The fourth division is G-d's goodness to an individual, by which he has been singled out from the rest of his family and people and other rational beings, as for instance, one chosen to be either a distinguished prophet, a leader appointed to govern a nation or a Sage whose spirit G-d has awakened and endowed with wisdom, understanding, counsel and similar qualities. For every one of these bounties, he is under the obligation of additional service of G-d. He who performs this service in full measure unto him will these gifts - general and special - be continued in this world, and G-d will increase his power over them and understanding of them, as it is said, "The L-ord has sworn unto David in truth-he will not depart from it, of the fruit of your body, I will set upon your throne. If your children will keep My covenant and My testimony that I shall teach them, their children shall also sit upon your throne for evermore" (Ps. 132:11-12). The reward in the world hereafter is indicated in the following verse: "unless I had believed to see the goodness of the L-ord in the land of the living" (Ps. 27:13).
But whoever [among these who] rebels against G-d, despite the beneficence which G-d has specially bestowed upon him, will fall from all these degrees, and the Creator will hold him more strictly to account in this world, as it is said, "... this is it that the L-ord spoke, saying, I will be sanctified in them that come near Me, and before all the people I will be glorified. And Aaron held his peace" (Lev. 10:3); furthermore, "You only have I known of all the families of the earth; therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities" (Amos 3:2). His punishment in the next world will be more severe, as it is said: "For Tophet (Gehinom) is ordained of old; yea, for the king it is prepared; He has made it deep and large. He makes great with fire and wood. The breath of G-d kindles it, like a torrent of brimstone" (Isaiah 30:33). 
According to the above four divisions, human beings are under obligations to serve G-d. Whenever G-d increases His beneficence to an individual, that individual is under an obligation to render additional service for it. This is illustrated by the following examples. It is a duty to tithe produce, as it is written, "You shall tithe all the yield of your seed that comes from the field year by year" (Deut. 14:22). One to whom G-d has given one hundred kur of produce is obliged to give ten kur; one to whom G-d has only given ten kur has to give one kur. If the former were to separate nine and a half kur and the latter were to separate one kur, the former would be punished, while the latter would receive a reward. 
So, too, if a man has no son, the obligation of circumcising and teaching his son Torah does not apply to him. If a person is lame, the duty of going to Jerusalem for the three festivals is not obligatory for him. When a person is sick, the precepts which he is unable to fulfill are not binding upon him. Analogously, if a person has been singled out by the Creator for special beneficence, he is under an obligation to increased service for it.
Hence, the saints in ancient times, when some good fortune happened to them, were troubled in two respects: First, that they should not fall short in the complete fulfillment of the service and gratitude they owed for this good fortune and that it should not turn into evil for them, as our ancestor Jacob said, "I have diminished from all the mercies, and truth which You have shown unto Your servant" (Gen. 32:11); secondly, that it should not be the Creator's reward for their service, and thus their reward in the world to come would be diminished, as the ancients explained the text, "And repays them that hate Him to their face to destroy them (in the afterlife)" (Deut. 7:10). This will suffice on this theme.
The Soul: I have understood all that you have mentioned. But I do not feel myself able to repay the Creator with services in return for His bounties, not even for those all men enjoy, much less for those with which He has specially favored me. And when it is my wish and desire to fulfill the service which it is my duty to render for them, before I have even completed forming the resolution, the hope of a future reward enters my thoughts. 
And so it is with my gratitude to G-d; when I thank Him, I thank Him for His great goodness to me in words but my thought and intent is the wish that the reward may be continued and increased. I am not like the one who renounced all expectation of an increase of the reward or its continuance. And if I behave in this way in my service and gratitude to G-d, with so little of clear intent to fulfill my obligations for His universal goodness, how will I ever be able to fulfill the rest of the service I owe to Him for bounties with which He has specially favored me? I therefore need that you should teach me the minimum of service that it is my duty to render for these favors, so that I may be worthy of their continuance. 
The Understanding: Your complaint of your scanty devotion in the service of G-d and ingratitude to Him and that the words of your mouth are [hypocritically] those of one who expresses thankfulness, while your purpose is that of a requester, and the wish in your heart is for an increase in the bounty and its continuance - all this is due to three dispositions:
The first is your excessive self-love, and desire to draw for yourself enjoyable things. You do not move a step to the service of the Almighty or for any other purpose without the motive to enjoy pleasures. I have already recommended as the beginning of my course of treatment that you should strive with all your might to keep this evil disposition far from you, and then I may hold out the best of hopes for you. 
The second is that you do not realize the Creator's kindness to you and imagine that you will not obtain His bounty except through your supplication for it, whereas G-d has been good to you in what you know and in what you do not know, and when you supplicate Him, you do not consider Who has done all this for you from the beginning. If you would put away from yourself this idea, your service would be wholly devotional, your thanksgiving to Him would express your inward feelings, and your hopes to Him [of benefits] would then be worthier and more justified. 
The third reason is that you neither know yourself nor how to conduct yourself. You deem yourself deserving of the greatest benefits and you never cease beseeching G-d for them. And when you obtain any of them, your mind yearns for something higher. You do not, however, realize that the exalted Creator deserves the greatest service on your part. When you render any service, you regard it as a favor granted by you to Him, though you realize that for all your needs you are dependent on Him and that He has no need of you. 
If you were to uncover (remove) this blinding folly, study the matter with open eyes and realize that the Creator who created you thinks of you and knows what is good for you and what is not good, better than you do, you would be contented with whatever benefits He bestows upon you, and would render great thanks to Him for them with a perfect heart. Then you would not rest your hope on what disturbs you, and keeps you from recognizing the bounties that you have gotten and from discharging the obligations that you owe to G-d for them. 
And it is impossible that you should not attain what you are fit for, when it will become due to you by reason of your service, and not merely because you hope for it and fix your mind on it. 

Chapter 7

In regard to your question as to what is the minimum service of G-d, below which, a person would not be discharging his duty, and which is requisite for the continuance of the Divine bounty, there are ten matters, as follows: 
(1) One should not use the Divine bounty (G-d's favor) as a means to rebel against G-d. 
(2) One should verbally declare G-d's bounty always and also abundantly thank and praise Him in his heart for it, in harmony with his utterances. 
(3) The bounty should not seem to him insignificant and small. 
(4) He should not ascribe it to anyone beside G-d; and, if it comes through an intermediary, he should not thank the intermediary and fail to thank the Creator for it. 
(5) He should not pride himself of it, nor think that he obtained it by his own strength and wisdom or by what is fitting for it. 
(6) It should not enter his mind that he can secure its continuance by his striving, and will lose it if he neglects the effort. 
(7) He should not despise one who lacks the bounty and regard himself as better before G-d than that person, since it may be that G-d is trying him in order to expose the evil hidden in his nature, so that his good fortune is actually leading him astray, while everyone who lacks this good fortune is better before G-d than he is. 
(8) His heart should be wholly with G-d in devotion and humility, and if he is not more active in his service than he had formerly been, and does not increase his gratitude and thankfulness, he should at least continue to maintain his standard. In his service he should endeavor to direct his heart to G-d, and prosperity should not cause him to diminish his former [pious] practices, nor disturb him in the effort to increase his devotion to G-d. 
(9) His attention should always be directed to one beneath him in material well-being, not to the one who is above him in this respect. So, too, his gaze should always be fixed on one more zealous in the service of G-d than he is, so that he will strive to rise to the latter's degree; and not on one who is less zealous, so that he may not become proud of his piety and negligent in his duties. 
(10) The protracted period during which the Creator overlooks his sins and restrains His anger should not entice him into thinking that he is safe from the Divine wrath, and so may rebel against the Almighty. 
For individuals, concerning whom reports have reached us from ancient times, as well as some also among our contemporaries, who were favored by G-d with various bounties and departed from the service of G-d and rebelled against Him, stumbled only because of the erroneous views which I have mentioned to you. This is also clearly set forth in the books of the prophets in every generation. All these faults are detrimental to the service of G-d which we endeavor to expound in this third treatise.
Yet, whoever cannot increase his service of G-d, but is able to undertake what I have set forth for the sake of G-d, will be worthy of a continuance of the good [portion] which has been specially allotted to him. And if this is withdrawn from him, it will be for one of two reasons: either to erase some previous sin or bestow on him in the life hereafter with a reward greater, more precious than, and much exceeding that of which he has been deprived here. 

Chapter 8

The Soul: You have occupied yourself with my treatment and helped my recovery. You have clarified for me, acted generously, and with your luminous mind supervised my treatment and dispelled the darkness of folly that enveloped me. But of the factors that are detrimental to the service of G-d, one still clings to me. If you will relieve me of the pain it causes me and remove the worry it occasions me, I will be delivered from my worst suffering, and will be near a cure of all my afflictions. 
The Understanding: What is it that troubles you, as you say?
The Soul: I have found in [the sacred] books in reference to the topic of necessity and fate, divine authority and will, that all things created mineral, vegetable, animal and rational being - are in the power of G-d, as it is said: "Whatsoever the L-ord pleases, that He does, in heaven and on earth" (Ps. 135:6). Further, "The L-ord kills, and makes alive: He brings down to the grave and brings up again; the L-ord makes poor and makes rich; He brings low and lifts up" (I Sam. 2:6-7). "Who is he that says and it comes to pass, when the L-ord commands it not? Out of the mouth of the most High, proceeds not good and evil?" (Lament. 3:37). "I form the light and create the darkness: I make peace and create evil" (Isaiah 45:7). "Except the L-ord build the house, they labor in vain that build it; except the L-ord keep the city, the watchman wakes but in vain" (Ps. 127:1). "Vain it is for you to rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrows; for so He gives His beloved sleep" (Ps. 127:2). 
There are many passages to the same effect, all of which indicate that the Creator formed man and other living creatures to fill the world. When they move, they are moved by His permission, His power and His ability. When they rest, it is because He ordains that they shall rest, as it is said, "When He gives quietness, who then can make trouble?" (Job 34:29). "You hide Your face; they are troubled. You take away their breath; they die and return to their dust" (Ps. 104:29). And all the sayings of the ancients in every book indisputably agree in this. 
We find, however, in the book of the Torah a contrary view, namely, that a human being's visible acts are in his own power. He can choose then as he pleases. They are effected by his choice and free will and he is accordingly liable to reward or punishment for service and transgression respectively, as it is said, "See, I have set before you this day life and good, and death and evil" (Deut. 30:15). ". . . therefore choose life" (Deut. 30:19). "Through your hands this has come" (Malachi 1:9). "For according to a man's act, He requites him" (Job 34:11). "A man's folly perverts his way" (Prov. 19:3). Everything in our religious literature, whether it be instruction, precept or moral exhortation, demonstrates this view. And whatever is there set forth concerning reward for service, and punishment for transgression, indicates that a human being's acts are left to himself and that the Divine glory does not interfere in his prosperity or in his ill-fortune, in his righteous deeds or in his perversities. 
This is hard for me to grasp, and to reconcile the contradiction of these two views is exceedingly difficult. If there is a remedy for this difficulty which troubles me sorely, may G-d relieve me through your aid. 
The Understanding: The difficulty you state of reconciling these two contending conceptions, found in the books, is no greater than that of solving the contradiction found in observing life's actual experiences. For we see that a human being's activities are sometimes in accordance with his thoughts and desires and sometimes they are against his wish and intent.
These differences show you that the exalted Creator has control over a human being and that the latter is bound by the Almighty who permits him to do only what He wishes and prevents him from doing what He does not wish. This is also apparent in the function of speech, hearing and sight. And, on the other hand, I see that reward and punishment come to a human being; that he is rewarded and punished according to his deeds and movements either in serving G-d or rebelling against Him. 
Controversies have long raged among the learned as to the modes of reconciling the issue between necessity and righteousness (divine decree vs free will). 
Some say that all human activities proceed according to man's will, capacity and strength; that G-d has left the conduct of these affairs in a man's own hands, and given him control over them. And since the Divine glory does not interfere in these, therefore a human being is liable to reward and punishment for them. 
Others ascribe all human actions, like everything else, to the Creator, blessed be He, and say that every movement in the universe from that of a rational being to that of an inorganic body, is in the control of the Creator, takes place by His decree and compulsion, and which cannot be varied by as much as a hair's-breadth, neither more nor less.
When, against this view, the justice of reward and punishment was questioned, they replied, "We have no knowledge on the subject of reward and punishment; we do not know its form nor the way it is enforced. G-d, however, is righteous and will not do any iniquity. He is faithful in awarding recompense and retribution as He appointed them, and will not depart from His rules. Our minds are too feeble to grasp His infinite wisdom. His righteousness is too apparent, His loving kindness too evident, that we should cast suspicion on His decisions, and there is no G-d beside Him. 
Some find it possible to accept both principles - necessity and righteousness. They say that one who goes deeply into these subjects will not escape sin and will stumble, in whichever way he apprehends them. They therefore assert that the proper course to follow is to act on the principle of one who believes that actions are left to a human being's free will, who will therefore be rewarded or punished for them, and that we should strive for all that will avail us with the Creator in both worlds. At the same time, we ought to trust in G-d with the trust of one, fully convinced that all things and movements, together with their advantageous and injurious results happen by the decree of the Eternal, under His authority and according to His sentence, and that G-d has a victorious claim upon us while we have no claim upon Him.
Of all the views that we have mentioned this is the nearest approach to the way of salvation. For honestly and in truth, we must confess our ignorance on this topic which refers to the wisdom of the Creator, because our knowledge is too weak, and our comprehension too limited. This ignorance is one of the various forms of divine beneficence; it is for our good that knowledge is hidden from us. If there had been any advantage to us in understanding this mystery, the Creator would have revealed it to us. 
A close analogy we can observe in the case of a person with weak eyes, who cannot enjoy the light of the sun without putting on a thin veil to protect his eyes. The more the eyes are impaired, the thicker the veil which he needs to aid his sight. When the impairment lessens, a thinner veil is suitable for him. 
Furthermore, we note in regard to a large number of physical occupations, that if we did not behold them with our own eyes, and only knew of them by report, we would right away declare the reporter a liar. Take for instance, the astrolabe (a measuring instrument formerly used by astronomers). If we had never seen this instrument with our eyes but someone had told us of its form and appearance and what can be apprehended by its use concerning the movements of the spheres, the positions of the stars, the precise determination of each of the seasons, the distances between stars and many other facts that would otherwise be unknown to us, we would have no clear conception of it, nor could we form a picture of it in our minds.
The same is the case with a thing we are more familiar with, which belongs to tools which many men use - the fulcrum scale.
For were it not that we apprehended it with our sense of sight, we could not possibly deem it conceivable that one could truly weigh with a balance scale one of whose parts is longer than the other. And what is still more surprising is that on this balance and by means of a single stone, many objects, varying in weight, can be weighed, some of these weighing more, others weighing less than the single stone.
A thing that people use still more is the upper millstone which the water causes to revolve regularly by a slight contrivance. When we cast a small stone into a swift current of flowing water, it does not stay on the surface for a single moment, but sinks to the bottom, while the millstone is many times heavier than the stone and the force of the water by which the mill is set in motion is much less than that of the current. If any one had told us this and we had not seen it with our own eyes, we would have quickly denied and rejected his statement.
All this is because we know so little of the secrets of nature and because our faculties are too limited to recognize the fundamentals of created things and their results, their natural constitution and special forces. Since a person is so ignorant, as we have shown, in regard to a familiar thing which he constantly handles, it is not surprising that he does not comprehend the divine decree and the righteousness of the exalted Creator's judgments, these being hidden and infinitely exalted beyond all that we have stated.
On a similar topic, David, peace be upon him, said, "L-ord, my heart is not haughty, nor did I lift up my eyes . . ." (Ps. 131:1). And he adds in the next verse, in regard to submission to G-d, "Surely I have stilled and quieted my soul, like a weaned child with his mother; my soul is with me like a weaned child" (Ps. 131:2). 

Chapter 9

The Soul: You have comforted me in having made me give up the hope of ever fathoming the mystery of this subject because of its subtlety and depth. But reveal to me the mystery of my existence in this world, its aim and purpose. 
And give me, as well as you can and briefly, some approximate conception of necessity and righteousness, so that the same should not happen to me as happened to a king who, as I learned, did not appreciate the various aspects of his good fortune. The story is that in one of the Indian islands, there was a state, the citizens of which decided to appoint over them every year a stranger as a ruler; and when the year had elapsed, they would banish him and he would have to return to the status he had had before he had been appointed over them. Among those elected, one was a fool who knew nothing of their secret plans in regard to him. He accumulated much money, built palaces which he fortified, and sent nothing out of their country. On the contrary, whatever he had outside the state - his money, his wife and children, he brought into it. And when the year was ended, the citizens sent him out, stripped of all his possessions, and deprived of all that he had built or acquired before he entered office up to the time he relinquished it. And so when he left, he had nothing of what had belonged to him in the city and outside it. He grieved and regretted the trouble he had taken and the efforts he had expended on the edifices he had erected and the treasures he had accumulated and which now would go to another person.
Afterwards, the citizens decided to appoint as their ruler a stranger who was wise and understanding. After he had been appointed, he selected a person to whom he showed kindness and inquired of him the customs of the people and their laws which they had observed with reference to the one who had preceded him in office. The favorite revealed to the new ruler their secret plan and what they intended to do to him. When he learned this, his activities took a different turn to those of his predecessor. He strove and labored to take everything valuable in the country to the land where he had placed all his other treasures. He did not trust his subjects' exaltation of him nor the honor they showed him. During the whole time he stayed in their country, his mood was in between grief and joy. He was grieved that he would soon have to leave the people, and that the treasures he could bring out were in his estimation, so few. If he could have remained longer, he would have been able to bring out more. But he was glad that he would soon leave and be able to settle in the place where he had put his treasures and would be in a position to use and enjoy them in various ways, with a quiet mind, confident spirit and uninterruptedly.
And after his year was up, he was not troubled at leaving, but prepared for the event speedily, calmly and joyously, with approval of his work and diligence. He was going to great good fortune, honor and enduring joy. So he had happiness in both positions and attained his wishes in both places.
I fear, however, that what happened to the fool who wearied himself in both matters and lost out in both places, may happen to me. Since G-d has favored me in sending you to be my advisor, please instruct me and show me my position and tell me all you know in regard to the mystery of my being and the ways in which it should be improved. 
The Understanding: In the parable you related, you have already given a picture of your state in this world and shown that your situation therein is like that of the kings you mentioned. You clearly realize that you are a stranger here and will soon depart from it. You should therefore act as the wise and understanding ruler did, so that the outcome in your case may be like his. Should you deviate from this course, my words will be of no use to you, my fine language will bring you no advantage.
The Soul: If I had no desire in the matter, I would not have troubled to investigate what is hidden from me in regard to my condition.
The Understanding: The mystery of your being is that the Creator created you out of naught, in common with all spiritual beings that He created; and His purpose is to exalt you and elevate you to the high degree of His treasured ones-the chosen and elect who are nearest to the light of His glory-for your good and as a kindness towards you. But you will only be worthy of this favor when three conditions have been fulfilled: 
The first is the removal of the curtain of folly from yourself so that He may enlighten you with the gift of His knowledge. 
The second is that you be tried and tested as to whether you will choose to serve Him or rebel against Him. 
The third is that He disciplines you in this world by your bearing the yoke of His service, in order to raise you to the degree of the higher beings who serve Him, of whom it is said, "Bless the L-ord, ye His angels, ye mighty in strength, that fulfill His word" (Ps. 103:20). All this could not have been possible if you remained in your former state. 
Therefore the exalted Creator, by His wisdom, created for you this world with all that is therein - minerals, plants and living creatures, everything suitably arranged and properly administered - and all for your benefit. Out of the finest elements, He chose for you a palace similar to the world in its origin, foundations, products and form. In this palace he set five gates opening to the external world, and appointed five trustworthy keepers of the gates. Those gates are the organs of the senses - eyes, ears, nose, tongue, hands. The gatekeepers are the five senses which employ these organs, namely, the sense of sight, the sense of hearing, the sense of smell, the sense of taste and the sense of touch, by means of which you are enabled to attain to the knowledge of all that can be useful to you in this world. He also prepared for you in this palace four degrees for the four rulers. These are the brain, the heart, the liver, and the testicles.
Furthermore, He placed four stores for four officers, namely, the faculty of ingestion, the faculty of retention, the faculty of digestion, the faculty of excretion. Their stores and offices are the two galls-black and green, the white lymphatic fluid and the blood. 
Within and without this palace, He distributed servants to attend to it and take care of it. Those within are the intestines, veins, sinews, nerves and arteries; those outside are the hands, feet, tongue, teeth, nails and other similar parts.
He furthermore made for you connecting intermediaries between the spiritual and physical, namely, the blood, the natural heat and the life spirit. By His wisdom and power He joined you to this palace in a proper and well-ordered union, so that you might fulfill the three requisites which I mentioned to you. 
He provided you with two counselors. He appointed for them two scribes. He gave you servants and attendants for your needs in this world.
Of the two counselors the first is the Understanding which points out to you what the will of G-d is. The second counselor is your lust which entices and seduces you to do that which will arouse the anger of the L-ord, your G-d. 
Of the two scribes, one writes down your good deeds, whether done in private or in public, secretly or in the sight of all, through any of those already mentioned whom he placed at your disposition, the gate-keepers, officers, administrators, servants, counselors, attendants and sextons. The second scribe writes down the bad deeds in the same way as we have stated in regard to the good deeds. 
The servitors and sextons are the soul's moods and qualities - cheerfulness, anxiety, gladness, joy and grief, memory and forgetfulness, wisdom and folly, courage and timidity, generosity and miserliness, righteousness and wickedness, bashfulness and arrogance, hope and apprehension, love and hate, pleasure and pain, pride and modesty, domination and submissiveness, and many similar dispositions which you use with your inner being. 
The blessed Creator appointed these watchmen, leaders and administrators, servants, counselors, servitors and sextons, to listen to you and be ready to do your bidding, up to a definite period, except in certain matters which He explained to them when they were brought into association with you. Those are the matters wherein necessity and the divine decree prevail. 
In other words, He gave you liberty to make use of all these aids for the improvement of your physical well-being and to do everything over which the Almighty gave you control and power, but only in certain ways and under certain conditions. These are comprised in the duties indicated by our natural Reason, or that are to be accepted on divine authority (torah), or that are permitted.
And He said to you: "Whatever I have put into your hands in this world and placed under your control, must not entice you, since none of them can contribute anything to your essential being nor take anything from it; nor will you obtain from any of them either pleasure or pain, for they are only things that incidentally affect your body, externally or inwardly. None of them is necessary for you. Their relation to you is that of the embryonic sack to the new-born baby or the egg-shell to the hatched chick. 
[G-d continues] "If you will understand and comprehend My intention towards you and the benefit which I have bestowed upon you, and you choose My service, and keep far from rebelling against Me in the management of everything over which I have given you control, I will raise you to the highest of the degrees attained by My elect and favored ones. I will draw you closer to My mercy and love, and enfold you with the radiance of My glory. But if you choose to rebel against Me, I will punish you with a severe punishment and afflict you with prolonged affliction." 
[G-d continues] "If you are ignorant of the modes in which you should use any of the things which pertain to your service of Me which I have appointed unto you as your duty and obligation, because you are too much occupied with your body and its concerns, with which I test you, I have appointed for you a counselor, wise and faithful. When you ask his advice, he will instruct you. If you ignore him he will arouse you. This counselor is the Understanding. Take counsel with him in all your affairs, for he will recommend you how to employ all your servitors who stand before you, in the right way of serving Me. The reprehensible qualities will be transformed into praiseworthy ones, even as does the wise physician, making use of injurious and even poisonous drugs for the benefit of the body." 
[G-d continues] "If you will continue to be of this mind, and strengthen your Understanding, and listen to his advice, the scribe who writes down good deeds will count all your permitted (neutral) movements among your good deeds to which they will be added, and all your servitors will help you in My service." 
[G-d continues] "But if you dismiss his advice and incline to the view of the second counselor who is in all respects his opponent, and use all the means placed at your disposal as he advises you, then your praiseworthy qualities will become reprehensible, even as the incompetent physician in his ignorance kills patients by his inexpert use of useful medicines. And the scribe, appointed to write down evil deeds will write, down all your permitted (neutral) movements and enter them in the record of your evil deeds, to which they will be added." 
[G-d continues] "You will find that your aids, attendants and servitors and everyone with whom you come in contact, are agreeable and carry out your desire and thus you will have increased joy and gladness." 
All this is in accordance with the justice of your Creator. Because, in your innermost thoughts and secret aims and purposes, you chose either to rebel against Him rather than serve Him, or serve Him rather than rebel against Him. 
For what is open and revealed in you and what is concealed in you, are equally known to Him. He will requite you for all that His omniscience observes in you, though it remain hidden from human beings. For do you not see that a human judge decides according to what has been established before him as fact, whether on the evidence of witnesses or by his own senses. If what was in the mind could be established for him, he would also take that into account in his decision. Since the blessed Creator knows everything equally well, it follows that He judges according to His knowledge, as it is said: "The secret things belong to the L-ord, our G-d" (Deut. 29:28). 
And when the Creator wishes to arouse you and admonish you, He charges one of the servitors to leave your service; and one or two of your limbs or all of them sicken and become painful for a definite time. If you awake and return to Him, He charges that servitor to return to your service. He heals your body, and it resumes its former function, as it is said: "Fools, because of their transgression, and because of their iniquities, are afflicted. Their soul abhors all manner of food until they reach the gates of death; Then they cry unto the L-ord in their troubles... He sends His word and heals them" (Ps. 107:17-20).
And when the days of your trial in this world are ended, the exalted Creator commands all those we have mentioned - gates, gate-keepers, servants and servitors - to depart from you and the bonds and connections between you and your body are severed, and you return to your first state. Your body has no movement and no feeling. It also returns to its first state, as the sage said: "Dust will return to the earth as it was: and the spirit will return to G-d who gave it" (Eccles. 12:7) : And then you will be shown the account-books, the record of your deeds and thoughts and what you had chosen and troubled yourself with in your earthly existence; and in accordance with this, will be your requital.
On all this, the Almighty, through His messengers and prophets and His faithful law, has exhorted and warned you, as the sage said: "Incline your ear, and hear the words of the wise; put to heart my knowledge; . . . for it is pleasant if you keep them within you . . . Have I not written for you excellent things in counsels and knowledge, that I might make you know the certainty of the words of truth, that you might answer words of truth to them that send unto you" (Prov. 22:17-21). 

Chapter 10

The Soul: I have comprehended your statement and paid attention to all that you have mentioned. And now I beseech your Honor to expound to me the occasions on which I should make use of my good and bad dispositions - each in such a way that there I shall win praise and commendation for their proper employment. 
The Understanding: You possess many dispositions of which I shall briefly mention those that occur to me. 
Among these there are two: joy and grief. They are opposites to one another. The proper occasion when joy is in place when you can trust that the pleasure will be everlasting without any mixture of grief, and uninterrupted by mishap. Then you may permit yourself the emotion of joy. The proper occasion for grief arises when something occurs to you that will cause you everlasting and unceasing pain, which you cannot remove nor separate from. Then you may permit yourself the emotion of grief and make use of it. 
Among your traits there are other two - fear and hope. Fear is proper when you are in a situation which will lead to a painful situation that will not have a good end and which you have no strength or power to avert. 
The occasion for hope arises when you busy yourself with the preliminaries that will bring you good and secure for you bliss with no hindrance to keep you from it, nothing that will separate you from it. And that is when you fulfill the duties which G-d commanded you and the result of which is good. 
There are two other emotions: courage and timidity. The right occasion for showing courage is when you meet the enemies of the L-ord, to wage war against them. [Courage is also in place,] to endure all distress and all trials in fulfilling the will of the exalted Creator and of His saints, as it is said: "Yea, for Your sake are we killed, all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter" (Ps. 44:23). Further, "Let the righteous smite me; it shall be a kindness; and let him reprove me" (Ps. 141:5). 
The occasion for timidity arises when you meet those who love G-d, so that you fight neither them, nor those devoted to His service; and that you refrain from standing up against one who rebukes you for your good, as it is said: "Because your heart was tender and you humbled yourself before the L-ord" (II Kings 22:19). 
Among your dispositions there are other two: shame and boldness. Shame is proper regarding rebelling against your Benefactor to His face while you are in His hands, using the good He bestows on you, and while He rebukes you by means of good or evil happenings; or by means of His prophets, as it is said, "O, son of man, show the house to the house of Israel, that they may be ashamed of their iniquities" (Ezek. 43:10); and further, "O my G-d, I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face to You" (Ezra 9:6). 
Boldness is in place when one meets wicked people and transgressors and those who oppose the truth; and to exhort men to do kindness; and to warn people to avoid what is reprehensible. Boldness is proper to shame sinners and rebuke the small and the great, as it is said: "I have set my face like a flint" (Isaiah 50:7). 
So, too, there are two traits - anger and satisfaction. Anger is in place when you see a departure from the way of truth and the rule of righteousness, when falsehood prevails over truth and those who follow it. 
Satisfaction is proper when all things fall in their right direction, when everything is in its right place, always keeping, in regard to them, in the ways of truth. 
So, too, there are two qualities - mercifulness and ruthlessness. The quality of mercy is to be shown to the needy, to the poor and the sick; to those who are leaving the world; to one who does not realize what is good for him; to one who does not know how to guide himself; to the prisoner who is in the power of his enemy; to one who has lost a great benefit (such as a rich man losing his wealth); to one who regrets his iniquities; to one who weeps for his past sins, out of fear of Divine punishment. 
Ruthlessness is in place in paying back the wicked and exacting vengeance on the corrupt, as Scripture says, "neither shall you pity him, have mercy upon him, nor shield him" (Deut. 13:9). 
So with the two traits, pride and humility. Pride and haughtiness are in place when you meet those who deny G-d and turn away from Him. Do not humble yourself before such people nor show them deference, so as not to seem to justify them or even incline to their corrupt views; but release the trait of arrogance and pride, to indicate your opposition to their views and how little you agree with them, as you learn from the relation of Mordechai to Haman.
Humility is in place when you meet a man who is pious and pure, G-d-fearing, learned in the Torah and occupied in the service of G-d. So, too, if any one has shown you kindness and favor, you are under an obligation to make a return for it. And how much more so, if His benefactions are so great and weighty that you cannot make Him a return for them. Likewise, you should accept on yourself the justice administered to you by G-d [in acceptance of His judgment], as it is said, "if their uncircumcised heart be humble and they accept their punishment then will I remember My covenant..." (Lev. 26:41-42). 
So with the two qualities, love and hate. Love is in place towards one who is in agreement with you in the service of G-d, and through whom you will secure abiding joy at the end of your earthly existence.
Hatred is proper against one who transgresses the will of G-d, stood up against men of truth and misled you to what angers your Creator, as it is said: "They that forsake the law praise the wicked; but such as keep the law contend with them" (Prov. 28:4). 
So with the two traits, generosity and miserliness. The part of generosity is to assign to everything its proper place, and give to every good-charactered person of your money and of your wisdom, in a measure suitable to the recipient, as it is said: "Withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of your hand to do it" (Prov. 3:27); further, "Let your fountains be dispersed abroad" (Prov. 5:16). 
Miserliness is in place towards the cruel and foolish and those who do not recognize themselves, nor the value of the beneficence bestowed on them, as it is said, "He that reproves a scorner gets to himself shame: and he that rebukes a wicked man, it is a blemish to himself" (Prov. 9:7). Our wise men say, "He who does a favor to an ingrate is like a man who casts a stone to Markolis" (A form of idol worship in ancient times). 
And so with the two qualities - laziness and diligence. Laziness is proper in the gratification of physical desires, the pleasures of which pass away while nothing remains to him who indulges in them but shame in this world and punishment in the world to come. 
Diligence is in place, in the spiritual pleasures and in doing deeds, with the intent to attain the favor of the blessed G-d, as David, peace be unto him, said: "I made haste, and delayed not to keep Your commandments" (Ps. 119:60). 
What I have expounded in this treatise should suffice for one who chooses the just way, seeks the truth for himself and desires wisdom for its own sake. 
May G-d in His mercy lead us out to the paths of His service. AMEN.

Fourth Treatise on Trust

Introduction

The author says: Since our previous treatise dealt with the duty to assume the service of G-d, I deemed proper to follow it with what is more necessary than all other things for one who serves G-d - placing one's trust in Him for all matters, the reason being the great benefits this yields both in religious and in secular matters.
The benefits in religious matters:
Among them, peace of mind, and trusting in G-d as a servant must trust in his master, because if one does not place his trust in G-d, he will place his trust in something else, and whoever trusts in something other than G-d, the Al-mighty will remove His providence from such a person, and leave him in the hands of the one he trusted, and he will be as it was written: "For My people have committed two evils; they have forsaken Me, the spring of living waters, to dig for themselves cisterns, broken cisterns that do not hold water" (Yirmiya 2:13), "They exchanged their Glory for the likeness of an ox eating grass" (Tehilim 106:20),"Blessed is the man who trusts in the L-ord; the L-ord shall be his refuge" (Yirmiya 17:7), "Praiseworthy is the man who made the L-ord his trust, and did not turn to the haughty and those who turn to falsehood." (Tehilim 40:5), "Cursed is the man who trusts in man, who makes flesh his strength and whose heart turns away from the L-ord" (Yirmiya 17:5). 
If he places his trust in his wisdom and tactics, physical strength and industriousness - he will toil for nothing, his strength will weaken, and his tactics will fall short of accomplishing his desire, as written "He traps the wise with their own cunning" (Iyov 5:13) , and "I returned and saw under the sun, that the race does not belong to the swift, nor the war to the mighty; neither do the wise have bread, [nor do the understanding have wealth, nor the knowledgeable, favor for time and chance happens to them all]" (Koheles 9:11), and "Young lions suffer want and are hungry, but those who seek the L-ord lack no good" (Tehilim 34:11). 
If he relies on his wealth, it will be removed from him and left to someone else as written "He lies down rich, but there shall be nothing to gather; he opens his eyes, and his wealth is not" (Iyov 27:19), "Do not weary yourself to grow rich; cease from your own understanding." (Mishlei 23:4), "Should you blink your eyes at it, it is not here; for it will make wings for itself, like the eagle, and it will fly toward the heavens." (Mishlei 23:5), "so it is he who gathers riches but not by right; he shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end he stands dishonored" (Yirmiya 17:11) 
Or, he will be prevented from its benefit as the wise man said "the Al-mighty will not give him the ability to eat from it" (Koheles 6:2), and it will be by him like a deposit that he guards from damages until it reaches someone worthy of it, as written "[For to a man who is good in His sight, He has given wisdom and knowledge and joy,] but to the sinner He has given an occupation to gather and to accumulate, to give to him who is good in G-d's sight; this too is vanity and frustration." (Koheles 2:26), and "he will prepare, but a righteous man will wear them; and the pure shall divide the silver" (Iyov 27:17). And it is possible that the money will be the cause of his destruction (in this world) and ultimate downfall (in the afterlife) as written "There is a grievous evil that I saw under the sun; riches kept by their owner for his harm." (Koheles 5:12). 
Another benefit for the one who trusts in the Al-mighty, is that his trust will lead him to the following: 
* to not serve other than G-d
* to not hope in any man, nor expect from anyone (Micha 5:6).
* to not work to win their approval.
* to not flatter them.
* to not agree with them in what is not the service of G-d (ex. going to their time wasting parties - Pas Lechem)
* to not be afraid of their matters.
* to not be afraid of disagreeing with them .
* to divest himself of the cloak of their favors and free himself from the burden of expressing gratitude to them, and from the obligation of paying back their favors . 
* if he rebukes them, he will not be afraid of slighting them.
* he will not shy from humiliating them (so that his rebuke is effective - Pas Lechem).
* he will not embellish their false ways
As the prophet wrote: "But the L-ord G-d helps me, therefore shall I not be confounded; therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed" (Yeshaya 50:7), "Do not fear them or their words" (Yechezkel 2:6), "And you, son of man, fear them not, and fear not their words" (Yechezkel 2:6), "fear them not, neither shall you be intimidated by them" (Yechezkel 3:9).
Another benefit: The trust in G-d will lead one to empty his mind from the distractions of the world, and to focus his heart to matters of service of G-d. 
And he will be similar in his peace of mind, tranquility of heart, and few financial worries to the alchemist, one who knows how to transform silver to gold and copper or tin to silver through skill and procedures. 
And the one who trusts in G-d will have the following 10 advantages over the alchemist:
(1) The alchemist requires special materials to perform his operation, without which he cannot do anything. These materials are not found at all times and in all places. But for one who trusts in G-d, his sustenance is assured and can come through any means of all the means of the world, as written "[And He fed you with manna, which you knew not, neither did your fathers know]; That He might make known to you that man does not live by bread alone..." (Devarim 8:3). For at no time and in no place are the means of obtaining his livelihood withheld from him, as you know already from the story of Eliyahu and the ravens, or with the widow and the cakes and water (Melachim 17:9), or the story of Ovadia with the prophets, where he said "I hid among the prophets of G-d, 100 men, 50 in each cave, and I fed them bread and water" (Melachim 18:13) , and "Young lions suffer want and are hungry, but those who seek the L-ord lack no good" (Tehilim 34:11), and "Fear the L-ord, His holy ones; for there is no want to those who fear Him" (Tehilim 34:10).
(2) The alchemist must perform actions and follow procedures without which he cannot successfully complete his goal. It is even possible that the fumes and odors will cause his death, along with the long work and great effort with them day and night. But one who trusts in G-d is secure against mishaps, and his heart is assured against future (potential) bad things. Whatever comes to him from G-d, he will accept with joy and gladness and his livelihood comes to him peacefully, quietly, and happily, as written "He causes me to lie down in green pastures; He leads me beside still waters" (Tehilim 23:2). 
(3) The alchemist does not trust anyone with his secret due to fear for his life. But one who trusts G-d does not fear any man on account of his trust, just the contrary it is a source of honor, as King David said: "in G-d I trusted, I will not fear, what can a man do to me?" (Tehilim 54:12).
(4) The alchemist must either prepare one large quantity of gold and silver for long term needs or must prepare small batches for short term needs. If he prepares a large quantity, all his days he will fear for his life that perhaps all the gold and silver will be lost in any number of ways (and he will be left penniless), and his heart will never quiet, nor will his mind be at peace due to fear of the king and of the people (finding his big stash of gold).If he makes small batches for short term use, it is possible that he will not successfully perform the procedure at a time of great need, due to a failure in one of the means. But one who trusts in G-d, has strong peace of mind that G-d will provide for him at any time He wishes and in any place, just like He sustains the fetus in its mother's womb or the chick inside an egg, which has no opening to enter anything from the outside, and birds in the air, or fish in the sea, and the tiny ant despite its weakness, while the mighty lion some days cannot obtain food, as written "Young lions suffer want and are hungry, but those who seek the L-ord lack no good" (Tehilim 34:11), and "The L-ord will not starve the soul of the righteous" (Mishlei 10:3), and "I have been young, and now am old; yet I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread" (Tehilim 37:25)
(5) The alchemist is under anxiety and fear of everyone, from the greatest to the lowest of people as a consequence of his work, but one who trusts in G-d will be revered by great men and honorable people, even animals and stones seek to do his will (i.e. do not harm him - TL) as written in the entire Psalm "He who sits..." (tehilim 91), and "In six troubles He will save you, and in the seventh no harm will touch you." (Iyov 5:19), until the end of the matter.
(6) The alchemist is not immune from sickness and disease which hinders his joy in being wealthy, and prevents him from benefiting from what he has and enjoying what he has acquired. But one who trusts in G-d, is immune from sickness and disease except as an atonement or to increase his reward, as written "Now youths shall become tired and weary, and young men shall stumble" (Yeshaya 40:30), "those who hope in G-d will renew strength" (Yeshaya 40:31), and "For the arms of the wicked shall be broken, but the L-ord supports the righteous" (Tehilim 37:17).
(7) It is possible that the alchemist will not be able to buy food with his gold and silver due to no food being available in the city at times, as written: "they shall cast their money in the streets" (Yechezkel 7:19), and "neither silver nor gold will be able to save them" (Tzefania 1:18), but for one who trusts in G-d, his sustenance will not be blocked at any time or in any place, as written "in famine He redeemed you from death" (Iyov 5:20), and "the L-ord is my shepherd, I shall not lack" (Tehilim 23:1), and "They will not be shamed in time of calamity, and in days of famine they shall still be satisfied" (Tehilim 37:19).
(8) The alchemist does not linger in one place too long due to fear that his secret will be discovered. But one who trusts in G-d feels secure in his land, and has peace of mind in his place, as written "Trust in the L-ord and do good; dwell in the land and be nourished by faith" (Tehilim 37:3), and "The righteous shall inherit the land and dwell forever in it" (Tehilim 37:29).
(9) The alchemist's skills will not accompany him in the afterlife, they may only provide him, in this world, security from poverty and from needing other people. But for one who trusts in G-d, the reward for his trust will accompany him in this world and in the next, as written "Many are the pains of the wicked ; but one who trusts in G-d will be surrounded by kindness" (Tehilim 32:10), and "how great is Your goodness that you hid away for those who fear You" (Tehilim 31:20. 
(10) If the alchemist's work is discovered, it will become a cause for his death, because his work runs contrary to the natural order, and the Director of the world will allow someone to kill him when he fails to hide his secret . But for one who trusts in G-d, when his trust becomes known, he will be held in high esteem and honored by the public. They will feel blessed to be near him or to see him, and his presence will bring good fortune to the city and shield the people from troubles, as written "the righteous man is the foundation of the world" (Mishlei 10:25), similar to Lot in Tzoar .
Among the benefits of trusting in G-d regarding religious matters:
One who trusts in G-d, if he has wealth, will be quick to fulfill his monetary obligations to G-d and to men with a willing and generous spirit. If he does not have wealth, he will consider that lack of wealth to be among the favors of G-d to him, because he is exempt from the monetary obligations to G-d and men which wealth brings, and he is spared from the mental distraction of protecting and managing it, as one of the pious used to say: "may G-d save me from dispersion of the mind". They would ask him "what is dispersion of the mind?" He would answer: "to own property at the head of every river and the center of every town." And this is what our sages referred to in saying: "the more possessions, the more worry" (Avos 2:7), and they said: "who is wealthy? He who is content with what he has" (Avos 4:1). 
One who trusts in G-d will receive the benefits of money, namely, his material needs, but without the mental distraction and constant worry of the wealthy, as the wise man said "The sleep of the laborer is sweet, whether he eats little or much, but the satiety of the rich does not allow him to sleep" (Koheles 5:11).
Another benefit, one who trusts in G-d will not diminish his trust on account of having much wealth because he does not rely on the money. He regards it as a deposit which he is ordered to use in specific ways, for specific matters and for a limited time. And if he stays wealthy for a long time, he will not become arrogant due to his wealth. He will not remind the poor person of his charity gifts since he was commanded to give to him, and he will not seek his gratitude and praises. Rather, he will thank his Creator who appointed him as a means for doing good to the poor person.
If his wealth is lost, he will not worry nor mourn his loss. Rather, he will thank his Creator for taking back His deposit, just like he thanked G-d when it was given to him. He will be happy with his portion, and will not seek to damage others . He will not covet other people's wealth as the wise man said "A righteous man eats to sate his appetite, [but the stomach of the wicked shall feel want]." (Mishlei 13:25). 
Benefits of trust in G-d for worldly matters:
* Peace of mind from the worries of this world.
* Peace from the frenzy and drive to pursue the lusts of this world.
* feeling calm, secure, at peace in this world, as written "blessed be the man who trusts in G-d, and G-d shall be his refuge" (Yirmiyahu 17:7), and "For he shall be like a tree planted by the water, that sends out its roots by the stream. [It does not fear when heat comes; its leaves stay green. It has no worries in a year of drought and never fails to bear fruit]" (Yirmiyahu 17:8).
Among them, peace of mind from the need to travel to faraway journeys, which weakens the body, and hastens aging, as written "my strength has weakened from the journey, my life shortened" (Tehilim 102:24).
It is said about a novice ascetic who travelled to a distant land in search of a livelihood. He met one of the idolaters of the city where he arrived and said to him: "how completely blind and ignorant you are to worship idols!". The idolater asked him: "And what do you worship?". The ascetic answered "I worship the Creator, the Omnipotent, the Sustainer of all, the One, the Provider of all, which there is none like Him". The idolater countered "your actions contradict your words!" The ascetic asked "How so?", the idolater said "if what you say were true, He would have provided a livelihood for you in your own city, just like He provided for you here, and it would not have been necessary for you to trouble yourself to travel to a faraway land like this." The ascetic, unable to answer, returned to his city and reassumed his asceticism from that time on, and never again left his city.
Another benefit, peace of mind and body, due to sparing oneself from pursuing grueling jobs, and wearying occupations, avoiding work of kings - mingling in their culture and dealing with their corrupt servants.
But one who trusts G-d, selects among the different occupations one which is easy on his body, allows him to earn a good reputation, does not consume his mind, and is best suited for fulfilling his torah obligations and the principles of his faith, because the choice of occupation will neither increase nor decrease the income he will earn unless G-d decreed so, as it says "For it is not from the east or from the west, neither from the desert does elevation come. But G-d judges; He lowers this one and elevates that one." (Tehilim 75:7), and "He causes me to lie down in green pastures; He leads me beside still waters" (Tehilim 23:2).
Another benefit, minimal aggravation in one's business dealings. If one's merchandise does not sell, or if he is unable to collect his debts, or if he is struck by illness, because he knows that the Creator is in charge of his life and knows best what is good for him, as written "Only to G-d should you hope, my soul, for my hope is from Him" (Tehilim 62:6).
Another benefit, joy in whatever happens to him, even if it is something difficult and against his nature, because he trusts that G-d will do only what is good for him in all matters, just like a mother has compassion on her baby in washing it, diapering it, and tying or untying it against its will, as David said "Surely I have behaved and quieted myself, as a child that is weaned of his mother: my soul is even as a weaned child" (Tehilim 131:2). 
Since I have clarified the benefits of trust in G-d for religious and secular matters, I will now clarify seven topics on the matter of trust:
(1) What is trust. (2) The criteria for trusting someone. (3) The prerequisites to trusting in G-d. (4) When trust applies and when it does not. (5) The difference between one who trusts in G-d in earning a livelihood and one who does not. (6) Obligation to refute those who promote delaying the service of G-d until reaching sufficient material prosperity. (7) Things that damage one's trust in G-d, and a summary of the matter of trust.





Chapter 1

Trust is peace of mind of the one who trusts. That one relies in his heart that the one he trusts in will do what is good and proper for him on the matter he has trusted him with, according to his ability and his understanding of what will further his good.
But the main factor, which leads one to trust in the one trusted, and without which trust cannot exist, is for one's heart to be confident that the one trusted will keep his word and will do what he pledged, and that he will also think to do what is good for him even on what he did not pledge out of pure generosity and kindness (this will be explained).

Chapter 2

There are seven factors which make it possible for one to trust in another (human being):
(1) Compassion, pity and love. When a man knows that his friend has compassion and pity for him, he will trust in him and be at peace with regard to troubling him with all of his matters.
(2) To know that his friend, besides loving him, is not forgetful or lazy in taking care of his needs. Rather, he knows that his friend is active and resolved to do it. Because if all of this is not clear, one's trust in him will not be complete, since one knows of his forgetfulness and laziness in attending to his needs.
But, when the one he trusts combines these two traits, great compassion for him and full attendance to his matters, he will trust in him without a doubt.
(3) He is strong. He will not be defeated in whatever he desires, and nothing can prevent him from doing the request of the one who trusts him. Because if he is weak, one cannot fully trust in him, even though it is clear that he is compassionate and active, due to the many occasions in which he failed doing things. When one combines these three traits, trusting in him will be more fitting.
(4) That the one he trusts knows what is beneficial for him, both for his inner and outer life and also that none of the ways which benefit him or further his welfare are hidden to him. Because, if he does not know all of this, one will not be at peace in entrusting himself to him. But if he combines the knowledge of the ways which are beneficial to him, the ability to implement them, great attendance to them, and compassion for him, his trust will certainly be strengthened.
(5) That the one he trusts is under the exclusive care of him from the beginning of his existence, his development, babyhood, childhood, youth, adulthood, old age until the end of his days (i.e. that no one else has ever done to him any good except the one he trusts - ML). And when all this is clear to the truster, he is obligated to be at peace on his friend, and to rely on him, because of the many past benefits he already received from his friend and the constant favors he still presently receives. And this will obligate strengthening one's trust in him. (since he has been continuously benevolent to him from then until now, certainly he will not abandon him until his final end - PL)
(6) All matters of the truster are entirely in the hands of the one he trusts, and no one else can hurt him, help him, benefit him, or protect him from harm, as a slave chained down in a prison is entirely in the hands of his master. If the truster were in the hands of the one he trusts in this manner, it would be more fitting to trust in him. 
(7) That the person he trusts is absolutely generous and kind (i.e. the most possible extreme of generosity and kindness - TL) to those deserving and to those who are not deserving, and that his generosity and kindness is continuous, never ending and without interruption. 
Whoever combines these traits, in addition to all of the previous traits has completed all the conditions that deserve trust, and would obligate the person who knows this to trust in him, to be at peace internally and externally, in his heart and in his limbs, and to give himself up to him and accept his decrees and judge him favorably in all his judgments and actions. (to presume that certainly everything is good and even what seems bad is actually good - ML)
When we investigate these seven conditions, we will not find them at all in the created beings, but we find them all in the Creator. He is compassionate to His creations as written "The L-ord is merciful and gracious" (Tehilim 103:8), and "Now should I not take pity on Nineveh, the great city" (Yonah 4:11). 
And that he never neglects us, as written "Behold the Guardian of Israel will neither slumber nor sleep" (Tehilim 121:4), that He is all-wise and invincible as written "He is wise in heart and mighty in strength; who hardened [his heart] against Him and remained unhurt?" (Iyov 9:4), and "Yours, O L-ord, are the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty" (Divrei Hayamim I 29:11) and "The L-ord your G-d is in your midst-a Mighty One Who will save" (Tzefania 3:17).
And that He alone is the one who guides a person from the beginning of his existence and development, as written "Is He not your Father who has acquired you? He has made you and established you." (Devarim 32:6), and "By You have I been upheld from birth: You are He that took me out of my mother's womb" (Tehilim 71:6), and "Did You not pour me out like milk and curdle me like cheese?" (Iyov 10:10), and the rest of the matter.
That one's benefit or harm is not in the hands of people but rather, only in the hands of the Creator, as written "Who has commanded and it came to pass, unless the L-ord ordained it? Out of the mouth of G-d, evil and good do not go out (of the boundary He has set - PL)" (Eicha 3:37), and "[All flesh is like grass, and all their kindness is as the flower of the field]; The grass shall dry out, the flower shall wilt, but the word of our G-d will stand forever" (Yeshaya 40:8), and "...surely the people are like grass" (Yeshaya 40:7), and we have already explained this sufficiently in the third gate of this book. 
That His generosity is universal and His kindness is all-embracing, as written "The L-ord is good to all, and His mercies are on all His works" (Tehilim 145:9) and "Who gives food to all flesh, for His kindness endures forever" (Tehilim 136:25), and "You open Your hand and satisfy every living thing [with] will (i.e. the good He bestows is not in a stingy way, according to basic need, but rather like His will - PL)" (Tehilim 145:16).
But really, the intellect can infer that these 7 conditions exist in the Creator and not in the created beings (as he will explain next chapter - TL), and therefore I have brought these verses from scripture only as a remembrance. 
When one clarifies this to himself, and his recognition in the true kindness of the Creator will be strong - he will place his trust in Him, give himself up completely to Him, and leave the guidance of his life to Him, never suspect Him in His judgments, nor be upset by what He has chosen for him, as David said (on the good - TL) "I will lift up the cup of salvation and call upon the name of the L-ord" (Tehilim 116:13), and (on the bad - TL) "I found trouble and sorrow and call upon the name of the L-ord" (Tehilim 116:3-4). 

Chapter 3

The introductions which must be clearly understood and the truth of which must be realized in order that a person's trust in G-d will be complete are five.
To believe and clearly understand that all of the seven factors (in the previous chapter) which when combined make it possible to trust in someone apply to G-d. And I have already mentioned them and commented on them from verses that occurred to me:
One: the Creator is merciful on a man more than any other merciful being, and all mercy and compassion that a man is shown from anyone besides G-d is really derived from G-d's mercy and compassion, as the verse says "He will give you compassion, and cause others to have compassion on you and multiply you" (Devarim 13:18). 
Two: none of the ways which benefit a man are unknown to the Creator. Logic necessitates this, since man is one of His handiworks. No one can know better than man's Maker the ways to further his making (i.e. biological conception in the womb - PL), and the ways of loss (where no conception will occur and the drop of semen will be lost - PL), and the possible damages which can occur (in the development of the embryo in the womb during the time of pregnancy - PL), and the ways it (the born child during his growth and development - PL) can become sick and healed.
And this is also true for human makers (who know best what damages or benefits their inventions), although they do not really create anything new, but rather merely make a new form from existing raw materials, since to create a new form from nothing is impossible to man.
And all the more so, He who has called into existence from nothing the basic elements of man, his form, his anatomy, and the order of his synthesis (of body and soul - PL). Obviously, He is the wise One who undoubtedly knows which matters benefit or harm man in this world and in the next, as written "I am the L-rd your G-d who teaches you for your benefit, who guides you in the proper path" (Isaiah 48:17), and also "G-d rebukes the ones He loves (to turn them to the proper path - TL), and like a father to a son He desires in" (Mishlei 3:12).
Three: the Creator is the strongest of all the strong. His word reigns supreme and nothing can reverse His decree, as written "Whatever G-d wants, He does" (Tehilim 135:6), and "so shall be My word that goes out from My mouth; it shall not return to Me empty, unless it has done what I desire" (Yeshaya 55:11).
Four: He watches over and directs the lives of all men, He does not abandon any of them (from bestowing good or benefiting them according to their needs - PL) nor neglects any of them (from saving them from damages - PL). None of their matters, small or great are hidden from Him, and no matter can distract Him from remembering another matter, as written: "Why should you say, O Jacob, and speak, O Israel, 'My way has been hidden from the L-ord, and my judgment (i.e. my providence - TL) is passed over from my G-d'?" (Yeshaya 40:27), and "Do you not know-if you have not heard-an everlasting G-d is the L-ord, the Creator of the ends of the world; He neither tires nor wearies; there is no fathoming His understanding (i.e. on His providence of all the creations simultaneously - TL)" (Yeshaya 40:28)....) 
Five: No created being can benefit or harm either itself or any other creature without the permission of the Creator.
If a slave has more than one master, and each one has the power to help him, it is not possible for him to put his trust in only one of them, since he hopes to benefit from each master. And if one master can benefit him more than the others, he should trust proportionally more in him, even though he also trusts in the others. And if only one of the masters can benefit him or harm him, certainly he should put his trust only on that master, since he does not hope for benefit from the other masters. Similarly, when a human being will realize that no created being can benefit him or harm him without the permission of the Creator, he will stop being afraid of them or of hoping for anything from them, and he will place his trust in the Creator alone, as written "Put not your trust in princes, nor in mortal man who has no help" (Tehilim 146:3). 
Six: That one is conscious of G-d's abundant goodness to man, and how He brought him into existence out of abundant and pure benevolence and kindness, without man being worthy of this, nor because G-d has any need for him, but only out of generosity, benevolence, and goodness, as we explained in the Gate of Examination of this book, and like King David said "Many, O L-ord my G-d, are Your wonderful works which You have done, and Your thoughts which are toward us: they cannot be reckoned up in order to You; if I would declare and speak of them, they are more than can be numbered" (Tehilim 40:5).
Seven: That one clearly realizes that all existing things in this world, whether purposeful or accidental have predetermined limits which cannot be increased or decreased from what the Creator has decreed, whether in amount, quality, time, or place. It cannot be numerous if the Creator decreed it few, nor few if the Creator decreed it numerous, nor come late if decreed to come early, nor come early if decreed to come late. And if something appears to be contrary to this, really, it was already pre-decreed with foresight, only that all decrees [are implemented through] causes and means, which in turn have causes and means. 
One who does not understand the matters of this world thinks that an immediate cause will force a change in matters, which in turn cause more changes (that present events constantly reshape the future). But really, a single cause is too weak to force a change by itself, as we see one grain of wheat can cause 300 ears of wheat to grow, which each contain 30 grains, so one grain would have produced around ten thousand grains. Can one hide the fact that one grain by itself is incapable of producing this amount? And likewise for other grains that one plants, and likewise we can say for a man or an animal from a drop of semen, or a huge fish from a tiny egg. 
To busy oneself in trying to bring early what the Creator decreed would come later, or to try to delay what was decreed to come early, or to try to make numerous what was decreed to be few or to try to diminish what was decreed to be numerous in worldly possessions, unless it causes strengthening of His service or accepting His torah, - all this is due to (1) weakness in the recognition of G-d's all-knowing understanding (of us and our needs - PL), and (2) foolishness in failing to understand the benevolent character of G-d's conducts. 
The wise man has already hinted this when he said: "everything has a time and moment under the heaven" (Koheles 3:1), and afterwards he mentions 28 matters (corresponding to the 28 lunar positions which alludes to astrological fate - TL), as he says "a time to be born, and a time to die..", until "a time for war and a time for peace", and also: "for time and fate will overtake them all" (Koheles 9:11), and then he said: "[If you see oppression of the poor, and deprivation of justice and righteousness in the province], wonder not about the matter, for the Highest over the high watches over them, and there are higher ones over them" (Koheles 5:7). (that really it is not astrological "fate", but rather G-d is guiding everything behind the scenes through chains of causes according to His desire and decrees - TL) 
The ways of judgments of the Creator are too deep, hidden and lofty for us to understand part of them, and all the more so to understand their general principles. And the verse already says: "As the heavens are higher than the earth, so are My ways higher than your ways and My thoughts [higher] than your thoughts" (Yeshaya 55:9).
(2) To know and clearly realize that the Creator is watching him, and neither one's private or public conduct is hidden from Him, nor his innermost being or outer appearance. He also knows whether a man's trust in Him is with a sincere heart or not, as the verse says "G-d knows the thoughts of the heart, that they are vain" (Tehilim 94:11) and "Does not He that tests the heart understand it?" (Mishlei 24:12), and "You alone know the hearts of all men" (Melachim I 8:39).
When this is clearly realized by the one who trusts, it is not proper for him to claim with his lips that he trusts in G-d (in the daily prayers in many places - ML), without trusting in Him in his heart and thoughts, whereby he would be in the category of he of whom the verse says "with their mouths and their lips they honor Me, but their hearts are far from Me" (Yeshaya 29:13).
(3) That a person trusts in G-d alone for the things he is obligated to trust in (the things that one should not trust in G-d will be explained later), and not to associate Him with anyone else by trusting in Him and one of the created beings because then his trust in G-d will be invalidated in that he associated someone else with G-d. You know what was said about Asa, despite all of his piety, when he relied on the doctors, as written "during his illness, he did not seek help from G-d, but only in the doctors" (Divrei HaYamim II 16:12) (i.e. he did not also pray ), and he was punished for this. And the verse says "Blessed is the man who trusts in the L-ord; the L-ord shall be his refuge" (Yirmiya 17:7).
And it is known that one who entrusts two or more men to do a task, the matter spoils. All the more so, for one who trusts in G-d and man, that his trust in G-d will be ruined (since he equated G-d with a created being, which is a great demeaning of G-d's greatness - TL). 
Furthermore, this will be the strongest factor for denying him the object of his trust, as written "cursed is the man who trusts in men,.. and turns his heart away from G-d" (Yirmiya 17:5). 
(4) That one is very careful and makes a great effort to fulfill what the Creator required of him in His service, to do his mitzvot and to guard oneself from what He has forbidden, just like he seeks that the Creator agrees to do with him in that which he trusts Him, as our sages said "make His will your will so that He will make your will His will, nullify your will to His will so that He will nullify the will of others to your will" (Avot 2:4). 
And the verse says "Trust in the L-ord and do good; so shall you dwell in the land, and verily you shall be fed" (Tehilim 37:3), and "G-d is good to those who hope in Him, to one who seeks Him" (Eicha 3:25).
But, If one trusts in G-d and rebels against Him, how foolish is he, how weak is his intellect and his understanding! For he can see in this world that if an employer appoints a man to do something or refrain from doing something and the man disobeys the instruction, this will be the strongest factor in the employer's refusing to fulfill his side of the deal. All the more so, for one who disobeys the commandments of G-d, for which G-d Himself testified that one who trusts in Him and disobeys Him will have his hopes foiled and his trust will be considered hypocritical. Rather, he will be like that of who it is written "For what is the hope of the flatterer who deceives, when G-d casts off his soul? Will G-d hear his cry when trouble comes on him?" (Iyov 27:8-9), and "Will you steal, murder, commit adultery, swear falsely, offer up to idols, and follow other gods that you know not. And will you come and stand before Me in this house, upon which My name is called, and say, 'We are saved,' in order to commit all these abominations? Has this house upon which My name is called, become a den of thieves in your eyes? I, too, behold I have seen it, says the L-ord." (Yirmiyahu 7:9-11). 
(5) A person should realize that every new thing that happens in this world after Genesis is completed in two ways:
First: By G-d's decree and His will that the matter should come into existence.
Secondly: Through intermediate causes and means - some near, some remote, some apparent, some hidden, all of which rush to bring into existence what was decreed, doing so with G-d's help.
An illustration of the causes: Consider the act of drawing up water from the depths of the earth using a wheel system to which buckets are attached and which raises the water from the well. The buckets are the near cause. The remote cause is the man who harnessed an animal to the wheel and compels the animal to move in order to raise the water from the bottom of the well to the surface of the earth.
The intermediate means between the man and the buckets are: the animal, the mechanical contraption of interconnected wheels/gears which turn each other in series, and the rope. If a mishap were to occur to any one of the causes mentioned (i.e. the intermediate means or the close cause - TL), the intended purpose for which they were designed would not be accomplished.
And so it is for other things which come to existence. They cannot be produced by a man or anyone else, but rather, through the decree of G-d, and His preparing all the means through which the thing will be produced, as written "And by Him, causes are counted" (Shmuel I 2:3), and "Who is great in counsel and mighty in carrying it out" (Yirmiyahu 32:19), and "it was a cause from G-d" (Melachim I 12:15). And if the means are blocked, none of the actions which normally bring this matter into existence will succeed. 
When we examine the need for a man to pursue means and exert himself to complete his needs, we can see with our own eyes that for one who needs food and proper food is served before him, if he does not exert himself to eat it by lifting the food to his mouth, chewing it, etc., he will not break his hunger. Likewise for someone thirsty, who needs water. And all the more so, if he has no food prepared, until he needs to exert himself through milling flour, kneading, baking, etc . And more so, if he needs to buy the food and prepare it. And even more still, if he has no money to buy them and will need even greater exertion to pursue means to earn the money or to sell the amount he needs from the objects he uses or his other possessions, or the like. There are two reasons why the Creator obligated a man to pursue means and exert himself for his livelihood and other needs. 
(1) Divine wisdom required the testing of man in the service of G-d or rebellion against Him. Therefore, G-d tests man with what demonstrates his choice in this - needs and lacking for external things such as food, drink, clothing, shelter, and sexual relations. G-d commanded man to pursue and attain them through the available means in specific ways (according to the torah - ML) and at specific times. 
What G-d has decreed that man will attain of them, man will attain fully after the completion of the prepared means.
That which has not been decreed that he will attain - he will not attain, and the necessary means will be withheld.
Through this process, his free choice of whether he served G-d or rebelled against Him will be demonstrated through his intention and choice, and the man will then deserve either reward or punishment, regardless whether or not he actually achieved his intentions.
(2) Secondly, if a man were not forced to exert himself in seeking a livelihood, he would kick (become defiant) and chase after sin, and he would ignore his debt of gratitude to G-d for His goodness to him. As written: "And the harp, and the lyre, the timbrel, and flute, and wine, are in their feasts: but they regard not the work of the L-ord, neither consider the work of His hands" (Yeshaya 5:12), and "But Yeshurun grew fat, and kicked: you are grown fat, you are grown thick, you are covered with fatness; then he forsook G-d who made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his salvation" (Devarim 32:15). And the sages said "it is good the study of torah with working for a livelihood because the toil in both removes thoughts of sin, and all torah study without work will in the end be abandoned and bring to sin" (Avot 2:2). And all the more so for one who has no share in either torah or work, nor directs his attention to any of these pursuits. 
It was out of compassion for man that G-d has compelled him to be occupied with matters of this world and the next for all of his days, and so that he does not seek that which he does not need and which he cannot understand with his limited intellect, such as matters of what was before the creation and of the final end (since these things do not further his perfection and on the contrary - they damage him - PL), as the wise man said "also the [toil of] the world He has set into their hearts, so that man should not seek the deed which G-d did, from beginning to end." (Koheles 3:11).
If a man strengthens himself in the service of G-d, resolves to fear Him, trusts in Him for his religious and secular matters, steers away from reprehensible things (such as anger or arrogance - PL), strives for the good midot (character traits), does not rebel in prosperity nor turn towards leisure, is not enticed by the evil inclination, nor seduced by the witchery of this world - the burden of exerting himself in the means to a livelihood will be removed from him, since the two reasons mentioned above no longer apply to him, namely, to test him on his choice and to protect him from rebelling during prosperity. His livelihood will come to him without strain (of the heart - PL) or toil (of the limbs - PL), according to his needs, as written "G-d will not bring hunger to the righteous" (Mishlei 10:3). 
If one asks: Behold we see some tzadikim (very righteous people) which do not receive their livelihood except after hard and strenuous toil, while many transgressors are at ease, living a good, pleasant life?
We will say: The prophets and the chasidim (extremely pious) already investigated this matter. One of them said "[Righteous are you, O L-rd, when I plead with You: yet let me talk with You of your judgments:] Why does the way of the wicked prosper? why are all they happy that deal very treacherously?" (Yirmiyahu 12:1), and another "Why do You show me iniquity and look upon mischief; and plunder and violence are before me; and the one who bears quarrel and strife endures." (Chavakuk 1:3), and "for a wicked man surrounds the righteous; therefore, justice emerges perverted." (Chavakuk 1:4), and "Why should You be silent when a wicked man swallows up one more righteous than he?" (Chavakuk 1:13), and another one said "Behold these are wicked, yet they are tranquil in the world and have increased wealth." (Tehilim 73:12), and "But for naught I cleansed my heart and bathed my hands with cleanliness" (Tehilim 73:13), and another said "And now we praise the bold transgressors, those who work wickedness are built up, they tempt G-d, and they have, nevertheless, escaped." (Malachi 3:15), and many more like this.
But the prophet refrained from giving an answer because each specific case has its own particular reason (there is no general answer which includes everything - TL). Therefore Moshe Rabeinu commented on this in the torah saying (Devarim 29:28) "the hidden things belong to G-d"..and the wise man said in connection to this "If you see the oppression of the poor, and perverting of justice and righteousness in a province, marvel not at the matter" (Koheles 5:7), and the verse says: "the Rock, His deeds are perfect for all His ways are justice" (Devarim 32:4).
Nevertheless, I saw fitting to attempt to clarify this matter that should be to some extent satisfactory (so that it won't be so difficult - TL).
The possible reasons why a tzadik is prevented from obtaining his livelihood without effort and must instead exert himself for it and be tested by it is as follows.
1. A previous sin for which it is necessary to pay him for it, as written "the tzadik will pay in the land" (Mishlei 11:31).
2. In the way of exchanging, to pay him more good in Olam Haba (the afterlife), as written "to benefit you in your end" (Devarim 8:16).
3. To demonstrate his good bearing and good acceptance of suffering in the service of G-d, so that others will learn from him, as you know from the matter of Iyov.
4. Due to the wickedness of his generation, G-d tests him with poverty, hardship, or sickness to demonstrate/contrast his piety and service of G-d unlike them, as written "Indeed, he bore our illnesses, and our pains he carried them" (Yeshaya 53:4).
5. Due to his not being sufficiently zealous in standing up for G-d, and exacting justice (i.e. protesting - TL) from men of his generation, as you know from the story of Eli and his sons, as the verse says "And it will be that everyone who is left in your house, will come to prostrate himself before him for a silver piece and a morsel of bread" (Shmuel 2:36). 
Sometimes G-d sends good to the wicked for the following reasons: 1. A previous good deed he did, to pay him in this world, as written "And He repays those He hates to their face, to destroy them" (Devarim 7:10) which Onkelos renders: "He pays those He hates for their good deeds during their lives to destroy them".
2. As a temporary deposit, until G-d gives him a righteous son who is worthy of it, as written "he prepares but the tzadik will wear it" (Iyov 27:17), and "to the sinner He has given a preoccupation to gather and to accumulate, to give to him who is good in G-d's sight" (Koheles 2:26).
3. Sometimes the money is the chief cause of his evil (in the next world) or death (in this world), as written "There is a grievous evil that I saw under the sun; riches kept by their owner for his harm." (Koheles 5:12) (such as Korach or Naval - PL).
4. Sometimes it is to give him time to repent and become worthy of it, as you know of the story of Menashe.
5. His father did good and it is fitting to benefit him in the merit of his father, as said to Yehu ben Nimshi "four generations of your descendants will sit on the throne of Israel" (Melachim II 10:30), and "He who walks innocently is righteous; fortunate are his sons after him." (Mishlei 20:7), and "I was young, and have aged, and I have not seen a righteous man forsaken nor his descendants begging bread." (Tehilim 37:25).
6. Sometimes it is to test those who are deceptive or have an evil interior. When they see the wicked prosper, they quickly stray from the service of G-d and hasten to win the favor of the wicked and to learn from their actions. In this way it will be clarified the pure men to G-d and it will be demonstrated who was faithful to G-d in bearing at a time when the wicked rule and persecute him. He will receive reward from the Creator for this, as you know of the story of Eliyahu and Isabel or Yirmiyahu and the kings of his generation. 
Since it has been clarified the obligation for a man to pursue the means for a livelihood, now we will clarify that not every man is required to pursue every possible means. The possible means are numerous.
Some occupations are easy, requiring little strain such as shop keeping or light work with the hands such as sewing, writing, contracting businesses, hiring sharecroppers or workers, supervisors.
Some occupations require hard physical labor such as tanning, mining iron or copper, smelting metals, heavy transport, constant travel to faraway places, working and plowing land, or the like,
For one who is physically strong and intellectually weak, it is fitting to choose an occupation among those that require physical exertion according to what he can bear.
He who is physically weak but intellectually strong should not seek among those which tire the body but should instead tend towards those who are light on the body and that he will be able to sustain .
Every man has a preference for a particular work or business over others. G-d has already implanted in his nature a love and fondness for it, as He implanted in a cat's nature the hunting of mice, or the falcon to hunt smaller birds, the deer to trap snakes. Some birds hunt only fish, and likewise, each animal species has a liking and desire for particular plants or animals, which G-d has implanted to be the means for its sustenance, and the structure of its body and limbs is suited for that thing. The long bill and legs of a fish catching bird, or the strong teeth and claws of the lion, horns of the ox and ram (i.e. for defense - TL), while animals whose sustenance is from plants do not have the tools to hunt and kill.
Similarly you will find among human beings character traits and body structures suited for certain businesses or activity. One who finds his nature and personality attracted to a certain occupation, and his body is suited for it, that he will be able to bear its demands - he should pursue it, and make it his means of earning a livelihood, and he should bear its pleasures and pains, and not be upset when sometimes his income is withheld, rather let him trust in G-d that He will support him all of his days.  And he should have intention when his mind and body is occupied with one of the means of earning a living to fulfill the commandment of the Creator to pursue the means of the world, such as working the land, plowing and sowing it, as written "And G-d took the man and placed him in Gan Eden to work it and to guard it" (Bereishis 2:15), and also to use other living creatures for his benefit and sustenance, and for building cities and preparing food, and to marry a woman and have relations to populate the world.
He will be rewarded for his intentions in heart and mind to serve G-d whether or not his desire is accomplished, as written "If you eat from the toil of your hands, you are praiseworthy, and it is good for you" (Tehilim 128:2), and our sages of blessed memory said "Let all your actions be for the sake of Heaven (to serve G-d)" (Avot 2:12).
In this way, his trust in G-d will be intact, undamaged by the toiling in the means to earn a livelihood, as long as his intention in heart and mind is for the sake of Heaven (to do the will of G-d that the world be populated and built up). 
One should not think that his livelihood depends on a particular means and that if these means fail, his livelihood will not come from a different means. Rather, trust in the Al-mighty, and know that all means are equal for Him. He can provide using whatever means and at any time and however He so wishes, as written "for with the L-ord there is no limitation to save with many or with few" (Shmuel I 14:6), and "But you must remember the L-ord your G-d, for it is He that gives you strength to make wealth, in order to establish His covenant which He swore to your forefathers, as it is this day." (Devarim 8:18), and "Not by might nor by power, but by My spirit, says the L-ord of Hosts." (Zecharia 4:6).

Chapter 4

The concerns for which the believer is obligated to put his trust in G-d are of two categories. (1) matters of this world, and (2), matters of Olam Haba (afterlife). And matters of this world subdivide to two divisions.
(1) matters of this world for the benefit of this world. (2) matters of this world for the benefit of the afterlife.
The matters of this world for the benefit of this world subdivide to three parts:
(1) what is beneficial for the body only.
(2) what contributes to one's maintenance or enables one to gain wealth, and various possessions. 
(3) what is beneficial for [dealing with] one's household, wife and relatives, for his friends and enemies, and for those above and below him among the various classes of people.
Matters of this world that will secure benefit in Olam Haba subdivide to two parts.
(1) duties of the heart and limbs which relate to oneself only, and whose actions do not result in benefit or damage to others.
(2) duties of the limbs which cannot be done without association with another, where one of them is active and the other is passive. For example, giving charity, acts of kindness, teaching of wisdom, instructing others to do good or to refrain from evil.
Matters of the afterlife subdivide to two parts.
(1) The reward that is deserved.
(2) That which is a special kindness which the Creator bestows to the pious and to the prophets, in Olam Haba. Therefore all things for which one trusts in the Creator fall into 7 categories:
(1) matters of the body alone.
(2) matters of one's possessions and means of earning a livelihood.
(3) matters of one's wife, children, relatives, friends, and enemies [and for those above and below him].
(4) duties of the heart and limbs which only benefit or damage oneself
(5) duties of the limbs which affect others as well, whether benefiting or harming.
(6) reward in the afterlife according to one's conduct in this world.
(7) reward in the afterlife from the Creator in the way of kindness on His treasured ones and those who love Him (i.e. to increase their reward due to their love and clinging to G-d - TL), as written "How great is Your goodness that You have hidden away for those who fear You; You have done for those who trust in You before the sons of men!" (Tehilim 31:20)
Since I have explained the fundamental introductions (in chapter 3) which make it possible for one to place his trust in the Al-mighty, it is proper for me to follow them with an explanation of the proper way of trust in each of the seven categories, through which one should trust in G-d and in something besides Him. 
For the first category, matters of the body alone, these are: his life and death, his income for obtaining food, clothing and shelter, his health and illness, his traits. The proper way of trust in the A-lmighty for all of these matters is to submit oneself to the course the Creator has decreed for him in these matters, and to place one's trust in G-d and to know that none of these matters can come to be unless it was previously determined by G-d that this would be the most proper situation for his matter in this world and in Olam Haba (the afterlife), and ultimately the greatest good for him (even if right now it appears to his eye to be not good, certainly, it is the best thing for him for his ultimate end - PL), and that the Creator has exclusive, total control over all of these matters. In none of them can any created being advise any plan, or exercise any control except through His permission, decree, and judgment. 
And just like one's life and death, health and sickness, are not in the hands of others, so too, one's livelihood, clothing and other bodily needs are also not in their control.
With clear faith that his matters are given over to the decrees of the Creator, and that the Creator's choice for him is the best choice, it is also his duty to be engaged in means which appear to be beneficial to him and to choose what seems to be the best choice under the circumstances, and the Al-mighty will do according to what He has already pre-decreed. 
An example of this: Even though a human being's end and length of his days are determined by the Creator's decree, nevertheless, it is a man's duty to pursue means to survive such as food and drink, clothing, and shelter according to his needs, and he must not leave this to the Al-mighty, and think: "if the Creator has predecreed that I will live, then my body will survive without food all the days of my life, therefore I will not trouble myself in seeking a livelihood and toiling in it".
Likewise, one should not put himself in danger while trusting on the decree of the Creator [that he will live a set time], drinking poisonous drink or going to battle lions or other dangerous animals without necessity, or to cast himself into the sea or into fire, or other similar things that a man is not sure of them and puts his life in danger. And the verse has already warned us in saying "You shall not try the L-ord, your G-d" (Devarim 6:16), because either one of two things will happen. 
Either he will die, and it will be considered as if he killed himself, and he will be held accountable for this just as if he had killed another man, despite that his death in this fashion was a decree of the Al-mighty and occurred with His permission. 
And we have already been commanded not to murder another human being in any form from the verse "do not murder" (shmot 20:13). And the closer the murdered is to the murderer, the more the punishment should be severe, as written "on pursuing his brother with a sword, corrupting his mercy" (Amos 1:11). And similarly the punishment for one who kills himself will undoubtedly be very great.
This is like a slave whose master commanded him to guard a place for a fixed time, and warned him not to leave the place until his messenger will come. When the slave saw that the messenger was late in coming, he abandoned his post, and the master became furious at him and punished him severely. Similarly, one who causes his own death (by doing dangerous things) moves out of the service of G-d and into rebellion against Him, by putting himself in mortal danger.
This is why you will find Shmuel say (to G-d) "And Shmuel said, "How shall I go? For, if Saul hears, he will kill me." And the L-ord said, "You shall take a heifer with you, and you shall say, 'I have come to slaughter (a sacrifice) to the L-ord.'" (Shmuel I 16:2). And this was not considered a lack of trust in the Al-mighty, and the answer from G-d to him shows that his zeal in this was appropriate (since G-d does not do public miracles without great necessity - TL), and He answered him "You shall take a heifer with you, and you shall say, 'I have come to bring an offering to the L-ord.'" (Shmuel I 16:2), and if this were considered a lack of trust G-d would have answered him "I cause death and grant life. I strike, and I heal" (Devarim 32:39), or something similar, as He answered Moshe when Moshe claimed "But I am slow of speech and slow of tongue" (Shmos 4:10), answering him "Who has made a man's mouth? Who makes a man mute or deaf, seeing or blind". And if Shmuel, with his perfect righteousness did not find it a light matter to put himself to a slight risk of danger, and even though he would be doing so by the command of G-d, as He commanded him "Fill your horn with oil, and go, I shall send you to Jesse, the Bethlehemite, for I have seen for Myself a king among his sons" (Shmuel I 16:1), all the more so for someone not commanded by G-d, that this would be considered reprehensible. 
(The second possibility) is that he will be saved by G-d's help. Then his merits will be annulled and he will lose his reward, as our sages said on this matter (Shabbat 32a): "a man should never put himself in danger thinking that a miracle will be performed for him, because maybe no miracle will be done for him, and even if a miracle is done for him, his merits are reduced". And Yaakov our forefather said "I am not worthy from all Your kindnesses" (Bereishis 32:11), to which the targum explains: "my merits have diminished due to all of Your favors and kindnesses."
What we have explained for matters of life and death, also applies to the duty to pursue means for health, food, clothing, shelter, good habits and distancing from their opposite - (to engage in them) while firmly believing that the means to these things do not help at all in attaining them, without the decree of the Creator. Then, when a farmer must plow his field, clear it from weeds, and to sow it, and water it, when rainwater is not available, let him trust in the Creator to make it fertile, and to protect it from plagues, to increase and to bless the crops. And it is not proper to leave the land unworked and unsowed and to trust G-d and rely on His decree that it will grow fruit without being sown first. 
And likewise workers, merchants, and contractors are under a duty to pursue their livelihood while trusting in G-d that their livelihood is in His hands and under His control, that He guarantees to provide a man (as the verse "who gives sustenance to all flesh" - PL) and fully provides for him through whatever means He wishes. One should not think that the means can benefit or harm him in the least.
If one's livelihood comes through one of the means he worked on, it is proper for him not to trust in this source, rejoice in it, intensify in it, and turn his heart to it, because this will weaken his trust in the Al-mighty. It is improper to think that this source will be more beneficial to him than what was predecreed from the Creator. He should not rejoice for having pursued and engaged in it. Rather, he should thank the Creator who provided for him after his labor, and that He did not make his work and struggle result in nothing, as written "If you eat the toil of your hands, you are praiseworthy, and it is good for you" (Tehilim 128:2).
A pious man once said: "I am amazed of he who gives to another what the Creator decreed for the latter, and afterwards reminds the latter of the favor he did for him, and seeks to be thanked for this. And I am even more amazed by one who receives his livelihood from another who is forced to provide for him and then submits himself before him, pleases him and praises him." 
If one's livelihood fails to come through the means he has worked on, it is possible that the money allocated to him for the day has already reached his hands (and that he doesn't realize it - PL) or that it will come through other means.
However the case, it is proper for him to engage in the means of earning a livelihood and not to be lax in pursuing after them, provided they are suited to his traits and physical abilities, as I previously explained. And all the while, he should trust in G-d, that He will not abandon him (in providing his needs - PL), neglect him (regarding his physical health - PL), or ignore him (in whatever trouble befalls him - PL) as written "The L-ord is good, a stronghold on a day of trouble and knows (Rashi - the needs of) those who trust in Him" (Nachum 1:7).
Similarly, we will say regarding health and sickness. A man is placed under a duty to trust in the Creator in this, while working on maintaining his health according to the means whose nature promotes this, and to fight sickness according to the customary ways, as the Creator commanded "and he shall surely heal him" (shmos 21:19). All of this, without trusting in the means of health or illness that they could help or hurt without the permission of the Creator.
And when one puts his trust in the Creator, He will heal him with or without a means, as written "He sends His word and heals them" (Tehilim 107:20). 
It is even possible that He will heal him through something that is normally very harmful, as you know from the story of Elisha and the bad water, that he healed their damaging properties with salt (Melachim II 2:19), and similarly "And G-d showed him a tree and he tossed it into the waters [and the waters became sweet]" (Shmos 15:25), And the midrash tanchuma there explains that this was a bitter, oleander tree. Another example, "let him smear crushed figs on the boils, and he will heal" (Yeshaya 38:21) (and figs normally damage even healthy flesh - PL). And you already know of what happened to the pious king Asa when he trusted in the doctors, and removed his trust in G-d regarding his illness, the sharp rebuke he received for this (i.e. because he did not pray to be healed). And the verse says: "For He brings pain and binds it; He wounds, and His hands heal." (Iyov 5:18).
For the second category, the matters of man's possessions, means of financial gain in his various pursuits, whether in commerce, skilled trades, peddling, business management, official appointments, property rentals, banking, work of kings, treasurers, contracting, writing work, other types of work, going to faraway deserts and seas, and other similar things, from what people toil in to amass money, and increase the superfluous. The proper way of trust in the Al-mighty for this is to engage in the means which G-d has made available to him to the extent necessary for his maintenance and sufficient for his needs of this world (i.e. his minimum necessary needs only - TL).
And if the Creator will decree for him more than this, it will come to him without trouble or exertion, provided he trusts in the Al-mighty for it and does not excessively pursue the means nor inwardly trust in them in his heart.
And if the Creator has not decreed for him more than his sustenance, even if all those in heaven and earth were to try to increase it, they would not be capable by any way nor by any means. And when one trusts in G-d, he will find peace of mind and tranquility of spirit, confident that G-d will not give over his portion to someone else, nor send it to him earlier or later than the time He decreed for it. 
Sometimes the Creator directs the livelihood of many men through one man. This is in order to test that man whether he will serve G-d or rebel against Him. And G-d will place this to be among the man's most difficult tests and sources of temptation. For example, a king who provides for his army and servants, or princes, ministers of the king, important officials, all of who are surrounded with groups of their servants, attendants, officers, wives, and relatives. They exert themselves to obtain money for those dependents through all types of means, regardless whether they are good or bad means. 
And the foolish among them will err on three fronts.
(1) In acquiring money, he will use bad and degrading means to take what the Creator has decreed he will take. And if he had sought after his wealth with proper means, he would have reached his desire, and both his religious and secular affairs would have succeeded, and he would not have received any less from what the Creator had decreed for him.
(2) He thinks that all the money that reaches him is for his own support. He does not understand that the money consists of three parts: one part, for the food he needs for his own body alone, and this is something G-d assures to all living creatures to the end of its days. The second part, for the food of others, such as his wife, children, servants, employees, and the like. This (extra money) is not assured by G-d to all people (that his business will prosper to the extent that his wife and children won't themselves need to engage in some means - PL), but rather only to a select few, and under special conditions, and this opportunity presents itself at certain times but not at others, according to the rulings of the Creator's system of kindness and justice. Third, money to hold on to. This is money which has no benefit for the man. The man guards it and accumulates it until he bequeaths it to another or that he loses it. The foolish person thinks that all the money decreed for him by the Creator is for his own sustenance and physical maintenance, and so he eagerly pursues it and exerts much effort to acquire it; and it is possible that he is amassing wealth for his widow's next husband, his stepson, or for his greatest enemy.
(3) The third error is that he provides money to those (dependents) as the Creator decreed this would happen through him, but he reminds them of his favors as if he were the one who provided for them and did them a kindness, and he expects them to thank and praise him richly, and that they serve him due to them, and he becomes arrogant, haughty, and inflated of heart. He neglects to thank G-d for them (that G-d appointed him as a means to bestow good on others whereby he would be an agent for this and receive reward for it - TL). He thinks that if he did not give this money to them, it would remain by him, and that if he did not provide for them they would not have any money. But really, he is the poor man, who will toil for nothing in this world and will lose his reward in the next world. 
The wise man, however, conducts himself in these three ways according to what will be proper for his religious and secular pursuits. 
And his trust in what is in G-d's hands is greater than his trust in what is in his own hands because he does not know if the money in his hand is meant for his own benefit or is merely placed in his care. And thus he will gain honor in this world and receive rich reward in Olam Haba (afterlife), as written in the psalm (112) "Haleluy-a praiseworthy is the man who fears G-d.." until the end of it.
There are some classes of people who busy themselves in acquiring money and amassing wealth only for the love of being honored by other people, and to make a name for themselves, and no amount of money is ever enough for them. This is due to their ignorance of what will bring real honor in this world and in the next. The reason they make this error is because they see the masses honoring the wealthy, but really, this honor is motivated by a desire for what they possess and to try to get some of what is in their hands. 
If the masses reflected and understood that the wealthy do not have the capability nor the power either to give or to hold back to someone except to whom the Creator decreed, they would not hope to anyone besides G-d. 
Nor would they find anyone worthy of honor except for he who the Creator has distinguished with praiseworthy qualities, for which he is worthy of the Creator's honor, as written "Those who honor Me, I will honor" (Shmuel I 2:30). 
And because the masses, in honoring the wealthy, were foolish in the causes of real honor, the Creator added to their foolishness in the causes of their requests [for money] (that they constantly seek to become rich - TL). And so they fell into great effort and tremendous toiling all of their days, while they abandoned that which is their duty to busy themselves with and to which they should hasten, namely, fulfilling their duties to the Creator, and to thank Him for the good He bestows on them, whereby their desire (for honor - TL) would have undoubtedly been closer to them in this way, as written "long life is in its right, in its left wealth and honor" (Mishlei 3:16), and "wealth and honor is from You" (Divrei Hayamim 29:12).
There exists among those who seek wealth, one who reaches all his heart's desire through the means we mentioned (commerce, skilled trade, etc), to another it came through an inheritance or the like, and he thinks it is due to the means, and without them, he would not have received anything, and he praises the means and not their Cause (i.e. the Creator who orchestrates all the means - PL).
How similar is he to a man in the desert, thirst weighing on him, who finds unclean water in a pit, and becomes full of joy. He quenches his thirst from them. And afterwards, he moves a bit further, and finds a well of pure water. He regrets on what he did previously, of drinking and quenching his thirst from the unpure water. 
Similarly, for the man who became wealthy through a certain means. If this means would have failed, he would have attained it through other means, as we explained earlier and as the verse says: "nothing can prevent G-d from saving, whether through many or through few" (Shmuel I 14:6). 
And the proper way for one who trusts in G-d, when his livelihood is withheld for some day is to say in one's heart: "He who took me out (from the womb) to this world at a fixed time and moment, and did not take me out to it earlier or later, He is the One who is withholding my livelihood for a fixed time and a fixed day, because He knows what is good for me."
Likewise, when one's livelihood comes very exactly, no more than the amount for basic food, it is proper for one to reflect in his heart and tell himself: "He who prepared my sustenance at my mother's breast, in my beginning, according to my need, and what was sufficient for me day by day, until He replaced it for me with something better, and (the milk's) coming exactly did not damage me at all, so too I will not be damaged now at all, by His sending me my food in the limited, exact amount, until the end of my days. 
He will be rewarded for this, as the Creator told our ancestors in the (Sinai) desert, whose matter was in this way: "The people shall go out each day and gather what they need for the day" (Shemos 16:4), and "go and call out to the ears of Jerusalem and say 'I remember for you the kindness of your youth, the love of your betrothal, when you followed Me in the wilderness, in a land that was not sown' " (Yirmiyahu 2:2). 
Likewise, if one's livelihood comes through one means but not through any other means (that he would have preferred - PL), or in one place and not in any other place, or through one person and not through any other person, let one say in his heart: "He who created me in a certain form, shape, characteristics, and measure and not through any other, for my purpose and benefit, He has chosen that my livelihood come through ways suitable to my purpose and benefit, and not through any other ways." And, "He who brought me into this world at a fixed time, and through two specific people, and not through other people of the world, He has chosen for me my livelihood from a specific place and through a specific person, He made him the means to my livelihood for my benefit", as written "G-d is righteous in all His ways" (Tehilim 145:17).
The explanation of the third category, matters of one's wife, children, household members, relatives, friends, enemies, acquaintances, those higher or lower than him among the various classes of people, the proper ways of trust in G-d is as follows. A man is necessarily in either one of two situations: either he is a stranger or he is among his family and relatives. If he is a stranger, let his companionship be with G-d during his time of loneliness, and trust in Him during his period of being a stranger. And let him contemplate that the soul is also a stranger in this world, and that all people are like strangers here, as the verse says "because you are strangers and temporary residents with Me" (Vayikra 25:23). And let him reflect in his heart that all those who have relatives here, in a short time, will be left a solitary stranger. Neither relative nor son will be able to help him, and none of them will be with him. (see Gate 8 ch.3 way #30 for more on this - Translator) 
And afterwards, let him consider that as a stranger, he is freed from the heavy burden of maintaining relatives and fulfilling his duties towards them. He should consider this to be one of the kindnesses of the Creator towards him, because if he needed to pursue a livelihood for providing his material needs, his exertion would be lighter without a wife and children, and their absence is peace of mind for him and it is good. And if he is concerned about his interests in the next world, his mind will undoubtedly be clearer and freer when he is alone.
And therefore the ascetics would leave their relatives and homes and go to the mountains, in order to focus their hearts in the service of G-d. Likewise, the prophets, during the era of prophecy, would leave their homes and live in solitude to fulfill their duties to the Creator, as you know from the story of Eliyahu's meeting with Elisha, which it is said of Elisha "twelve pairs of oxen were before him, and he was with the twelfth" (Melachim I 19:19). And as soon as Eliyahu hinted to him a small hint (to come with him), he understood him and said "Let me, please, kiss my father and my mother, and I will go with you", and afterwards, "and he went after Eliyahu and ministered to him". 
It is said about one of the ascetics, who traveled to a country to teach its inhabitants the service of G-d. He found them all dressed in the same manner and adorned in the same way. Their graves were near their homes, and he did not see among them any women. He asked them about this and they answered him: "the reason we are all dressed alike is so that there's no noticeable difference between a rich man and a poor man, and the rich man will not come to arrogance for his wealth, and the poor man will not be embarrassed of his poverty, and so that our matter above the earth should be in our eyes like our matter below the earth (i.e. in the grave where everyone is dressed the same way - TL). It is said of one of the kings that he would mix with his servants, and there was no noticeable difference between him and them, because he would conduct himself in the way of humility in his dress and adornments. 
As to the reason why the graves of our dead are near our homes, they said, this is so that we encounter them and prepare ourselves for our deaths, and that we prepare our provisions for the afterlife. As to your noticing that we separated ourselves from women and children, know that we prepared for them a village near here. When one of us needs something from them, he goes to them and after obtaining his wants, returns to us. This we did because we saw how much distraction of the heart, great loss, and great exertion and strain there was when they were among us, and the great peace of mind from all of this, in separating from them, to focus on matters of the afterlife and to be repulsed by matters of this world. And their words found favor in the eyes of the ascetic, and he blessed them and commended them on their matters. 
If the one who trusts in G-d has a wife, relatives, friends, enemies, let him trust in G-d to be saved from them. 
He should strive to fulfill his duties to them (provide their necessities - PL), to do their wishes (to also provide them with a bit more than the necessities like the nature of the world - PL), to be wholehearted with them (to provide their needs willingly not like one forced to do so - PL). He should refrain from causing any harm to them, try to promote what is good for them. He should deal faithfully towards them in all matters, and teach them the ways that will be beneficial for them in their religious matters and the secular ways [which will benefit them] in the service of the Creator, as written (Vayikra 19:18) "you shall love your neighbor as yourself..", and "do not hate your brother in your heart" (ibid). Do not do this out of hope for future benefits from them or to pay them back for past benefits. Nor should you do this out of love of being honored or praised by them, or out of desire to rule over them - but rather with the sole motive to fulfill the commandment of the Creator, and to guard His covenant and precepts over them. (i.e. to see to it that they guard the covenant of G-d and His commandments - TL)
The person, whose motive in fulfilling their wishes is one of the [reprehensible] motives we mentioned above, will not obtain what he wants from them in this world. He will tire himself for nothing, and will lose his reward in the afterlife (since his intent was not l'shem shamayim - PL). But if his sole motive is to serve G-d, the Al-mighty will help them to make a return to him in this world, and G-d will place his praise in their mouths and they will hold him in high esteem, and he will reach the great reward in Olam Haba (afterlife), as the Al-mighty said to Shlomo "also what you did not ask, I will give you, also wealth and honor" (Melachim 3:13). 
But the ways of trust in G-d in dealing with those above him or below him in the various classes of men is as follows. The proper way to act when one needs to request some benefit of someone above or below him is to trust in G-d, and to consider them as means of obtaining what he needs, just like one makes the working and sowing of the land a means of obtaining his food. If G-d wishes to support him through it, He will make the seeds sprout, grow, and multiply, and one does not thank the land for this, but rather, he thanks the Creator alone. And if the Al-mighty will not desire to supply him through it, the land will not produce, or it will produce but be struck by damaging things, and one does not blame the land.
So too, when he seeks something from one of them, it should be equal in his eyes whether the person he asked is weak or strong, and he should trust in G-d for its completion. 
And if it was completed through one of them, let him thank the Creator who fulfilled his desire, and thank the person through whom it was done, for his good will towards him, and that the Creator brought his benefit through him, and it is known that the Creator does not bring good except through the tzadikim (righteous), and it is rare that He brings a loss through them, as the sages said "merit occurs through the meritorious and guilt through the guilty" (Bava Basra 119b), and the verse "No wrong shall be caused for the righteous" (Mishlei 12:21 - Rashi "No sin will chance before him inadvertently"). 
And if his request is not accomplished through them, one should not blame them, and not consider it due to their being lax in it, rather he should thank the Al-mighty who chose what is best for him in this, and praise them according to his knowledge of their efforts to fulfill his will, even though the matter was not completed according to his and their desire. Similarly, one should act with his acquaintances and friends, his business associates, employees and partners. 
If someone higher or lower than himself requests from him to do something for them, he should wholeheartedly use every means to do it, and apply his mind to do the matter, provided one is capable of doing it and that the person who requested it is worthy that he exerts himself on his behalf (but if the person is wicked, refrain from it as he wrote in the end of gate #3 - ML). And after this, he should trust in the Al-mighty for its completion. If G-d completes it through him, and makes him the cause for benefiting another, he should thank G-d for this privilege. If G-d withholds this from him, and he is not capable of doing it, he should not blame himself, and he should inform the person that he was not lax in doing it, provided that he indeed exerted himself to do it. But for one's enemies, those jealous of him, those who seek to harm him, he should trust in G-d regarding their matters. He should bear their contempt, and should not treat them back in the same way.
Rather he should pay them back with kindness, and to try to benefit them as much as he possibly can, and to remember in his heart that only G-d has the ability to benefit or harm him. 
If his enemy becomes a means to harm him, he should judge them favorably and suspect that it is due to himself or his past deeds from his bad start in life towards G-d. He should plead to the Al-mighty and seek from Him to atone for his sins, and then his enemies will become his friends, as the wise man said "when G-d is pleased with a man's way, even his enemies will make peace with him" (Mishlei 16:7).
The explanation of the fourth category, matters of duties of the heart and of the limbs which only benefit or harm oneself, for example, fasting, praying, dwelling in a sukka, taking a lulav, wearing tzitzis, observing the sabbath and the holidays, refraining from sins. This category also includes all of the duties of the heart since their performance does not affect others, and whose benefit or harm is limited only to oneself and is not shared by others. The proper way of trust in the Al-mighty in all of these, I will explain, and I ask the Al-mighty to teach me the truth, in His mercy. 
Any human action which is either service [of G-d] or sin can only take place if three factors occur. (1) the choice in heart and mind (i.e. a thought that it is fitting to do this thing - ML). (2) The intent and resolve to do what one chose. (3) The endeavoring to complete the act with one's physical limbs and to bring it into actuality.
[Of these three factors,] two are not beyond our control, namely, (1) the choice of service or sin and (2) intent and resolve to carry out the choice. For these, trusting in G-d would be a mistake and a foolishness, because the Creator left free choice in our hands whether to serve Him or rebel against Him, as written "...[life and death I have set before you] and you shall choose life" (Devarim 30:19). 
But the bringing out of the act into actuality, He did not leave in our hands, but rather, made it depend on external means which sometimes are available and sometimes are not. 
If in choosing to serve the Al-mighty, one would trust in Him and think to himself: "I will not choose the service of G-d nor attempt to do any part of it until He chooses what is good for me of it" - he has already strayed from the straight path, and slipped his feet away from the proper way, because the Creator has already commanded us to choose in matters of His service, and to intend and make efforts towards it, with complete, wholehearted resolve for the sake of His great Name, and He has informed us that this is the proper way for our welfare in this world and in the next. 
If the necessary means are available to us, so that we are capable of accomplishing the work in G-d's service which we chose to do, then we will receive the great reward for choosing it, for the intent and resolve to do it, and for completing the actions by our physical limbs. But if its accomplishment with the physical limbs is withheld from us, then we will receive reward for our choice and intent to do it, as we previously explained (in ch.3), and similarly for punishment of sins. 
The difference between the service of G-d and secular activities in this world, regarding trust in G-d, is as follows. For secular matters, it was not revealed to us which one of all the means is best and most beneficial for us nor the ways in which some course is more harmful and worse than other courses. We do not know which particular trade is best suited for us and most fitting for us in obtaining money, preserving health, and for general well-being. Nor do we know which business sector, which journey to undertake, or which other worldly endeavors will be successful if we engage in them.
Therefore, it follows that we must put our trust in the Al-mighty that He will help us choose and carry out what is the best choice for us, provided that we apply ourselves (in the means which are fitting to attain this thing - PL) and that we plead to Him to arouse in our hearts to make the good and proper choice for ourselves. (then after these two things we can have in our hearts the trust mentioned - PL) 
But the service of G-d is not like this, because G-d has already taught us the proper ways for it, commanded us to choose it, and gave us the ability to do it. If we then plead to Him in the choice we should make, and trust in Him that He will reveal to us what is good for us, we will be mistaken in our words (of prayer) and foolish in our trust, because He already taught us the proper way which will be good for us in this world and in the next, as written "G-d has commanded us to fulfill all of these statutes, to fear the L-ord, our G-d, for our good, all of our days". And regarding the reward in Olam Haba "we will be rewarded, if we are careful to observe" (Devarim 6:25).
Furthermore, in secular matters, sometimes a good means changes to become a bad means and vice versa, while for service of G-d and transgression it is not so, matters of good and evil do not switch positions and never change. 
Hence, for religious acts, trust in G-d is proper only in the completion stage of the act. After choosing it wholeheartedly and faithfully and after the second stage of resolving and making efforts to do it with a pure heart , and with intent to do it for the sake of His great Name. With this, we are obligated to beseech Him to help us in it, and to teach us on it, as written "lead me in Your truth and teach me" (Tehilim 25:5), and "lead me in the path of Your commandments for I desired it" (Tehilim 119:35), and "I have chosen the way of truth, I have placed Your ordinances before me" (Tehilim 119:30), and "I have clung to Your testimonies; O L-ord; put me not to shame" (Tehilim 119:31), and "And take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth; for I have hoped in Your judgments" (Tehilim 119:43). 
All these verses demonstrate that the psalmist's service of G-d was his own choice. He prayed to G-d for two things only:
(1) To wholly devote his heart and to strengthen his choice in the service of G-d by distancing the distractions of the world from his heart and eyes, as he said "unite my heart to fear Your Name" (ibid 86:11) and "uncover my eyes that I may gaze at the wonders of Your torah" (Tehilim 119:18), "turn away my eyes from beholding vanity" (ibid, 119:37), "incline my heart towards Your torah and not to unjust gain" (ibid, 119:36), and many more.
(2) To strengthen him physically to be able to complete the acts of service of G-d. This is what is meant "lead me in the path of Your commandments" (119:35), "support me and I will be saved" (119:117), and many more like this. And I will explain in this gate which factors help and harm these things, and the proper path in it, with G-d's help. 
The fifth category, physical duties which affect others whether beneficially or harmfully, such as giving charity, maaser (tithes), teaching wisdom, commanding others to do good, warning them against evil, returning loans on faith, keeping a secret, speaking well of others, good activities, honoring parents, bringing the wicked back to G-d, instructing/advising others what will be good for them, pitying the poor and treating them with mercy, patiently bearing their contempt when arousing them to the service G-d, inspiring them to hope for the reward [in doing good], and instilling in them fear of punishment [for doing bad].
The proper way of trust in G-d for these, is for one to keep in mind all these and similar acts, resolve and make efforts to practice them, according to what we previously explained in the fourth category, regarding the duty when choosing (in these things -PL) to have the sole intent of drawing near to G-d alone; not for acquiring a name or honor among human beings, nor out of hope to receive reward from them, nor to try to rule over them. And afterwards having done his utmost - to trust in G-d in the completion of the acts which he undertook, according to what G-d wants from us (that we do His will, accordingly He will help us to complete what we undertook - ML).
In all of this, one should be careful to hide his deeds as much as possible from those who do not need to know. Because if it is kept hidden, the reward will be greater than if it becomes known. And that which he is unable to hide, let him remember the important general principle which we explained, namely, that neither benefit nor harm can come from the created things, except by permission of the Creator. 
When the Creator completes a mitzvah (commandment) through him (that G-d benefits another person through him - PL), he should consider that this is a favor bestowed on him from the Creator. He should not rejoice if other people praise him for doing it, nor desire that they honor him for it, since this will bring him to become proud in his actions, and his purity of heart and motive towards G-d will be ruined, thereby his deeds will be spoiled and his reward for it will be lost. I will explain this later on in its proper Gate (in #6 the gate of submission - PL) with G-d's help. 
The explanation of the sixth category, regarding the reward in this world and the next which one merits for his good deeds in this world, is divided into two parts. (1) Reward in this world only. (2) Reward in the next world only. Sometimes one merits reward in both worlds for one act.
This was not explained to us clearly, however the Creator guaranteed to His people a general reward for general good behavior, but He did not specify the details of reward in this world for each act of service like He did regarding the punishments in this world for transgressions. For example, He specified which offences warrant capital punishment by stoning (i.e. falling from a height), burning, decapitation, or strangulation, or 40 lashes, death (through G-d's providence), premature death (karet), monetary fines - two, four or five fold, monetary damages by ox, pit, tooth, fire, damaging a man, embarrassing by seizing, slander, and other offences. But regarding the reward and punishment in the afterlife, the prophet [Moshe] did not explain anything for several reasons.
One of these is that the semblance of the soul without the body is foreign to us, and even less known is what the soul in that state would take pleasure in or suffer from. However, this was explained to one who understood such things, as G-d spoke to Yehoshua (the high priest) (who G-d granted special understanding into divine matters - PL) "I will give you a place to walk among these (angels) that stand" (Zecharia 3:7), and this was not referring to when the soul is joined to the body, but rather was a hint to what would happen after death, where the soul, in its simple, ethereal state, divested from and no longer using the body, resumes the form of the angels, after it had been purified and made radiant when its deeds were good in this world. 
Another reason is that the explanation of reward and punishment in the next world was received by the people from the prophets, and can be derived by the wise (in every generation, in addition to the transmitted tradition - PL), and it was left out of books as much of the explanation of the positive and negative commandments were left out, relying on the transmission from the oral tradition. 
Another reason is that the people were foolish and of little understanding (when they left Egypt) something which is not hard to see in the verses.
The Creator conducted Himself with them like a father who has mercy on his young son, when he wants to discipline him slowly and gently (so as not to overload him, so too the Creator did not want to inform them of the punishments in the afterlife which are very harsh - PL), as written "Yisrael is a child, and I loved him" (Hoshea 11:1). When a father wants to educate his young son in the wisdom with which he will attain exalted levels, and the youth is not capable of understanding them at that time, if he tries to induce him, saying "bear the hard discipline and the learning, in order that you later reach the great levels", the son would not have the patience to bear this, and would not listen to his father, because he does not understand them.
But if the father promised him with what is pleasurable right away, whether food and drink, fine clothing and a nice wagon, or the like, and warned him [that if he did not heed he would suffer] what will cause him immediate pain such as hunger, nakedness, spankings or the like, and gave him clear proofs and tangible evidence, so as to impress these promises and warnings in his son's mind and the truth of his statements, it will be easy for the son to bear the strain of the discipline and to endure its tedious work.
And when he becomes a young man and his intellect strengthens, he will understand the intent of the discipline he was put through (the exalted levels - PL) and turn towards them. He will think little of the sweetness of pleasures which he had earlier been so eager to run towards. This kind of education was a kindness toward him. (i.e. this conduct to motivate him initially through sweet things, etc. as before, was due to the father's mercy on him - PL) 
Similarly, the Creator encouraged his people with promises of rewards and threatened them with punishments that would come soon [i.e. in this world - PL] because He knew that after they would be strongly established in the service, their foolishness regarding reward and punishment here on earth would shed (i.e. that which they served primarily for reward in this world [would shed] - PL) and their intent in the service would be to Him, and they would direct their conduct for Him. And in this way, we can explain all of the physical forms ascribed to the Creator in scripture. 
Another reason, is that a man does not become worthy of the reward of Olam Haba (the next world) due to his good deeds alone (since the reward is infinitely great - TL). Rather he is deemed by G-d worthy of it due to two things besides his good deeds. (1) That he teaches other people the service of G-d, and guides them to do good, as written "they who bring merit to the public shall be as the stars forever" (Daniel 12:3). And also, "to them that rebuke shall be delight, and on them will come the blessing of the good" (Mishlei 24:25). And when the industrious man will combine the reward for those who he brought merit, with the reward for his own good deeds, and the reward for the faith in his heart and patient acceptance [of G-d's will] - he will be deemed by the Creator worthy of the reward of Olam Haba. (i.e. if he also brings merit to others in addition to his own piety, then certainly he is worthy of the reward, as written: "to them that rebuke shall be delight" - ML) 
(2) The second factor is a kindness from the Al-mighty, and generosity and goodness, as written "to You, G-d, is kindness, for You pay a man according to his deeds" (Tehilim 62:13) (i.e. even if one has only his own good deeds [and did not bring others to the good], G-d will bestow on him good reward in Olam Haba - TL).
The reason for this, is that even if a man's good deeds are numerous like the sand of the seashore, it would not weigh enough to cover even one favor the Creator had bestowed on him in this world. All the more so, if he has committed any sins, because if the Creator will hold a man strictly to account for his obligation of gratitude, all of his good deeds would be cancelled and wiped out by even the smallest favor the Creator has done for him, and that which the Creator owes him will not amount to anything. Hence, that which the Creator rewards a person for his good deeds is to be regarded as a Divine grace to him. 
The punishment in both worlds, however, is through truth and justice, and it is a debt a man must pay. Yet here too the Creator's loving-kindness is extended to us in both worlds, as written "to You, G-d, belongs loving-kindness" (Tehilim 62:13), and "the compassionate One will atone for sin, and will not destroy" (Tehilim 78:38). 
Another reason, is that good deeds are of two categories. (1) Those concealed from others, and visible only to the Creator, like the duties of the heart, and other similar duties.
(2) Those visible in the limbs and not concealed from other creatures.
For the fulfillment of the visible duties of the limbs, the Creator rewards with visible reward of this world. While for fulfillment of concealed duties, He rewards with hidden reward, namely, in Olam Haba. Therefore, King David, spoke of this with words which hint to this matter, as written "how great is Your goodness which You hid away for those that fear You; [which you have done for them that take refuge in You before the sons of men]" (Tehilim 31:20). And likewise, the way of punishments for hidden and revealed misdeeds, is similar to the way of reward.  
The proof for this view is as follows. G-d has guaranteed to His people that for their visible service, He would give them visible and swift reward in this world. This is explained in parsha Bechukosai "If you will go in My ways.." (Vayikra 26), and likewise, for visible sins, visible and swift punishment in this world, because the masses understand only that which is visible not that which is hidden, as written: "the hidden things belong to G-d, but the revealed things belong to us and to our children, forever" (Devarim 29:28). And the verse says "if the people will turn their eyes away from the [evil] acts of this man and his family, I will turn My face to this man and his family" (Vayikra 20:4). Hence, the reward and punishment for the fulfillment or transgression of the duties of the heart belongs to the Creator. Therefore, Scripture omitted an explanation of their reward and punishment in the next world. (see Tov Halevanon for more details)
Another reason why rewards and punishments mentioned in scripture are limited to those in this world only is because the prophet is addressing worldly people. On the other hand, since Yehoshua (kohen gadol) was in the mystical world of angels (i.e. his soul was divested of his body at that time and was in the spiritual world - PL), G-d told him, "I will give you a place to walk among these (angels) that stand" (Zecharia 3:7). The proper way of motivating with hope and fear should be in accord with the time and place. Understand this. 
Another reason is that the purpose of reward in Olam Haba is essentially clinging to G-d, and drawing near to His supernal light, as written "your righteousness will go before you, the glory of G-d will gather you in" (Yeshaya 58:8), and "the wise will shine like the radiance of the firmament" (Daniel 12:3), and also, "To bring back his soul from the pit (i.e. Gehinom see below Tov Halevanon), to be enlightened with the light of the living" (Iyov 33:30). And no one can reach there except he who the Creator finds favor in, and the favor of the Creator is the root of the reward, as written "his anger is but a moment, in His favor is life" (Tehilim 30:6). And there are hints in parsha bechukosai that pleasing the Al-mighty [is the greatest reward], this is what is written "My soul will not abhor you" (Vayikra 26:11), and "I will turn to you and be unto you a G-d and you will be unto Me a people" (ibid, 26:9). 
Trusting in G-d regarding the reward in this world and in the next, which He promised to the righteous man for his service, namely, that He will pay reward to one who is fitting for it, and mete out punishment to one who deserves it, is incumbent on the believer, and is an essential part of perfect faith in G-d, as written, "and he believed G-d, and it was counted to him as a righteousness" (Bereishis 15:6), and "had I not believed to see the goodness of G-d in the land of the living" (Tehilim 27:13). 
It is not proper for one to trust in his own good deeds, and assure himself that he will receive reward in this world and the next due to his good deeds. Rather, he should strive and exert himself [to do good] and make efforts to thank G-d and be grateful for His constant kindnesses to him, and not be motivated by hope of future reward for his deeds. Rather he should trust in G-d and try his best to pay his debt of gratitude for His great favors towards him, as our sages have said "Do not be like servants who serve their master on condition of receiving reward, rather be like servants who serve their master without the condition of receiving reward, and let the fear of Heaven be upon you" (Avos 1:3) 
One of the pious said "if one takes strict account of what he is obligated to the Creator for His kindness to him, no man would ever be worthy of the reward of Olam Haba for his deeds. Rather it is only as a kindness of the Al-mighty, therefore do not trust in your deeds." And King David said of this "to You, G-d, is kindness, for You pay a man according to his deeds" (Tehilim 62:13) (i.e. even the paying of a man for his deeds is only a kindness).
The seventh category - trust in regard to G-d's special grace to His elect and treasured ones on whom many favors which are indescribable will be bestowed upon in Olam Haba. The proper way of trust in G-d is as follows: To exert oneself in the means which bring one to the high levels of the pious who are worthy of this special grace from G-d. This entails conducting oneself in the ways of the ascetics who loath worldly pleasures, and to uproot from one's heart the love of them and desire for them and replace these with the love of the Creator, and to devote oneself to Him, to delight in Him, to be desolate/astonished from the world and its inhabitants (see commentary), and to follow the ways of the prophets and the pious, and to trust that the Al-mighty will show him favor as He will do with them in the afterlife. 
But one who trusts that G-d will thus favor him without the means of performing good deeds is a fool and a simpleton. He is like those of whom it is said "they act like Zimri and expect the reward of Pinchas" (Sota 22b). Some signs of those who have reached this high level are those who: (1) teach servants of G-d on the service (due to the love of G-d in all their being, they cannot hold themselves back from remaining silent on the falling short in the service of G-d in other people - TL), (2) demonstrating patient bearing and accepting in times of trial and difficulty, (3) regarding everything else as insignificant compared with the fulfillment of the commandments of G-d, as we see by the test of Avraham (Bereishis 22:1), or of Chananya, Mishael, and Azarya who were thrown in the fiery furnace (Daniel 3:13), or Daniel who was thrown in the lion's den (Daniel 6:13), or the 10 martyrs.
Whoever chooses to die in the service of G-d, rather than rebel against Him, whoever chooses poverty rather than riches, sickness rather than health, suffering rather than tranquility, submits to the Creator's judgment, and desires in His decrees - such a person is worthy of the Divine grace of the Creator in the bliss of Olam Haba, of which it is written "That I may cause those that love Me to inherit substance; and I will fill their treasures" (Mishlei 8:21), and "no eye has ever seen, O G-d, beside You, what He has prepared for him that waits for Him" (Yeshaya 64:3), and "How great is Your goodness that You have hidden away for those who fear You" (Tehilim 31:20). 

Chapter 5

The differences between one who trusts in G-d and one who does not with regard to employing the means for earning a livelihood, I say, are seven: 
(1) One who trusts G-d accepts His judgment in all his matters, and thanks Him for good as well as for bad, as written "G-d gave, G-d took back, blessed be His Name" (Iyov 1:21), and as written "of kindness and of judgment I will sing to You" (Tehilim 101:1), which the sages explained "if kindness, I will sing, if justice I will sing" (Berachos 60b) (Rashi: when You bestow kindness upon me, I will praise you [with the blessing:] "Blessed be He Who is good and does good", and when You perform judgment upon me, I will sing, "Blessed be the true Judge." In either case, to You, O Lord, I shall sing), and they also said: "a man is under duty to bless G-d on the bad (with joy - ML) just like he blesses on the good" (Berachos 54a).
But one who does not trust in the Al-mighty boasts on the good (saying "it is due to my might and ingenuity, etc" - PL) as written "For the wicked boasts of his heart's desire" (Tehilim 10:3), and he becomes angry on the bad as written "And the one who passes therein shall suffer hardships and hunger, and it shall come to pass,] that when he shall be hungry, he shall be enraged, and curse his king and his [idolatrous] god, and he will turn to Heaven" (Yeshaya 8:21). 
(2) One who trusts in the Al-mighty has tranquility of spirit and a heart at ease regarding bad decrees, knowing that the Creator will arrange them for what is his good in this world and the next, as King David said "my soul, wait you only on G-d; for my expectation is from Him" (Tehilim 62:6). But one who does not trust in G-d, even when he is prosperous, is always pained and in a state of continual anxiety. He is saddened and grieving, because he is little satisfied with his situation, and yearns to augment, increase, and hoard in. And likewise in bad times because he is disgusted by it, and it is contrary to his desires, nature and traits. So too, the wise man said "all the days of the poor are evil" (Mishlei 15:15) 
(3) One who trusts in G-d, even while he is engaging in the means for earning a livelihood, his heart will not rely on them, and he will not hope to receive profit or loss from them unless it is the will of G-d. Rather, he engages in them as part of his service of G-d who commanded us to occupy ourselves with the world, to maintain it and make it more habitable. If these means will yield him profit or help him avoid a loss, he will thank G-d alone for this, and he will not love and cherish the means more for this, nor will he rely more on them on account of this. Rather, his trust in G-d will be strengthened, and he will come to rely on Him and not the means. And if the means do not yield any benefit, he knows that his livelihood will come to him when G-d wants, and through whatever way He wants. Therefore, he will not reject the means because of this, nor abandon employing them, and thus he will serve his Creator (as above - TL). 
But one who does not trust in G-d, engages in certain means because he places his trust in them, confident that they will yield him a profit and protect him against a loss. If they yield a profit, he will praise them and himself for his exertion in them and choosing of them, and he will not try other means. But if they do not yield him a profit, he will abandon them and reject them, and lose interest in them, as written "Therefore he sacrifices to his net (through which he succeeded in his actions - TL), and he burns incense to his trawl, for through them he lives in luxury and enjoys the choicest food" (Chavakuk 1:16). 
(4) One who trusts in G-d, if he has more money than he needs, he will spend it in a way which pleases the Creator (charity, etc.) with a generous spirit and a good heart, as written "everything is Yours, and from Your hand we have given to You" (Divrei Hayamim I 29:14). (since he knows and understands that everything is from G-d, and he is giving G-d of His money, certainly he will give with a generous spirit and a good heart - PL)
But one who does not trust in G-d, does not regard the entire world and everything in it as enough for his maintenance and sufficient for his needs. He is more concerned with saving his money than fulfilling his obligations to the Creator and to his fellow men, and he won't feel anything (of the causes which will suddenly strike his money - PL), until all of his money is lost and he is left destitute, as the wise man said: "There is one that scatters, and yet increases; and there is one that withholds more than is right, but it leads to poverty" (Mishlei 11:24).
(5) One who trusts in G-d engages in a means of livelihood, in order to also prepare provisions for his end, and needs for his appointed home (in the afterlife). Only a means of livelihood which is clear to him that it is safe for fulfilling his torah study and fulfilling his religious service will he engage in it. But a livelihood which will bring any loss of torah observance or mislead him to rebel against G-d, he will not engage in, so as not to bring on himself spiritual sickness instead of healing. 
But one who does not trust in the Al-mighty, trusts in the means, and relies on them, and he won't refrain himself from empploying any of them. He will engage in good means as well as bad means (i.e. those permitted to him as well as those forbidden to him - TL), and he won't think about his final end, as the wise man said, "the wise man fears and avoids evil" (mishlei 14:16). 
(6) The one who trusts in G-d is beloved by all classes of people, and they feel at ease with him, because they feel secure that he will not harm them, and their hearts are at peace with regard to him. They are not afraid of him that he will take their wives or their money (etc, as in the tenth commandment, do not covet your fellow's wife, etc - PL), and he also is not worried about them because he realizes that it is not in any created being's power or control to benefit or harm him. Therefore, he does not fear harm from them nor expects any benefit from them. And since he is assured from them and they are assured from him, he will love them and they will love him, as written "he who trusts in G-d will be surrounded by kindness" (Tehilim 32:10).
But he who does not trust in G-d, has no [true] friend, because he is always coveting others, and jealous of them, and he thinks that any good that reaches others is a loss to him (as if it was in his hand and left from him to them - PL), and that their livelihood is taken from his own, and (1) any preventing of attaining his desires is caused by them, and that (2) others are capable of helping him to obtain his desires, and (3) if some harm comes to his money or his children, he will think they caused it, and (4) that they are capable of removing the harm and problems from him, and since his thinking is based on these principles he will [come to] despise them, slander them, curse them, and hate them. And he is the disgusting one in both worlds, regarded as a disgrace in both abodes as written "a crooked heart will not find good" (Mishlei 17:20). 
(7) The one who trusts in G-d will not mourn if his requests are denied, or if he loses something he loves, and he will not hoard possessions nor be troubled by more than his day's needs (see below commentaries). He does not worry about what will be tomorrow since he does not know when his end will come. He therefore trusts in G-d to prolong his days, and provide his sustenance and needs during this time. He neither rejoices nor grieves about the future (i.e. he does not rejoice in hoping for a future good which is coming up and likewise, he does not grieve or worry on any future bad thing coming up - PL), as written "do not delight in tomorrow because you don't know what today could bring" (Mishlei 27:1), and Ben Sira said "do not anguish about the troubles of tomorrow because one doesn't know what today could bring, perhaps tomorrow he will be no more (i.e. perhaps you will not live to see tomorrow - ML), and he had anguished on a world that is not his" (Sanhedrin 100b). Rather, his worry and mourning is on his lackings in the fulfillment of his obligations to G-d, and he tries to make up as much as he can of them, of his external (actions - PL) and internal duties (of the heart - PL), because he thinks of his death and the arrival of the day of ingathering, and the fear that death may come suddenly increases his efforts and zeal to prepare provisions for his end, and he won't be concerned about preparing for this world, and this is what was said "repent one day before your death" (Avos 2:10). They explained on this (Shabbat 153a): "repent today, perhaps you will die tomorrow, therefore let all your days be in repentance, as written 'at all times let your clothing be clean' " (Koheles 9:8). 
But one who does not trust in G-d, mourns greatly the constant troubles of the world that befall him, that his wishes and the things he loves are taken away or denied from him (he worries constantly that these things will be lacking to him - TL). He tries to amass much wealth of this world, as if he were assured from passing on (that his situation passes from this world to the next - TL), and the fear of death has left him, as if his days are unlimited and his life will never end. He does not consider his end, occupied only with this world, unconcerned about his religious matters, making no provisions for the hereafter, and his eternal abode. His trust in prolonging his days in this world is a cause for his perpetual desire for his worldly affairs and for his little desire in matters of his final end. 
When the preacher rebukes him or the teacher instructs him saying "how long will you avoid thinking about preparing provisions for your final journey and for matters of your eternal abode?" 
He will answer "when I will have enough money for my needs and for the needs of my wife and children until the end of our days. Then I will have peace of mind from my worries of this world, and I will take time to pay my debts to the Creator, and will think about preparing provisions for my final end."

Chapter 6

I saw proper to expose the foolishness and error in this way of thinking in 7 ways. I will reveal the greatness of their mistake, and if our words prolong, this is because there is much to shame and rebuke proponents of this outlook. 
They are a class of "security pledge seekers", similar in their practice to merchants who sell goods on credit to someone he does not trust, and will demand a security pledge at the time of sale, because he minimally trusts his client or fears the client will not be able to pay him.
(1) The first of the possible ways to answer him: we tell him "You, the man who doubts the decree of the Creator, and doubts His [Almighty] power, you whose light of intellect has obscured, whose candle of understanding has extinguished due to being overwhelmed by the darkness of material desires. You deem proper to seek a security pledge from a client who has no dominion over you, and cannot give you orders, however, for a worker who seeks to be hired by an employer, it is not proper for him to seek a security pledge of his wages before he starts to work. All the more so, it is not proper for a slave to seek a security pledge of his food from his master before working for Him, and even more so, for a created being to seek a pledge from his Creator before fulfillment of the service he owes Him!
It is a wonder! For a slave to undertake service to his master with a precondition that the master pay him a wage after his service is completed would be regarded as a disgrace (since the owner boards, lodges, and clothes him and provides for all his needs - Rabbi Hyamson zt'l), as the sages said "be not like servants who serve their master on condition to receive reward, but rather like servants who serve their master even without condition of receiving reward" (Avos 1:3). And how much more so if he were so brazen as to demand a pledge for his maintenance from his master before he even starts work. On similar to this it is written "Is this how you repay the L-ord, you disgraceful, unwise people?! [Is He not your Father that has acquired you? has He not made you, and established you?]" (Devarim 32:6). 
(2) One who takes a security pledge from a client receives a definite amount and his request is limited. But for the proponent of this thinking, there is no end to what he seeks, because he does not know how much money will suffice for his and his family's needs and luxuries for the rest of their lives, and even if he obtained money many times his needs, he would not be at peace, because the time of their end is hidden, and the number of their days is not known, and he is foolish in what he seeks because there is no end by him and no measure. 
(3) One who takes a security pledge from his fellow, only does so if there are no previous debts that he owes the fellow, and the fellow has no claims against him, only then is he justified to request a pledge. But if he has outstanding debts to the fellow, and knows the fellow has legitimate claims against him, he has no business whatsoever in seeking a pledge, and it is not proper for him to accept it even if the fellow volunteered the pledge.
All the more so, for the Creator who has such legitimate claims on man, so that if the service of all human beings who ever lived could be accumulated and credited to a single man, their total would not be sufficient return to cover the debt of gratitude that a man owes for even one of the benefits the Creator bestowed on him (such as bringing him to existence from nothingness). 
And how can this brazen faced person not be ashamed to ask from the Creator big favors on top of previous favors thereby increasing his debt to Him. (the man seeks from G-d more favors, and that they be bigger than the favors He bestowed on him until now - PL) And maybe he will not even be able to fulfill the service that he says he will do (after he acquires wealth) because his days will have passed and his end will have come. 
One of the pious would say to people: "Gentlemen, is it conceivable that the Creator would demand payment today for debts that are not due until tomorrow? And likewise, would He demand payment today for debts that are not due until next year, or many years from now?" 
They answered him, "How is it possible to claim from us payment of future debts when we don't even know if we will be living at the time when the debt is incurred? Rather, we are only bound to perform a definite service for a definite time and when the future comes, we will perform the service that is due then."
He would answer them: "So too, the Creator guarantees for you for every definite period its needed livelihood, and in return for this, you are indebted a great service (in that time period - PL). Just like He does not demand from you the special service before its appointed time, so too you should feel ashamed to ask for income before the time for it has arrived. Why do I see you seeking from Him income for several years in the future when you don't even know if you will live to reach those days. Furthermore, you ask Him to provide you with maintenance for a wife and children which you don't even have yet. You are not satisfied with the livelihood provided in the present and you seek to prepare money for needs and luxuries for future times that you are uncertain to reach and that are not assured to you. And, not only do you not render to Him service for the benefits you will receive in the future, but you don't even make an accounting with yourselves for the service to Him which you neglected to do in the past during which G-d has not neglected to provide for your livelihood in full."
(4) One who takes a security pledge from his fellow does so for one of three reasons: One, maybe the fellow will become poor and won't be able to pay him. Two, maybe the fellow will close his hand [refuse to pay] and he may be unable to collect payment from him. Three, in case the fellow dies or won't be found. The security pledge is like a medicine against these ailments that occur between people (i.e. if he takes a pledge he is immune from these ailments and worries - TL). But if men were assured of each other against these three mishaps, it would certainly be disgraceful to demand a security pledge. And the Creator for whom these three mishaps do not apply, how much more so is it a great disgrace to demand a security pledge from Him. And scripture already says "silver and gold is Mine" (Chagai 2:8), and "wealth and honor belong to You" (Divrei Hayamim 29:12). 
(5) One who obtains a security pledge from his fellow will be at peace with his pledge because he expects to collect from it and to derive benefit from it or its monetary value. But one who thinks that if the Creator will advance him future provisions he will have peace of mind regarding affairs of this world - his thinking is false and mistaken, because he cannot be sure the money will remain by him. It is possible that he will be struck by some mishap that parts him from the money, as written "in mid-life he will lose it" (Yirmiyahu 17:11).
And as for the claim that he will have peace of mind when he amasses wealth - this demonstrates falsehood and foolishness on his part. On the contrary this may well be the very cause that will cause him much mental pressure and anxiety as our sages said "more possessions, more worries" (Avos 2:7).
(6) If one who takes a security pledge from his fellow were certain that the fellow would pay him before the due time, and would out of pure kindness compensate him with an amount twice as much as was due for his waiting time, he would not seek a security pledge under any circumstances. Now, the blessed Creator, of who it is known to us of His benevolent conduct towards us, and of His great past and present favors to us, and that He rewards acts of righteousness and service with reward that we cannot even imagine, as written "no eye had ever seen, O G-d, besides Yours, what He has prepared for those who wait (trust and hope - TL) to Him" (Yeshaya 64:3), certainly it is a great disgrace to ask for a security pledge. 
(7) One who takes a security pledge from his fellow, is only justified in doing so if he is able to supply him with the merchandise purchased for which he takes the pledge. But one who seeks a security pledge from the Creator, in seeking advance favors, is not capable of paying for them in services. He is not even certain of paying back what he owes from past debts, all the more so for paying what he owes for future favors, because the righteous man cannot pay back the debts of gratitude of the Al-mighty on him except through the means of help which G-d renders him. And so, one of the pious in his praises of G-d said: "Even the thinking person who has knowledge of You, does not praise his own religious acts, but rather praises Your Name and mercy, for You have prepared his heart to know You. Through You (Your help - ML) the people of Israel will be found worthy and be praised saying: "We praised [ourselves] with G-d all day long, and we will forever thank Your name" (Tehilim 44:9). 

Chapter 7

Since we have completed in this gate, to the best of our ability, a fitting amount of discussion on the themes of trust, it is now proper to clarify the things detrimental to trust in the Al-mighty. I say that the detrimental things mentioned in the 3 preceding gates of this book are all likewise detrimental to trust [in G-d]. 
Additional things which cause a loss of trust:
(1) Ignorance with regard to the Creator, and His good attributes, because one who does not realize the Creator's mercy towards His creations, His guidance, providence and rule over them, and that they are bound by His chains, under His total control - he will not be at peace (from mishaps - PL) and will not rely on Him (for providing his needs - PL). 
(2) Another, ignorance of the Creator's commandments, namely His torah, where He instructed us in it to rely on Him and trust in Him, as written "test Me in this..." (Malachi 3:10), and "trust in G-d forever" (Yeshaya 26:4). 
Another detriment to trust is to tend to rely on the means which one can see, without realizing that the nearer the causes are to the one affected by them, the less ability they have to help or harm him, and the further [up] they are, the stronger and the more power it has to help or harm him.
As an illustration, when a king decides to punish one of his servants, he commands his prime minister to take care of it, and the prime minister orders his chief of police, and the chief of police orders his sergeant, and the sergeant orders his officer, and the officer orders the policeman, and the policeman inflicts the punishment with the instruments (whip, stick, etc. ) he has.
The instruments have the least capability of all of them to reduce or increase his suffering because they have no will of their own. The policeman has greater capability than the instruments (to reduce the number of whippings - PL). Likewise, the officer has greater capability than the policeman, and the sergeant than the officer, and the chief of police than the sergeant, and the prime minister than the chief of police, and the king more than all of them, because if he wants, he can pardon the man (from everything - TL).
As you can see, the weakness and strength of the agents to affect the person are according to their remoteness from him or nearness to him. And the exalted Creator, who is the First Cause and infinitely remote from those affected by Him, is the One who it is proper to trust and rely on because of His infinite power to help or harm, as we explained. 
The general principle in the matter of trust is that the degree of trust among those who trust in G-d increases according to the amount of knowledge of G-d, faith in His protection of them, and in His abundant providence to promote what is for their good. 
(1) An infant, at the beginning of his existence, trusts in his mother's breast, as written "For You drew me from the womb; You made me trust on my mother's breasts" (Tehilim 22:10). (2) When his perception strengthens, his trust moves to his mother, due to the great care she gives him, as written "I swear that I calmed and quieted my soul like a weaned child with his mother" (Tehilim 131:2). (3) When his understanding grows more, and he observes that his mother depends on his father, he moves his trust to his father due to the greater degree of protection he receives from him. (4) When his body strengthens, and it becomes possible for him to earn for himself a livelihood through work or business, or the like, he moves his trust to his strength and resourcefulness, due to his ignorance that all the good that came before this was through the providence of G-d. 
It is said of one of the pious, whose neighbor was a swift scribe and would earn his livelihood through his scribal skills. One day he inquired to the scribe: "how are things?" He answered "good, as long as my hand is still in good shape." Then, that evening his hand was crushed, and he could not write with it for the rest of his life. This was his punishment from G-d, in that he placed his trust in his hand. (to atone for him. Note that he must have been at a very high level of piety, therefore G-d paid him in this world even for minute sins so as to spare him from any punishments in the next world) 
(5) If his livelihood comes through one of his fellow human beings, he will transfer his trust to them and rely on them. 
(6) But when his wisdom grows and he realizes their lacking and their need for the Creator, he will then move his trust to G-d, and rely on Him for things beyond his own control and which he cannot escape submitting to the decree of G-d, such as the falling of rainwater on the crops, or (safely) traveling through the sea, or crossing a barren desert, floods, outbreak of a plague among the living, or the like among matters which human beings have no plan whatsoever, as written "In the time of their trouble they will cry out: 'arise and save us' " (Yirmiyahu 2:27).
(7) If his knowledge of G-d strengthens more, he will put his trust in G-d in matters where he has some plan, such as avoiding earning a livelihood through dangerous means or exhausting occupations that wear down the body, and trusts in G-d that He will provide for him through a lighter occupation.
(8) If his knowledge of G-d strengthens more, he will put his trust in G-d in all the means, whether difficult or easy, and while occupied in them, his intent will be directed to serve G-d and guard His commandments. 
(9) If his knowledge of G-d strengthens more regarding His mercy on the created beings, he will accept with heart and mind, outwardly and inwardly, the decrees of G-d. He will rejoice in whatever G-d does to him, be it death or life, poverty or wealth, health or sickness. He will not desire other than what G-d has chosen for him, and desire only what G-d has chosen for him. 
He will give himself over to G-d, and surrender his body and soul over to His judgment. He will not prefer one matter over another and will not choose anything other than his current situation, as one who trusts in G-d said "I never resolved to do a thing and desired something else". 
(10) When his knowledge of G-d strengthens more than this and he understands the true intent why he was created and brought to this fleeting world, and he recognizes the exaltedness of the eternal, next world, he will think lightly of this world, and its means. With mind, soul, and body, he will flee from this world and surrender himself to the blessed Al-mighty, and delight in remembering Him in solitude. He will feel desolate when he is not (capable of - MC) meditating on His greatness. 
If he is among a crowd of people, he will long for nothing else than to do His will, and yearn only to come near to Him. His joy in his love of G-d will distract him from the pleasures worldly people have for this world, and even from the joy of souls in the next world. 
This is the highest of the levels of those who trust in G-d, reached by the prophets, pious ones, and treasured, pure men of G-d, and this is what the verse refers to in saying "Even [for] the way of Your judgments, O L-ord, have we hoped for You; for Your Name and for Your remembrance is the desire of [our] soul directed." (Yeshaya 26:8), and "my soul thirsts to the Al-mighty, the living G-d; [when shall I come and appear before G-d?]" (Tehilim 42:3).
These are the ten levels of trust which one cannot escape belonging to one of them. We find the matter of trust in scripture expressed in 10 synonyms corresponding to these 10 levels. They are:
Mivtach (trust), Mishan (support), Tikva (hope), Machse (protection), Tochelet (waiting), Chikui (expecting), Semicha (reliance), Sever (resting), Misad (confidence), and Chesel (assurance). 
May G-d place us among those who trust in Him, who give themselves over to His judgment outwardly and inwardly, in His mercy, Amen.
The Gate of trust is Complete, to G-d the last and the first.

Fifth Treatise on Devotion

Introduction

Since the topic of our preceding discussion was placing one's trust in G-d, I deemed proper to follow with a clarification of the ways in which it is incumbent to devote all actions of religious service to G-d alone. For this leads to purification of thought and heart from mixtures of other intents which diminish the quality of the actions, and saves one from all sorts of embellishment and flattery to try to win the approval of other people, as Elihu said "I will show partiality to no one, nor will I flatter any man" (Iyov 32:21).
It is now proper to clarify six matters on the subject of devotion of actions to G-d:
1. What is devotion of actions to G-d?
2. What leads to it?
3. On which actions is devotion a duty?
4. Which things damage devotion?
5. Ways to distance from them until one can successfully devote all actions to G-d
6. To guard, protect and rule over one's thoughts





Chapter 1

What is devotion of actions to G-d? It is the intent in all revealed or hidden acts in the service of G-d, to do them for His Name. To attain His favor only and not to do them to win the favor of other people.


Chapter 2

How can one come to devote all of his actions to G-d alone? Through ten matters.
When they are established in a man's heart, and he clarifies for himself that they are the pillars of his service and the roots of his actions, he will be able to fully devote his actions to G-d, and he will not turn nor hope to anyone else, nor have any other intent in them other than to do His will.
(1) To believe with a complete heart, the unity of G-d, as I explained in the beginning of this book.
(2) Reflecting on the constant favors of G-d on oneself, as we explained (gate 2).
(3) To take on oneself the duty to serve G-d, as mentioned (gate 3).
(4) to realize the duty to place one's trust in G-d [alone] and not in the created beings.
(5) To realize that help or harm is not in the hands of any created being without the permission of the Creator.
(6) That it be equal to oneself whether people praise or scorn him.
(7) To abandon trying to embellish oneself to others.
(8) To turn the heart away from worldly interests when occupied with matters of the next world.
(9) To fear G-d and feel embarrassed from Him.
(10) Whenever the yetzer (evil inclination, lower self) stirs an urge in one's heart, to take counsel from the intellect and follow it, and not to follow the yetzer.

Chapter 3

The deeds that are perfected by devoting them to G-d alone while performing them are the acts of service whereby one hopes to find favor with G-d. These deeds are all the visible mitzvot (commandments) of the physical limbs. For it is possible to perform them without intent for G-d, such as to do them in order to appear important in the eyes of others, or to hope for their honor and praise.
But for the duties of the heart, there can be no hypocrisy, nor expectation of honor, respect, or praise on account of fulfilling them since other people cannot look into one's heart. Therefore one's intent in fulfilling them is automatically only to the Watcher, namely, the blessed Creator alone, as written "I, the L-rd, search the heart, examine the reins.." (Yirmiya 17:10), and "the hidden things belong to the L-rd our G-d" (Devarim 29:28).

Chapter 4

Three things damage one's devoting his act of service to G-d alone:
(1) Ignorance of G-d and His good.
(2) Ignorance of G-d's mitzvot and His torah.
(3) Thoughts and suggestions the yetzer presents a man to endear to him this world and distance him from the path that leads to [his good in] the next world.
Explanation of the above three: Ignorance of G-d causes lacking in the service because one who does not know his master will not serve him devotedly. Rather, he will only serve someone who he is familiar with and which he expects benefit or harm from.
Hence, if one who does not know G-d does an act of service, his intent will be to people that he is afraid of or that he hopes to get some benefit from. Therefore, he is serving people not He who created them, because he is ignorant of G-d's matter. Similarly we can say for the idol worshipper, that ignorance of G-d is what brings him to this.
However, the idol worshipper is to be preferred over the flatterer (hypocrite) in the following four ways:
(1) In our times, there are no prophets which can perform miracles to clarify to the idol worshipper his faulty outlook. But the flatterer in G-d's torah, there are grounds for a claim against him. For he undertook the commandments to serve G-d alone and undertook the prohibitions not to serve someone else (than G-d).
(2) The idolater worships something which does not rebel against G-d . But the flatterer in G-d's torah worships a human being who rebels against G-d as well as one who does not rebel against Him.
(3) The idolater worships one thing alone, whereas for the flatterer, there is no limit to those he worships.
(4) The idolater's status is visible for all to see, and people guard themselves from him due to public knowledge of his denial of G-d's existence. But the flatterer's denial is not visible, and people trust in him. Therefore, he is more likely to damage them than the idol worshipper.
It comes out that the flatterer is the greatest disease in the world. He is called in our writings, the flatterer, the haughty, the enticer.
One who does not understand the commandments of G-d and His torah is not capable of devoting his acts wholly to G-d. For as he does not know the ways of service prescribed and their roots in the torah, much less will he understand how to perform them properly, namely, with wholehearted devotion to G-d. Because he is not sure whether he is in truth under duty to perform them. Nor does he know what is detrimental to wholehearted devotion in his service of G-d, even if he is knowledgeable of G-d and of His goodness, as our Sages said "an ignorant man cannot be pious" (Avot 2:5).
TEMPTATION OF THE YETZER HARA<br>The temptations of the yetzer (evil inclination) divide into two categories:
(1) Thoughts which cast doubt on truths and confuse his emuna (faith), so that he cannot do any religious act properly to G-d.
(2) He comes in the way of arguments and proofs that his zeal and exertion in the service of G-d is neither a duty nor meritorious, and advises him to instead work for this world and its inhabitants.

Chapter 5

INTRODUCTION TO THE YETZER HARA<br>I saw fit to clarify for you in this subject some examples which will teach [even] on things I do not mention in order that people will watch out for them, and so that their hearts will be complete with G-d. As the wise man said: <i>"Let the wise man hear and increase understanding"</i> (Mishlei 1:5).
O Man! You should know that the great archenemy you have in this world is your own yetzer (evil inclination). He is interwoven in the forces of your soul and intertwined in the order of your spirit. He associates with you in the guidance of your physical and spiritual senses. He rules over the secrets of your soul and of what is hidden in your breast. He is your advisor in all of your movements whether visible or invisible that you wish to do. He lies in wait, watching your steps to lead you astray. You are asleep to him but he is awake to you. You look away from him but he does not look away from you. He masks himself as your friend, and pretends to show love. He enters in your inner circle of close friends and advisors. From his gestures and signs it appears he is running to do your will but in fact he is shooting deadly arrows at you to kill and uproot you from the land of the living, as the verse speaks of one like this "like a madman who throws firebrands, arrows, and death; so is a man who deceives his friend and says, 'Am I not joking?'" (Mishlei 26:18).
Among the strongest of his weapons which he will fire at you and wage war with you in your innermost being - is to try to cast doubt on things you deem to be true, and to confuse what is clear to you, and to confuse your mind with false thoughts and erroneous arguments, and to draw you away from what is for your benefit, and to cause you to doubt what is clear to you in your faith and religion.
If you will guard yourself from him, and have ready the weapons of your intellect to wage war with him, and deflect his arrows away from you, you will be saved and will escape from him with G-d's help. But if you leave your matters to him, and you are drawn after his will, he will not let up on you until he destroys you from both worlds, and uproots you from both lands, as written of one member of his legions: "For many are the dead that she has felled, and numerous are all her victims; Her house is the way to hell, going down to the chambers of death" (Mishlei 7:26-27).
Therefore, let no other war distract you from his war, no battlefield from his battlefield, no sword of a distant enemy from the sword of the enemy which is at close quarters and inseparable from you. Let not the effort to repel the enemy who will not approach you without permission (of G-d) prevent you from repelling the enemy who approaches you without [needing] permission, since he exists within you.
It is said of a pious man who met some men returning from a war against enemies, and they brought spoils after a raging battle. He said to them: "you returned from the small war with spoils, now prepare for the big war!" They asked: "which big war?" He answered: "the war of the yetzer and his legions".
It is a wonder, my brother, that for any enemy that one has, if one defeats him once or twice, he will back down from you and not consider waging war again, thinking your strength is greater than his, and he abandons thoughts of defeating you and overpowering you.
But the yetzer, is not satisfied with one battle or even a hundred battles, whether he has defeated you or you have defeated him. Because if he defeats you, he will slay you, and if you defeat him, he will lie in wait all of your days to defeat you, as our Sages said "do not believe in yourself until the day of your death" (Avot 2:4). He does not consider the smallest of the smallest of your matters as too insignificant a means of defeating you, in order that he will gain a step to defeat you on a higher matter.
Therefore, it is proper for you to be on your guard against him. Do not fulfill the slightest of his requests. Rather, let it be big in your eyes the smallest of the smallest victory over him, or the least increase of your power over him, so that you will gain a step for defeating him on higher ground. For his lust [to destroy] you will soon return, but he will not be capable of standing up to you when you stand firm against him as written: "he will desire in you, but you will rule over him" (Gen.4:7).
Therefore do not panic at his word despite his mighty armies, and do not fear him on account of his many helpers, because his primary intent is to make the false appear true, and his goal is to establish lies (as truth). How near is his downfall, how swift is his destruction, if you will realize his weakness! And as the wise man describes him: "there was a small city with few inhabitants, and a great king came and surrounded it, he built high towers (to conquer it), but a poor wise man from the city defeated him with his wisdom but no one remembered that poor man" (Koheles 9:14).
The analogy is as follows: a man is the "small city", because man is called a "miniature world", the man's limbs and organs, and the traits of the [lower] soul are the "few inhabitants". Because they are small relative to the greatness of his heart's continuous desires for the lusts of this world, and lack of ability to attain them. The yetzer is the "great king", due to his possession of many tactics, soldiers, and legions. Then he "surrounds it", because he encompasses all matters of a man, whether public or private. Then he "built high towers", which refers to the many bad urges, bad thoughts, and disgraceful incidents which he strives to slay a man with, as we will explain later in this gate, with G-d's help.
And the "poor wise man" refers to the intellect, "poor", since its men and helpers are few as the verse continues "no man remembered this poor man...and the wisdom of the poor man was despised".
Despite [the man's] weakness, the text tells further of the yetzer's eager lust to wage war with a man, and how its power to injure him was easily removed because a little truth defeats much falsehood, just as a little light dispels much darkness.
From this analogy, there is to stir a person to wage war against the taavot (base desires), and to stand up to the yetzer with diligent exertion. Because we have seen that the yetzer is too weak to stand up against the Understanding, and how quickly he falls before it, as written "the evil ones bow before the good" (Mishlei 14:19).
THE ENTICEMENTS OF THE YETZER<br><i>1 - NO LIFE AFTER DEATH</i><br>The first matter the yetzer will try to cast doubt in your mind, and will try to convince you is that the soul cannot exist without a body, and that the soul perishes along with the body, and has no existence after the death of the body. He uses imaginative arguments, which don't hold if a man contemplates them, and the purpose of this is to induce you to pursue the temporary pleasures, and fleeting desires, and so that you adopt the outlook of the group of men which the verse describes "let us feast and drink because tomorrow we will die" (Yeshaya 22:13). If you take counsel with your understanding on this, you will distance from this outlook with clear proofs which the early ones already brought and which are mentioned in the words of the prophets.
<i>2 - NO G-D</i><br>When the yetzer abandons hope of casting doubts in your mind on this, he will attempt to cast doubt on the [existence of the] blessed Creator. He will tell you that the world is neither new nor created. It was never different from what it is now nor will it ever be any different, and there is no existence which is more fitting to be a creator than a created (being), and no one is under duty to serve anything since everything is ancient and has existed eternally.
If he comes to you with this claim, return to your understanding and it will show you the fallacy of this claim from the discussion of the first gate of this book, and prove to you that this world has a Creator who created it from nothing.
<i>3 - FALSE GODS</i><br>When he gives up trying to make you doubt these matters, he will try to confuse you with matters of associating G-d, such as the beliefs of the dual gods, or the three god belief of the Christians, or the naturalists, or the beliefs of the foolish worshippers of the stars, according to their various views. When it will be clear to you that the Creator is one and eternal, according to the introductions of the beginning of this book, all of these doubts will leave you.
<i>4 - YOUR RELIGIOUS SERVICE IS POINTLESS</i><br>When he gives up trying to mislead you in these matters, he will try to entice you regarding the duty to serve the Creator, saying "the service from the servant to the master is only when the master needs it. Since the Creator does not need His creations, and does not lack anything, therefore your service to G-d has no reason and no purpose. But when you examine with your understanding, in the previous Gate of Reflection, regarding the beneficence of G-d towards us, and in the "Gate of the Obligation to assume the service of G-d" due to this, then this doubt will disappear, and you will obligate yourself in the service of G-d.
<i>5 - TORAH'S AUTHENTICITY</i><br>When he gives up trying to entice you in these ways, he will try to cast doubt on the matter of prophecy and the prophets, the torah and the principles of its authenticity and necessity.
But if you stand up against him with your intellect, and fight him using the argument from the third gate of this book, all of these doubts will disappear from your heart. The fact of prophecy, the necessity of the torah and the sending of a prophet, and the ways in which the torah stirs [a person's heart to serve his Creator - PL] will be established as truths.
<i>6 - ORAL LAW IS NOT ESSENTIAL</i><br>When he gives up on this matter, he will try to cast doubt on the Tradition. He will tell you that what reason obligates and what the written torah obligates are both true, but what the Sages said is not essential and its acceptance is not obligatory.
But if you examine with your understanding, you will see that the rational laws as well as the scriptural laws are both greatly in need of the tradition. Because not one of them can be fulfilled completely without the tradition. For rational laws: without the boundaries and explanations of the oral torah regarding amount, kind, time, place, and other circumstances, it is impossible to derive the laws from logic alone. Similarly for scriptural laws, without an explanation from the oral torah on how to read it properly, the meaning of the words, its explanation and that of its derivatives, it will not be completely understandable from the verses alone. Therefore our Sages taught "with 13 attributes the torah is expounded.." (Beraita of Rabbi Yishmael) and "the tradition is a boundary to the torah" (Avot 3:13).
Furthermore, the torah itself, refers us to the tradition for its details as written "If a matter eludes you in judgment,..then you shall rise and go up to the place the L-rd, your G-d, has chosen; And you shall come to the Kohanim, to the judge who will be in those days, and you shall inquire, and they will tell you the words of judgment." (Devarim 17:8-9), and "And the man who acts intentionally, not obeying the priest who stands there to minister the L-rd, your G-d, or to the judge that man shall die" (Devarim 17:12).
When you understand all of this, the doubts will leave, and it will be clear to you that [in addition to] the knowledge derived from reason and the scriptures, the oral tradition [is also indispensable].
<i>7 - NO REWARD AND PUNISHMENT IN THIS WORLD</i><br>When he gives up trying to entice you in these ways, he will try from the aspect of reward and punishment. He will claim that the course of events in the world does not follow the lines of justice because if there were justice in this world, the wicked would not prosper, and the righteous would not suffer, as one whom we mentioned in gate 4 (end of ch.3) of this book said.
But when the understanding will show to you the justice [of divine wisdom] in both of these ways as we introduced in the Gate of Trust, these doubts will vanish, and your heart will be at peace from this confusion.
<i>8 - NO REWARD AND PUNISHMENT IN THE AFTERLIFE</i><br>When the yetzer abandons the hope of overcoming us in these topics, he will try to cast doubt on us regarding the reward and punishment in the afterlife. He will try to confuse and distort this on us, due to the little mention of it in the torah and the little apparentness in it.
But if we examine what there is in the books of the other prophets (besides Moshe Rabeinu) on this matter [which is mentioned explicitly], for example "[And the dust returns to the earth as it was,] and the spirit returns to G-d, Who gave it" (Koheles 12:7), and "I will give you a place among these who stand here" (Zecharia 3:7), and "How great is Your goodness that You have laid away for those who fear You" (Tehilim 31:20), and "no eye has seen O G-d besides you, who prepares for those who wait for Him" (Yeshaya 64:3), "your righteousness shall go before you; the glory of the L-rd shall gather you in" (Yeshaya 58:8). When we study these and many more other similar verses in addition to what our Sages taught us in this, and with what our reason tells us, our souls will be at peace, and will be assured of the inevitability of reward and punishment in the afterlife.
<i>9 - PREOCCUPY IN SECULAR INTERESTS</i><br>When the yetzer abandons hope of trying to make us doubt in all the previous matters mentioned, he will try to make us lazy in the service of G-d, and will try to preoccupy us in our secular interests - eating, drinking, dressing, riding, and to derive enjoyment from other physical pleasures.
And when we listen to him regarding eating, which we cannot exist without, he will make superfluous things that are secondary to food appear so embellished, and rejoicing and pleasure so charming that we will envy kings and their ministers, strive to live like them, adopt their practices, and go in their statutes, in pursuit of physical enjoyments.
When the yetzer observes our desire and willingness in this, he will say:
"Girdle your loins, bare your arms, O enticed man, exert with all your strength, O seduced man, to serve this world, and to serve its people, and you may attain some of your desire in it. Do not toil in matters of the next world. Rather, only in things which will help you in this world, to find favor among the people and the leaders, from kings to the rest of the people."
"Don't exert your mind in any field of wisdom except those which will bring you honor from the public and favor in the eyes of the great men of your generation, the leaders, rulers, or anyone who occupies a high position. This includes the knowledge of languages, the essentials of prose, fundamentals of grammar, music, charming riddles, amazing parables and unusual sayings. Try to frequently meet with charismatic people, and be knowledgeable of cultures to be able to converse with all types of people and won't sit silent and be considered a fool and a simpleton. Leave the other wisdoms because their work demand is high but their practical benefit is low."
But if from the beginning we did not open a door to the desires and satisfy their wants, nor accustom ourselves to indulge in superfluous things and chase after them, but instead we reply to the yetzer that we have no need for the superfluous things and that we already have enough mental anxiety in working to obtain what we need. If G-d sends us extra income without our having to trouble our heart or straining our mind for it, we will spend them in the right and proper manner as duty dictates. And if this does not happen, we will be satisfied with the basic necessities, and won't require more than this, then the [power of the] yetzer will be broken and smitten.
But if we listen to the yetzer in these things, we will descend step by step until he has brought us to hopeless destruction in this world and in the next.
All these example illustrations were on the first kind of enticements, which the yetzer uses to cast doubt on a man who is weak in wisdom and in the knowledge of G-d and of His torah.
SECOND KIND OF TEMPTATION OF THE YETZER<br><i>10 - TOPPLING THE WISE PERSON</i><br>But if a man is wise in understanding of G-d and His torah, the yetzer will strive to damage and confuse his wisdom and actions by objections and arguments from whichever side he can - from reason, scripture, and tradition. He will bring spurious proofs whose premises are not true and whose conclusions do not necessarily follow.
If your intellect is sharp and your wisdom is strong in analyzing and defending and debating a position, you will see the various fallacies in the proofs of your yetzer, and the truth will become clear to you. The correct view will be apparent to you, your knowledge will be freed from doubts and your actions, from confusion.
But if your knowledge and ability in this is deficient, his enticements on you will be (increasingly - PL) stronger. He will overcome you more frequently. His ruling over you and surrounding you in your outer and inner life will become more imperative because he comes to you with wisdom, and leads you using proofs which your mind relies on. If your understanding has become seduced by him, he will let up from you, and it will help him work against you, because you rely on your mind when you have doubts, and trust its reasoning when some matter is not understood by you.
And when the yetzer has overcome you, and rules you with the aid and support of your understanding, now, by deceiving you and representing in your eyes falsehood in the form of something demonstrated [as true], he will transfer you from this level, which was near to truth, and where falsehood was still concealed, and descend you to a lower level, where there is less truth and more falsehood.
And thus, he will not cease to lower you from one level to the next, until he will bring you to the level where the truth is completely concealed, and there is complete falsehood. And he will uproot you from this world, and topple you from the levels of reward in the next world. And your wisdom will become an evil for you, and your intellect, the cause of your destruction, as written <i>"Hoy! They are wise in their eyes, and think they are understanding"</i> (Yeshaya 5:21), and <i>"they have rejected the word of the L-ord; and what wisdom is in them?"</i> (Yirmiyahu 8:9), and <i>"For the ways of the L-ord are just, and the righteous do walk in them; but transgressors do stumble therein"</i> (Hoshea 14:10).
It has been said that when wisdom is used in the proper way, it is a cure for all illnesses, but if one sways from its proper path, then it becomes an all-encompassing disease without cure and without medication.
On this, the torah is compared to fire as written <i>"Is not My word like fire?"</i> (Yirmiyahu 23:29), because it enlightens the eyes, as written <i>"the commandments of the L-ord are pure, enlightening the eyes"</i> (Tehilim19:9) and <i>"Your word is like a candle to my feet, and a light to my path"</i> (Tehilim 119:105). But anyone who turns away from its proper path, it burns up with its fire, as written <i>"by fire G-d will exact judgment"</i> (Isaiah 66:16), and <i>"on the wicked He will rain fiery coals"</i> (Tehilim 11:6), and <i>"Should I say; I will not mention Him, and I will no longer speak in His Name, but this was in my heart like a burning fire"</i> (Yirmiyahu 20:9).
Therefore, be careful that your steps not stray from the path of the forefathers and the path of the early ones towards a new path you have devised, and be careful to not rely on your intellect nor to take counsel only with yourself. Do not reason on your own. Do not distrust your forefathers in the tradition they bequeathed to you as to what is good for you. Do not reject their advice in what they taught you because none of the plans you can think of were not previously known and their good and evil consequences were already weighed.
According to your reasoning, you may be impressed by the advantages which your plan brings at the beginning, but the long term negative consequences which the plan will bring are hidden to you. In your short sightedness, you will see its initial benefits but not its error and eventual damage. And the wise man said <i>"do not remove an ancient boundary stone set up by your forefathers"</i> (Mishlei 22:28), and <i>"listen my son to your father's instructions"</i> (ibid 1:8), and it is said of one who condemns the ways of his forefathers <i>"a generation clean in its own eyes, and yet are not cleansed of their excrement"</i> (ibid 30:12), and <i>"there is a generation that curses its fathers"</i> (ibid 30:11), and <i>"the eye that mocks a father, [that scorns obedience to a mother will be pecked by the ravens of the valley, will be eaten by the vultures]"</i> (ibid 30:17).
However, if you see fit to take on yourself additional duties, what you can, beyond what is required, then, provided you are fulfilling those that are obligatory and that your motive is love of piety, and after your understanding has [examined it and] agreed, and that it is far from lusts - then the resolution is good.
You will receive reward for this and are not deviating from the way of the forefathers. Because they already said <i>"make a fence for the torah"</i> (Avot 1:1), and <i>"why was Jerusalem destroyed? Because they pursued the letter of the law, and did not go above and beyond the letter of the law"</i> (Bava Metzia 30b), and "says Rav Huna - he who only occupied himself is as if he had no G-d, for it is said: 'Now for long seasons Israel was without the true God' - What is meant by 'without the true G-d'? - It means that he who only occupies himself with the study of the Torah, it is as if he has no G-d" (Avodah Zara 17b).
And one of the pious would say <i>"he who does no more than his duty is not doing his duty"</i>. But these "extra" acts are not accepted until one first fulfills the obligatory duties.
Our Sages already permitted us, and even [sometimes] obligated us to add on to the commandments, as they said (regarding friday evening) <i>"one must add from profane to holy"</i> (Yoma 81:2). Other examples are additions to fasts, prayer, charity, and refraining from the unnecessary permitted foods. They also warned us against taking an oath in G-d's Name, even for the truth, and from talking excessively even if the words are free of falsehood, and from discussing the affairs of other people, even if the words are not derogatory. Likewise, to refrain from lavishly praising someone even if it fitting, and to not speak bad or be disgusted by those who are falling short in fulfillment of their duties even if they deserve it, and many more things like this.
It is proper for us to now bring some examples of the second type of enticements of the yetzer which one can learn to apply to other matters and to guard oneself from them with G-d's help when he understands them. Because necessarily, every good thing has corresponding bad things which can spoil it. Therefore, one who understands the things that damage good deeds will be capable of guarding himself from them. But one who knows only the good deeds, and does not know the things which can damage them will end up with nothing due to the abundance of damaging things which will beset him.
One of the pious would instruct his disciples: "learn the bad things first to avoid them, and afterwards learn the good things and do them, as written '<i>Plow for yourself a furrow and do not sow upon thorns'</i>" (Yirmiyahu 4:3).
Rabbi Yochanan ben Zakai would say regarding the falsification of weights and measures (Bava Basra 89b) "woe to me if I say, woe to me if I don't say; if I say - perhaps the swindlers will learn from my words, if I don't say - perhaps the swindlers will say that the Sages are ignorant of our tricks.", the question was raised: "did he speak of them or not?", and concludes "he did speak of them", relying on the verse <i>"for the ways of the L-rd are right, and the righteous shall walk in them, while the wicked shall stumble on them"</i> (Hoshea 14:10).
EXAMPLES OF THE SECOND KIND OF TEMPTATION OF THE YETZER<br><i>11 - STRIVE TO FIND FAVOR WITH HUMAN BEINGS</i><br>We have already mentioned in this gate regarding the ways in which the yetzer tries to cast doubts in a man's mind. If he is not successful in raising such doubts, he will attempt the method of arguments and proofs in order to revoke the truths of his faith. When you stand up to his superficiality and the weakness of his proofs and he is not capable of standing up to you, nor of annulling what you know to be clear and true of the matters previously mentioned in this gate, he will return to flatter you and mislead you in regard to yourself. He will say to you: "How I rejoice for you on your good faith and devoted heart to G-d. You have already reached a degree of piety which others in your generation have not been able to reach, and you have already thanked G-d sufficiently for His goodness and kindness to you. Now it is proper for you to also work to pay your debts of gratitude to your fellow men. Because you already know that they are means to your benefit and harm, and it is clear also that when they like you, you will be honorable in their eyes. But if they are angry with you, you will incur losses. Therefore, endeavor in things that will please them and that will find favor in their eyes, as our Sages said: "One who is pleasing to his fellow men, is pleasing to G-d. [But one who is not pleasing to his fellow men, is not pleasing to G-d]" (Avos 3:10).
Answer the yetzer:
"What will I benefit from finding favor with someone who is weak like me, who does not have the ability to help me or harm me (see gate of trust), and the verse says: 'Withdraw yourselves from man whose [life] breath is in his nostrils, for by what should he be esteemed?' (Yeshaya 2:22). And even if it were my duty, how could I possibly find favor with all my contemporaries when I don't even have the ability to find favor with the members of my own household?!"
"And the proofs which you brought from the words of our Sages does not imply that one needs to try to find favor in the eyes of everyone. Rather this is like the case of the wise man that left in his will a command to his son: 'My son, to find favor with the public is not in your ability. Instead try to find favor with the Creator and He will grant you favor with the public, as written "When G-d finds favor in a person's ways, He will cause even his enemies to make peace with him" (Mishlei 16:7).
And likewise, when you see a man whom everyone, young or old, praises him and finds favor in his deeds, it is a proof that G-d has implanted love of him in their hearts, and established a good name for him on their tongues. The Creator does not do this for those He hates. And this is a clear and powerful proof that the Creator is pleased with him. But that a pious person should exert himself and strive so that others will praise him due to his service of G-d - this is not the way of the pious.
Therefore, be careful of this or similar things among the enticements of the yetzer toward you. Because he will try to lead you in this until he topples you in the trap of (the trait of - PL) flattery.
And on his praising you, answer him: "what is this that you are congratulating me on? Is it because I know my duties to G-d? Just the opposite - because I know my duties to G-d, there is grounds for a claim against me, namely, that I am not acting in accordance with my knowledge.
And even if I were doing enough according to my knowledge of my duties to G-d, would this be enough of an expression of gratitude to the blessed Creator for even the smallest benefits He bestows on me? And what is the measure of my days relative to the measure of the days of the universe? Even if it were equal to the age of the universe, it would not be enough time for me to recount all the favors G-d has bestowed upon me. How much less then is it possible for me to repay my debts of gratitude to G-d for them? And scripture has already said: "<i>All flesh is like grass, and all its kindness is like the flower of the field"</i> (Yeshaya 40:6), and our Sages said <i>"If I am not for myself, who is for me? And if I am only for myself, what am I? And if not now, when?"</i> (Avos 1:14).
<i>12 - TO LOVE BEING PRAISED AND ACQUIRING A GOOD NAME</i><br>When the yetzer gives up trying to entice you in this way, he will try to entice from the angle of love of praise and of acquiring a good name in this world. He will say to you:
"I rejoice at your service of G-d with good trust, in that you have placed all your matters to Him, and have freed your heart from [the thought] that any created being can possibly benefit you without G-d. Now you are truly trusting in G-d wholeheartedly. It is not proper for you to conceal from people the high degree of piety you have attained. Rather it is proper now that you have ruled over your inclination and overcome your base desires to show your piety to others, and to reveal your heart to them. In this way you will be honored by them in this world, and will have good name and a good remembrance among them, as the verse says: "I will give them in My house and in My walls a memorial and a name, better than sons and daughters" (Yeshaya 56:5). It also says: "I will make for you a great name, like the name of the great ones of the land" (II Shmuel 7:9). Additionally, so that they will learn from your deeds, and you will receive reward for them. Hence, don't hide your deeds from them except those things that cannot be shown to people. Therefore, you will receive honor and a good name in this world and good reward in the next".
Answer him: "what will I benefit from praises of people, and from a good name among them, when I know that I am lacking in my obligations to the Creator? What benefit can I have from their honor and esteem, when they are incapable of helping me or shielding me from harm? In this regard, aren't they like plants and animals. And maybe if I have these intents in my deeds, I will not find favor in their eyes. Rather, they will see me as a flatterer and I will become an object of disgust and contempt, and the result will be that I will lose my good deeds in that I did not have intent to G-d and will also fail in what I had hoped to attain from people in this world.
It is said of one of the kings of Israel who was asked: "how did you like the (torah) reading of the Chazan? His voice was pleasing and he was an expert in the chanting of the cantillation notes." The king answered them: "How could I like his reading. He was reading it only so that it would be pleasing to me, and to find favor in my eyes. But if he had intent for pleasing the Creator alone - then it would have been pleasing to me".
We can likewise say about all those leading the congregation in prayers, and the chazanim who compose new piyutim (liturgical prayers), whose intent is to find favor in the eyes of men and not of G-d - that their prayers are not acceptable to the Creator.
Answer him further: "Maybe, if I receive honor in this world for my deeds, nothing of my reward will be left in the next world, because I received it already in this world".
It is said of one of the pious who entered a market to buy something. He came to one of the shops to buy it and the shopkeeper's neighbor told the shopkeeper: "give in to him, and do his will since he is a pious scholar". The pious man answered him: "Thank you but I don't need special treatment. I came to buy with my money, not with my torah knowledge". He refused to buy from that shop, and instead went to another shop where he was not recognized.
(Answer the yetzer also:) "And that which you brought from the verse: 'I will make for you a great name..', this is just like the other things people aspire to in this world, such as wealth, honor, which the Creator bestows on His servants when His wisdom deems this proper, as written <i>"And I have also given you that which you have not asked for, both riches and honor"</i> (Melachim 3:13), and also <i>"long life is in its right, to its left, wealth and honor"</i> (Mishlei 3:16). But the pious do not intend for any of these things in their service, rather their sole intent is for the Creator who bestows good to who He wishes, among his servants or others, believers or non-believers, as His wisdom dictates, as written <i>"wealth and honor is Yours"</i> (Divrei HaYamim 29:12).
(Answer further:) "And what is this world? Even if my name becomes known to the whole world, what is the measure of my days? Even if my name does go out to part of the world, certainly my memory will reach an even smaller part, and even then it will fade away after a short time and be forgotten as if it had never existed. And scripture says: 'The sons of men are but vanity, and men of distinction are a falsehood; were they to be put on a scale, together they would equal vanity' (Tehilim 62:10), and 'his breath leaves, he returns to his dust' (Tehilim 146:4), and 'there is no memory of the early ones' (Koheles 1:11)."
"Therefore, for me to trouble myself for this world, and put my thoughts in it, is clear pettiness and a disgraceful mistake on my part. It is told of one of the pious that asked his friend: 'have you achieved equality?, he answered 'on what?', he replied 'is it equal in your eyes whether you are honored or insulted?'. He answered: 'No'. He said: 'if so, you have not yet arrived. Keep trying, maybe you will reach this level, because it is the highest of the levels of the pious, and the most desirable of qualities.'"
<i>13 - ENDLESS WORRIES AND DISTRACTIONS OF THIS WORLD</i><br>When the yetzer gives up trying to entice you in these ways, he will try to ruin your [religious] deeds by distracting your mind with this world and its people and with your extensive desires so that you forget your final end.
When he sees that you wish to turn your attention to matters of the next world, such as during prayer, whether obligatory or voluntary, or when you study the torah or some other wisdom related to emuna (faith) or mussar (ethics), he will confuse you and distract your thoughts with secular matters, such as thoughts of merchandise, buying and selling, profit and loss. He will say to you: "you should be happy that now you have some free time, an opportunity which will not return due to your many business dealings. Now, think about your business partner, and make an accounting of what he owes you and what you owe him, and how much you have collected of your debts, and how much is due to you. Consider which financial means of gaining livelihood are suitable to you and which are not. Reflect on which matters brought you satisfaction and which made you regret, and if you have a court case against someone, review in your mind all of your claims and all of his claims against you, and all the ways you can outsmart him when the case is brought to court."
So too, if you have money [to invest], or sheep and cattle, or land for sowing, or you have a job to do for the nobleman or a commoner, or you need to make an accounting with either, or if you owe debts which you are unable to repay, or you have friends which you must watch over and think about, he will bring one of these to your mind when you turn to devote some time to matters of service of G-d. This is to distract you and ruin your deeds. Because when you do them, you are ready in body but distracted in mind and spirit.
If he does not distract you with one of the things mentioned previously, he will remind you of riddles, or other subjects which require much thought. If a man is among those who play dice or chess, or the like, he will bring him to picture as if the game is arranged before him and he needs to think about which moves to make, and which strategies to use to win the game.
<i>14 - DISTRACTING WITH GOOD DEEDS</i><br>If a man will escape from all that we mentioned previously, and belongs to the men of wisdom and understanding (becomes a talmid chacham), the yetzer will bring to his attention a difficult matter of wisdom, and he will distract him with questions and answers, with difficulties and solutions, and he will show him which matters he missed and which he should have investigated more. He will also show him how much he still has to learn in this wisdom so that he makes a personal accounting and resolves to learn it. This way, the yetzer will distract him in all his acts of service of G-d, and will cause him much more damage than gain.
(Due to all of these distractions) it is possible that he will do the service of G-d but be outside of it, and that his thoughts are always distracted in some other secular interest. It may even be that he will seek forgiveness from G-d with his tongue, all the while eagerly rushing in his mind and spirit to rebel against Him.
On this one of the pious said: "this kind of seeking forgiveness requires seeking forgiveness". And he pleas to G-d with his limbs, but turns from Him in his heart and thoughts, similar to the verse: "These people come near to Me with their mouth and honor Me with their lips, but their hearts are far from Me. Their worship of Me is nothing but acts of rote" (Yeshaya 29:13), and "But then they would flatter Him with their mouths, lying to Him with their tongues; Their heart was not sincere with Him" (Tehilim 78:36).
If you will wake up then and make an accounting with your soul and say to yourself: "How could I conduct myself towards the Creator in a way that would be improper for me to conduct myself with His creations when I need something from them, or likewise, for them to act towards me when they need something from me?
Because, if I went to borrow something from someone, and I asked him for the thing with my lips but my heart was against him, if he noticed this, he would be disgusted and repulsed by me. All the more so, that he would not grant me my request. And certainly, even more so, if he knew that I were planning in my thoughts not only things which would not find favor with him but rather even things which would make him angry with me. Surely, his hatred for me would be greater and his refusal more appropriate. And certainly, I would act in this same way towards someone who asked me to borrow something and if I knew his thoughts, just like the Creator knows what is in my heart.
Therefore, how then while [standing] before my Creator could I not feel ashamed? How can I expect to please Him with my conduct when I would not want a weak, created being like myself to conduct himself thus towards me, and which a fellow weak, created, and dependent creature like myself would likewise not be pleased to find in me, as it is written "Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush:[therefore shall they fall among them that fall: in the time of their punishment they shall be cast down, says the L-ord]" (Yirmiyahu 8:12)." Then the yetzer will be smitten.
<i>15 - CONCEAL YOUR RELIGIOUS DEEDS COMPLETELY</i><br>When the yetzer gives up trying to entice you in this way, he will try to entice you from the angle of distancing from flattery, and he will say to you: "you cannot possibly serve G-d with a perfect heart until you distance yourself completely from flattery whether it is a little or a lot. And to distance yourself from flattery towards other people requires completely hiding all of your deeds from them, and showing them the opposite of what is in your heart.
Therefore, when you pray, be brief, and let there be no appearance of desire or striving in them. When you learn wisdom, do so in seclusion so that none but the Creator knows. Let no good trait in you become apparent. Show others laziness and heaviness in the service of G-d so that your name will not go out and you will lose your reward. Do not instruct others to do good nor rebuke them against evil. Do not show your wisdom nor teach others, and let there be no sign of fear of Heaven on you, and no sign of being a servant of G-d so that others will not honor you on account of this. In order that your zeal in hiding your deeds to people is complete, mix with and befriend all the different classes of people. Adopt their customs and walk in their ways regarding laughter and laxness in words of truth.
Do not guard so much from lies and oaths. Join them in their feasts and drinking parties, in their riddles, in their excessive indulgences and abundant laughter. Speak of people, and speak of their faults. To summarize, avoid all things that will bring you a reputation for asceticism."
If you listen to him in this, slowly without noticing, you will wind up losing even your faith. But if you answer him: "you have already helped my enemies by waging war with me, by your cunning planning to destroy my strength and promote my downfall. How could I flee from a small fire towards a big fire? I have tried to flee from love of recognition and honor in order to not embellish myself towards people, and you are instructing me to embellish myself to them by leaving the service of G-d!"
"Rather, the religious deeds which it is proper for me to conceal are those which can be done from beginning to end without knowledge of people. But to pray with the congregation, to instruct others to do good, to rebuke others from evil, the study of wisdom, doing acts of kindliness, or the like - it is not right to neglect and abandon them due to concern for flattery. It is my duty to do them with intent to G-d. If people praise me or honor me for this, my reward will not be diminished in the least because while doing them, this was not my goal."
It was already said: when you do a good deed that others know about, and you want to know if your motives (are proper), test yourself in two ways.
(1) Examine what reward you hoped to receive, and from whom you intended to receive it. If from G-d, this is good. If from anyone else, it is not good.
(2) To consider, if you were alone, would you still do this deed in the way you did it? If the answer is yes, your deed is wholly devoted to G-d. Continue doing more like these. But if it would be less than this, stop doing it until your heart has become more purely devoted to G-d. Then the yetzer will be smitten.
<i>16 - WORSHIP YOURSELF</i><br>If the yetzer will not find a way to entice you in these ways, he will try to outsmart you with a subtler approach, namely, through the ways of reward and punishment in this world and the next. He will say to you: "behold, you are among the pious of the Creator, and His treasured ones. A person like you is surely worthy of reward in this world and in the next. You must exert yourself according to your abilities, maybe you will earn the reward through your good deeds and your zealous pursuing of the service of G-d with a good heart and with great joy. Set the reward before your eyes, and work your hardest to reach it, because this is the greatest success and joy, as king David said: "A light is sown for the righteous, and for the upright of heart, joy" (Tehilim 97:11).
If you listen to him and you rely on his words, he will topple you by making you worship hidden association, namely, self-worship, in that you exert yourself in things that will bring you selfish pleasure and joy, and that will repel from you worries and despairs. If it were not for your hopes for these, you would deny the constant favors G-d bestows on you and not obligate yourself to serve Him on account of them. And furthermore, you don't see that it is befitting to serve G-d (even without these benefits) due to His greatness, infinite power, and the manifestations of His wisdom. On this the Sages said: "do not be like servants who serve their master in order to receive reward, but like servants who serve their master without [the condition of] receiving reward" (Avos 1:3).
<i>17 - G-D's DECREE VS. FREE WILL</i><br>When the yetzer gives up trying to entice you in the ways mentioned, he will hurl you in a sea of doubts regarding necessity and righteousness (predestination and free will).
When he sees you lax in the service [of G-d], and turning towards the path of sin, he will try to convince you of the matter of necessity with powerful arguments drawn from Scripture and Tradition, in order to give you excuses, and he will say to you:
"If the Creator wanted you to serve Him, He would force you and make you zealous in this, for only what He decrees can occur. How can you stand up against His decrees or defeat His judgments? You can only do what He decreed on you to do, because all things occur through the Creator's decrees as written 'I am G-d who does everything' (Yeshaya 44:24)."
But if he sees you engaged in secular matters and occupations, he will tell you (the opposite): "be careful of laziness and sluggishness. Don't rely on anyone but yourself, because good and evil are in your hands and success and failure in accomplishment depends on you. Therefore, exert yourself with all your strength and work with all your ability and you will succeed in obtaining your desires of this world. Guard from damaging things with all your strength and you will be saved from them, as the wise man said "Thorns and snares are in the way of the crooked; whoever guards his soul will keep far from them" (Mishlei 22:5), and "A man's folly perverts his way" (Mishlei 19:3), and "from your own hands this came" (Melachim 1:9). And so the yetzer turns around the argument, sometimes he comes with necessity and divine decree and sometimes with justice and free will according to what he deems fitting for him to entice you and weaken you.
But if you wake up and put to heart what our Sages said "everything is in the hands of Heaven except the fear of Heaven" (Berachos 33b), you will exert yourself in religious matters in the way of someone who understands that according to his own actions in them will be his reward and punishment, as written <i>"He repays a man for what he has done; he brings upon him according to his ways"</i> (Iyov 34:11). And in secular matters, you will conduct yourself with the conviction that all of your movements and the course of your matters are bound to the decree of the Creator, and you place your trust on G-d on all of them, as written <i>"Cast your cares on the L-rd and he will sustain you"</i> (Tehilim 55:23).
<i>19 - INSTILLING ARROGANCE IN YOU</i><br>When the yetzer gives up trying to entice you in the ways we mentioned, he will try to do so by inducing in you haughtiness and pride and diminishing your humility.
He will say to you: "you have reached the exalted levels, which the pious and righteous reached through your faithful heart and perfect deeds in the service of G-d. You are unequaled in your generation and singular among your contemporaries. It is proper for you to show your superiority over them, by being disgusted by them and despising them. Recall their faults, publicize the wickedness in their hearts, shame them and rebuke them for it, until they are humiliated and repent to G-d, and feel regret for their past. Thereby, you will follow the conduct of the prophets, as written "Son of man, describe the temple to the people of Israel, that they may be ashamed of their sins." (Yechezkel 43:10).
If you answer him: "how could I be disgusted and shame someone whose matters towards G-d in heart and mind I do not know? If externally he appears reprehensible, perhaps his inner being is not like his outward appearance. If the prophets shamed and rebuked their generation, they did this with the permission of the Creator who looked into their hearts and corrupt interior. But it is beyond my powers of wisdom and understanding to know what is in the hearts and the minds. Perhaps their inner heart which is disgusting in my eyes is much better than their outer appearance, and I don't even know it. Perhaps, their inner heart is better than mine in the eyes of the Creator.
And even if his appearance is bad, it is possible that the reason is because he is ignorant of his obligations to the Creator. Therefore he is more pardonable than me, because my knowledge is greater than his. For the Creator claims from a man only according to the extent of his wisdom. Therefore, I am more deserving to be considered reprehensible for my shortcomings in the Creator's service, despite my knowledge, compared to this man whose shortcoming is due to his ignorance. He rebels against G-d due to ignorance and error, while I rebel against Him knowingly and deliberately.
It is possible, that the bad in him is revealed and visible while the good is hidden and concealed. For me it is the opposite. Therefore, he is more worthy of G-d's mercy and forgiveness than me. One merit of him outweighs many merits of mine, because no one observes it except G-d and no one praises him for it nor gives him any honor. But for me, it is the opposite. For my external appearance appears better than his.
Similarly, regarding sins, because one sin by me is equal to many sins by him since my sin is concealed and hidden, while his is visible and public. And due to other people shaming him for it, his punishment will be reduced, while for me, my reward is diminished due to my good deeds being known. He will be left with the full reward of his deeds in the next world, and will reduce his punishment for sin in this world due other's belittling him over his sins. As for me, I will be left with the full measure of my punishments in the next world.
Furthermore, if I exert my mind to search for the flaws of others and examine their bad traits, this will prevent me from examining my own flaws and lackings, which is something more useful for me, and for which I am more responsible for. My condition is like that of a sick man whose illness distracts him from the illnesses of others, and the healing of himself from the healing of others. Thus the yetzer will be smitten and broken before you.
<i>20 - INCITEMENT DURING PROSPERITY OR DIFFICULTY</i><br>If the yetzer's arrows do not hit you in what we mentioned, he will wait in ambush for you during your times of prosperity or times of difficulty.
When things are going according to your wish, he will say to you: "this is the fruit of your efforts, strategies, and wisdom. Therefore exert yourself more on your secular matters so that your success will perpetuate and you will reach a higher level. Receive these days with joy and enjoy them because soon you will be called by name (to die), and you will be forced to answer and will go to the darkness of the grave, a place where there is no wisdom, no movement, no pleasure, and no pain." He will even bring proofs of this from what the wise man said: "Whatever your hand finds to do, do it with your might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, where you are going" (Koheles 9:10).
In your times of difficulty, he will bring to your mind the good life of the wicked, and the success of the nonbelievers, as written "The tents of bandits prosper, and those who provoke G-d are secure" (Iyov 12:6). He will say to you: "the difficulties you are going through are due to your having clinged to the service of G-d and His commandments. You are not capable of handling this due to the unbearable load and remote goal. If you had unloaded this from your heart and rested from it, you would have had joy from your situation as you see by the wicked. You can see from what scripture says: "with those near Me, I will be sanctified" (Vayikra 10:3), and "Only you did I love above all the families of the earth; therefore, I will visit upon you all your iniquities" (Amos 3:2), and many more like this.
<i>21 - DIFFICULTY IN DOING GOOD AND PLEASURE IN DOING BAD</i><br>When he sees that you have taken on yourself to do something of the service of G-d, he will exaggerate its demands and attempt to scare you in order that you abandon it.
If you intend to fast, he will say to you: "be careful, this will weaken you and make you sick and prevent you from doing your secular and religious matters".
If this is regarding a voluntary prayer at night, he will attempt to convince you that sleep is more healthy than eating, and it guards and strengthens your health more than food and drink.
If this is regarding giving charity, he will picture in your mind financial destitution and put poverty before your eyes, and remind you of the suffering of poverty and lacking. Similarly with all the types of mitzvot and acts of kindliness, he will try to scare you and exaggerate the matter in your heart, in order to weaken your resolve.
But if the thought of sin enters your mind, he will inflate (in your imagination) the pleasure it will bring and will try to make you forget its punishment and encourage you to do it and tend towards it.
Whenever you sense this, or similar to it, reply to him: Of all the suffering that came to me in the past, there is no trace of it left. It quickly passed and vanished, and the reward is mine forever. It will never fade nor end. One who fasts during the day and eats at night, is the same as if he didn't fast. His strength will return and his reward is reserved for him. And similarly one who rises for part of the night, and then sleeps, his alertness will return as if he never rose early, and the reward for his rising early and prayer will remain forever. And for the matter of charity, I have already explained this amply in the gate of trust.
For the matter of sins, you must put to your heart and contemplate in your mind how swiftly the worldly pleasures fade away afterwards, whether they are permitted or forbidden, and then you will remain with the disgrace and punishment due to them in this world and in the next. Thus the yetzer will be smitten before you and you will be zealous in doing good and sluggish towards all disgraceful acts.
<i>22 - SADNESS IN DOING GOOD AND PLEASURE IN DOING BAD</i><br>When he will lose hope in enticing you in these ways, and you succeed in doing the religious activities which you undertook to do, he will strive to put worry in your heart, and perpetuate in you a state of sadness. This is in order that you regret the good acts you did in the past, so that you will lose your reward and so that the Creator will not accept them.
But if you did a bad deed, he will strive to put joy and delight in your heart so that you will strengthen in this and be eager to do it again.
If you sense his deception, and stay alert for his many traps, you will guard from them and be helped from G-d to be saved from them. But if you do not sense his deception, he will knock you down and empty his arrows on you suddenly, as written <i>"until an arrow pierces his liver"</i> (Mishlei 7:23).
<i>23 - WEAKEN TORAH STUDY</i><br>If you stand up to him despite all of this, and he will not be able to entice you in what we mentioned, he will try to remove you from the study of wisdom (torah). If he sees in you a zeal to study wisdom, he will say to you: "isn't it enough for you to know the torah as much as the great men of your generation? Don't you know that the torah is endless and has no final objective? Put your aspiration in knowing the elementals of faith and the foundations of the torah, and then learn what will make you esteemed with people, such as music and poetry, the depths of grammar, proverbs and famous sayings. Leave over the study of Jewish laws and the disputes of the sages in them. Do not enter into the study of the fundamentals of logical demonstration, comparisons, proofs, examining cause and effect, the connection between concealed wisdom and revealed wisdom, and other ways of reasoning because these subjects are deep and subtle. Rely on those who know the explanations of the tradition, even in matters which you can attain clarity through your own efforts, just like you rely on them for those matters which you cannot do so.
<i>24 - JEALOUSY AND ARROGANCE</i><br>If you don't listen to him, and you exert yourself and strengthen yourself, he will shoot you with arrows of jealousy towards your friends. If they have acquired wisdom which you do not possess, you will begrudge them and look for faults in them. You will denigrate them and speak badly of them, as if they plundered your understanding and stole your wisdom.
If your wisdom is greater than theirs, he will try to make you look down on them on account of your superior understanding, and hate them due to their ignorance, and that you show this feeling to the common people. You will become haughty, and praise yourself for your wisdom until you claim that you know more than you do. In your inflated spirit, you will think you know everything and don't need to learn more. [When teaching,] you will be annoyed when others raise a question on your words. You will increasingly consider yourself a wise man. You will seek to honor yourself by exposing the ignorance of others, and glee in embarrassing your peers. Eventually, you will be divested of all the ethical teachings from the torah Sages regarding G-d and His torah.
If the yetzer's intentions to entice you in this angle of torah wisdom do not succeed, he will attempt to entice you from the angle of torah commandments. When you do a commandment of G-d, he will aggrandize and inflate it in your eyes, and make you haughty over it, and make the people of your generation appear contemptible in your eyes, so that it will be easier to be disgusted by them, and to humiliate and shame them, while really it is possible that in the eyes of G-d they are better than you.
If one of your peers is greater than you in some aspect of the service of G-d, and his acts are greater than yours, and he tries harder than you to come close to G-d. The yetzer will incite you against him and say: "any zeal by your peers in the service of G-d highlights your own deficiencies. Because, if it were not for this man, you would be in the eyes of men and G-d the most righteous of your generation. Denigrate him, envy him, hate him, seek out his faults, wait for his transgressions, watch for his mistakes and publicize them as much as you can, and belittle him for them. If you can spread false rumors about him to lower his esteem in the eyes of the public, do so."
Then answer him: "How could I be repulsed by someone who G-d loves, and denigrate one who the Creator deems praiseworthy. Is it not enough that I am lazy in not doing the service of G-d as zealously as him, that I must also hate one who serves G-d? This is certainly no way to repay the Creator for what I owe Him. Rather, it is my duty, out of love of G-d, to love those who love Him, and out of honor of G-d, to honor those who honor Him, as written and he honors those who honor G-d" (Tehilim 15:4). And you already know what happened to Miriam, as written: "Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moshe.." (Bamidbar 12:1), and what happened to Korach and his followers in envying Moshe and Aharon due to their closeness to G-d.


Chapter 6

Regarding watchfulness and guarding of one's thoughts, it is proper that you do not neglect watching over your thoughts, reflections, and musings of your heart. For most of the deterioration and rectification in deeds is due to nothing else but these and varies according to their deterioration and rectification.
As the verses say: "Guard your heart above all else, for it determines the course of your life" (Mishlei 4:23), and "for the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth" (Bereishis 8:21), "For I know their imagination.." (Devarim 31:21), "for the L-rd searches all hearts, and He understands all the imaginations of the thoughts of every creation; [if you seek Him, He will be found to you, and if you forsake Him, He will abandon you forever]" (Divrei Hayamim 28:9), "Rather,[this] thing is very close to you; it is in your mouth and in your heart, so that you may do it" (Devarim 30:14), "And now, O Israel, what does the L-rd, your G-d, demand of you? Only to fear (revere) the L-rd, your G-d" (Devarim 10:12), and fear (reverence) is in the heart, reflections, and thoughts. Therefore, my brother, strive that all of your actions be devoted only to the blessed Creator, so that your exertion will not be for nothing, and your efforts not for falsehood, as written "Why should you weigh out money for that which is not bread and your toil without satiety?" (Yeshaya 55:2).
Do not neglect what I have aroused you to. For I have collected for you in this gate all the roots of the things detrimental to activities devoted to G-d, and from each root sprouts almost endless branches.
Therefore, you must guard from them to the utmost of your ability. Maybe then your acts will be complete before G-d and devoted wholeheartedly to His Name, and will then be pleasing and receive acceptance from the Creator. Conduct yourself in the service of G-d as you conduct yourself in your worldly affairs, where you choose the best option you can find and which will be far from potential damages, clean from falsehood, and clean of confusions. Since you do all this for this fleeting world, all the more so that you should do this many times over for matters of your final, permanent existence, and for what will bring you closer to G-d.
Strive with all of your strength that your deeds be pure even though they will be fewer. For it is better than if you exert yourself to do many acts which are not pure. Because a small amount of pure is much, while a large amount of not pure is little and useless. And all the more so, that your work, small and insignificant as it is, should not be impure before G-d.
Be careful that the matter of your deeds to G-d won't be like that of a certain careless bird which the verse speaks of, which lays an egg on the ground and sits on it to warm it, whereby other living creatures damage the egg and no chick hatches from it, as the verse says: "For she leaves her eggs on the ground, and she warms herself on the earth. She forgets that a foot may crush them, and the beast of the field may trample them. [She is hardened against her young ones as though they were not hers; though her toil is in vain, she has no fear]" (Iyov 39:13-16), and the rest of the matter.
The wise man already praised a creature who has the opposite trait. It is industrious and hardworking for its interests in this world. He commanded us to observe it and learn from it, even though it is the weakest of the vermin, saying:
"Go to the ant, lazy one! observe its ways and become wise; she prepares her bread in the summer; [for she has no chief, overseer, or ruler; she gathers her food in the harvest. O lazy one, how long will you lie there; when will you get up from your sleep?]" (Mishlei 6:6-9)
Behold, we have discussed a small part of a large matter. Let it not seem excessive in your eyes, and don't be discouraged by it. For according to the value and importance of a matter will be the corresponding potentially detrimental things.
The value and importance of our investigation in this book is not unknown by he who understands. May G-d, in His mercy, place our portion among those who are complete with Him, and who endeavor for the sake of His great Name, Amen.

Sixth Treatise on Submission

Introduction

Since our previous discussion dealt with the duty to devote one's acts wholeheartedly to G-d alone, and arrogance in the acts devoted to G-d was found to seize the person more swiftly than any other potential damager, and that its damage to these acts is exceedingly great, I deemed pressing to follow the discussion with that which will distance arrogance from man, namely, submission.
And furthermore, because it is clear to us that submission is the root of servant hood, and this trait of submission alone is what separates a servant from the traits of master hood.
And also to come to acknowledge that G-d is singular in this attribute unlike the creations.
As King David said: "Yours, O L-ord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty [for all that is in the heaven and in the earth is Yours; Yours is the kingdom, O L-ord, and you are exalted as Head above all]" (Divrei hayamim 29:11), and <i>"For who in the heavens can be compared to the L-ord? [Who] among the mighty can be likened to the L-ord?"</i> (Tehilim 89:7).
Furthermore, it is the nature of this trait (of submission) to distance a man from the grandiose, from presumption, pride, haughtiness, thinking highly of oneself, desire for dominion over others, lust to control everything, coveting what is above one and similar outgrowths of arrogance.
It is now proper for us to clarify 10 things on the subject of submission.
1. What is submission?
2. How many divisions it divides into.
3. what brings to submission?
4. How should one conduct himself in it?
5. How one acquires it.
6. How the submitted should conduct himself.
7. When it is proper when is it not proper?
8. Does submission depend on good traits or the opposite.
9. If it is possible for a man's heart to contain submission and arrogance simultaneously.
10. benefits of submission in this world and in the next.





Chapter 1

<b>What is submission</b><br>Submission is lowliness of the soul, its bowing down and not thinking much of itself.
It is one of the traits of the soul (that can be acquired - Rabbi Hyamson). When it becomes established in the soul, its signs will appear in the limbs. Among them: a soft tongue, a low voice, humility at a time of anger, little exacting revenge when one has the power to do so. It as was said about a certain king who told a man who was convicted and a whip had already been brought [for punishment]: "I swear by G-d, if I did not feel such a strong anger against you, I would have exacted a severe revenge on you." Then he pardoned him. It is said of him that he would say: "I don't know of any sin of others which are greater than mine".

Chapter 2

<b>How many divisions it divides into</b><br>The explanation of the divisions of submission is as follows. Submission divides into three categories.
(1) One category applies to human beings and many species of irrational animals. It is poverty of the spirit and patient bearing of harm it is capable of avoiding due to ignorance regarding the right ways to remove the harm. This sort of submission is found among foolish and ignorant people due to their little knowledge and weak understanding of their soul and its capacities. This is called submission in the way of common language only, but in truth, this is merely spiritual poverty and blindness due to stupidity that has overcome the soul and prevents it from seeing what could further its welfare, as written <i>"For You have hidden their hearts from understanding; therefore, it cannot raise itself"</i> (Iyov 17:4).
Rather, true submission is that quality which comes into being after an elevation of the soul, after rising above being similar to the animals, with their base traits, and after it has elevated itself from being of similar traits to the lower class of men. This elevation stems from having greater wisdom than them, greater esteem of one's soul than them, and clear knowledge of which traits are good and which are base. When submission and lowliness comes after this elevation - then it is a praiseworthy trait. Otherwise, it dos not enter into the category of good traits and qualities of the soul, but rather among the disgraceful traits, since its submission is like that of the animals.
(2) The second category - submission towards other human beings. If because they rule over him, such as a prisoner in the hands of his enemy, or a slave in the hands of his master; or because he lacks what they have and greatly needs what they possess such as a tenant to his landlord or a poor man who looks to the generosity of the wealthy man, or a student to his teacher, or a substantial loan that one is unable to repay and he must be submissive and lower himself before his lender, as written <i>"A rich man will rule over the poor, and a borrower is a slave to a lender"</i> (Mishlei 22:7).
To this category belongs the submission of one who knows about himself that he is falling short regarding the bounds (the torah set -PL) in matters of this world and the next, and is ignorant of the proper path. When he finds the prophet of his generation or righteous teacher or anyone else who preaches the proper path, he will submit to him and lower himself before him, as our teachers said: <i>"serving (a wise man) is greater than learning by him"</i> (Berachos 7b), as written: <i>"Elisha ben Shafat who poured water for Eliyahu"</i> (Melachim II 3:11), it does not say: <i>"who studied by Eliyahu"</i> but rather: 'who poured water', this teaches that serving a Sage is greater than studying by him (one grows more from this); and also: <i>"his (Moshe's) attendant, Joshua, the son of Nun, a young man, would not depart from the tent"</i> (Shmos 33:11). Likewise the wise man said regarding the general masses: <i>"A rich man will rule over the poor, and a borrower is a slave to a lender"</i> (Mishlei 22:7).
This category of submission, proper though it may be, is not of universal character, since it does not apply to all human beings, nor does it apply at all times and in all places. Because, when the prisoner leaves his prison, or when the slave redeems himself, or the lender pays back his debt, or the student leaves his teacher's presence, or the poor man leaves the rich man's presence - it is not their duty to submit to them, and to humble themselves and lower themselves before them anymore.
(3) The third category: submission to the blessed Creator. This duty applies to all rational beings. They are obligated in it at all times and in all places. To this (category of submission) was our intent in this gate.
The submitted one is called in scripture: "humble", "low in his eyes", "modest", "broken", "low of spirit", "broken spirited", "crushed", "soft hearted","weak in spirit", "broken hearted", "bowing spirit".
When we will speak of the term "submission", in general, our intent is only in this third category which is the highest degree of submission.
One who has reached this level, the path to nearness to G-d and [worthiness] to stand before Him is not far off. He will be accepted by G-d and be pleasing to Him, as written <i>"The offerings of G-d are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, O G-d, You will not despise"</i> (Tehilim 51:19).

Chapter 3

<b>In what does one submit</b><br>The circumstances which will bring a person to submission and a lowly spirit after he has become proud are ten.
(1) When his physical strength wanes in its normal power of movement due to either sickness or frail temperament or weakening constitution and he becomes submissive due to this, and he pleas to G-d and to human beings, as written <i>"And He submitted their heart with toil"</i> (Tehilim 107:12).
(2) When he is smitten by troubles or suffers poverty and he now needs people whereby he previously did not need them, and he becomes submissive to them, and his spirit becomes too broken to be arrogant in his situation, as written: <i>"And it will be that everyone who is left in your house, will come to prostrate himself before him for a silver piece and a morsel of bread"</i>(Shmuel 2:36).
(3) When someone who is better off than him, will manifest his kindness towards him, he will make himself submissive towards him, as written <i>"Many will entreat the favor of the generous man"</i> (Mishlei 19:6).
(4) One who must pay back his fellow a debt but is unable to do so, and makes himself submissive before him as written <i>"If you do not have what to pay, why should he take your bed from under you?"</i> (Mishlei 22:27).
(5) One who is in the prison of his enemy - will make himself submissive towards him and his spirit will drop low, as written <i>"They afflicted his foot with fetters; his soul was placed in irons"</i>(Tehilim 105:18), and "if they be bound in fetters, and be held in cords of affliction; [Then He declared unto them their work, and their transgressions, that they have behaved themselves proudly. He opened their ear to discipline, and commanded that they return from iniquity]" (Iyov 36:8).
(6) A slave who does not have the ability to redeem himself (purchase freedom) from the hand of his master and becomes submissive towards him as written <i>"Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their masters"</i> (Tehilim 123:2).
(7) When saddening troubles and disasters befall a man, his spirit will break and his heart will submit, as written <i>"And that I also have walked contrary unto them, and have brought them into the land of their enemies; if then their uncircumcised hearts be submitted"</i> (Vayikra 26:41).
(8) When one makes a personal accounting and sees that he has rebelled against G-d despite G-d's goodness towards him, and how instead of praising Him for it, he has kicked. Then, he will become submitted, ashamed, and humiliated from the Al-mighty, as written <i>"O G-d, I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face to you, my G-d: [for our iniquities are increased over our head]"</i> (Ezra 9:6).
(9) When the Creator rebukes him and humiliates him on having rebelled against Him, he will become submitted and terrified, as written on Achav <i>"Have you seen how Ahab has submitted himself before Me?"</i> (Melachim 21:29).
(10) When one senses the nearness of death, and the coming of his final day, and he contemplates the terror of death, and how he will be brought to trial and have to give an accounting, and he becomes submitted and bowed down. He will think little of himself and will regret the passing of his days, and wasting of his life without having prepared provisions of good deeds to come before him for his journey to the next world, as written <i>"The sinners in Zion are afraid"</i> (Yeshaya 33:14).

Chapter 4

<b>how should one conduct himself in it</b><br>In which matters is it a duty to conduct oneself with submission and lowliness? I say it is one's duty to conduct himself with submission in seven relations.
(1) In business dealings with his contemporaries, and in good conduct with his fellow human beings, as I will explain later. On this the verse says: <i>"despised and disgraceful is he in his own eyes"</i> (Tehilim 15:4).
(2) When meeting those who are wise in knowledge of G-d and of His torah, or pious men who are near to G-d, as written: <i>"Let the righteous smite me in kindness and reprove me"</i> (Tehilim 141:5), and <i>"The evil bow before the good"</i> (Mishlei 14:19).
(3) When one is praised for his good qualities, it is his duty to submit himself, and to reflect on previous sins and iniquities he committed, which the Creator knows about and yet keeps them secret, and holds back (retribution) from him so that he may repent from them. He should not rejoice in that his fellow men are mistaken about him. Rather, let him mourn, since the Creator knows truly the wickedness of his deeds, and his neglect in fulfilling his duties to Him and from rendering thanks for His kindnesses, and he should submit in his heart as written: <i>"For I relate my iniquity; I worry about my sin"</i> (Tehilim 38:19).
(4) If other people speak badly of him, he should submit himself to the Creator, and thank Him for having opened his eyes to a few of his many shortcomings in order to chasten him and rebuke him, so that he will repent to Him, as written <i>"He opens also their ear to discipline, and says so that they return from iniquity"</i> (Iyov 36:10).
(5) When the Creator bestows much good on him in this world, he should submit himself to G-d because of the heavy burden of gratitude he owes for them. He should also lower himself before Him out of fear that perhaps this good is for exacting retribution from him. For when G-d sends great wealth to a person, it is for one of three reasons:
1. as a benefit granted by the Creator.
2. as a trial and a test to the person.
3. for exacting retribution and to make him stumble.
Signs that the wealth is a benefit:
* If he is more occupied with fulfilling his duties to the Creator rather than with busying himself with his wealth.
* That the wealth causes him to increase his service of G-d.
* He does not set his heart on this benefit and does not place his trust in it, but spends it on fulfilling his duties to the Creator.
This is similar to how Iyov described how he would spend his wealth, how he would spend it for fulfilling his duties to G-d, and how he would not place his trust in it, as written: <i>"If I put my hope in gold, and to jewelry I said, 'My confidence'"</i> (Iyov 31:24).
Signs that the wealth is sent as a trial and test:
* That the wealthy man is more occupied in his worries with guarding and increasing his money and in fearing potential financial losses than he is with fulfilling his debt of gratitude to the Creator for it.
* That he has nothing but perpetual worry from it or from managing it.
Thus, the man is tested with the wealth and will need to give a judgment and an accounting (in the afterlife), of such a person it is said <i>"For all his days are pains and his occupation is vexation; even at night his heart does not rest"</i> (Koheles 2:23).
Signs that the wealth is for exacting retribution:
* That the wealthy man is so preoccupied with enjoying his money and deriving pleasure from it that he fails to pay his debts to the Creator and to his fellow man (such as tzedaka, maaser, good deeds -TL) that he owes on account of it, and from rendering thanks to his Benefactor (G-d). He does not feel that he is obligated to serve G-d on account of it, as the verse says: <i>"And behold, joy and happiness, slaying cattle and slaughtering sheep, eating meat and drinking wine; 'Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we will die.'"</i> (Yeshaya 22:13), and <i>"And there are harp and lyre, tambourine and flute, and wine at their drinking feasts; and the work of the L-ord they do not regard, and the deed of His hands they have not seen"</i> (ibid. 5:12), and this is a retribution disguised as a benefit.
But for the intelligent person, when good fortune comes to him and all his matters go smoothly according to his wish, he will submit himself, fearing that perhaps this wealth may have come from the Creator for exacting retribution from him, as written: <i>"riches kept by their owner for his harm"</i> (Koheles 5:12).
(6) When one reads the torah and the books of the prophets, and he sees the rewards and punishments set forth, and he becomes aware how much he has neglected to fulfill his duties to the Creator, he will realize that it is his duty to submit and lower himself before the Creator out of fear of His punishment, as written on Yoshiyahu <i>"And it was when the king heard the words of the scroll of the Law, that he rent his garments"</i> (Melachim II 22:11). The Creator then said to him <i>"Because your heart was tender, and you have humbled yourself before the L-ord, when you heard what I spoke against this place, and against the inhabitants thereof, that they should become a desolation and a curse, and have torn your clothes, and wept before Me; I also have heard you..."</i> (ibid. 22:19).
(7) When one is involved in an act of service such as giving charity, prayer, or mitzva whether voluntary or obligatory, or in rebuking others, he should not have in his heart any pride or haughtiness, but rather should outwardly and inwardly submit himself and be lowly before the Creator. This act should be like nothing in his eyes compared to the magnitude of what is his duty to G-d which is many times more than that deed, as written "With what shall I come before the L-ord, bow before the Most High G-d?...[He has showed you, O man, what is good; and what does the L-ord require of you, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with your G-d?]" (Micha 6:6).

Chapter 5

<b>How one acquires it</b><br>The manner to acquire the trait of submission and the way to facilitate its acquisition is for one's thoughts and reflections to be set on seven topics:
(1) The root and origin of his existence is from a putrid drop (of human seed) and blood, after they became foul and stenchful. Afterwards, he was nourished from blood of tuma, all the days of his stay in his mother's belly. Afterwards, he exited, and was weak and fragile in body and limbs. Then, he advanced from stage to stage until most of his years have passed. Afterwards, he will become ill from old age until he completes his days (dies).
One of the wise men would say on this matter: "I am amazed at how one who has passed through the pathway of urine and blood two times can be proud and haughty?" Contemplating this or similar things regarding the nature of man necessarily brings humility, as king David said: <i>"O L-ord, what is man that You should regard him, the son of man, that You should consider him?"</i> (Tehilim 144:3), and <i>"Man that is born of a woman is of few days and full of trouble"</i> (Iyov 14:1), and <i>"But I am a worm and not a man"</i> (Tehilim 22:7), and <i>"How much less man, that is a worm? and the son of man, which is but a maggot?"</i> (Iyov 25:6).
(2) When one contemplates the severity of the tribulations that befall a man in this world such as hunger and thirst, cold and heat, sickness, accidents, worries, which one has no assurance against until death. When an understanding person puts all this to heart, and he realizes how weak he is, how limited and helpless he is from protecting himself from all of this, he will recognize his predicament. He is not only similar to a prisoner in this world, he truly is a prisoner! And so he will humble himself like the humbling of a prisoner who is placed in a dungeon, and who has no strategy or ability to free himself without his master's consent, as written: <i>"May the cry of the prisoner come before You"</i> (Tehilim 79:11), and <i>"Bring my soul out of prison"</i>(Tehilim 142:7).
(3) When one considers his fleetingness, and the swift coming of death, and the abrupt cutting off of his desires and aspirations at that time. He must leave all of his possessions, and abandon hope that he can take with him any of them as provisions or that any of them will be of use to him when he is in the grave. The countenance of his face has already dimmed, its appearance darkens. And his flesh (after death) will bring up worms, decay and putrid liquid. The signs of his physical beauty vanished and an increasingly rotten odor will exude from him,as if he had never washed or scrubbed or put on a good fragrance. When he puts this or similar considerations to mind, he will feel humble and lowly. He will not become arrogant. His heart will not arise and become high and proud, as written: <i>"Withdraw yourselves from man whose breath is in his nostrils, for in what is he to be esteemed?"</i> (Yeshaya 2:22), and <i>"men of low degree are but vanity, and men of high degree are but a lie; were they to be put on a scale, together they would equal nothing"</i> (Tehilim 62:10).
(4) When one contemplates on the service he owes to G-d for the benevolent goodness and abundant kindness bestowed on him, and he considers how much he has neglected the precepts and fallen short in their observance, both those which reason mandates and those which the torah commands, and how his pleas and excuses will be cut short when the day of reckoning comes and he will be full of regret on the great day of assembly. Then he will be submitted and his spirit will be broken, as written <i>"For lo, the day comes, glowing like a furnace, and all the audacious sinners and all the perpetrators of wickedness will be stubble. And the sun that comes shall burn them up so that it will leave them neither root nor branch, says the L-ord of Hosts"</i> (Malachi 3:19), and <i>"who can endure the day He comes"</i> (Malachi 3:2).
(5) When one contemplates the greatness of the Creator and His infinite might, who observes one's outer and inner life. When one fixes his mind on this great theme and considers what our sages report regarding the impressive and awesome presence of the pious sages in previous generations, for example "he (Rav Sheshes) gazed his eyes on him and the man (died and) became a pile of bones" (Berachos 28a), or as it was said of Yonatan ben Uziel: "when he would expound the torah, any bird that would fly over him was instantly burnt."
And there is no doubt that the prophets were greater than them, and you will find that the prophets' strength melted and they bent their knees and prostrated themselves when they were visited by angels, as written by Daniel, Yehoshua, and many like them. And you will find in the books of the prophets that the angels bow and prostrate themselves before the Creator, as written <i>"the hosts of the heavens bow to You"</i> (Nechemia 9:6), and <i>"Behold, He does not trust His servants and He casts reproach upon His angels"</i> (Iyov 4:18), and <i>"in His temple does every one speak of His glory"</i> (Tehilim 29:9), and <i>"And one cried unto another, and said, 'Holy, holy, holy, is the L-ord of Hosts'"</i> (Yeshaya 6:3).
And when one reflects what is manifested to our intelligence in what He created, such as the sun, moon, stars, the celestial spheres, and the earth and all that is in it such as minerals, plants and animals - this should be sufficient for anyone who has understanding and intelligence, as written <i>"How great are Your works, O L-ord! Your thoughts are exceedingly deep; A brutish man knows not; [neither does a fool understand this]"</i> (Tehilim 92:6), and <i>"all the nations are as nothing before Him"</i> (Yeshaya 40:17), and <i>"all the inhabitants of the earth are as nothing"</i> (Daniel 4:32).
When an understanding man considers his significance relative to all of humanity, and the significance of humanity relative to the earth, and the earth relative to the lunar sphere, and the lunar sphere relative to the cosmos, and that everything relative to the greatness of the Creator is as nothing, he will be humbled in his soul and will lower himself before the Creator, as written <i>"[when I contemplate Your sky, the moon and the stars..] What is man that You should be mindful of him?"</i> (Tehilim 8:5).
(6) When one reads the books of the prophets and he sees the great punishment meted out to the arrogant and proud and also G-d's great protection over the humble and the lowly. Regarding the arrogant and proud it is written: <i>"The lofty eyes of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and the L-ord alone shall be exalted on that day"</i>(Yeshaya 2:11), and <i>"For the day of the L-ord of Hosts shall come upon everyone that is proud and lofty, and upon everyone that is lifted up; and he shall be brought low"</i> (Yeshaya 2:12).
Regarding both types, it is written: <i>"The L-ord lifts up the meek: He casts the wicked down to the ground"</i> (Tehilim 147:6), and <i>"Though the L-ord be high, yet has He respect unto the lowly: but the proud He knows from afar."</i> (Tehilim 138:6), and it is said about the lowly <i>"the humble shall inherit the land"</i> (Tehilim 37:11), and <i>"the L-ord has anointed me to bring good tidings to the humble"</i> (Yeshaya 61:1), and <i>"With the lofty and the holy ones I dwell, and with the crushed and humble in spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble and to revive the heart of the crushed"</i>(Yeshaya 57:15), and <i>"Before destruction comes pride, and before stumbling [comes] a haughty spirit"</i> (Mishlei 16:18), and <i>"Before ruin, a man's heart becomes haughty, but before honor there is humility."</i> (Mishlei 18:12).
(7) When one observes the changing of people's situations in this world, the swift changing of governments and rulers, and the passing of people from one condition to another, and the fall of one nation promoting the rise of another, while the end of all is death, as written <i>"Like sheep, they are destined to the grave; death will devour them"</i> (Tehilim 49:15), he will submit and will not pride himself on any worldly possessions, and he won't place his trust on any matter of them, as written <i>"Praiseworthy is the man who made the L-ord his trust, and did not turn to the haughty and those who turn to falsehood"</i> (Tehilim 40:5).
If a man's mind is never empty of these seven matters we mentioned, he will always be humble and lowly. Humility will cling to his nature and will not separate from him. When he clings to humility, all the snares of arrogance, haughtiness, and pride will keep far from him, as we mentioned. He will be saved from sin and from stumbling as written <i>"and that His fear may be before your faces, that you sin not"</i> (Shemos 20:20). And our sages said: "Reflect upon three things and you will not come to sin. Know from where you came and where you are going and before whom you are destined to give account and reckoning. From where have you come? - from a putrid drop. Where are you going? - to a place of dirt, worms, and maggots. Before whom are you destined to give account and reckoning? - before the supreme King of kings, the holy One, blessed be He" (Avos 3:1).

Chapter 6

<b>How the submitted should conduct himself</b><br>The manners of conduct, which are proper for the submitted person to adopt, are ten.
(1) Knowledge of G-d, and of His good attributes, and the higher qualities He bestowed on man over other living creatures, as written <i>"You give him dominion over the work of Your hands; You have placed everything beneath his feet"</i> (Tehilim 8:7).
When one recognizes the infinite greatness of the Creator and His exalted omnipotence and supreme wisdom, he will submit to Him and become humbled before Him. And he will learn from the verse: <i>"Do not glorify yourself before a king"</i> (Mishlei 25:6) and draw the inference - how much more so before the King of kings, and the Master of masters, who is exalted beyond any likeness or comparison, as Chana said: <i>"There is none as holy as the L-ord, For there is none like You"</i> (Shmuel 2:2).
(2) He should know the duties ordained by the torah and those which reason teaches us. He should read G-d's torah, and gain understanding in the wisdom derived from reason, the written law, and the oral law (talmud) so as to learn from there the conditions for humility, and the areas where it applies.
(3) To cultivate a broad heart (forbearance -TL) and ability to bear patiently words and deeds one hates, [and do so] for the Creator's sake, as written <i>"If I repaid the one who did evil to me, Or have plundered him who without cause was my enemy"</i> (Tehilim 7:5), and <i>"Do not say, 'As he did to me, so will I do to him; I will repay the man according to his deeds'"</i> (Mishlei 24:29), and our sages taught (Gitin 36b): "those who are insulted, but do not retaliate, who hear themselves humiliated and do not respond, serve (G-d) with love and rejoice [even] in suffering, on them the verse (Shoftim 5:31) says: "those that love Him will be like the sun when it goes forth in its might". The sages refer to this as <i>"Ma'avir Al Midosav"</i> (lets offenses pass and is forgiving).
(4) He should do good to others, speak well of them, judge them favorably, not speak of their faults, forgive them when they speak badly of him, even if they do not deserve this, as written <i>"Even in your thoughts, do not curse a king"</i> (Koheles 10:20), and <i>"You let loose your mouth for evil, and you accustomed your tongue to deceit, you slandered your own mother's son"</i>(Tehilim 50:19). Regarding forgiving others who speak ill of him, the verse says: <i>"and Miriam and Aharon spoke of Moshe"</i>, and then <i>"the man Moshe was exceedingly humble"</i>, i.e. he had forgiven them. Likewise, the wise man said: <i>"Also take no heed on all words that are spoken"</i> (Koheles 7:21), and adds <i>"For your heart knows that many times you too cursed others"</i>(Koheles 7:22).
And our Sages taught (Taanis 25b) that Rebbi Eliezer once (in a time of drought) became Chazan (cantor) and offered 24 supplications for rain and there was no response. Afterwards, Rebbi Akiva became Chazan and said only: "Our Father, our King..." and his prayer was accepted. A heavenly voice proclaimed "not because the latter sage was greater than the former, but only because he was 'Ma'avir Al Midosav' (lets offenses pass and is forgiving) while the former does not behave thus."
And it is said of a pious man who passed by an extremely foul smelling carcass of a dog. His disciples said to him: "how foul-smelling is this carcass!". He answered them "how white are its teeth!" And they regretted on having spoken disparagingly about the carcass. If it is improper to speak disparagingly of a dead dog, all the more so for a living human being. And if it is proper to praise the carcass of a dead dog for the whiteness of its teeth, how much more so, according to this, is it a duty to praise a human being endowed with intelligence and understanding. His intent was to rebuke them, to not habituate their tongues to speak badly, as this will enter their nature.
Likewise, when one habituates his tongue to speak good, it will become part of his nature, as written <i>"He who does not habituate/slander with his tongue"</i> (Tehilim 15:3), and it says regarding the opposite of this <i>"Your tongue devises mischief, [as a sharpened razor, working deceit], You love all devouring words"</i> (Tehilim 52:4), and <i>"What does it give to you, what does it increase unto you, O deceitful tongue?"</i> (Tehilim 120:3), and <i>"The words of a wise man's mouth are gracious; but the lips of a fool will swallow him up"</i> (Koheles 10:12)
(5) There should be humility in all his worldly matters, whether they are public or private, in speech and in deed, when he is active or resting - that his interior does not contradict his exterior, nor his hidden matters contradict his revealed matters. Rather his behavior should be weighed, proper, harmonious, and consistent - all going in the spirit of submission and humility to G-d and also towards human beings, in accordance with each person's merits (their wisdom and fear (reverence) of G-d - <i>TL</i>) and the good he benefits from them in religious and secular matters, as written <i>"Good is the man who is gracious and lends, who conducts his affairs with discretion"</i> (Tehilim 112:5). And our sages said: "be humble in spirit before all men" (Avos 4:12), and "Be submissive to an elder and courteous to the young." (Avos 3:12).
(6) That one's esteem be high and one's desire great for matters of the next world, that it should not be sufficient for him whatever comes his way, and he should not consider that what he does is enough. Rather, his good deeds, service, and efforts should be little in his eyes. He should always strive to reach a higher level, as the verse says of Yehoshafat <i>"And his heart was lifted up in the ways of the L-ord"</i> (Divrei Hayamim II 17:6), and let one always complain to himself that he is not doing enough of his torah duties to G-d and men. And he should seek help from G-d, and strengthen to add in the service and in good deeds, as written <i>"I pray that my ways be directed to keep Your statutes"</i> (Tehilim 119:5).
(7) That his deeds be little in his eyes, and that he should complain to himself over his shortcomings in the fulfillment of his religious duties to G-d and to his fellow men. He should pray to G-d for help and strength. For the sake of G-d, he should put aside all haughtiness, and renounce personal pride and dignity while he is performing any religious service, whether he is alone or among a crowd of people. As the verse said about Aharon, in his exalted status (as head priest), <i>"And he shall lift out the ashes"</i> (Vayikra 6:3). The Creator obligated him to take out the ashes every day in order to lower and remove pride from his heart. And similar to this by king David: <i>"and she saw the king David leaping and dancing before the L-ord; and she despised him in her heart"</i> (Shmuel II 6:16), and the rest of the matter, and also <i>"I will speak of your testimonies before kings, and will not be ashamed"</i> (Tehilim 119:46).
(8) He should be contented with whatever means of livelihood present themselves, and with whatever he finds, because he regards himself as insignificant and of little worth. He should accustom himself to abstain from gratifying bodily desires in order to be free to pay his duties to G-d for His many favors and great goodness towards him, as David said <i>"I will run the way of your commandments, for You will free my heart"</i> (Tehilim 119:32).
(9) To exact vengeance from the wicked for the honor of the Creator. Let one not be enticed on account of his own practice of forgiving others in matters that only affect himself to also forgive them in matters of G-d, or to forgive those who speak against His prophets, or his pious and treasured ones. Likewise, let one not conduct himself in his personal way of forgiving others, when he sees a man oppressing another man. Rather, he should come to the rescue of the oppressed and help to free them from the hands of their oppressors, as written <i>"O house of David, thus said the L-ord; Execute judgment in the morning, and deliver him that is spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor"</i> (Yirmiya 21:12), and <i>"I broke the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of his teeth"</i> (Iyov 29:17).
He should teach others the service of G-d, rebuke them and make them feel ashamed. He should exhort them on the good, and warn them on the evil forcefully and by word of mouth to the extent of his ability, and be swift to exact the punishment G-d commanded to administer to one who is guilty. He should not be humble or lowly in this, as written by Pinchas: <i>"Then Pinchas stood up and exacted justice, and the plague was stopped. It was accounted for him as a merit for generation to generation forever"</i> (Tehilim 106:30).
(10) He should speak little and in a low voice. He should laugh little. He should seldom take an oath in the name of G-d even if what he swears is true. No falsehood should come out of his lips. He should not sit in the company of men engaged in laughter and idle talk, nor delight in the worldly things ignorant people delight in. He should act like this out of submission and lowliness of spirit, not out of arrogance and pride as the prophet said <i>"I sat not in the assembly of merrymakers, nor did I rejoice; because of Your hand I sat alone, for You filled me with indignation"</i> (Yirmiya 15:17).

Chapter 7

<b>When it applies and when it does not</b><br>The signs by which true submission is verified in a humble person are five.
(1) When he is intensely angry towards someone who reviled him, whether in word or deed, and he rules over his spirit, and forgives, despite that he has the ability to take revenge, and instead forgives him out of humility and lowliness - this attests to true submission.
(2) When he is struck with a severe financial loss, or some calamity occurs to one of his loved ones - if his calmness overcomes his shock, and he humbly accepts the Creator's decree, and justifies the Divine judgment - this attests to good submission and to his lowliness before G-d, as the verse tells of Aharon when Nadav and Avihu were killed (by a heavenly fire): <i>"And Aharon was silent"</i> (Vayikra 10:3), and David said: <i>"Be silent to G-d and wait patiently for Him"</i> (Tehilim 37:7), and <i>"Therefore the wise shall keep silence in that time"</i> (Amos 5:13).
(3) When a deed he does becomes generally known, whether it is good or bad.
If it is a good deed and he is praised for it, and he belittles the deed to the one who praised him, and he will consider in his thoughts that the deed is small and lacking in quality to be acceptable to the Creator due to his being obligated to do deeds many times more than this. And he will say to the one who praised him: "stop my brother, because compared to my sins, it is like a spark of fire (trying to extinguish) the sea, and even if it is worth something, how can I know if it is saved from the things which nullify a mitzvah (as described in Gate #5), and that the Creator will accept it from me, and will not return it to me, or throw it back into my face?, as written: "When you come to appear before Me, who requested this of you, to trample My courts?" (Yeshaya 1:12), and <i>"You shall no longer bring vain flour-offerings, it is smoke of abomination to Me"</i> (ibid 1:13).
All the more so, if the praise is false, that he must reject it, and say to the speaker: "My brother, it is bad enough that I am lacking in fulfilling my obligations to the Creator, do not add to my discredit the iniquity of accepting praise for something I have not done, for I am aware of my sins and iniquities better than you are, as David said: 'For I know my transgressions..' (Tehilim 51:5).
If people speak of bad things he did (which are true):
He will admit his failings and will not seek false excuses to absolve and justify himself, as Yehuda said: "She has been more righteous than I" (Bereishis 38:26), and he won't attempt to shame the speaker and make him out a liar, nor condemn him for having exposed him, rather, he will say to him: "my brother, the amount of bad things you have observed in me is little compared to what you don't know about me and which the Creator has for so long kept hidden. If you knew the full extent of my bad deeds and transgressions, you would flee from me, fearing that the punishment of the Creator which they merit, would befall you too, as a poet once said: "if my neighbors could smell my sins, they would run away and keep far from me", and as Iyov said: <i>"Did I, like men, cover my transgressions, to conceal my iniquity in my hiding place?"</i> (Iyov 31:33).
If the bad thing that was said of him was false, he should say to the person who reported it: "my brother, I am not amazed that the Creator has saved me from doing that which you accuse me, since He has bestowed upon me so many benefits. What really amazes me, is that He allowed to remain concealed what is far worse and more reprehensible than that which you have told over about me. Stop my brother, and be concerned for your merits, that you do not lose them without your noticing it. For it is told of a pious man about whom someone spoke badly of, that when he heard of this, he sent a basket full of the choicest fruits of his province to the one who spoke badly of him and wrote to him: 'I have been notified that you sent me an offering of your merits, and I am sending you this gift in return' "
Another pious man once said: "Many people will come on the day of judgment, and when they are shown their deeds, they will find in the book of their merits, good deeds that they did not do, and they will say: 'we did not do these things'. They will be answered: 'they were done by someone who spoke badly of you'. Likewise, at that time, those who spoke badly of others will find that some of their merits will be missing, they will seek them, and will be told: 'you forfeited them when you spoke of this or that person'.
Similarly, some people will find in their book of sins, sins they did not do, and when they will protest saying "we did not commit these things", they will be told "these were added to the list of your misdeeds for having spoken of this or that person", as written: <i>"And return to our neighbors sevenfold into their bosom, their reproach with which they reproached You, O L-ord"</i>(Tehilim 79:12). And on this the scripture warns us: <i>"remember what the L-ord your G-d did to Miriam on the journey"</i> (Devarim 24:9).
(4) When G-d bestows a special benefit on him such as exceptional wisdom and understanding, or great wealth, or honor from the ruling king, or other things like this which people commonly take pride in and become haughty on account of, and yet one remains in his humility as before and even increases in humility and lowliness before G-d, and honors and benefits other people, as written by Avraham who said: <i>"I am but dust and ashes"</i> (Bereishis 18:27) when the Creator praised him saying <i>"how can I hide from Avraham what I intend to do"</i>(Bereishis 18:17). And Moshe and Aharon said <i>"we are nothing"</i> (Shmos 16:7), and David said: <i>"I am a worm and not a man"</i> (Tehilim 22:7). (If one acts like this), it will clarify his interior and affirm his submission is true. The wise man said of this matter: <i>"If the spirit of the ruler rise up against you, leave not your place; for gentleness pacifies great offenses"</i> (Koheles 10:4).
(5) When the humble man rebukes himself, exacts the Creator's justice upon himself of his own initiative, and voluntarily submits to it, even though no human authority has the power to enforce it - this points to his true humility before G-d as well as his lowliness and submission to Him, as written: <i>"We have trespassed against our G-d, and have taken strange wives of the people of the land"</i> (Ezra 10:2), and <i>"they gave their hand to send away their wives"</i> (Ezra 10:19).
Through these situations and others similar to them will be fulfilled the signs of [true] submission to G-d and humility from the submitted and whether their heart is faithful in them.

Chapter 8

<b>does submission depend on good traits or the opposite</b><br>Is submission secondary to other moral qualities or are other moral qualities secondary to it? I answer this as follows:
It is well known to us, that the first prerequisite for the service of G-d is for one to divest from himself completely the trait of masterhood and leave it to G-d alone and that he accepts on himself all the traits of slavehood to the Creator.
Because slavehood and masterhood are interdependent, one cannot exist without the other, a man cannot be called a slave if he does not have a master, and a master is not fit for this title until he has a slave. Neither one can precede the other whether by title or by relationship, similar to a buyer and a seller.
Hence, a human being's service of G-d can only exist when he assumes all the traits of slavehood, namely submission and humility before Him, shedding from himself all traits of masterhood, namely, self-glory, honor, splendor, pride and the like.
One of the wise men said: "Grandeur is the garment of the Creator. Whoever wishes to come into His presence in this garment will be pushed out. David said: <i>"The L-ord reigns; He is clothed in majesty"</i> (Tehilim 93:1).
PROOF THAT SUBMISSION IS FIRST AND FOREMOST<br>The believer cannot acquire [extra] piety until he [first] discharges his [basic] obligation, as written <i>"Has the L-ord as much desire in burnt offerings and peace-offerings, as in obeying the voice of the L-ord? Behold, obedience is better than a peace-offering"</i> (Shmuel 15:22).
And he cannot succeed in fulfilling the [basic] duty until he undertakes the service of the Creator.<br>And he cannot succeed in undertaking the service of the Creator until he first designates G-d alone with all the traits of masterhood and divests them from himself for His sake.<br>And he cannot succeed in this until he undertakes all the conditions of slavehood.
And he cannot succeed in undertaking the [conditions of] slavehood except through training to submit himself to G-d, and to humble himself and lower himself before Him, as we explained.
Hence, it follows that all moral qualities are secondary to the trait of submission, which is the head and beginning of all of them. And it follows logically from this, that no piety can possibly exist in one whose heart is devoid of submission to G-d or has in it any trace of arrogance or pride.
Therefore the beginning of repentance is lowliness, humility, and submission, as the verse says: <i>"If My people, who are called by My Name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek My face, [and turn from their wicked ways; then will I hearken from heaven, and will forgive their sin...]"</i> (Divrei II Hayamim 7:14), and <i>"They have submitted themselves; therefore I will not destroy them, but I will grant them some deliverance"</i> (Divrei Hayamim II 12:7).

Chapter 9

<b>if it is possible for a man's heart to contain submission and arrogance simultaneously</b><br>Can submission and pride co-exist in the heart of the believer? I answer this as follows:
There are two categories of pride:
(1) A man's pride in his body, and its conditions, or in all things that further his body's well being.
(2) A man's pride in his spiritual qualities - the wisdom used and good deeds he performed in the service of G-d.
Any pride which stems from bodily things distances submission from the heart. It is impossible for both to co-exist simultaneously since they mutually repel each other. For if a man takes pride in any secular thing, what brings him to this pride is:
* belittling the Source of this good (G-d)
* downplaying the value of this good
* little consciousness of how swiftly it can be taken from him or leave him.
Rather, he will consider it that he himself is the creator of his good fortune, that he has acquired it with his own strength and ingenuity, as written about Sancheriv <i>"by the strength of my hand I have accomplished"</i> (Yeshaya 10:13), and about Nebuchadnezar <i>"Is this not the great Babylon, which I built for a royal palace with the strength of my power and for the honor of my glory?"</i> (Daniel 4:27), and Pharaoh <i>"My river is my own..."</i> (Yechezkel 29:3), and you already know what swiftly followed their boastful proclamations - the destruction of their kingdom and their land.
Pride in spiritual qualities divides into two categories, one reprehensible and one praiseworthy.
The reprehensible one - that a person prides himself on his wisdom or a righteous man on his good deeds. This causes the wisdom and righteousness to become magnified in his eyes, so that he is satisfied with what he has already accomplished, and thinks that it is enough for him the good reputation and praise he has achieved from his fellow men. This will cause him to look down on others, despise them, and speak badly of them, to belittle the wise men of his generation in his eyes, and glorify himself in the shortcomings and ignorance of other people. Our Rabbis of blessed memory call this: "one who seeks honor by putting down others (has no share in the world to come)". One like this will never be submitted nor humble.
The praiseworthy one - the pride of the wise man in his wisdom or of the righteous man in his good deeds when it is an expression of his gratitude to the Creator for helping him greatly on them, and of his joy in them. When it causes him to improve and continue exerting himself in them, and to be humble to his colleagues, happy with their success, and concerned for their honor. To not reveal their failings and to speak good of them. To love them and judge them favorably, and to be careful of their honor. All of his own good deeds will seem few in his eyes, and he will always exert himself to increase them. He will be humbled by his inability to reach his longing in them. He will lower himself before someone who he hopes will help him to increase in them. He will be grateful to G-d for having graced him with qualities and thanks Him for helping him to reach exalted levels.
This kind of arrogance (aggrandizing) is not detrimental to submission and does not repel it. The verse says of Yehoshafat <i>"And his heart was uplifted in the ways of the L-ord"</i> (Divrei Hayamim II 17:6), just the opposite - such pride helps humility and increases his submission as written <i>"In the wake of humility comes fear of the L-ord, riches, honor, and life"</i> (Mishlei 22:4).

Chapter 10

<b>benefits of submission in this world and the next</b><br>The benefits of submission in matters of this world and the next world are six things, three of them refer to matters of this world and three to matters of the next world.
For matters of this world:
(1) That one is happy in his portion. Because for one whom arrogance and pride have entered in him, the entire world and everything in it is not enough for his needs due to his inflated heart and due to his looking down with contempt on the portion allotted to him. But if he is humble, he does not consider himself as having any special merit, and so whatever he attains of the world's goods, he is satisfied with it for his sustenance and other needs. This will bring him peace of mind and minimize his anxiety. He will eat what is available and wears and dwells with what he can find. Due to his submission, even the minimum of the world's goods is enough for him. But for the arrogant - the entire world will not satisfy his lacking due to the pride of his heart and arrogance, as the wise man said: <i>"A righteous man eats to sate his appetite, but the stomach of the wicked shall feel want"</i> (Mishlei 13:25).
(2) The humble man can bear it when troubles befall him or when reverses in his affairs occur to him due to his lowliness and humble spirit. But for the proud man, his fear will be great and his ability to bear will be little when hit by troubles because his soul is proud, his heart is haughty, and he is dissatisfied with his matters, as written by one who was in this way: <i>"How have you fallen from heaven, oh morning star? You (Nebuchadnezar) have been cut down to earth, You who cast lots on nations"</i> (Yeshaya 14:12).
(3) The humble man will find more favor in people's eyes. He is beloved by them, and will easily fit in with them and adopt their customs.
It was already said on a king who would hasten his steps when walking. He was asked about this and answered: "because it keeps me away from the way of pride, and also so I arrive more quickly to my destination"
A wise man was asked: "How were you able to become accepted as head of your entire generation?" He replied: "Because I never met one of them that I did not see in him a quality in which he is greater than me. If he was wiser than me, I concluded that he must be more G-d fearing than me since his wisdom is greater than mine. If he had less wisdom than I have, I considered that on the day of Judgment, he will be held less accountable than I, because my transgressions were committed with knowledge and intent while his were committed in error. If he was older than me, I would reason that his merits must be greater than mine since he came into the world before me. If he was younger, I thought that his sins were fewer than mine. If he was equal to me in age and wisdom, I would tell myself: maybe his heart is more devoted to G-d than mine, because I know of my past sins, but I don't know of any that he committed. If he was wealthier than me, I would think that due to his wealth, he likely served G-d more than me, in doing charities and helping the poor. If he was poorer than me, I would consider that he was more low and humble than me due to his poorness, and he is better than me. Due to this, I never ceased to honor all of them and humble myself before them."
Similarly, our sages taught "judge every man favorably" (Avos 1:6), "receive every person with a cheerful countenance" (Avos 1:15), and "Be very, very lowly of spirit" (Avos 4:4), and "One should always be flexible as a reed and not unyielding as a cedar. This is why the reed has merited to have made from it a quill to write a Sefer Torah, Tefilin and Mezuzot" (Taanis 20b).
(4) The fourth benefit, which is for matters of the afterlife, is that the humble person is nearer to attaining wisdom, since he is drawn to the Sages, he submits to them, and frequently goes to them, as written: <i>"He who goes with the wise will become wise"</i> (Mishlei 13:20). Our sages of blessed memory said: <i>"Let your house be a meeting house for the sages; sit amidst the dust of their feet and drink in their words thirstily"</i> (Avos 1:4). G-d will help him to attain wisdom as written: <i>"The humble will He guide in justice: and the humble will He teach his way"</i> (Tehilim 25:9). But for one who has a proud heart, true wisdom will never endure in him, and he will never reach the goal of clear knowledge, because he feels too important to go to the wise men and torah sages, as written <i>"The wicked, through the pride of his countenance will not seek..."</i> (Tehilim 10:4).
(5) The humble man hastens to do his religious duties with diligence and zeal. He does not become arrogant because he fulfills them, and does not take lightly any of them as our sages said: <i>"Be as scrupulous about a light precept as of a grave one"</i> (Avos 2:1). But one who is proud procrastinates from doing the service, due to his high heartedness and inflated spirit. He does not sense this until he falls and becomes low, as written: <i>"Say unto the king and to the queen, Humble yourselves, sit down: for your rule shall come down, even the crown of your glory"</i> (Yirmiya 13:18), and <i>"Six things the L-ord hates, and the seventh is an abomination of His soul; Haughty eyes..."</i> (Mishlei 6:16).
(6) The service of the humble man is acceptable to G-d, as written: <i>"The sacrifices of G-d are a broken spirit; [O G-d, You will not despise a broken and crushed heart]"</i> (Tehilim 51:19). His sin is quickly forgiven if he repents from it, as written: <i>"He who conceals his sins will not succeed, but he who confesses and abandons [them] will obtain mercy"</i> (Mishlei 28:13), and <i>"When men are cast down, then you shall say, There is lifting up; and He shall save the humble person"</i> (Iyov 22:29).
FINAL WORDS<br>These ten roots of submission will clarify for you, my brother, the remaining qualities of this important, supremely lofty virtue, which I have not mentioned in this gate. Remember therefore what I have called to your attention concerning this virtue. Place it before your eyes. Ponder it always. Strive to acquire it. Be constantly checking it with your soul and faculties. Seek the help of G-d in this. Plea to Him for it, in order that you be drawn closer to Him and attain His favor. Perhaps He will and straighten you to this virtue, thereby preparing for you the path to Him, as the pious would ask after their prayers: "O G-d, keep my tongue from evil and my lips from deceit. Help me to be silent in the face of derision, and let my soul be like dust to everyone."
Be on guard against the imaginations of your heart, and enticements of the yetzer (evil inclination) towards you that would mislead you to haughtiness, arrogance, pride, lust for ruling, self-glorification and domineering. The wise man already exhorted us as to the right road a man should take in this world in saying: "Two things have I asked of you... Remove far from me vanity and lies: [give me neither poverty nor riches]; give me my daily bread. [lest I become sated and deny, and say, 'Who is the L-ord?' Or lest I become poor and steal" (Mishlei 30:7-9).
Wake up my brother! Do not evade from healing the sickness of pride from your soul and your traits with the medicines I have taught you. Let not your observing of the masses' neglecting the healing their souls from this disease stop you from doing so, in saying to yourself: "I will share the same fate as them". Because, if a blind man finds the potions which can benefit and heal him if he applies them, it is not proper for him to procrastinate using them and say "I will share the same fate of my blind friends". Anyone who heard him saying such a statement would scorn his words and ridicule his reasoning.
According to this, examine your soul, and exert yourself with all of your might to promote its well-being. Do not neglect what will benefit you in this world and in the next, lest you die without fulfilling your longing for exalted spiritual levels which you are capable of reaching, as the wise man said: <i>"The desire of a lazy man will bring about his death, for his hands refuse to labor"</i>(Mishlei 21:25), and <i>"By the fields of a lazy man, I passed and by the vineyard of a man without sense. And behold, thistles had grown all over it; nettles had covered its surface, and its stone fence had been torn down"</i> (Mishlei 24:30), and the rest of the matter.
May the Al-mighty teach us and you the path to His service, in His mercy and kindness. Amen.

Seventh Treatise on Repentance

Introduction

Since our preceding discussion dealt with the subject of submission, which is the root and beginning of repentance, I deemed it fit to follow with a clarification of its essential parts and the ways to complete its fulfillment.
I will start with the obligation and necessity for repentance. For it is already clear to us through reason and scripture that a human being falls short in the fulfilment of his service to the Creator which he is under duty to perform.
Through reason:
By what we observe of man, his changing nature, his composition of different elements, his opposing natures, his changing moods and emotions, the changing of circumstances which motivate his behavior. All this inevitably causes changes in his actions according to the state he is in, such as from decent to indecent, wicked to righteous, good to evil. For this it was necessary for the torah to restrain him (from evil) and guide him (to good).
Through scripture:
Among them, what the verse says: <i>"for the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth"</i> (Bereishis 8:21), and <i>"the L-ord saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually"</i> (Bereishis 6:5), and <i>"a man is born as a wild donkey's colt"</i> (Iyov 11:12), and <i>"Behold, the moon has no brightness"</i>(Iyov 25:5) and <i>"how much less, man, who is a worm, and the son of man, who is but a maggot!"</i> (Iyov 25:6), and <i>"[How then can man be justified with G-d,] or how can he be clean that is born of a woman?"</i> (Iyov 25:4).
Since we have clarified the reality that man's actions fall short, it was out of Divine grace to man that the Creator gave him the capability of rectifying his mistake and of returning the loss of his service through repentance. G-d encouraged the matter and promised (its effectiveness) through his servants, the prophets. And He expanded the possible excuses (vindications) for the man who went off the path of His service, and promised us that He would accept these excuses from us, and desire in us quickly, even if we rebelled against His word and broke His covenant for a long time as written: <i>"And when a wicked man repents of his wickedness and performs justice and righteousness, he shall live thereby..."</i> (Yechezkel 33:19).
Since tzadikim (righteous people) fall into two categories: (1) those saved from sin and iniquity, (2) those who sinned but repented. Since the vast majority of tzadikim are of the penitent (second type), therefore the psalmist opened with <i>"How blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, Whose sin is covered"</i> (Tehilim 32:1), and afterwards spoke of the first type.
And even though, those saved from ever sinning are on a higher level (than the penitent), since every penitent was a tzadik before he sinned, but not every tzadik was a penitent. And David said of them <i>"How blessed is the man to whom the L-ord does not count in him iniquity"</i> (Tehilim 32:2), and the reason he mentioned them second is because they are few to be found in every generation, as written: <i>"If You, L-ord, should mark iniquities, O L-ord, who could stand?"</i> (Tehilim 130:3), and <i>"For there is not a just man on earth who does good and sins not"</i>(Koheles 7:20), and <i>"for (there is) no man who does not sin"</i> (Melachim 8:46).
Because of this our Rabbis instituted in the beginning of our (Amida) prayers the matter of repentance and forgiveness in saying <i>"harotze biteshuva"</i> (who desires repentance), and <i>"hamarbe lisloach"</i> (who abundantly forgives).
It is now proper for us to clarify ten matters on the subject of repentance:
1. What is repentance?
2. What are its parts?
3. What are the prerequisites of repentance?
4. An explanation of its essential elements.
5. the conditions for each element.
6. which things stir a man to repent?
7. which things are detrimental to repentance?
8. is the penitent equal to the tzadik who never sinned?
9. if it is possible to repent of every sin or not?
10. strategy to be adopted by one for whom repentance is difficult
In this, we will complete the various kinds of repentance and its obligations, by the fulfillment of which, with G-d's help, we hope to obtain forgiveness of our transgressions.





Chapter 1

<i>- What is repentance</i><br>With regard to what is repentance, I say that repentance means that a man makes himself fit to resume the service of the Creator after he went out of it and transgressed against it, and to restore what he lost in it. This could be due to:
* ignorance of G-d and of the matters of serving Him.
* his evil inclination had overpowered his understanding
* neglect of his duties towards G-d
* associating with bad company who entice him to sin,
or other similar reasons, as the wise man said: <i>"My son, if sinners entice you, do not consent"</i> (Mishlei 1:10), and <i>"My son, fear the L-ord and the king; and meddle not with them that are given to change"</i> (Mishlei 24:21).
The withdrawing out of the service of G-d occurs in two ways, whether one (1) abandons and ignores what the Creator commanded us to do, or (2) one does what He warned us not to do, with the intent to rebel against his Creator.
If his withdrawing out of the service consists only in abandoning what the Creator commanded to do (but not in doing what He warned against), then the repentance for his shortcomings will be to exert himself in the proper acts and to cling to the roots of repentance which I will clarify in this gate.
If his withdrawing consisted of doing what the Creator warned against, the way to make up his failing will be in guarding from returning to do any form of this act, to endeavor to do its opposite, and to cling to the roots and conditions of repentance which I will clarify in this gate with G-d's help.
An analogy of this with regard to natural matters. A man became sick due to poor diet, whether because he refrained from eating food which promotes good health or because he ate something damaging to him and so ruined his health.
When his illness is due to starving himself from proper food, the way to bring him back to good health is for him to eat a larger amount than normal of proper foods, compatible with his nature, until he returns to proper balance. After he returns to his original balance, he can reduce his diet to normal amounts.
If his illness was due to habitually eating food harmful to him (ex. too much spicy food), the way of his healing would be to abstain from this food or others similar, and to habitually eat foods of an opposite nature and composition (ex. non spicy), until he returns to his original state. When his health is restored and he reaches a balanced state, he can eat foods midway both types of nature and composition (mildly spicy), and the verse already compares moral iniquities to bad food as written: <i>"But every one shall die for his own iniquity. He who eats the sour grapes, his teeth shall be set on edge"</i> (Yirmiya 31:29).

Chapter 2

<i>- What are its parts</i><br>There are three kinds of repentance:
(1) One who repents because he does not have an opportunity (or the means) to repeat the transgression. But when he does find the opportunity, his evil inclination overpowers his understanding and he does not refrain from it. After he finishes the deed, he realizes the shamefulness of his act and regrets what he did. This person repented with his mouth but not with his heart, with his lips but not with his deeds, and he is guilty and deserving of the punishment of the Creator. Of such a person, it is written: <i>"Will you steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely,... And come and stand before Me in this house, which is called by My Name, and say, 'We are saved'...? Has this house, which is called by My Name, become a cave of thieves in your eyes?..."</i> (Yirmiya 7:9).
(2) One who repents in his heart and in deed. His understanding stands up to his evil inclination. He trains himself to discipline his inward being, and fight its lusts until he defeats it and restrains it from what is hateful to the Creator. But his inner being always desires to draw him to the opposite of the service of G-d, and longs to do transgressions. He exerts himself to restrain it. Sometimes he defeats it, sometimes it defeats him. This person is not complete in the way of repentance. It will not secure an atonement, until he renounces the sins completely, as written: <i>"Therefore by this the guilt of Jacob will be atoned for, and this will be the full fruit of the removal of his sin: when he makes all the stones of the altars like chalkstones crushed to pieces, no Asherim or incense altars will remain standing"</i> (Yeshaya 27:9).
(3) A man who has fulfilled all the conditions of repentance (as will be explained later), which means, has strengthened his intellect over his lusts, and habituated himself in making a personal accounting (see gate#8), fears his Creator, is in awe of Him, contemplates the greatness of his sin and error, recognizes the infinite greatness of the One who he rebelled against and He whose word he transgressed, places his sins always before his eyes, regrets them and prays for forgiveness on them all the days of his life, until his final end comes - to the Creator, this person is worthy of being spared.

Chapter 3

<i>- What a man needs to know to repent</i><br>What are the prerequisites of repentance? I say on this, to be effective, repentance must be preceded by first understanding seven things:
(1) The penitent must understand clearly that he did a disgraceful act. Because, if this is not clear to him, and he is in doubt or ignorant of it, it is not possible for him to regret it and seek forgiveness for it, as written: <i>"For I know my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me"</i> (Tehilim 51:5)
(2) He must understand the gravity of his sin and its disgracefulness, since if it is not clear to him that his deed was evil, he will not regret it nor take on the conditions of repentance for it. He will imagine that his act is like unintentional and that he will easily be able to justify himself, as written: <i>"But who can discern their own errors? Forgive my hidden faults"</i> (Tehilim 19:13).
(3) That he realizes the punishment the act obligates. Because, if he does not know this, necessity does not bring him to regret it. But, if it is clear to him that he will be punished for it, he will regret it afterwards and seek forgiveness, as written: "<i>For after my return I have completely changed my mind, and after I had been brought to know myself (the punishments waiting for me) I smote upon my thigh</i>" (Yirmiyahu 31:18), and <i>"My flesh bristles from fright of You, and I dread Your judgments"</i> (Tehillim 119:120).
(4) He must realize that his sin is pending [retribution] and inscribed in the book of his sins. It is not subject to being neglected, forgotten, or overlooked, as written: <i>"Is it not laid up in store with Me, sealed up among My treasuries?"</i> (Devarim 32:34), and <i>"By the hand of every man He seals so that every man should know His deed"</i> (Iyov 37:7). Because if one thinks that since he has not been punished for it until now, therefore the sin is discarded and not pending for him, then he will not regret it nor seek forgiveness for it, as written <i>"Because the sentence of an evil deed is not executed swiftly; therefore, the hearts of men are fully set in them to do evil"</i> (Koheles 8:11).
(5) He must be fully convinced that repentance is the remedy for his illness, and the road to recovery from his evil deed and disgraceful conduct, and through it he will correct his error and recover what he had lost. Because if this is not clear to him, he will despair from obtaining the Creator's atonement and mercies, and he will not seek forgiveness for past wickedness, as written <i>"So have you spoken, saying: For our transgressions and our sins are upon us, and because of them we are melting away, so how should we then live?"</i> (Yechezkel 33:10), and they were answered by the Creator through His prophet: <i>"Say to them: As I live, says the L-ord G-d, I do not wish for the death of the wicked, [but for the wicked to repent of his way so that he may live. Repent, repent of your evil ways, for why should you die, O house of Israel]"</i> (Yechezkel 33:11).
(6) He must make a spiritual accounting (see Gate#8) with himself on the kindness the Creator already bestowed on him, and how he had rebelled against Him instead of being grateful for them. He should weigh the punishment of the sin in the next world against the pleasure (he got from the sin in this world), and the sweet bliss of the reward for good deeds he will get in the next world against the suffering he has [here] in doing them, as our sages taught: <i>"Consider the loss from doing a mitzvah against its reward and the gain from doing a sin against the loss it involves"</i> (Avos 2:1).
(7) He must strengthen himself greatly to be able to bear the suffering from refraining to do the evil he had been addicted to do, and firmly resolve inwardly and outwardly to renounce it, as written <i>"And tear your hearts, and not your garments"</i> (Yoel 2:13).
Only if these seven things are in the mind of the sinner, can repentance from his sins be effective.

Chapter 4

<i>its essential components</i><br>The essential components of repentance are four:
1. That he should regret the past sins he committed.
2. That he abandon and turn away from them.
3. That he confess them and beseech forgiveness for having committed them.
4. That he take on himself with heart and soul not to repeat them.
1. Regret is a sign that the sin is disgraceful in his eyes, as written: <i>"He who knows will return and regret and leave a blessing behind him"</i> (Yoel 2:14). It is said of one who persists in his sins for a long time: <i>"no man repented himself of his wickedness"</i> (Yirmiyahu 8:6). We ourselves can see in relationships between human beings, that when one who wronged his fellow shows regret for having wronged him, this will be strongest the factor for his fellow's granting him forgiveness.
2. Abandonment (of sin) is a sign of his firm faith in reward and punishment, as written: <i>"The wicked shall give up his way, and the man of iniquity his thoughts, and let him return to the L-ord, who shall have mercy upon him, and to our G-d, for He abundantly pardons"</i> (Yeshaya 55:7). Of one who persists in his [evil] ways for a long time, the prophet says: <i>"For the iniquity of his covetousness was I angry, and smote him, and he went on forwardly in the way of his heart"</i> (Yeshaya 57:17). Similarly we can observe among human beings, that if one has wronged his fellow, and along with expressing regret, ceases to wrong him, then it will be proper to forgive him and overlook the misdeed.
3. Beseeching forgiveness demonstrates submission and humility before G-d, and confession of one's sin is a ground for forgiveness, as written: <i>"he who confesses and renounces them will obtain mercy"</i> (Mishlei 28:13). Regarding the opposite of this, it is said: <i>"[Yet you say, Because I am innocent, surely his anger shall turn from me.] Behold, I will contend with you, because you say, I have not sinned"</i> (Yirmiyahu 2:35), and <i>"he that conceals his transgressions will not succeed"</i> (Mishlei 28:13). Similarly we can observe among human beings, that if one wrongs his fellow, and afterwards humbles himself towards him, and admits that he sinned against him and wronged him and beseeches forgiveness from him, and the fellow recognizes that he truly regrets the wrong he committed, the fellow will not refrain from forgiving him and will overlook the wrong-doing, and the grudge in his heart against him will be removed.
4. The resolution not to repeat [the sin] reflects his understanding of the wickedness of his deed and the gravity of his sin, as written <i>"If I have committed iniquity, I will do no more"</i> (Iyov 34:32), and <i>"Assyria shall not save us... nor will we say any longer to the work of our hands, you are our gods"</i> (Hoshea 14:4). Of one who acts in the opposite manner, it is written: <i>"Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots? then may you also do good, that are accustomed to doing evil"</i> (Yirmiya 13:23). And similarly we can observe among human beings that when one who wronged his fellow takes on himself not to wrong him again, and demonstrates that he regrets and abandons his sin and confesses it, this will complete the grounds which lead to forgiveness and removal of his iniquity, and cancelling the punishment from him.
When the penitent combines these four components along with their conditions, which we will clarify [next chapter], the Creator will forgive the sinner his iniquity, and overlook his transgression. If it is a sin of the type which it is written: <i>"he will not hold him guiltless"</i> (Shmos 20:7), such as a false oath or adultery, the Creator will reduce his punishment in this worldand show him grace in the Olam Haba (afterlife), and he will be included in the group of tzadikim (righteous), as written <i>"And a redeemer shall come to Zion, and to those who repent of transgression in Jacob, says the L-ord"</i> (Yeshaya 59:20), and <i>"If you return, O Israel, says the L-ord, to Me you shall return"</i> (Yirmiya 4:1), and <i>"thus says the L-rd, If you return, then will I bring you again, and you shall stand before Me"</i> (Yirmiya 15:19).

Chapter 5

<i>the conditions for each component</i><br>The conditions of the (four) essential components of repentance are exceedingly numerous. I will only mention, of them, twenty conditions. Hence we will clarify five conditions for each of the four components. Through these conditions, the corresponding components will be complete.
Among the conditions for regret, the following five:
(1) To fear the imminent punishment of the Creator for the sins he already committed, and that his remorse intensifies due to this, as written <i>"Give glory to the L-ord your God, before He causes darkness, [and before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, and, while you look for light, He turns it into the shadow of death, and makes it to deep gloom]"</i> (Yirmiya 13:16).
(2) He should be broken hearted and humbled before G-d due to his sins, as written <i>"If My people, upon whom My Name is called, will humble themselves [and pray and seek My presence and repent of their evil ways, then I shall hear from heaven and forgive their sin...]"</i> (Divrei Hayamim II 7:14).
(3) He should change his clothing and adornments and show signs of remorse in his speech in his eating, and in all of his conducts, as written <i>"Because of this, gird yourselves with sackcloth, lament and wail [for the fierce anger of the L-ord has not turned back from us]"</i> (Yirmiya 4:8), and <i>"Let man and beast be covered with sackcloth [and cry mightily unto G-d, let them turn every one from his evil way, and from the oppression that is in their hands]"</i> (Yona 3:8).
(4) By tears, lamentations, and mourning, the penitent should express remorse for the sin he had committed, as written <i>"Rivers of waters run down my eyes because they did not keep Your commandments"</i> (Tehilim 119:136), and <i>"Let the priests, the ministers of the L-ord, weep between the porch and the altar"</i> (Yoel 2:17)
(5) He should rebuke his soul and inwardly shame it for not having fulfilled his obligations to the exalted Creator, as written <i>"And tear your hearts, and not your garments, and turn unto the L-ord your G-d"</i> (Yoel 2:13).
The conditions for renouncing (of sin) are also five, as follows:
(1) Abandonment of everything the Creator has warned against, as written <i>"Hate the evil and love the good"</i> (Amos 5:15), and <i>"...guards his hand from doing any evil"</i> (Yeshaya 56:2), and <i>"let the wicked abandon his way"</i> (Yeshaya 55:7).
(2) Abstaining from what is permitted if it might lead to what is forbidden in cases where one is in doubt whether they are permitted or forbidden. It is said of some of the pious, that they would refrain from seventy kinds of permitted things out of fear of taking one kind that is forbidden. This is like the Rabbinic fences which our sages commanded us, in saying <i>"make fences for the torah"</i> (Avos 1:1).
(3) Abandonment of sin while one has the ability and opportunity to repeat it, and that he refrains from doing it only out of fear of the punishment of the Creator, as written <i>"My flesh bristles from fright of You, and I dread Your judgments"</i> (Tehilim 119:120)
(4) That one abandons sin out of a feeling of shame from the Creator, and not out of fear of human beings or because one hopes for some benefit from them, or out of being ashamed of them. He should not be like those which the verse speaks of: <i>"with their lips they honor Me, but their heart is far away from Me. their reverence for Me consists of tradition learned by rote"</i>(Yeshaya 29:13), and <i>"Yehoash did what was proper in the eyes of the L-rd all the days that Yehoyada the priest instructed him"</i> (Melachim II 12:3, which implies after the death of Yehoyada, his teacher, he stopped doing what was proper).
(5) That one abandons the evil, a permanent abandonment - to not enter in his heart to repeat it. He should resolve in his heart and say in speech what the pious man said: <i>"if I have done iniquity, I will do so no more"</i> (Iyov 34:32).
The conditions for beseeching forgiveness are also five:
(1) The penitent should confess his sins, and realize their enormity in his eyes and in his heart, as written <i>"For our transgressions against You are many, and our sins have testified against us"</i> (Yeshaya 59:12).
(2) That he recalls them always, and places them before him, opposite his face, as written <i>"For I know my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me"</i> (Tehilim 51:5).
(3) He should fast by day and pray at night, the time when his mind is free and he is not distracted by secular matters, as written <i>"Arise, cry out in the night, [.. Pour out your heart like water before the presence of the L-ord]"</i> (Eicha 2:19). I will later explain the greatness of prayer at night, with G-d's help (Gate 10 chapter 6).
(4) That one pleas to G-d and constantly beseeches Him to atone for his sins, forgive him, and accept his repentance, as written <i>"Therefore, let every one who is pious pray to You at the time that You are found"</i> (Tehilim 32:6), and <i>"I acknowledged my sin to You, And my iniquity I did not hide; I said, 'I will confess my transgressions to the L-ord'; And You forgave the guilt of my sin"</i> (Tehilim 32:5).
(5) That one labors and exerts himself to warn other people of sins similar to his, and arouse them to fear the punishments incurred [by the sins], and remind them to repent from them, as written <i>"Perhaps G-d will turn and relent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not?"</i> (Yona 3:9), and <i>"I will teach transgressors Your ways, and sinners will return to You"</i>(Tehilim 51:15).
The conditions for resolving to not repeat what the Creator warned against are also five:
(1) To weigh an immediate pleasure which is fleeting and mixed against a future, constant and everlasting pleasure, pure with no darkness and without any mixture of pain. And to weigh an immediate, fleeting pain, which is without permanence, against a future pain, which is everlasting and without interruption.
Regarding the pleasure (in the afterlife), it is written: <i>"And when you see this, your heart shall rejoice"</i> (Yeshaya 66:14), and <i>"the sun of mercy shall rise with healing in its wings for you who fear My Name. Then will you go forth and be rich as fatted calves"</i> (Malachi 3:20), while regarding the pain it is written: <i>"And they shall go forth, and look upon the carcasses of the men that have transgressed against Me: for their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire ever be quenched; [and they shall be an eternal abhorrence unto all flesh]"</i> (Yeshaya 66:24), and <i>"For lo, the day comes, that shall burn like a furnace, and all the audacious sinners and all the perpetrators of wickedness shall be stubble. And the sun that comes shall burn them up so that it will leave them neither root nor branch, says the L-ord of Hosts"</i> (Malachi 3:19). When the sinner puts this matter to heart, he will deem it proper to take on himself not to repeat his sin.
(2) He should put to heart the coming of his day of death, when the Creator will be furious on him for having neglected his duties, as written "Now who can endure the day of His coming, and who will stand when He appears, for He will be like a blazing fire that refines metal" (Malachi 3:2). If he puts this to heart, he is bound to fear His punishment, and will resolve strongly not to repeat what will arouse the wrath of the Creator on him.
(3) He should put to heart the days during which he turned away from G-d, and did not care about His service, in spite of His continuous goodness towards him during then, as written: <i>"For of old I broke your yoke, I tore open your yoke-bands, and you said, 'I will not pass'"</i> (Yirmiya 2:20), the explanation of <i>"I will not pass"</i> is: <i>"I will not take on Your service, and will not enter Your covenant"</i>, as if he said <i>"I will not pass in Your covenant"</i>, similar to the matter <i>"to pass you over the covenant of the L-rd your G-d"</i> (Devarim 29:11).
(4) He should return stolen things and refrain from sin, and from doing harm to any human being, as written: <i>"The wicked man shall return the pledge, he will repay the theft; [in the statutes of life he walked, not to commit injustice - he will surely live, he will not die]"</i> (Yechezkel 33:15), and <i>"If iniquity be in your hand, put it far away, and let not wickedness dwell in your tents; For then shall you lift up your face without shame"</i> (Iyov 11:14).
(5) His mind should reflect on the greatness of the Creator, whose word he rebelled against - casting off the yoke of His service (positive commandments), and removing the ropes of His torah (negative commandments), and one should rebuke himself and shame himself for this, as written <i>"Is this how you repay the L-ord, [you disgraceful, unwise people?! Is He not your Father, your Master? He has made you and established you]"</i> (Devarim 32:6), and <i>"Will you not fear Me? says the L-ord, or, do you not quake from before Me, for I made sand a boundary for the sea, an everlasting ordinance, which it cannot pass"</i> (Yirmiya 5:22).
In this, we have completed the requirements of repentance.

Chapter 6

<i>which things stir a man to repent</i><br>The stirring of a person to repentance occurs through one of four ways:
(1) It is stirred by a person's strengthening himself in the recognition of G-d (His greatness -PL), reflecting on the constant goodness he receives, and realizing of what is his duty in exchange for it of the service [of G-d], of observing His commandments and of refraining from what He prohibited.
He is like a slave who ran away from his master and then when he reflects on the good his master bestowed on him, he will return to him of his own free will to beseech his forgiveness for rebelling against him and fleeing from his service. This kind of slave has chosen the right way and understands the path which leads to his salvation (from punishment) - it is proper to forgive him and accept him.
Of (a penitent) like him it is said: <i>"If you return, O Israel, says the L-rd, to Me, you shall return, and if you remove your abominations from My sight and will not wander; And you will swear by My Name in truth and in justice and in righteousness, nations will bless themselves with you and boast about you"</i> (Yirmiya 4:1)
The explanation is as follows: <i>"If you repent willingly before the punishment comes on you, I will accept your repentance, and choose you for My service, and if you remove your abominations from My face and you don't move and you don't run away from My service, and you swear in My name in truth, and your heart will faithfully return to Me, if you repent with all the conditions the nations will bless and praise themselves that: '(would that it were that) we should be like you"</i>.
It is also said: <i>"return to Me and I will return to you"</i> (Malachi 3:7).
(2) When the Creator rebukes and humiliates him on his evil ways and deeds, whether through the prophet of his generation, if he lives in the era of prophecy, or from the Torah of G-d, or through a Rabbi who preaches to him on the service of G-d. And this is grounds for a charge by G-d against all of humanity, since no generation is ever without such a guide, as our sages said "Before the sun of Moshe Rabeinu has set (his death), the sun of Yehoshua his disciple had risen, before the sun of Eli set, the sun of Samuel rose, before the sun of Elijah set, the sun of Elisha rose. The day Rebbi Akiva died, Rebbi HaKadosh was born" (Kidushin 72b), and in this way it can be found in every generation and in every land, there is never an absence of a preacher who calls to G-d and His service, and teaches His torah.
A penitent stirred this way is like a slave who ran away from the service of his master. He then met another slave who was faithful to his master, who rebuked him for fleeing from his master, and advised him to return, and assured him that the master will forgive him. He reminded him of the abundant goodness and kindness that he had received. The slave returned and humbled himself to his master.
(3) When one observes the trials and severe punishments the Creator meted out to a person who followed the path he himself is following, in leaving G-d's service, and he will be reproved by it and return to G-d because he fears G-d's punishment and severe retribution. He is like a slave who ran away from his master. When he heard the punishment another slave like him received for running away, he became reproved by it and returned to his master pleading him to forgive him and pardon his sin before his punishment comes. Thus, the verse says: <i>"And let the land not vomit you out for having defiled it, as it vomited out the nations that preceded you"</i> (Vayikra 18:28).
(4) When the punishment of the Creator comes on him, in the form of some type of tribulation. Since he sensed (the message early), he awakened and got up from his slumber, and repented to G-d from his sin. He is like a slave who ran away from his master, and the master dispatched an emissary to punish him and beat him for running away from his service. When the emissary reached him, he ran back to his master, confessing his sin and seeking forgiveness. On one like him, it is said: <i>"when your fear comes like a storm, and your calamity comes like a whirlwind; when trouble and straits come upon you; then they will call Me, but I will not answer; [they shall seek Me, but they shall not find Me; Because they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the L-ord;]"</i> (Mishlei 1:27), and <i>"And when he was distressed, he entreated the L-ord his G-d, and he humbled himself greatly before the G-d of his fathers"</i> (Divrei Hayamim II 33:12).
The most successful and most accepted is the one who repented to G-d in the first case (on his own). Below him in success and acceptance is the second case: he who did not repent until being alarmed by the Creator's rebuke; below them in success and acceptance is the one who did not repent until punishment inflicts those around him. Below him in acceptance and return is he who did not repent until punishment was inflicted on him and made him suffer.
He is the furthest of the penitent and the least likely that G-d will accept his repentance and pardon his sin unless he repents to G-d, and demonstrates regret, abandonment, beseeching forgiveness in heart, speech, and movements, to an extent that will make him fitting to be pardoned and to accept his repentance and to overlook his sin.

Chapter 7

<i>things detrimental to repentance</i><br>The things detrimental to repentance are very numerous. I have already mentioned most of them previously. Some additional detrimental things: complacency in doing the sin, which means persisting in doing the sin, and delaying to [resolve to - PL] abandon it. As long as this condition continues, it is not possible to repent.
There is a saying: "no sin is small if done persistently, and no sin is big if one beseeches forgiveness for it". The explanation: doing a sin persistently reflects one's disregard for the word of G-d, and that he regards His commandment and prohibition lightly, and so invites on himself punishment. Of such a person, it is said: <i>"But if a person should act highhandedly, whether he is a native born or a proselyte, he is blaspheming the L-ord, [and that soul shall be cut off from among its people]"</i> (Bamidbar 15:30).
Furthermore, persistence in sin, even though it is small, it continuously grows by his repeating it. While, for a big sin, when its owner beseeches forgiveness for it, and abandons it out of fear of G-d, it gradually reduces and shrinks until it is entirely erased from one's book of sins, and its owner is purged from it with repentance.
You can see regarding a strand of silk how strong it becomes when it is doubled over many times, though it is made up of the weakest of material, namely the saliva of the silkworm. Consider the huge rope of boats. After a long time of use, the rope gradually wears out until it eventually breaks and the material returns to being the weakest of the weak.
Similarly for the matter of the smallness or largeness of sins, with regard to repeating them frequently or seeking forgiveness on them. Therefore, the verse compared them to a rope as written: <i>"Woe to those who draw iniquity with cords of falsehood, who draw sin as with cart ropes"</i> (Yeshaya 5:18).
It was already said: "do not look at the minuteness of what you committed, but rather look at the [infinite] greatness of He who you sin against."
Do not rejoice that others cannot recognize your hidden bad deeds, but rather it is proper to mourn because the Creator knows that which you are concealing, sees your hidden thoughts and revealed acts, and that He will remind you of them, more than you will remember of them, because you forget, but He does not forget. You will ignore them, but He will not ignore them, as written: <i>"Behold, it is written before Me [I will not keep silent, but will repay, even repay into their bosom]"</i> (Yeshaya 65:6), <i>"The sin of Judah is written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a diamond"</i> (Yirmiya 17:1).
Another detrimental thing: To return to the sin, after completing all the conditions of repentance from it, as written in its chapter: <i>"the word which came to Yirmiyahu...to proclaim freedom, that every man should let his manservant and every man his maidservant.."</i> (Yirmiya 34:8), and the rest of the matter.
Another detrimental thing also: That one assures himself that he will repent in his later years, and thinks he will refrain from sins after he is satisfied and has obtained his desires in them. He is like one trying to cheat G-d. Regarding him, the sages said: "one who says: 'I will sin then repent, I will sin then repent', will be prevented from doing repentance" (Yoma 85b).
In the Tochecha (rebuke) section I wrote at the end of this book, (I wrote): "O my soul, prepare many provisions, do not be scant while you are still alive and have the opportunity, because the journey before you is exceedingly long. Do not say tomorrow I will take provisions, because the day is closing and you don't know what the day may bring. Realize that yesterday will never return and all that you did was weighed, written, and accounted for. Don't say tomorrow I will do my duty, because the day of death is hidden from every living creature. Hasten to do every day's portion, because like a bird is driven from its nest, so too a man is driven from his place".
Another detrimental thing: That the penitent repents on part of his sins but continues in others. For example, he stopped from the sins between man and G-d, and repented on them, but did not stop from what is between himself and other men, such as theft, ona'a (overcharging money), or the like. On this it was said: <i>"if iniquity is in your hands - distance it far away"</i> (Iyov 11:14). And our sages said: "R. Adda b. Ahaba said: One who has sinned and confessed his sin but does not repent may be compared to a man holding an [spiritually] unclean reptile in his hand. For although he may immerse himself in all the waters of the world his immersion is of no avail unto him; but if he throws it away from his hand, then as soon as he immerses himself, immediately his immersion becomes effective, as it is said: "one who confesses and abandons them shall obtain mercy" (Taanis 16a).
The detrimental things we mentioned in previous gates of this book, all of them are also detrimental to repentance, and there is no need to repeat them in this gate.

Chapter 8

<i>the penitent and the tzadik</i><br>If the penitent is equal to the tzadik (righteous person). On this I say: (1) sometimes a penitent is equal after repentance to the tzadik who never sinned, (2) sometimes he is greater than the tzadik, and (3) sometimes the tzadik is greater than him even though he repented.
The explanation of the first case: That the lacking was in a positive commandment which does not carry the punishment of Karet (spiritual excision), such as tzitzit, lulav, sukka, or the like. When the person repents on them in his heart and in speech, and exerts himself to fulfill them, and does not repeat his neglect to do them, the Creator will forgive him, and he will be equal to the tzadik who never sinned in them. On such a penitent, it is said: "one who repents from a sin is as if he never sinned", and our sages said of them: (Yoma 86a) "one who transgressed a positive commandment which does not incur Karet (spiritual excision) and repented - he is forgiven right away, as written: 'return to Me and I will return to you' (Malachi 3:7)".
For the second case, where the penitent becomes greater than the tzadik, the explanation is that the penitent committed a minor sin of the negative commandments, such as one which does not carry the punishment of Karet, and afterwards fully repents with all the conditions of repentance. He places his sin before him and opposite his face, and always beseeches for forgiveness of it. He feels full of shame before the Creator, his heart penetrated by the fear of the punishment, his spirit is broken. He always submits and humbles himself before G-d, and the sin becomes a cause for his submission and for his endeavoring to fulfill his debts to the Creator. He does not become haughty in the least for his good deeds and they do not amount to much in his eyes. He does not glorify himself in it and guards from stumbling for the rest of his life - such a sinner, is the one who is greater than the tzadik who never sinned this sin or others like it. For the tzadik is not assured that his heart will not become proud and haughty for his deeds. It was said that "sometimes a sin is more useful to the penitent than all the righteous deeds of the tzadik, and sometimes a good deed damages the tzadik more than all the sins of the penitent". This applies when the tzadik turns his heart away from submission and grows pride, flattery (hypocrisy), and love of praise.
One of the righteous would say to his students: "if you were completely without any sins, I would be afraid for you, on what is worse than sin", they said, "what is worse than sin?" He answered, "pride and flattery". Regarding a penitent like this, our Sages said: "In the place where the penitent stands, the perfectly righteous cannot stand" (Berachos 34b).
For the third case, (where the tzadik is greater than the penitent), this is where the penitent transgressed big sins of the negative commandments which carry the punishment of death by Beit Din or Karet from the heavenly court, such as Chilul H-shem, false oaths, or others like these of the severe sins. The person afterwards repented from his evil path, and fulfilled all the conditions and requirements of repentance. In this case, forgiveness will not be granted until he receives suffering in this world with what he will be able to bear and so be cleansed of his sins. On this kind of penitent our sages said (Yoma 86a): "If he has committed a sin punishable by Karet or death through Beit Din, and repented, suffering cleans him and death completes the atonement, as written 'I shall punish their transgression with a rod, and their iniquity with afflictions' (Tehilim 89:33)", and <i>"certainly this iniquity shall not be atoned for you until you die"</i>(Yeshaya 22:14). Without any doubt, the Tzadik who never transgressed these types of sins is greater than the penitent in them.

Chapter 9

<i>repentance on all sins</i><br>Whether or not repentance is effective for all sins, I will answer this question as follows: Sins are of two categories.
(1) Sins between man and G-d only. For example, denying the existence of G-d, bad thoughts, bad interior, transgressing negative commandments which apply to the heart, and many of the commandments on the limbs, where the sinner hurts only himself, and his only sin is to transgress the commandment of G-d.
(2) Sins between man and his fellow. These have matters of oppression and wickedness towards other people, whether to their bodies, possessions or reputation. In these, the sinner combines two forms of affliction: one, for himself in rebelling against G-d and two in afflicting other people.
The sins which are between man and G-d alone, it is possible to repent on them during the whole of his lifetime, whenever he arouses himself from his lacking, and endeavors to turn away from his sin and repent to the Creator.
If possible, it is proper that his repentance from the sin be related to the sin he did. For example, if his sin was in the duties of the heart, such as maintaining a bad heart, evil thoughts, bearing a grudge, jealousy, hatred or the like, the proper repentance for this consists of cultivating a good heart and good thoughts, love of doing good to others, and forgiving them.
If his sin was in the physical limbs, such as eating what the Creator forbade to eat, forbidden relations, transgressing the Sabbath or the festivals, or false oaths, it is proper for his repentance to refer to the particular sinful act and also to the class the act belongs to. All the while, he should have intent of heart towards G-d.
All this is possible for a man during his lifetime, if he lives long enough, and only if his intent is to repent and cleanse his soul of its sin before his Creator. Concerning such a penitent, the wise man said: <i>"If you are wise, you are wise for yourself, And if you scoff, you alone will bear it"</i> (Mishlei 9:12).
But for the sins towards both G-d and man, it will be difficult to repent for several reasons:
1. He may not be able to find the person he oppressed, or the person died or moved far away.
2. The oppressor lost the money, and he is not able to return it to the oppressed.
3. Perhaps the oppressed will not forgive him for what he oppressed him or hurt him physically, or spoke badly of him.
4. The oppressor may not know whom he oppressed, or he does not know the amount of money involved. For example, if he oppressed the people of a city or a province, and he does not recognize them, and he does not know the amount of money he took from them wrongfully.
5. The forbidden money was mixed with a much greater amount of permitted money, and he cannot return it without incurring a much greater loss, as our sages said: "One who stole a beam and used it in the building of a palace. Beit Shamai says: 'dismantle the palace and return the beam', Beit Hillel says: 'he can return the value of the beam only, because of the enactment for the penitent' " (Gitin 55a).
6. That the repentance becomes too difficult for him, such as when a person became accustomed to doing it until the bad deed attached to him and became part of his nature, and it will not be easy for him to abandon it, as written: <i>"they have taught their tongue to speak lies, and weary themselves to commit iniquity"</i> (Yirmiya 9:4), and <i>"Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots? [then may you also do good, those that are accustomed to doing evil]"</i> (Yirmiya 13:23).
7. Spilling blood or killing the innocent, whether he killed them directly or whether he caused their deaths through slander, as you know of the matter of Doeg and the city of Kohanim, who caused them to be sentenced to death first through his slander, and later executed them himself, as written: <i>"Then the king said to Doeg, 'You turn around and attack the priests.' And Doeg the Edomite turned around and attacked the priests, and he killed that day eighty-five men who wore the linen priestly ephod"</i> (Shmuel 22:18).
8. One who causes his fellow to lose money on account of slander, his repentance does not avail until he makes amends with him, whether by paying him or by beseeching him with words and humbling himself before him to forgive him and pardon his wrong, as written: <i>"and those who ate the flesh of My people and did flay the skin from upon them...then they shall cry out to the L-ord, but He will not answer them"</i> (Micha 3:3).
9. One who had forbidden relations (punishable by Kores) and fathers a mamzer (illegitimate child) - the disgrace will never leave, and the wrong cannot be corrected, as written: <i>"For that is lewdness, and it is iniquity to be punished by the judges; For it is fire; it consumes to destruction"</i> (Iyov 31:11), and <i>"They betrayed the L-ord for they begot strange children"</i> (Hoshea 5:7).
10. One who habituated his tongue to lie and to speak of the faults of others, and to denigrate them. For he cannot remember all of what he said and all those who he spoke about due to the countless words, and forgetting the people he spoke against. It is all guarded against him and recorded in the book of his sins. On him it is said: <i>"And if he comes to see me, he speaks vanity: his heart gathers iniquity to itself; when he goes abroad, he tells it"</i> (Tehilim 41:7), and <i>"When you saw a thief, you are pleased with him, and you keep company with adulterers"</i>(Tehilim 50:18), and the rest of the matter. Behold, the verse equated evil speech with theft and adultery. So too, it is said <i>"they deceive (corrupt) one another and do not speak the truth; they have taught their tongue to speak lies, they commit iniquity until they are weary"</i> (Yirmiya 9:4).
11. One for who repentance will be extremely hard for him: he who enticed people with a false religion that he invented and influenced them to believe in it. He sinned and caused others to sin, the more people join his false beliefs, the more his sin will increase and be multiplied over, as the sages said: "Whoever leads the masses in the right path will not come to any sin, but whoever leads the masses astray will not be able to repent for all the wrong he commits.. Yeravam ben Nevat, sinned and caused the multitude to sin, and so the sin of the masses is ascribed to him as it is written (I Kings 15:30) 'Because of the sins of Yeravam that he committed and that he caused Israel to commit.' " (Avos 5:18)
Included in this last category is one who is capable of bringing others to the good and steer the erring away from evil, but refrains from doing so due to hoping to receive money from them or due to being afraid of them, or being ashamed to rebuke them, and they went off, and he did not teach them the right way, as written: <i>"if you do not speak to warn the wicked, that wicked man shall die in his iniquity; and I will hold you accountable for their blood"</i> (Yechezkel 33:8).

Chapter 10

What strategy should be adopted by one for whom repentance is difficult? We will answer this question as follows:
One who has transgressed a sin for which repentance is difficult, the particular sin necessarily falls into one of two categories. One, that the sin is between him and G-d. Two, that the sin is between him and his fellow men, such as overcharging, various types of theft and trickery, violence, and oppression.
Whatever category it belongs to, if the repentance is difficult due to one of the factors we previously mentioned (last chapter) which cause repentance to be difficult, then, if the person takes on himself to fulfill the requirements of repentance with all its conditions to the utmost extent that is in his power and ability to do, the Creator will make his repentance easier. He will pardon what is hidden from him and not in his ability to do, and will give him a nearer exit for deliverance from his sin and allow him to absolve himself in this way (as will be explained).
If the sin is in the category of forbidden relations, which we mentioned, for one who fathers from an illicit relation (a mamzer), the Creator will wipe out his descendants (from the mamzer).
If it is from overcharging or theft of money, G-d will give him money to pay back his fellow and appease him so that the latter will forgive him.
If he hurt his fellow physically or damaged his possessions, the Creator will put in his fellow's heart favor and love until he forgives him for his sin towards him, as written: <i>"When the L-ord favors a person's ways, He will cause even his enemies to make peace with him"</i> (Mishlei 16:7).
If the oppressed is far away, the Creator will arrange their meeting, and the oppressor will humble himself before the oppressed and will be forgiven by him.
If he doesn't know the number of people he oppressed and the amount of money he took, the Creator will give him the opportunity to spend his money in some kind of public project, such as building a bridge, digging a well to benefit the public, or digging water pits in roads where water is scarce, or other similar things to benefit the public, until the project will serve the one he oppressed and also the one he did not oppress.
If the oppressed died, he should return the money to his heirs. If he hurt him physically or he spoke badly of him, he should confess at his grave with a minyan of ten Jews and he will be forgiven for his sin, as our sages on this matter said: "And if he had died, he should bring ten Jews and to stand by his grave and say: I have sinned against the L-ord, the G-d of Israel, and against this man, whom I have hurt." (Yoma 87a).
Repentance is not withheld from a sinner, rather the obstruction comes from his own wickedness and deceitful heart. But if he sincerely wants to draw near to G-d, the gate of repentance will not be closed before him, and no obstacle will prevent him from reaching it. Rather, G-d will open for him the gate of the just, and teach him the good path in His mercy and in His goodness, as written <i>"Good and upright is the L-ord: therefore will he teach sinners in the way"</i> (Tehilim 25:8), and <i>"from there you will seek the L-ord your G-d, and you will find Him, if you seek Him with all your heart and with all your soul"</i> (Devarim 4:29), and <i>"Rather,[this] thing (repentance) is very close to you; it is in your mouth and in your heart, so that you can do it"</i>(Devarim 30:14), and <i>"The L-ord is near to all who call upon Him, To all who call upon Him in truth"</i> (Tehilim 145:18).
FINAL WORDS<br>I have already clarified for you, my brother, some of the obligations of repentance, and I revealed to you some of the ways to return (to G-d). Now, there are grounds for a claim against you, and your escapes are gone. What will you answer tomorrow to G-d? - "I was ignorant (that I needed to repent)" - but you were not ignorant! Or maybe you will answer: "I did what I did, but I didn't know (how to repent)".
What will be your answer to this question? And there's no doubt that we will be asked. Prepare the repentance while (G-d) is still pushing off (your punishment, to give you an opportunity to repent). Know my brother that the answer to this question will not be acceptable with our words but only with our deeds. Think to yourself, make a personal accounting of how you can obtain favor from your Creator, know that only one who hastens will reach the good, and the fruit of not doing enough will be regret.
Wake up my brother from the slumber of your simplemindedness. Have mercy on your soul, which is the most important deposit of all the deposits the Creator entrusted by you. How long, and how much longer will you procrastinate in this? You have already consumed your days gratifying your selfish desires, like a base slave, now return and finish your remaining days following the desire of your Creator. You already know that the lifetime of a man is brief, and what remains of your life is still briefer, as our sages said: "the day is short and the workload is great" (Avos 2:15).
You have, my brother, a precious and exalted spirit. With it, you honored this fleeting and lowly world and you abandoned your end that you will be left with. Should you not lift up your spirit to think of that exalted place, the high abode, the place where the spirits which ascend to there will not be lowered from their exaltedness forever. Hurry, while the gates of repentance are open and the acceptance and atonement are still available, as written <i>"Seek the L-ord while He is found, call to Him while He is still near"</i> (Yeshaya 55:6).
Hurry my brother, hurry before the horror you dread comes, because you are not assured that you will live for even one more day. Examine yourself with a careful and weighed examination according to what is proper and possible for one like you.
And he who wants to obtain the favor of his Creator will enter through the narrow opening through which the pious who bear in this world (in the service of G-d). All of us hope for the good. But only those who hasten towards it will reach it, who run towards it, as our sages said: "Be bold as a leopard, light as an eagle, swift as a deer and mighty as a lion to do the will of your Father in Heaven" (Avos 5:23), and David said: <i>"I hastened and delayed not to keep Your commandments"</i> (Tehilim 119:60).
Take counsel with your soul. Be ashamed to act with your Creator in a way that you would be ashamed to act with even a human being like yourself. For, you know that if you angered even a low ranking official of the king, you would not delay to humble yourself to him, and to plea to him to forgive you, so that he will not punish you, even though he has little power in this. All the more so if a high ranking officer were to be angry at you, and even more so if it was the king himself, that you would hasten to seek forgiveness from him, show remorse to him, and try to appease him out of your fear of being swiftly punished.<br>Yet you already know (from the gate of trust of this book), his helplessness of being able to do anything without the decree of the Creator, as the wise man said: <i>"A king's heart is like rivulets of water in the L-ord's hand; wherever He wishes, He turns it"</i> (Mishlei 21:1). All this despite that (he may never get around to punishing you due to) his reign ending, his kingdom being overthrown, his mind confused or distracted by his numerous matters, forgetting or overlooking you. This happens for revealed things, all the more so for hidden things. Despite your knowledge of all of this, you would not delay to seek from him a pardon to your transgression. You would rush to do that which will appease him and be acceptable to him.<br>My brother, how then can we not be ashamed of our Creator, who observes what is revealed as well as what is concealed of all our deeds and thoughts. He is not subject to forgetting nor overlooking anything. No matter can distract Him from another matter. None can escape from His justice, and there is no end to His reign? How can we turn away from Him, or delay humbling ourselves before Him and repenting to Him, while we don't know our final end nor the number of days we have been allotted.
If a man were to visit a village or province and announce to the people saying: "People, be prepared to go on to the next world, for one of you will pass away this month, but I will not reveal who it is". Is it not proper for each person to prepare for death, for fear he is that man?
And we can see that every month, death consumes a large number of the living. Surely it is proper for us to fear for our souls every month, at least for one day, and to reflect on our matter and provisions and final destination before we need them, as our sages said: <i>"repent one day before your death"</i> (Avos 2:10), and <i>"at all times let your garments be white"</i> (Koheles 9:8, i.e. that you are clean of sin).
With your superior intellect and recognition examine what you see with your own eyes, and it will be clearer to you than if you had only heard it from someone else.
Do not push away that which your intellect and understanding [obligate you to do - PL], since it was already said: the Creator bestows many good things to His servants (wisdom, etc), if they accept them (use them to serve Him), they will gain. But if they refuse them (use them to rebel against Him), they will become grounds for a claim against them, and afterwards a reason to exact retribution against them.
The Creator did good to you. He bestowed you with wisdom, understanding, and knowledge. He gave you of them more than another. Be careful, and be careful - that they don't turn to become grounds for a claim against you.
He has already stirred you to the straight way (through this book), and taught you the path leading to your good, out of mercy for you, and to guide you gently. He didn't want you to continue in your foolishness, and continue in your rebelliousness, He conducts with you in the way of kindness as befitting Him, and out of pity and mercy for His creations, as written <i>"Good and upright is the L-ord; therefore does He instruct sinners in the way"</i> (Tehilim 25:8). He has already called you gently and with a soft language, and afterwards with rebukes and embarrassments, and finally threatened you with His punishment, in order that you repent to Him, and speedily return to His service.
Hurry my brother, and hurry to lend ear to Him. Listen to His voice, and cling to Him. Choose for your soul what your G-d has chosen for it. Desire for it what your Creator desired for it. Do not allow laziness to make you lax in it, because if your own soul is light in your eyes, then what else will be important by you?
Be careful lest the thoughts of your mind (evil inclination) entice you saying: "Now?! After my long protracted neglect of the service of G-d, and the passing of most of my days, how can I now return to G-d and seek His forgiveness?!"
You should reply to him (the evil inclination) as the prophet spoke of this matter: <i>"And when the righteous turns from his righteousness and does wrong.... All his righteous deeds that he has done shall not be remembered; in his treachery that he has perpetrated and in his sin that he has sinned, in them shall he die.... And when a wicked man repents of his wickedness that he has done, and does justice and righteousness, he shall save his soul alive; Because he considered, and turned away from all his transgressions that he had committed, he shall surely live, he shall not die."</i> (Yechezkel 18:24-27), until the end of the matter.
The early ones already compared this to a man who had in his possession silver coins, and he needed to cross a big river, when he reached the river bank, he threw all the coins in the river hoping to slow its flow and walk over the coins, and he threw all of them except for one that remained in his hand, and the current was not stopped by the coins, when he saw this, he said to one of the sailors who happened to pass on the river: "take this coin which is in my hand, and take me through the river with your boat". The sailor did this, and the man reached his desire with the remaining coin that was in his hand. He accomplished more with that coin than all the coins he lost in the river, and it was as if he didn't lose anything.
Likewise, a baal teshuva (penitent) who wasted most of his life in things other than the service of G-d, if he repents at the end of his days, the Creator will forgive him for all of what happened of the bad deeds of all of his previous days, as written: <i>"None of his transgressions that he had committed shall be remembered against him; [for his righteousness that he had done he shall live]"</i> (Yechezkel 18:22), and <i>"None of his sins that he had committed shall be remembered against him; [he performed justice and righteousness; he shall surely live]"</i>(Yechezkel 33:16).
Let it not be too wearying, my brother, my exhorting you on guarding yourself, which you have neglected for so long to do. Because I am speaking not only to you but to myself also. Submit to the truth. Do not run away from it. Thank the Al-mighty who aroused you on that which you did not know, and let not the long hiding of other people be an excuse for you, because this is one of the distortions and snare of the yetzer (evil inclination) for people who are of weak understanding.
May the Al-mighty place us among those who hurry towards him, who repent to Him wholeheartedly, in His mercy. Amen.

Eighth Treatise on Examining the Soul

Introduction

<b>On making a personal accounting of one's duties to G-d</b><br>The author says: Since our previous discussion dealt with the essentials of repentance and its conditions, and making a spiritual accounting was one of those conditions, I saw proper to follow with a clarification of the matter of making an accounting with oneself, because this contains matters to arouse oneself for things beneficial in both worlds, as David, peace be unto him, said: "I reflected on my ways, and turned my feet unto Your testimonies" (Tehilim 119:59). 
It is proper for us to clarify six matters on the subject of the spiritual accounting.
1. What is meant by making a spiritual accounting with oneself.
2. If the accounting is equal for all individuals or not.
3. how many ways should one bring himself to an accounting.
4. What are the benefits of this accounting.
5. Whether the spiritual accounting is a constant duty
6. Which activities should follow the accounting.





Chapter 1

Spiritual account-taking means the deliberation of a man on his torah and worldly affairs between his nefesh (bodily soul/emotional side/will) and his intellect, so that one may know what one has and what one still owes of his duties. (this will be clarified through examples). 
The prophet (Moshe) has already exhorted us on this in saying: "Know therefore this day, and establish it in your heart that the L-ord he is G-d" (Devarim 4:39), and David, peace be unto him, said: "O taste and see that G-d is good" (Tehilim 34:9), "know the G-d of your father and serve Him.." (Divrei Hayamim 28:9), and "Be you not as the horse, or as the mule, which have no understanding" (Tehilim 32:9).
It was said of one who did not examine his matters and did not account with himself on them: "None returns it to heart, neither is there knowledge nor understanding to say" (Yeshaya 44:19), and "They remembered not His hand [nor the day when He delivered them from the oppressor]" (Tehilim 78:42), and "Remember the days of old..." (Devarim 32:7), and "I remember the days of old [I meditate on all Your works; I ponder on the work of Your hands]" (Tehilim 143:5), and "I will get my knowledge from afar [and will ascribe righteousness to my Maker]" (Iyov 36:3). 

Chapter 2

Whether or not the spiritual accounting of each person is equal, I will answer this as follows:
The self accounting for people in their religious and secular matters varies according to their level of perception and intelligence, and clarity of understanding and every person is commanded to deliberate with his soul (i.e. bodily soul/instinct/will) as to what are his duties in the service of G-d, in accordance with his recognition of the favors of the Creator, whether collective or individual as the verse says: "And know this day; for I speak not with your children that have not known, and that have not seen... but your eyes have seen all the great work of the L-ord which He did" (Devarim 11:2-7). The verse means to say, that the claim from the Creator on you is stronger and more evident than the claim on your descendants who did not witness the miracles of the Creator, since you witnessed them with your own eyes, and only you were bestowed these great favors and were spared from the plagues of Egypt, and of Korach. But your descendants were not present, therefore you are more obligated to serve G-d on account of them.
Similarly, we can say for other individuals - that their obligation varies in accordance with their level of understanding and the amount of good bestowed to them. 
It is incumbent on the believer to take account with his soul what are his duties to G-d, and to think through this in meticulous details to the utmost extent of his ability, and according to what he is able to grasp of it. Then, whatever one is capable of attaining in practice, he should make diligent efforts in it and exert himself, and that which is beyond one's ability to attain in practice - he should attain an understanding of it, and desire for it, as David, peace be unto him, said "O that my ways were directed to keep your statutes!" (Tehilim 119:5), and "more to be desired are they than gold, than fine gold" (Tehilim 19:11). and the Creator will judge him favorably, and he should be on watch, for the time when he will be able to fulfill what is possible for him of his debts to the Creator.
Let him not try to find escapes for himself, treat this lightly, leave it, or ignore it, lest he be in total despair on the great day of accounting, as written: "Whoever despises the word shall be destroyed by it" (Mishlei 13:13).

Chapter 3

Regarding how many ways is the accounting of a man with himself on his duties to G-d, I say, that the ways of accounting in this matter are numerous. However, among them, I will expound thirty ways whereby it will become clear through them, what a man is obligated to his G-d, when he puts them to heart and takes on himself to reflect on them and remember them always.
<b>THE FIRST: </b><i>(Obligation to serve G-d for creating him, elevating him over other creations, and taking care of his needs) </i>When a man reflects on his own matter, and considers the first beginning of his being, his emergence from non-existence to existence, from nothing to something, without his meriting any of this, but rather solely out of pure kindness of the Almighty, out of His benevolence and generosity. And when he will see with his understanding that he is more important in his matter, more exalted in level, and more elevated in form over the animals, plants, and inanimate objects, he will realize that he is under an obligation to thank his Creator, blessed be He. 
Let him take a tangible illustration and imagine that when he was an infant, his mother abandoned him on the road, and a man passed by and saw him, and had pity on him, and took him in to his home, and raised him until he grew and his intellect matured. How greatly is he under an obligation to run to do his adopter's will and follow all of his commands and refrain from his prohibitions. (In short,) how much such a man is obligated to his benefactor!
Likewise according to the Creator's protection of him, and providing for all of his needs, there should be a corresponding drawing towards His service and acceptance of His commandments. And the prophet already rebuked the Jewish people on this matter in saying: "Is this how you repay the L-ord, you disgraceful, unwise people? (Is He not your Father, your Master? He has made you and established you)" (Devarim 32:6), and Yechezkel elucidated this saying "And when I passed by you, and saw you wallowing in your own blood..." (Yechezkel 16:6), and the rest of the matter.
<b>THE SECOND: </b><i>(debt to G-d for one's body) </i>To bring oneself to an accounting for the great favor of G-d on him in composing his body and completing his form, his essence, and the anatomy of his limbs, taking him out of his mother's belly, and preparing his sustenance before this and after this - as fitting for him and according to the amount he needs - all this is a kindness of G-d on him. Let him think to himself, that if in his early creation he were lacking eyes or hands or feet, and a certain man was able to make them for him so that his body would be complete, how would he thank the man, and praise him, and be drawn to do his will, and cling to serving him. According to this one should correspondingly be drawn towards the Creator, who built his body and all of his limbs according to perfect functionality, as written "Remember now that You made me like clay and to the dust You will return me" (Iyov 10:9), and the rest of the matter, and "For You created my reins, You covered me in my mother's womb" (Tehilim 139:13). 
And "For You drew me from the womb" (Tehilim 22:10). 
<b>THE THIRD: </b><i>(debt to G-d for one's intellect) </i>To observe and bring oneself to an accounting for the great favor of G-d on him for bestowing him with intellect and understanding and with many good, noble, and honorable traits. 
Through these he has superiority over the irrational creatures (animals), as written "Who teaches us more than the beasts of the earth, and makes us wiser than the fowls of heaven" (Iyov 35:11). Let him imagine that if he were without intellect and understanding and a certain man came and helped him to attain them, and he afterwards understood the superiority he had gained over his previous state. Would it be enough for him to thank and praise the man for the rest of his days to repay him for his help? How much more so the Creator, for who there is no limit to His favors on us, and no end to His kindness towards us, as written: "Many, O L-ord my G-d, are Your wonderful works which You have done, and Your thoughts which are toward us: they cannot be recounted in order unto You: if I would declare and speak of them, they are more than can be numbered." (Tehilim 40:5). 
<b>THE FOURTH: </b><i>(debt to G-d for the torah) </i>To bring oneself to an accounting for the great favor of G-d on him for arousing him to what will bring him life in both worlds - the exalted and faithful torah, to remove his blindness, root out his ignorance, enlighten his eyes, bring him nearer to the will of G-d, make known to him the truth of the existence of his Creator and what is his duty towards Him, and through which he will be successful in both worlds, as written "The statutes of the L-ord are right, rejoicing the heart" (Tehilim 19:8).
Let him imagine to himself after he recognized its worth, that if it had been unknown to him, and afterwards he met a certain man who bestowed it to him, would his efforts and abilities to pay him back be enough to convey his gratitude and praise? All the more so, for the Creator who rouses him to it and helps him to understand it and to fulfill it. The least debt of gratitude that we are obligated for it is to run to cling to His torah, and that we hasten to accept the obligation of His commands and His prohibitions, as written "I made haste, and delayed not, to observe Your commandments" (Tehilim 119:60), and "How I love Your Torah" (Tehilim 119:97), and "How sweet are Your words to my palate" (Tehilim 119:103).
<b>THE FIFTH: </b><i>(obligation to study the torah beyond superficial) </i>To bring oneself to an accounting for delaying coming to understand the book of G-d's torah, and his being contented not to grasp its matters. 
One would not act like this for a book that was sent to him from a king. If he had a doubt as to its meaning due to its unclear handwriting or words, or due to the depth of its matter, or its subtlety, or confusing mix of subjects or its enigmatic words. Rather, he would apply his whole heart and mind to understand its meaning, and would greatly pain himself until he understood its meaning. 
If he does this to understand the words of a weak, mortal man like himself, how much more so is it his duty to do many times more than this until he understands the book of G-d, which is his life and his salvation, as written "For it is your life and the length of your days" (Devarim 30:20). How did you permit yourself, my brother, to hide from it, and to content yourself from it with that which is readily familiar of its matter and revealed of its surface meaning, and you were lenient with (knowing) the rest. 
Can you see your own faultiness and lowliness in this?
This is similar to the story of who it was said: "But over the L-ord of heaven you exalted yourself, and the vessels of His House they brought before you, and you, your dignitaries, your queen, and your concubines drank wine in them, and you praised gods of silver and gold, copper, iron, wood and stone, which neither see nor hear nor know, but the G-d in Whose hand is your soul and all of your ways - He, you did not glorify" (Daniel 5:23). 
<b>THE SIXTH: </b><i>(obligation to not disobey G-d) </i>To make an accounting with oneself, when one feels that his tendencies are to rebel against the Creator and to break His covenant. Let him take account with himself and put to heart that all of what he perceives in the world with his senses - whether the foundations of the earth and its branches, or its elements and compounds, its higher (stars, planets) and its lower creations (i.e. physical creatures) - all of them exist by the word of G-d and guard His covenant (follow the laws of physics, etc).
Does one see anything leaving the bound of the service of G-d, rebelling against His word or breaking His covenant? If we would imagine in our mind that one of them would transgress the covenant of the Creator, no human would be left alive.
For example, what would happen if one of the elements would transgress the covenant of the Creator and change its nature, or that the earth would leave its center (its orbit around the sun), or that the waters of the ocean would spill over their boundary and cover everything on dry land. Would any man be left on the face of the earth?
More wondrous than this, regarding the organs of a man, if they were to rebel against the covenant of the Creator, and the organs whose nature is to move would be stationary, or the stationary ones would move, or that the five senses would not transmit the information they were commanded to transmit - one's formation would break down, his composition would disintegrate, and his normal ability to function would become null and void.
And how can a man not be ashamed to transgress the covenant of his G-d in a world which does not transgress the covenant of G-d, and do so with the help of limbs which G-d has commanded them to obey the man's wish and bear all the man's affairs, and these limbs do not transgress the Creator's covenant? 
As an analogy, a king commanded a group of his servants to cross one of his ministers over a wide river with the utmost careful guarding to a specific place and during a specific time. Then, he commanded the minister to do to them during that time certain things. The servants fulfilled what the king had commanded them to do towards the minister, but the minister did not do what the king had commanded him.
One of the servants said to the minister: "you the minister who hides from the command of the king, would you not be afraid if one of us did like you and transgressed the command of the king to guard you, just like you transgressed while with us, thereby you would fall in this great river and die a grim death? Retract from your mistake by repenting and asking for forgiveness, because the king has commanded us to neglect guarding you if you transgress his command while with us." The minister woke up from his neglect (of guarding the king's command), and corrected his mistake.
Consider, my brother, if one of your limbs were to transgress the Creator's command in relation to yourself when you wished to use it. You know that the Creator stipulated in His faithful torah that everything in the world is in your command and will obey your wish on condition that you serve Him, and (the opposite), that it (the world and everything in it) will go against your will when you transgress His word, as explained in Parsha Bechukotai: "If you will go in My statutes" (Vayikra 26:3), and in other places. 
<b>THE SEVENTH: </b><i>(to complete the conditions of slavehood to G-d) </i>To bring oneself to an accounting to His G-d regarding assuming the conditions of slavehood, and to take on himself the obligation of masterhood due to His Creator. We have noted most of the conditions in the third gate of this book. Let the seeker find them there. 
One should think of them when he realizes the constant favors of the Creator on him in preparing what is beneficial to him, having compassion on him, always providing him with the food he needs. Neither did G-d abandon him to himself when his understanding was weak in the proper way to conduct his affairs, and He bestowed him with wisdom, intellect, and understanding to conduct his affairs. Through them, he will know his debts to G-d, as David said: "I am Your servant; grant me understanding, that I may know Your testimonies" (Tehilim 119:125).
And when a slave recognizes the great favors from his Master on his soul and body, and all his movements, and that the Master watches over him constantly, and knows his revealed and hidden matters, and guards all of his movements, and binds them with his bonds and rules over them, and how the Master tests and checks him with what he granted him on whether to use his limbs and turn his thoughts towards his good inclination or whether he will turn them towards his evil inclination. And the slave considers the teachings of the torah and its rousing as to what is the will of G-d and what is against it and will bring G-d's wrath upon him - he will use all movements of his body and all powers of his spirit for what will find favor in the eyes of his Master, and bring him closer to Him. He will remove the veil of foolishness from himself, and don the garment of awe and reverence from Him and love of Him, and he will desire what G-d wants - then the great good, and the great light from G-d will come upon him, as written "O G-d in the light of Your countenance they shall walk" (Tehilim 89:16), and "the L-ord will cause His countenance to shine on you and favor you" (Bamidbar 6:25).
The main thing of all - is to complete the conditions of slavehood and to designate G-d alone with masterhood - that all this be wholeheartedly and faithfully, and through this one's love of G-d will be wholehearted and likewise will be G-d's love towards him, as written "You have declared the L-ord this day to be your G-d...And the L-ord has declared you this day to be His treasured people" (Devarim 26:17-18), and "to make you supreme, above all the nations that He made" (Devarim 26:19), and "Then all the peoples of the earth will see that the name of the L-ord is called upon you, and they will fear you" (Devarim 28:10). 
The reason for this: it is known that the greatness of a slave in the eyes of men is according to the greatness of his master and according to his master's choosing of him, and bringing him close, and since the Name of the Creator is above and higher than all the high in the eyes of the nations, as written "For from the rising of the sun even unto the going down of the same My Name shall be great among the nations" (Malachi 1:11), and the closest nation to Him, which is singled out for His service is the nation of Yisrael, it would be proper, according to this, that our level and glory be above the other nations. 
The reason for "that the Name of the L-ord is called upon you" (Devarim 28:10), is that we were called "the nation of G-d", "the nation of the Almighty", "the priests of G-d", "the servants of G-d", "the slaves of G-d", "the sons of G-d", and other titles similar to these of words depicting special treasured status and special choice. But "they will fear from you", is for the honor of the Creator and awe of Him, as written "Who would not fear you, O King of nations?" (Yirmiya 10:7), and like the verse says of what in the future we will attain of closeness to the Creator, and being singled out for His service "One shall say: 'I am of the L-ord'" (Yeshaya 44:5), and therefore the importance of a person to the Creator is according to the person's closeness to Him and serving of Him. 
Therefore, my brother, bring yourself to an accounting on this matter and do not be swayed by your evil inclination. Do not consent with your base desires when using your intellect and understanding in this . Put to heart the Creator's observing your making an accounting with yourself in your inner thoughts and let your intent be for the sake of His Name. Carefully think through it for His honor, out of shame of His observing you on it, as written "The L-ord knows the thoughts of man, that they are vanity" (Tehilim 94:11).
<b>THE EIGHTH: </b><i>(obligation to serve G-d sincerely) </i>To bring oneself to an accounting in what one is obligated regarding devoting one's heart to G-d alone.
The devotion of heart is in two ways:
One: Wholehearted devotion when declaring the unity of G-d, as we explained in the beginning of this book.
Two: Wholehearted devotion to G-d alone when doing an act of the next world (religious act), whether it is an act one is obligated to do or it is an optional act, as we explained in gate 5 of this book.
Some of the essentials of acknowledging the unity of G-d are:
* to acknowledge that there is no other god besides Him
* to not associate Him with any image, form, measure, movement, nor any kind of physical representation, nor any kind of state whether purposeful or incidental (see Gate 1).<br>* to believe that there is no beginning to His being and no end to His existence.
* to know that He is [absolutely] One and there is nothing which is one like Him, and there is no creator other than Him, and no maker besides Him, and likewise for His other Names and attributes (see Gate 1). 
Some of the essentials of wholehearted devotion to G-d alone when doing a religious act:
to not have intent when doing it other than for the sake of His great Name, not out of love of praise from men, not out of hope to get benefit from them, not out of fear of them, not to bring some benefit or prevent some damage in this world or in the next, as our sages said: "Be not like servants who minister unto their master for the sake of receiving a reward, but be like servants who serve their master not upon the condition of receiving a reward" (Avos 1:3).
You can observe this, my brother, with how human beings conduct themselves regarding friendships. When one senses that his friend's heart is not sincere with him, and all the more so a master regarding his slave - he will be angry with him and will not desire his deeds, even if he exerts himself to the best of his ability and appears sincere externally, and even though a man needs his friend and needs his help.
All the more so for the Creator, that all the created beings need Him, and He has no need nor benefit from them, He can see into their hearts and their innermost secrets. How can we expect Him to desire in us with what we would not expect our friends to desire in us with, despite their ignorance of our inner deception and of our little wholeheartedness towards them. 
When the understanding person will reflect on this matter, he will feel disgrace and shame before the Creator, and will rectify his inner self, and devote his heart to G-d alone when declaring His unity, doing one of His commandments or learning His torah, and he will do it with exertion and zeal, as David said: "I will run the way of Your commandments, for You will broaden my heart" (Tehilim 119:32). 
<b>THE NINTH: </b><i>(intent in prayer and mitzvos) </i>To bring oneself to an accounting that his acts and exertion in doing the various religious activities in the service of G-d be at least as much as what he would do if his (human) king would request of him to do for some physical activity. Surely, he would not hold himself back in the least from exerting himself fully and to the best of his ability [for the human king]. 
If it were an act requiring investigation, thought and counsel, he would apply all of his heart, understanding, intellect and perception to work on it with the utmost care and zeal.
If he came to praise and thank the king for some good or some favor he received from him, whether he would transmit the message of gratitude through a song or poem whether it be oral or written - he would not refrain from all sorts of eloquence, metaphors, analogies, embellishments whether true or false, that it is possible to say of him, and if he could praise him with all of his limbs and his inner and outer being he would do so. And if he could move heaven and earth and everything in them to praise and thank him in order to show the king his good feelings towards him, he would do so, in spite of his being a mere weak human, small and of swiftly passing days. 
According to this should the intelligent person conduct himself in the service of G-d. When he does anything of it.
Every act of service to G-d must necessarily fall into one of three categories.
Duties of the heart alone. It was our intention to clarify them in this book.
Duties of the heart and limbs together, such as prayer, torah study, praise and psalms to G-d, study of other wisdoms, instructing others to do good or refrain from evil, or the like.
Duties of the limbs alone, whereby the heart has no participation, except for the intent to G-d at the beginning of the act, such as (dwelling in a) sukkah, lulav, tzitzis, mezuza, guarding the Sabbath and the festivals, charity, or others similar where distraction of the heart by other things does not damage the act. 
However for the duties of the heart, one is obligated to empty his heart from thoughts of this world and its distractions, and to focus his heart and mind to G-d alone at that time, as it was said of one of the ascetics who would say in his prayer to G-d: "my G-d! The sorrow I have for You nullified all my other sorrows, and the worry I have from You, distanced me from all other worries". 
Through this, G-d will accept his act and desire it, of these our sages said (Berachos 13a): "mitzvot need kavana (intent)".
If one is engaged in a religious act of the category involving both the heart and the limbs together, such as prayer or praising G-d - he should free his body from doing any worldly or other religious act, and clear his heart from all thoughts which distract him from the matter of the prayer . After he has cleansed himself, and washed from any filth or dirt, and distanced from any bad smell or the like, then he should put to heart:
to Whom he has intent to pray to.
What does he seek from it.
With what he will speak before his Creator, of the words and the subject matter of the prayer. 
Know that the words one is forming with his tongue are like the shell and the meditation on the words is like the fruit, (or) that the uttering of the prayer is like the body, and the meditation is like the soul. 
When one prays with his tongue but his mind is distracted in a matter other than the prayer, his prayer will be like a body without a soul, or like a shell without a fruit, because his body is present but his mind is not with him in his prayer, of like him the verse says: "For as much as this people draw near with their mouth and with their lips do honor Me, but their hearts are far from Me, and their fear of Me is a commandment of men learned by rote" (Yeshaya 29:13). 
An analogy was further said on this regarding a slave whose master came to his home. The slave ordered his wife and children to honor him and do everything for him, but he himself left to engage in merriment and laughter, and refrained from serving his master personally, and from trying to honor him and doing what is proper to him. The master became angry with him and did not accept his honors and service, and he threw everything back to his face.
Likewise for one who prays, while his heart and mind are devoid of the matter of prayer, G-d will not accept the prayer of his limbs and tongue. You can see from what we say at the end of our prayers "May the words of my mouth and the thoughts of my heart be acceptable to You O G-d..." And when a man (is distracted and) thinks of any matter in the world, whether it is permitted or forbidden, and afterwards he finishes his prayer and says "imrei fi vehegyon libi lefanecha" (may the words of my mouth and the thoughts of my heart find favor before You), is this not a great disgrace, that he claims to have spoken to his G-d with his heart and mind while his heart was not with him, and afterwards he asks G-d to accept it and favor it from him? He is similar to one of whom it was said "as a nation that pretends to show righteousness..." (Yeshaya 58:2), and our sages said: "a person should estimate himself - if he thinks he is capable of having intent in heart, he should pray, otherwise, he should not pray" (Berachos 30b). And Rebbi Eliezer said when he was about to die, among the things he commanded his disciples - "when you are praying, know before Whom you are praying" (Berachos 28b). And the verse says: "prepare yourselves to greet your G-d, O Israel" (Amos 4:12), and our sages said: "When you pray do not make your prayer a form of routine but a plea for mercy and supplications" (Avos 2:18), and "When my soul grew faint upon me, I remembered the L-ord: and my prayer came to You to Your Holy Temple" (Yona 2:8), and "Let us lift up our heart with our hands unto G-d in the heavens" (Eicha 3:41).
PURPOSE OF PRAYER<br>You should know, my brother, that our aim in prayer is only the longing of the soul to G-d, its submitting before Him, elevating its Creator, praising and thanking His Name, and casting all of its needs on Him. 
And since it is difficult for the mind to remember all of this, it was necessary for our sages to arrange a written order of the matters which most men need, which demonstrate to them their great need for G-d and their need to submit to Him on account of of them. These are the matters of prayer which were ordered and arranged, so that the person can greet his Creator, and not be ashamed in approaching Him, and to see in the prayer matters which bring it humility and submission before G-d.
And since the thoughts of the heart change rapidly, and these thoughts do not hold firmly due to the swift arising of thoughts that flash through the mind, it is difficult for a person to arrange his own prayer. 
For this our Sages composed the prayer with fixed words, to place them on a man's tongue, because the thoughts of the mind go after and follow the words he utters.
Therefore the prayer has fixed words and subject matters. Words need a subject matters. But a subject matter of thought does not need speech, if it is possible to arrange it in an orderly fashion in one's heart. For the subject matter is the essence of our devotion and the chief aim to which our attention should be directed. 
You can see what the sages said regarding a time of difficulty: "a man who experienced a seminal emission should say the blessing in his mind and not utter the words, neither before (the shema) nor after it" (Berachos 20b), and they permitted one to pray a short version of the (amida) prayer (under some circumstances), and if the uttering of words was the main purpose of the prayer, it would not have been permitted for us to reduce them under any circumstances.
Therefore, my brother, rectify the subjects of your prayer in your heart, so that it will be consistent with your words, and let your intent in both be only to G-d. Keep your body free from any movements and restrain your senses and thoughts from dealing with any worldly matter while you are praying.
Compare what you would do to your (human) king when you are engaged in thanking him, praising him, and lauding him for his good deeds, in spite of his ignorance of your thoughts. All the more so, for the Creator, who watches your external and internal being, who observes what is visible in your life and what is concealed.
It is a wonder, since prayer is like a trust and deposit the Creator entrusted you with, since he gave over its matter in your hands and your domain. Nobody can watch over it except Him 
If you pray like the Creator commanded, you will have fulfilled your duty of faithfulness, and He will accept it from you. But if you are not faithful in it, in your heart and tongue, you will be considered among those who betray the trust G-d placed on them, and the verse says of them: "for they are a very inverted generation, sons in whom is no faith" (Devarim 32:20), while for those who are faithful the verse says: "My eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell with Me" (Tehilim 101:6).
DUTIES OF THE LIMBS<br>If one engages in the duties of the limbs alone such as (dwelling in a) sukka and (taking a) lulav, or other things we mentioned earlier (Sabbath, festivals, mezuza, etc), it is an obligation to precede the intent to G-d before doing it, so that the root of his act is to heed the commandment of the Creator, to elevate, to glorify, to thank Him, and to praise Him - for His great favors and great kindnesses on him. 
And so he will attain the ultimate purpose of the service, at its beginning, during its performance, and until its completion. That he will do them (1) due to reverence of G-d, (2) desire to fulfill His will, and (3) to keep away from what will bring the wrath of G-d on himself. 
As David said: "to do your will, O G-d, I desired" (Tehilim 40:9), and one should imagine to scrutinize himself with the analogy I preceded at the beginning of this way regarding speaking with a (human) king, and that he should ever keep this on his mind - then he will find zeal in his limbs for the acts of service, with G-d's help, as we introduced from the words of David "I considered my ways, and turned my feet to Your testimonies, I made haste, and delayed not, to observe Your commandments" (Tehilim 119:59).
<b>THE TENTH: </b><i>(the watching of the Creator) </i>To make an accounting with oneself regarding the Creator's watching his outer and inner life. That G-d sees him, remembers all of his deeds and all of the thoughts that go through his mind, whether good or bad. And therefore, one should fear Him always, and make efforts to rectify one's public and private life to be in accord with G-d's will. 
Let one make the following analogy to himself: If a man was watching him and constantly observing his every movement, would he do something that would cause the man to be disgusted by him? And all the more so, if the man was a benefactor of him, and all the more so, if the man was his master, and all the more so if the one watching him was his Creator, how much greater is his duty to be ashamed and embarassed before Him, and to be careful to refrain from rebelling against Him, and to hurry to His service, and to try to obtain His favor and love.
Furthermore, it is known to us that we adorn ourselves with the best clothing we can when going out to greet our kings, high officials, or great men of our generation because they observe our exterior appearance, as written "for one may not enter the king's gate dressed in sackcloth" (Esther 4:2), and "So Pharaoh sent and called Joseph, and they rushed him from the dungeon, and they shaved and changed his clothes, and he [then] came to Pharaoh" (Bereishis 41:14). According to this, we are obligated to adorn ourselves in the service of G-d in our exterior and in our interior for G-d, because He observes us equally in both respects at all times, since if we believed in our minds that the (human) kings were able to look at our interior just like they can see our physical exterior, we would not delay to adorn our interior in a way that they would wish us to do.
You can observe that for the majority of men, the main reason they occupy themselves to study and teach the fields of wisdom is only in order to become great through them in the eyes of the kings. And likewise for many portions of the laws/culture of the kingdom, for the people are commanded to obey the laws of their king. 
Surely, regarding G-d, it is more fitting and more obligatory on us to adorn ourselves in His service in our inner thoughts, heart and limbs, since He watches them and contemplates them continuously and nothing can distract Him from some matter, as the verse says "I am the L-ord who searches the heart; I test the reins" (Yirmiya 17:10), and "the eyes of the L-ord are in every place, beholding the evil and the good" (Mishlei 15:3), and "the eyes of the L-ord, that run to and fro throughout the land" (Zecharya 4:10), and the verse says regarding the awe one should feel regarding the watching of the Creator "Be not rash with your mouth, and let not your heart be hasty to utter a word before G-d; for G-d is in heaven, and you are upon earth; therefore let your words be few" (Koheles 5:1), and "The L-ord looks down from heaven upon men" (Tehilim 14:2). 
When this matter returns in the thoughts of the believer at all times, and the believer will make an accounting with himself on this always,
then the Creator will be with him in his inner realm, he will see G-d with the eye of his intellect, and will fear Him always, and glorify Him, and reflect on His works, and examine His deeds in governing His creations, which testify to His greatness, exaltedness, wisdom, and power. 
When one does this diligently, the Creator will grant him peace from his sadness and calm his heart from fear of Him. 
And the Creator will open for him the gates of His knowledge, and reveal to him secrets of His wisdom, and G-d will put His attention to guide and lead him, and He won't abandon him to himself and his (limited) ability, as the entire psalm 23 says: "The L-ord is my shepherd; I shall not lack.." (Tehilim 23:1), until the end. 
And he will be on an exalted level, among the levels of the Chasidim (extremely pious), and a high level among the Tzadikim (righteous), and he will be able to see without his physical eyes, and hear without his physical ears, and speak without a tongue, and he will sense things without his physical senses, and be able to picture them without need for a [physical] comparison. 
He will not dislike any situation nor will he prefer another situation other than what the Creator chose for him.
And he makes his will like G-d's will, and his love, what He loves. He will cherish what G-d cherishes, and what is disgusting to him is what is disgusting to G-d. Of like him, the wise man said: "Blessed is the man that hears me (the torah), watching every day at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors" (Mishlei 8:34), and "For whosoever finds me (the torah) finds life, and shall obtain favor of the L-ord" (Mishlei 8:35).
<b>THE ELEVENTH: </b><i>(regular accounting of one's deeds) </i>To make an accounting with oneself regarding one's days which have already passed whether he was engaged in the service of G-d or the service of his own yetzer.
He should apply to himself the following illustration: Let him imagine that a king gave him money to spend for a certain purpose, and he commanded him not to spend any of the money for anything else. The king informed him that at the end of the year, he would make an accounting with him and will not forgive him in the least of it. Is it not proper for the man to make an accounting with himself at the end of each month of that year to see how much of the money was spent and with what he had spent it, and so that he will be careful with the remaining money and the remaining time, before the time of accounting suddenly comes and one is ignorant of what he may claim and what may be claimed from him? 
According to this illustration, my brother, it is necessary for you to check with yourself, if you can, each and every one of your days, and to make an accounting with it on your service of G-d - which is your duty for that day. And if you neglected from doing this (daily accounting) in the days of your life that already passed, at least do the accounting with yourself for your remaining days. Do not continue neglecting due to your previous neglecting, or continue overlooking it due to previously overlooking it, because before G-d there is no neglect, nor overlooking nor forgetting. 
It was already said that the days are like scrolls, write on them what you would like to be remembered by, and the verse says: "Be you not as the horse, or as the mule, which have no understanding" (Tehilim 32:9), and it is said of one who prolonged his time of ignoring to make a personal accounting "also old age was cast into him, but he did not know" (Hoshea 7:9). 
<b>THE TWELFTH: </b><i>(the pursuit of physical) </i>To make an accounting with oneself at a time when one's heart is excited and diligent for worldly matters, applying himself fully with his utmost ingenuity and maximum ability, and to weigh this against one's laxness in matters of his final end, and his straying from the service of his G-d.
Then he will see and feel that his thoughts for matters of this world are the highest of his thoughts, and his aspiration for this world is the higher of his aspirations, because all the various types of possessions will never be enough for him in the least, on the contrary he is like a fire, the more wood is added, the more it increases flames, and all of his heart and intent will be drawn to it day and night. He will not consider anyone a close friend except one who helps him in them, and no one a friend except he who leads him to them. His eye will be to the times it is good to buy, and the times it is good to sell. And he will observe matters of the selling rates for the whole world. He investigates where they are cheap and where they are expensive, and when they go up and when they go down. He will not refrain from travelling to faraway places. Neither heat, nor cold, nor stormy sea, nor long desert roads - all this out of his hope to reach the end of his desire but there is no end to it.
It is possible that all of his efforts will be for nothing, and he will not attain anything except a long suffering, exertion, and toil. And even if he attains some of what he hoped for, perhaps he will not get any benefit from it, but instead will only guard it, manage it, and protect it from potential damages, until it will go to he who G-d decreed it should go to, whether while he is still alive, as written: "at mid life he will leave it" (Yirmiya 17:11) or after his death, as written: "they will abandon their fortunes to others" (Tehilim 49:11).
The wise man already warned us against zeal and exertion for amassing wealth, as written: "Labor not to be rich: cease from your own wisdom" (Mishlei 23:4), and he spoke of the calamity found in it, in saying "Will you set your eyes upon that which is not? for riches certainly make themselves wings; they fly away as an eagle toward heaven" (Mishlei 23:5), and the other wise man (King David) taught us and permitted us to make efforts in earning money for our basic needs only, in saying: "If you eat the toil of your hands, you are praiseworthy, and it is good for you" (Tehilim 128:2).
And likewise, the pious man asked G-d to give him his livelihood only in the basic amount, and to distance him from wealth which leads to the luxuries, and from poverty which leads to loss of morals and torah, in saying: "Two things have I asked of you; Do not give me poverty nor wealth, provide me with my food portion" (Mishlei 30:7), and the rest of the matter. Like him, we find our forefather, Yaakov, who asked G-d only for his basic needs, in saying: "If G-d will be with me, and He will guard me on this way, upon which I am going, and He will give me bread to eat and a garment to wear" (Bereishis 28:20).
Wake up my brother! Look at the deficiency of that which you hurry and pursue - to maintain your body in its natural state. Your association with it will only be for a short time, it will not be spared from pain and it will not be saved from troubles while you are attached to it. If it eats too much, it will become sick. If it eats too little, it will become weak. If you clothe it more than it needs, it will become uncomfortable, and if you leave it naked, it will be pained. Furthermore, its health and sickness, its life and death are not according to your will and not in your control, rather everything is directed by your Creator.
Where is the superiority of your soul over your body? And the exaltedness of its world over the body's world, its rising above (after death) while the body descends below, its spirituality versus the body's physicality, its unchanging nature versus the body's changing nature, its eternal existence versus the body's deteriorating and disappearing existence, its simple form versus the body's composite elements, its pure essence versus the body's baseness, its wisdom and understanding versus the body's beastliness, its tendency for the virtuous traits versus the body's tendency for the disgraceful traits.
If you conduct yourself in this kind of zeal and effort for the rectification of your body, in spite of its lowliness and baseness, and despite your weak capacity to save it from damage or to benefit it, how much more is it your duty to conduct yourself with this zeal and effort for the rectification of your soul, which is so important and which you will be left with (forever), and which you were commanded to guide its matter, and to look into things which will rectify it in acquiring wisdom and understanding, as written: "Buy the truth, and sell it not" (Mishlei 23:23), and "Get wisdom, get understanding" (Mishlei 4:5), and "How much better is it to get wisdom than gold! and to choose understanding rather than silver!" (Mishlei 16:16), and "So shall the knowledge of wisdom be unto your soul" (Mishlei 24:14), and "If you are wise, you shall be wise for yourself" (Mishlei 9:12), which means that the spiritual acquisitions are yours. No one can ever steal them from you, unlike what occurs by physical acquisitions.
See, my brother, what is between the two things, and what is between the two matters. Turn away from the luxuries of your world, and exert yourself in what you need for your final end. Do not say: "I will share the fate of the fool" (who does not make this accounting). Because more will be claimed from you according to your higher level of understanding, and your punishment will be greater. The accounting demanded of you for your neglect will be stricter. Do not rely on a claim which you will have no grounds for, and do not rest assured on a plea which will be used against you and not for you.
The discussion to complete this subject is too lengthy, let it be enough for you what I have aroused you on it, and taught you according to your understanding. Contemplate my words, and understand my allusions. Investigate them in the book of the torah of G-d, and the words of our sages. You will see their explanation from the verses, from logic, and from the talmud, with G-d's help.
<b>THE THIRTEENTH: </b><i>(not to waste any time) </i>To make an accounting with oneself regarding that one's wisdom is greater than his deeds, that one's recognition (of his duties) exceeds his efforts in the service of the Creator, and that one's capabilities exceeds what he is actually paying back to the Creator for His many favors to him. 
Let one imagine the analogy of a slave whose master gave him land to sow, and gave him the seeds according to what he needs, and he planted part of the seeds and used the rest for his own use. When the master checked the land, he found part of it was not sown. When he asked the slave on this, the slave admitted his lacking in this matter, and the master made a calculation based on what the slave claimed he sowed of the seeds in the land, and checked the land to see how much was sowed. He then investigated how much produce grew from the land (to see how much produce each seed makes), and then claimed from the slave the rest of the seeds by charging him to pay what the land would have produced from those seeds - his pain was great and his trouble was multiplied. 
Likewise, my brother, it is proper for you to make an accounting with yourself for what the Creator has graced you with to understand Him and His torah, and how much strength and ability He has given you to pay back what you owe Him. Then check with yourself what you have actually done. And imagine that you are in judgment for all of this, and being taken into account for it, and all the more so while receiving prolonged and constant benefits from the Creator.
It is proper for you to endeavor with all of your strength, and exert yourself to the best of your ability to pay Him back, and to bring your deeds equal to the level of your wisdom, and your exertion to the level of your recognition. And let all your extra toil (beyond what you need to toil for your worldly needs such as earning a basic livelihood) be spent doing according to your level of wisdom, and do not get involved in the luxuries of this world, lest you will weaken from paying your torah debts. G-d has given a person strength according to what he needs for his torah and his worldly (needs). One who spends any of it for the luxuries, which he can do without, will be lacking (in strength) that he will need for the necessary things.
Do not absolve yourself with "if only" or "maybe", saying "if only I would reach such and such a level of education or money, then, after that I would pay everything that I am obligated of the service of the Creator", or other similar answers, because they are false claims. One who relies on them will veer away and one who leans on them will fall. This is the greatest mistake of the "deposit takers", which I mentioned to you in (chapter 6 of) the Gate of Trust.
Be careful lest you take it for yourself as an excuse, because then you will be just like any other sinner who claims this, and you already know that this claim does not save a person from punishment, as Shlomo said regarding a thief: "Men do not despise a thief, if he steals to satisfy his soul when he is starving, but if he be found out, he shall pay sevenfold" (Mishlei 6:30), even though his dire situation is clear, and necessity brought him to steal the money of others, even so, he will not be spared from punishment and the fine of Kefel (double). How much more so for other sins. 
Instead, make this procrastination time into a bounty (use it properly), while you can still pay back your daily obligations to the Creator, and do not procrastinate doing today's service until tomorrow, lest it will be too much of a burden for you to pay back, assuming that you reach tomorrow and are among its (living) men. Worse than this, if your end comes, your excuse will be cornered, and your claim will be halted, because this world is like a market fair which crowds together and then disperses. He who did business and profited is joyful, but he who lost money regrets, therefore the wise man said: "And remember your Creator in the days of your youth, before the days of calamity come..." (Koheles 12:1).
<b>THE FOURTEENTH: </b><i>(the spider web) </i>To make an accounting with oneself when feeling love, closeness, or devotion towards someone who one thinks loves him, as written: "As in water, face reflects face, so the heart of man to another man" (Mishlei 27:19). 
And all the more so, if this person is an important official or a ruler, and still more, when one sees signs from the person such as drawing him close, promising (to help him), or benefiting him and doing kindness to him without needing anything from him in return - then nothing will distract him from remembering his love for the person, and he will not hold back any of his ability for the person but rather will use his full capacity to fulfill his friend's command and do his service, and in his gratitude, he will volunteer of himself, of his money, and of his sons to pay the person back.
Since one does this for a weak creation like ourselves, how much more so are we obligated many times more to our Creator, who told us through His prophet that He loves us, as written "Not because you are more numerous than any people did the L-ord desire in you and choose you, etc." (Devarim 7:7). And in addition to telling us of His love we saw signs of His love for us, and His help to us, both in the present and in the past, and His drawing us to Him and promising to us for every generation, as written: "And yet for all that, when they are in the land of their enemies, I will not cast them away, neither will I abhor them, to destroy them utterly, and to break my covenant with them: for I am the L-ord their G-d" (Vayikra 26:44), and "For we are slaves, and in our servitude our G-d has not forsaken us" (Ezra 9:9). 
More on this matter: it is evident that for a person who was the friend of our fathers and our forefathers, we are obligated to recall this love by honoring him and treating him with love, as the wise man said: "Your own friend, and your father's friend, forsake not" (Mishlei 27:10). And the Creator reminds us of the bris (covenant) of our forefathers and His providence over us due to them, and in order to fulfill His covenant with them, as written: "But because of the L-ord's love for you, and because He keeps the oath He swore to your forefathers" (Devarim 7:8), and many more like this.
If we do not place our trust in Him, and do not rely on His kindness nor move ourselves to love Him and cling to His service, nor pour our prayers to Him - how crude is our nature, how stiff-necked and of little faith our we, and how strongly we resist going after the truth! We do not recall His love for our fathers and forefathers nor do we pay back the Creator's love and providence for us, nor for His promises and for drawing us close to Him do we do His service, nor for His great goodness and kindness to us do we listen, nor on account of His creating us and benevolent guiding of us do we feel abashed.
Wake up my brother from this slumber, and roll away from your heart the curtain your yetzer (evil inclination) has spread over you, until he separated you from the light of your understanding, like a spider who weaves a web around the window of a house, and when it persists in this, it will thicken the web and block the light, until the light of the sun is completely prevented from penetrating inside the house. In the beginning, when first spun, the web is extremely weak and thin, but as the matter (of weaving) persists more and more, it will strengthen and thicken, eventually completely preventing the light of the sun's rays from penetrating it and entering the house.
Similarly is the work of the yetzer in your heart. At the beginning of the matter, it will be extremely weak, and will not prevent you from seeing the truths. If you sense it at that time, and drive it out of your heart, it will be an easy matter. But, if you treat the matter lightly and neglect it, the work of the evil inclination will strengthen and he will prevent the light of your intellect from reaching you, and then it will be difficult to remove its (evil) effects from your mind. 
Therefore hurry to save your soul, and plea to G-d to help you drive him off of yourself. Work hard and exert yourself, then you will be illuminated with the light of wisdom, and you will perceive the truth of things with your mind's eye. 
The early ones already compared the acts of the yetzer on a man with different analogies based on verses, in saying: "And there came a <i>wayfarer</i> unto the rich man, and he refused to take of his own flock and of his own herd, to prepare for the <i>guest</i> that had come to him; but took the poor man's lamb, and prepared it for the <i>man</i> that came to him" (Shmuel II 12:4), at first he was termed "wayfarer" and then "guest", and after that progressed to "man". 
Similarly, it is written: "Happy is the man that <i>walked</i> not in the counsel of the wicked, nor <i>stood</i> in the way of sinners, nor <i>sat</i> in the seat of the mockers" (Tehilim 1:1), at first "went", then "stood", then "sat", and many others similar.
Commune with your soul, my brother, on this and on similar ideas to it, and force it to do that which will be its salvation, because the wise man already said of those who neglect the duty of reflection: "Evil men understand not justice" (Mishlei 28:5). 
<b>THE FIFTEENTH: </b><i>(preparing for the journey) </i>To make an accounting with oneself when preparing provisions before needing them, without knowing whether he will live until the time that he will be able to benefit from them. Likewise, when one needs to go on a long journey, he will prepare matters of his journey many days in advance: he researches which merchandise he will be able to sell at the place he is going, and then prepares what he will ride on, and what he can of provisions and company, and which stations he will stop along the way, and similar to this, despite not knowing what the Creator decreed for him on all of this nor how long he will live.
In this way, my brother, we are obligated to be prepared for the appointed time, and to prepare for the faraway journey to the other world, which we have no escape from, and no refuge from, and to think on the provisions, and with what we will greet our Creator on the great day of accounting which scriptures says of it: "For, behold, the day is coming, it burns as a furnace; and all the proud, and all that work wickedness, shall be stubble; and the day that comes shall set them ablaze, says the L-ord of Hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch" (Malachi 3:19).
How can we ignore this when the journey is constant,, and the displacing is forever, and the road is long, and the resting place is faraway. Why do we not put to heart to remember our end, and do not think of the provisions we should make for our final abode? We occupy ourselves with a fleeting world, and abandon the everlasting one. We occupy ourselves with the ailing of our bodies, and forget our spiritual ailments, we occupy ourselves with the service of our evil inclination, and abandon the service of our Creator, we serve our base desires and do not serve our G-d. 
Alas to this confusion! How so universal it is! And to this drunkenness, how strong it is!, as the verse says: "for their eyes are shrouded, that they cannot see, and their hearts, that they cannot understand" (Yeshaya 44:18), and "ye that are drunken, but not with wine, that stagger, but not with strong drink" (Yeshaya 29:9). 
<b>THE SIXTEENTH: </b><i>(reflecting when seeing sudden death) </i>To make an accounting with oneself on the lengthy amount of time he survived in this world, and to put to heart the approaching of his end, and the coming of death on him, at a time when he sees that other living things, whether of the speaking (human beings) or otherwise (the animals), die suddenly without foreknowledge, nor even any hint, and (to put to heart) that there is no time that a person can be assured that it is not his time. It does not refrain from coming any month of the months of the year, nor any day of the days of the month, nor any hour of the hours of the day. It does not come only in old age, sparing the middle aged, or the young men, the young girls, the children or babies, rather it befalls all the living at all times, in every stage, and in every place. 
A person should imagine to himself as if a king had placed a deposit in his charge, and did not specify the time when to return it, and the king commanded him to be ready for his return at all times, so that he will not go to another city and will be available at the time the king will claim it from him. Is it conceivable for him to dwell outside the city of the king while the deposit is still in his hands? 
Some make the following analogy: One should imagine himself as if he has a debt to pay with no fixed payment date, expecting every moment to be called for payment. He will not be at peace until he pays it back. 
When a man considers his long stay in the world, and remembers that many of his friends journeyed to the other world before himself, at a time when they had strong expectations to be in the company of the world, and one does not see any advantage in himself that would obligate his living longer than them - his hope in this world will diminish, and he will consider his end. He will think on his provisions for the time of his journey, and will commune with himself before the day of accounting.
One of the wise men said: "one who precedes death before him rectified himself". 
And the wise man said: "the heart of the wise is in the house of mourning" (Koheles 7:4), and "It is better to go to the house of mourning, than to go to the house of feasting; for that is the end of all men, and the living will lay it to heart" (Koheles 7:2), the intent of "the living" is he whose heart is living, namely, one who understands and realizes. It is also written: "Man is like to vanity: his days are as a shadow that passes away" (Tehilim 144:4). 
<b>THE SEVENTEENTH: </b><i>(benefits of solitude) </i>At a time when one sees himself tending towards association with people and enjoying their company, he should reflect on the benefits of solitude, and separation from people, and with the evil resulting from being in the company of fools without necessity. 
The evil of their company:
Excessive talk, "so and so said", "it was said on so and so", long winded confusion without purpose, and the wise man said: "In the multitude of words there lacks not sin, but he that refrains his lips is wise" (Mishlei 10:19). One of the wise would say: "safeguard the superfluous of your words, and muzzle the superfluous (movement) of your tongue".
Speaking of people, recalling their bad deeds, and mentioning their faults. The verse says of this matter: "You sit and speak against your brother; you slander your own mother's son" (Tehilim 50:20).
Falsehood and lies. On this the verse says: "wickedness in its midst" (Tehilim 55:12), and "I hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright" (Yirmiya 8:6). 
False oaths and useless oaths. The Creator said of them "for the L-ord will not exonerate one who takes His Name in vain" (Shemos 20:7), and one of the pious said to his disciples: "the torah permitted us to make an oath in the Name of the Creator for truth, but I advise you not to swear neither to what is true nor to what is false, rather say only 'yes' or 'no' ".
Arrogance and frivolity, and to put down some of those present, and to laugh with them, and I already designated a gate in this book on the subject of distancing oneself from this matter, namely, the Gate of Submission.
Absence of fear of G-d in one's heart at a time when one mingles with people and converses with them, along with little chance of being spared their damaging his business affairs and talking of him. 
Flattery and love of acquiring a name for oneself, to become proud on them, and to try to be important in their eyes by demonstrating what he knows of the various branches of wisdom and deeds, whether or not he actually knows them. 
The obligation to command others on the good and warn them against evil, which the Creator commanded us in saying: "you shall surely rebuke your neighbor" (Vayikra 19:17).
We are obligated to warn against evil in three ways: One, forcibly hitting someone by hand (physically), as Pinchas did in the case of Zimri and Cozby. Two, to verbally protest, as Moshe did in saying to the wicked man: "Why strike you your fellow?" (Shemos 2:13). Three, in one's heart, as David said: "I hated the congregation of the evildoers, and with the wicked I shall not sit" (Tehilim 26:5).
If one can protest forcibly (and it will help) but refrains, this will be considered a lacking on his part. If it is difficult for him to protest forcibly, let him protest with words. If he cannot protest with words, it is his duty to do so in his heart. Therefore, we are obligated to rebuke the wicked, in any event, since the common people are not free from shortcomings. 
But when one is alone, undoubtedly, he is absolved of the mitzva of commanding others to good and warning them from evil. And it is difficult to fulfill G-d's command, and to fully discharge one's obligation in this mitzva, as the sages said: "it is a wonder if there is someone in this generation who accepts rebuke" (Arachin 16b), and others said: "it is a wonder if there is someone in this generation who knows how to give rebuke" (ibid).
(9) Loss of clarity of thought and intellectual understanding, and strengthening of the yetzer (evil inclination) while in their company and camaraderie, and learning from their bad traits, as the wise man said: "a companion of fools shall be corrupted" (Mishlei 13:20), and therefore our sages said: "conversing with children and sitting in the assembly houses of the unlearned (amei haaretz) takes a man out of the World (To Come)" (Avot 3:14).
The general principle: Most sins cannot be completed without two people, such as illicit relations, corrupt business practice, false oaths, false testimony, all sins which depend on speech. All these cannot be completed without the company of others and by mixing with them.
But solitude and separating from people, is a means to be saved from all of the sins we mentioned, and it is one of the strongest things which bring one to good traits, and it was already said that the pillar of a pure heart is love of solitude and choosing to be alone.
Therefore, my brother, be careful lest the yetzer deceive you and embellish in your eyes the company and mingling with people, and lest he entice you to yearn for them at a time when you feel lonely in solitude.
Afterwards, be careful lest the musings of your heart deceive you, telling you that the company of sages who know G-d and His torah, and the mixing with great men is detrimental to the matter of solitude, and takes away from the benefits of being alone. Rather, in truth, this is the complete separation and the perfect solitude. Furthermore, to frequent men who excel in good deeds and in torah has much greater benefits over the benefits of solitude. 
And the wise man said: "He that walks with the wise shall become wise" (Mishlei 13:20), and "hearken your ear, and hear the words of the wise" (Mishlei 22:17), and it was said of one who refrained from being with pious men:: "A scorner loves not one that reproves him: neither will he go to the wise" (Mishlei 15:12). And the sages, of blessed memory, said: "The gathering together of the wicked is bad for them and bad for the world, but for the righteous, it is good for them and good for the world. The dispersing of the wicked is beneficial for them and beneficial to the world, but for the righteous, it is bad for them and bad for the world" (Sanhedrin 71b). And they said: "Let your house be a meetingplace for the sages and sit amidst the dust of their feet and drink in thirstily their words" (Avos 1:4), and "Then they that feared the L-ord spoke one with another; and the L-ord hearkened, and heard" (Malachi 3:16).
<b>THE EIGHTEENTH: </b><i>(the elevation of man) </i>To make an accounting with oneself when one feels himself becoming arrogant and proud, and (as a result) overly ambitious in this world - to then contemplate one's significance in the creation (before being elevated by G-d), among the lower and the celestial creations, then one will understand his puniness and lowliness among the works of the Creator, as I clarified on this matter in the sixth gate of this book. 
Afterwards, reflect on the Creator's granting greatness to man, that he made him ruler over the animals, plants, and natural resources, as written "You give him dominion over the work of Your hands; You have placed everything beneath his feet" (Tehilim 8:7), and He made known to man the statutes of His torah, and established him (to understand) what will further his welfare of the upper and lower wisdoms of this world. And G-d elevated man further by permitting and desiring his praise and gratitude, and to call to Him during difficulties, and to answer his prayers in difficult times, and chose in him, and appointed him over His creations, and transmitted to man secrets of His might, and made miracles through His treasured ones, besides what would be lengthy to recall of the hidden and revealed favors, whether physical or spiritual, general and specific, of His kindness and goodness towards us. 
See, my brother, how little is your worth and how unimportant is your matter, and yet, how much the Creator has elevated you, even though He has no need for you and (just the opposite, see) your great need for His providence. Don't waste this glorious crown He has crowned you with, and the exalted status He has elevated you to in this world, and the great reward He has hidden away for you in the next world when you cling to His service and to thanking Him.
Let not the Creator's elevating you, of what I recalled to you, of his kindnesses and favors, be reason to become proud in your status, and haughty in your spirit, and to glorify yourself due to the kindness of the Creator on you by thinking that you deserve it, and that you are worthy of it, and that it is befitting you.
Rather, cling to the traits of submission, humility, and lowliness which is fitting for you to cling to when you admit to the truth of your worth among the creations of the Creator, as a weak, unimportant, and petty slave is obligated to do when his master elevates him and places him inside his inner circle of treasured ones out of pure benevolent kindness - he is obligated to humble himself and to see himself as he was in his original status, before his master's kindness was on him, and not to become proud before his master, nor haughty due to reaching greatness and importance, and not to request his own needs to his master in a habitual way , rather he will leave his matters to his master and trust in him and in his kindness.
It was said of one of the tzadikim (righteous) who would say after his prayer: "My G-d, I was not persuaded by my intellect to stand before You due to ignorance of my puny worth and little understanding of Your greatness, that You are high and exalted and I am insignificant, disgraceful, and petty to ask of You and to say before You praises and exaltations, or to sanctify Your holy Name using the words of the holy angels on high, rather, I was persuaded to do this in that You have elevated me by your commanding me to plea before You, and have given me permission to praise Your great Name according to my understanding of Your glory, so that I can demonstrate that I am serving You and that I humble myself before You.
You know what is beneficial for me, and how to guide me. I mentioned to You my needs, not in order to arouse You on them but rather so that I feel my great need for You and my trust in You. If, in my ignorance, I ask of You something, which is not beneficial for me, may Your exalted choice override my choice. I have already submitted all of my matters to Your decrees, which endure, and to Your supernal guidance, as David, peace be unto him, said: "O L-ord, my heart was not haughty, nor were my eyes raised on high, and I did not pursue matters greater and more wondrous than I" (Tehilim 131:1).
<b>THE NINETEENTH: </b><i>(disasters of the world) </i>To make an accounting with oneself in that the Creator has spared him from the disasters of the world, its sufferings, the various diseases which strike people, the calamities which befall them such as imprisonment, hunger, thirst, cold, burning, lethal poisons, dangerous animals, leprosy, insanity, paralysis, or the like - all the while knowing that they are fitting for him and he deserves them due to his previous sins and iniquities before the Creator, and the greatness of what occurred in the past, of his rebelling against G-d, and disrespecting His words, and leaving his duty of thanking and praising Him, and turning away from His service, and neglecting repentance and confession before G-d for his prolonged rebellion despite G-d's continuous favors and constant good on him. 
When the intelligent man will look and contemplate how the Creator tests people with the troubles of this world we mentioned, and that he was saved from them, and spared from their tumults, even though he deserves them - his praise will increase for the favors of G-d on him, and he will hurry to repent and seek forgiveness for his past sins and iniquities which the Creator has concealed for such a long time, and he will run to cling to the service of the Creator, out of fear of them (the punishments he deserves) and so will avert them, as written "If you will diligently hearken to the voice of the L-ord your G-d... I will put none of these diseases upon you, which I have brought upon the Egyptians" (Shemos 15:26), and "the L-ord will remove from you all illness, and all of the evil diseases of Egypt which you knew, He will not set upon you, but He will lay them upon all your enemies" (Devarim 7:15), and one of our early pious ones would say to his disciples: "see, the serpent does not kill, rather it is sin that kills" (Berachos 33a), and David, peace be unto him, said: "You shall tread upon the lion and adder: the young lion and the serpent shall you trample under foot. Because he has set his love upon Me, therefore I will deliver him" (Tehilim 91:13).
<b>THE TWENTIETH: </b><i>(acquiring and spending money) </i>To make an accounting with oneself if he has wealth, in the manners he acquired it, and the ways he spends it, and whether he is fulfilling his obligations to G-d with it, and paying his debts to man according to how much he has, and not to think that the money will be for him alone, rather, to know that it is by him like a deposit - it will remain by him for as long as the Creator desires that it be in his hand, and afterwards He will transfer it to someone else when He wishes.
When the rich man contemplates this, he will not fear the damages time brings on him. If the money stays by him, he will thank the Creator and praise him. If it is lost from him, he will bear His judgment and accept His decree. It will be easier for him to use it and spend it in the service of G-d, to do good with it, to return deposits people entrusted him with, and return money he took unjustly, and not to covet another man's wealth nor disrespect a poor man due to his poverty, and it will be a strong cause to help him acquire good traits and to refrain from the bad traits, as written "Honor the L-ord from your wealth, and from the first-fruits of all your produce" (Mishlei 3:9), and "He that has pity on the poor lends to the L-ord; and that which he has given will He pay him back" (Mishlei 19:17).
<b>THE TWENTY FIRST: </b><i>(on Divine help)</i> Accounting with oneself on the extent of his capability in the service of G-d and to train oneself in it, and be diligent in it, and to hasten and be zealous in doing it until it becomes habit to him, and afterwards to endeavor to do more than what was within one's ability, and to long for it in his heart, and desire it in his thoughts, and to plea to G-d with a faithful and genuine heart and mind to help him and strengthen him for what is above his current ability in understanding (torah) and in good deeds. 
When one perseveres more and more in this, the Creator will fulfill his request, and open for him the gates of His understanding, and strengthen his intellect and limbs, level by level, to fulfill the commandments on a higher level, above and beyond his abilities, as written: "I am the L-ord your G-d, Who teaches you for your benefit, Who leads you by the way you should go" (Yeshaya 48:17). 
The analogy of this regarding learning the skills of a trade and learning mathematics : When one who learns a trade, in the beginning, will do only parts of it according to his understanding and less than his ability. When his understanding of the trade strengthens and he persists in it, the Creator will enlighten him to the general principles of the trade and its fundamentals and he will be able to deduce new branches which were not taught to him by other people.
Similarly in learning mathematics: The master of geometry cannot teach his student the theoretical lessons in abstract concepts, rather he will first teach him concrete geometric drawings as Euclides organized them in his book of mathematics. When the student understands well, and desires to grasp its branches with diligence and interest, the Creator will help enlighten him on the subject, and establish his general understanding, and then he will be able to bring forth from this wondrous forms and fine works which appear almost divinely inspired.
So too in other fields of wisdom: The student will find when he exerts his mind in the wisdom, that he will feel a higher spiritual power which no human being has the ability to give him, on this the sages said: "the wise man is greater than the prophet" (Bava Basra 12a), and Elihu said: "But it is a spirit in man, and the breath of the Almighty, that gives them understanding" (Iyov 32:8). 
Through this, it is proper for you, my brother, to understand that the primary intended purpose in the mitzvot which involve the body and the limbs, is to arouse our attention on the mitzvot of the heart and mind, because they are the pillars of the service and they are the roots (and foundations) of the torah, as written: "You shall fear the L-ord, your G-d, worship Him, and cleave to Him.." (Devarim 10:20), and "Rather,[this] thing is very close to you; in your mouth and in your heart to do it" (Devarim 30:14), and "And now, O Israel, what does the L-ord, your G-d, ask of you? Only to fear the L-ord, your G-d, to walk in all His ways and to love Him, and to worship the L-ord, your G-d, with all your heart and with all your soul" (Devarim 10:12).
And because this is beyond a man's normal power, and it is not possible for him until he separates from most of his animalistic desires, and forces his base nature, and takes control of all his movements, the Creator has made him serve with his body and limbs with what he is capable of doing, until it will be easy for him to fulfill them.
Then, when the believer engages in them with his heart and mind, and exerts himself to the best of his ability, G-d will open for him the gates of spiritual qualities, and he will attain with them what is beyond his ability, and he will serve G-d with his body and soul, with his outer and inner being, as David said: "my heart and my flesh cry out for the living G-d" (Tehilim 84:3). 
This was already compared to a man who plants trees and digs in their roots. He cleans the soil from rocks, thorns, and weeds, waters it when needed, fertilizes it, and afterwards he hopes that G-d will cause fruits to grow. But if he neglects working the land and supervising its needs, it is not proper for the Creator to give him fruits from them. 
Likewise for one who strives to do actions for the service (of G-d), if he exerts himself with diligence and zeal to do what is in his power to do - G-d will help him to accomplish what is beyond his ability, namely, the divine fruit and the glorious good from G-d on His treasured ones and His beloved ones in this world, as our sages said: "whoever fulfills the torah from poverty will fulfill it from wealth" (Avos 4:9), and the wise man said: "For to a man who is good in His sight, He has given wisdom and knowledge and joy" (Koheles 2:26).
Our sages said: "Torah brings to action, action brings to watchfulness, watchfulness brings to zeal, zeal brings to abstinence, abstinence brings to cleanliness, cleanliness brings to purity, purity brings to piety, and piety is greater than all of them, as written 'then You spoke in prophecy to Your pious ones' (Tehilim 89:20)".
But if one neglects from doing what is within his ability, and is lax in doing what is within his power, the help and assistance from G-d will distance from him, as written: "G-d is far from the wicked" (Mishlei 15:29), and "your sins were separating between you and your G-d" (Yeshaya 59:2). 
<b>THE TWENTY SECOND: </b><i>(to love for others what you would love for yourself) </i>To make an accounting with oneself regarding his joining with people for furthering the general welfare, such as plowing or harvesting, buying and selling, and other societal matters which people help each other in - that he loves for them what he would love would happen to himself, and that he hates for them what he would hate would happen to himself, and that he has compassion for them, and saves them, according to his ability, from what would damage them, as written: "love your fellow as you love yourself" (Vayikra 19:18). 
Let one apply in this the following analogy: A group of people travel to a distant land on a difficult journey. They need to stop in several stops along the way, and they have many animals loaded with heavy loads, and the men are few, each one has many animals he must unload and reload frequently. If they will help each other in loading and unloading, and their desire is for the peace of all and to lighten each others' burden, and that they equally share the load of helping each other - they will reach the best results. But if their opinions differ and they do not agree to one plan, and each one exerts to further only his own interests - most will become exhausted.
In this way, my brother, the world is burdensome on its inhabitants, and their work and exertion is many times more difficult, because each one wants his portion to be for himself alone and that he has more than his allotted portion (more than what he needs).
And because they desired more than their proper portion, and seek from it even what does not belong to them, therefore the world withholds from them their portion in it, and does not produce for any of them even their portion in it, therefore they are not content with it, and there is not even one who does not complain and weep over it, and because they seek the superfluous in food, they were prevented even from the basic necessities except through tremendous toil and great exertion.
If, however, their basic needs were enough for them, and their exertion was equal and for the benefit of all, and that they were equal in their interests, they would succeed in their world and attain even more of their desire in it. But not only do they not help each other in their worldly interests, but they weaken each other, and each one prevents his fellow and weakens his strength, until not one of them reaches his desire and attains his lusts.
Therefore, my brother, exert yourself, to acquire faithful and pure friends to be your helpers in your torah and worldly matters . (How is this done?) When your heart is whole with them, and your heart is pure towards them, and that they are precious to you like yourself, if you find among them some worthy of this.
Do not reveal your private matters except only to a very select few among them, as Ben Sira said: "let many be your friends, but reveal your secrets to only one in a thousand" (Ben Sira 6:6) 
And the wise man said: "Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart: so does the sweetness of a man's friend by hearty counsel" (Mishlei 27:9). 
<b>THE TWENTY THIRD: </b><i>(seeing G-d in nature) </i>To investigate all that exists in the universe, from the smallest creations to the largest, and the superior qualities human beings have in the world, and the levels of the creations below and above, and the arrangement of the heavenly spheres, the movement of the sun, the moon, the stars, those stationary and those which move, the falling of the rain, the blowing of the wind, the emergence of a baby from the womb, and other wonders of the Creator, which are more wondrous, more subtle, more apparent (yet) more mysterious which teach on His perfect wisdom and power, and His good guidance, and all encompassing grace, His mercy, and His abundant providence over His creations. 
Do not be deceived due to seeing them so frequently, and being used to them for so long, that you abandon being in wonder of them, and abandon contemplating them, and that it is inevitable that your previous knowledge of them cause you to make light of them due to habitually seeing them and observing them since your childhood.
In this way, we find most of the common people and many of the important men on this matter - that they are in wonder when seeing something they are not used to seeing such as a solar or lunar eclipse, thunder and lightning, comets, earthquakes, hurricanes, or other similar phenomena, but they are not in wonder of the movement of the spheres and their orbits, such as the sun, moon, and stars, the sunrise and sunset, the rain, blowing of the wind, or the like of the things that exist with them, and that they see constantly. Similarly, they are in wonder when seeing the sea, its waves and storms, and the creatures in it, yet they don't wonder at the flow of rivers, drawing of underground springs, and other things like this, which are continuous (around them) day and night.
Therefore, it is proper for you, my brother, to investigate all of what the Creator created, whether you are used to it or not, whether you have already seen it or not. Let not your foolishness entice you, that after you were foolish in your childhood and did not contemplate these matters when you first saw them, that you also do not contemplate them now in your adulthood and time of strong recognition, clear heart, and mature understanding , rather look at them and contemplate them, as if you never saw them, and imagine to yourself that you were blind before you contemplated them and afterwards your sight was restored and you could see them and contemplate them.
See my brother, that the fool is like a blind man, and when he becomes intelligent, he will be similar to a blind man whose eyes were healed and can now see, as the verse says on Adam and Eve: "the eyes of both of them became opened" (Bereishis 3:7), though we know that they could see before this. 
Do not hide yourself from contemplating them, and from investigating all of them - then you will see the truth of the matters, and will recognize some of the wonders of the Creator, which you have long been ignorant of and blind in, as one of the wise men said: "the hearts of the wise have eyes, they can see what the ignorant cannot see", as the verse says: "Have you not known? have you not heard? has it not been told you from the beginning? have you not understood from the foundations of the earth?" (Yeshaya 40:21). 
<b>THE TWENTY FOURTH: </b><i>(child's eyes) </i>That you make an accounting with yourself and claim from yourself on all matters which have been established in you regarding knowledge of G-d and His torah, and the words of the ancients, and the metaphors of the wise, and the contents of prayers, which you started learning in your childhood and youth. For the picture of a complex matter by one whose understanding is weak is not like the picture for one whose understanding is strong, and the more a man increases understanding, the more he will increase clarity.
Therefore do not be content with what has been formed in your mind in the beginning of your learning of the difficult matters, and the deep reasons. Rather, it is proper for you to start at the age of mature intellect and understanding to examine the book of G-d and the book of the prophets, like someone who never learned one letter of them. Habituate yourself to expound and clarify them, and to contemplate their words and structure, and what you can of their interpretation, and what is to be understood literally and what is not, and what is visible and what is concealed, and what is possible to compare to other areas and what is not. 
Similarly do for the prayers and praises, study their words and their intended message, so that when you speak them before your G-d, you will understand the words you are uttering, and what your heart seeks in the matter. Do not conduct yourself in this like the custom of the days of youth, that you pronounce whatever words follow (without understanding the words), and in whatever way you follow, without understanding the matter, and we have already dealt sufficiently with this matter (in #9 and #18).
Similarly do for the words of the sages and the words of the oral tradition, that you contemplate them and judge them favorably. Do not be satisfied with the clarity you had when you first learned them, rather claim from yourself to be like one who starts learning it. What you understand, recall it and work it through.
What you are now in doubt about its explanation (even after the reexamination), and which you were not in doubt in your youth, investigate after it from the wise men of your generation, then you will see of the secrets of the torah and the secrets of the prophets and of the sages which was impossible for you to grasp from the learning of your teachers at the beginning of your studies.
Let not arrogance deceive you, to think that your perception did not increase from what it was in your youth, and that what passed into your mind then will not change and become strange in your mind now, because this is an enticement of the yetzer (evil inclination) on you, to weaken your resolve to examine and investigate the truth of the matters, and to imagine to your eyes that you are a completely wise man and lack nothing of what you need, as the wise man said: "The lazy man is wiser in his own eyes than seven men that can answer reasonably" (Mishlei 26:16). 
And: "Have you seen a man wise in his own eyes? there is more hope for a fool than of him" (Mishlei 26:12), and "the wise man's eyes are on his head but the fool walks in darkness" (Koheles 2:14), which means that he looks at the beginning of his matters, and what passed over him of the matters of his torah and worldly matters, and examines them, and understands the good and the bad of what has happened to him, and strengthens the good and repents from the bad.
But the fool ignores all of this, as one who walks in the darkness of night on a long road. He does not look at what has passed, since if he turns his head what he sees will not be clear to him, rather all of his attention is only on what is in front of him, on this it says: "but the fool walks in darkness" (ibid), and "Then I saw that wisdom excels folly, as far as light excels darkness" (Koheles 2:13). 
<b>THE TWENTY FIFTH: </b><i>(fire and water) </i>To make an accounting with oneself for being sunk in love of this world and strengthening its lusts over the love of Olam Haba (the next world), and to make efforts to remove the love of this world from one's heart, and strengthen the love of Olam Haba over it, by contemplating what will be one's end from both worlds and what will be one's final condition from both abodes, and to try to remove the love of this world from one's heart and to maintain the love of Olam Haba in it always. 
One of the wise men already said: "just like fire and water cannot coexist together in one container, so too the love of this world and the love of the Olam Haba cannot coexist together in the heart of the believer". They also said: "this world and the next world are like two jealous wives (of one husband), when he shows a liking to one of them, the other one gets angry. 
Likewise, my brother, both your soul and body need management and thought.
The strengthening and rectification of the soul is through habituating it with morals and wisdoms, and to guide it with words of wisdom, and to teach it the good traits, and refrain from the bodily lusts.
The strengthening and rectification of the body is to provide it with various types of good, tasty food and drink which are suitable to its nature, and to wash it with warm water, and to supervise its benefits and needs constantly.
If your thoughts will be on the needs of your body, and you place all of your attention on it - you will neglect the improvement of your soul. Likewise, if you turn your attention to rectifying your soul by focusing all of your attention on it - you will neglect much of the needs of your body.
Therefore, the proper way is to strengthen your eternal soul over your fleeting body, and that you focus attention on your soul and worry on its needs, but without neglecting the matters that are very necessary for your body, thereby overburdening it and weakening it, as this will be a means to make both weak. Rather, give your body the food it needs to maintain its functioning, and give your soul of the wisdoms and morals more than its ability to take. 
On this the wise man said: "Be not overly righteous...why should you bring desolation upon yourself? Be not overly wicked, and be not a fool; why should you die before your time?" (Koheles 7:16), and "It is good that you should take hold of this, and also from this you shall not withdraw your hand" (Koheles 7:18), which means:
"Be not overly righteous" - Do not be extreme in the ways of the righteous who separate from this world, lest you become ruined. 
"Be not overly wicked" (ibid), Likewise, do not be extreme in the ways of the wicked who strengthen after this world, and you indulge in base desires more than the amount fitting for your religious and secular needs. 
"why should you die before your time" (ibid), this refers to the death of the soul, in being overpowered by the base desires, and drowning in the sea of physical pleasures. 
Rather, hold on to the balanced path. Strengthen on your final end (Olam Haba) and do not abandon this world, because from it you will take provisions for the eternal world, and it is like the passageway to the place of rest, as our sages said: "This world is like a corridor to the future world. Prepare yourself in the corridor that you may enter into the banquet hall" (Avos 4:16).
This is the path of the early pious ones who feared G-d.
He said: "Do not be overly wise", since wisdom has a fixed limit which cannot be crossed. The explanation is that all the various branches of wisdom which lead to the service of G-d, guarding His commandments, or demonstrating His wisdom and power - this category is permitted to us, and it is our duty to investigate it, as written: "Behold, the fear of the L-ord is wisdom" (Iyov 28:28), and "The fear of the L-ord is the beginning of wisdom: and the knowledge of the holy ones (good deeds/traits) is understanding" (Mishlei 9:10), which means knowledge of G-d, and also: "The fear of the L-ord is the beginning of wisdom" (Tehilim 111:10), and "The wise men are ashamed, they are dismayed and taken; lo, they have rejected the word of the L-ord; and what wisdom is in them?" (Yirmiyahu 8:9), and all that is a wisdom outside of this way we mentioned - it is forbidden to study it and investigate after it. Therefore he said: "do not be overly wise".
But as for foolishness and frivolity he warned us against the smallest amount of it, therefore he said: "do not be foolish", and did not say "do not be too foolish", because even a small amount ruins much of the good qualities, as written: "Dead flies make the ointment of the perfumed fetid and putrid; so does a little folly outweigh wisdom and honor" (Koheles 10:1). 
<b>THE TWENTY SIXTH: </b><i>(fearing a mortal king) </i>To make an accounting with oneself that when one is standing in the commandment of a king, he fears being punished if he transgresses the king's command, yet one does not trouble himself about the commandments of G-d, and does not fear His punishment if he transgresses His command.
How could he neglect to consider the difference between the two commands and the two matters, and not understand the weakness of a mortal king in enforcing his decrees, his possible delay in administering punishment to him, his limited ability to see him, and his many distractions (with other affairs), and the wise man already said: "fear G-d and the king, my son" (Mishlei 24:21), and "The fear of a king is as the roaring of a lion: whosoever provokes him to anger sins against his own life" (Mishlei 20:2).
How can an intelligent man not be ashamed of his G-d, whose decree cannot be overturned, who watches over him always. He cannot be distracted. He cannot be prevented (from enacting His decree) by anything, and yet one does not fear His judgment? How can one rebel against His word when he knows that G-d is watching his inner and outer being. How can one not repent for his past by saying to himself: "how long have I rebelled against His word, while He continues delaying punishing me. I will seek His forgiveness before He destroys me from this world, or afflicts me in the next world", this is what David said: "The wicked, in the pride of his countenance will not seek; G-d is never in his thoughts" (Tehilim 10:4). 
<b>THE TWENTY SEVENTH: </b><i>(bearing suffering) </i>To make an accounting with oneself when trouble strikes him, whether physically, financially, or any of his other matters. He should receive everything from his G-d with joy, and bear it as one who accepts the judgment of G-d and not bear it as one who is angry on His decree. 
As written "And I will wait for the L-ord, that hides His face from the house of Jacob, and I will hope unto Him" (Yeshaya 8:17), and he should not be like the one the verse speaks of: "and it shall come to pass that, when they shall be hungry, they shall fret themselves, and turning their faces on high, curse by their king and by their G-d" (Yeshaya 8:21).
Know, my brother, that for the ten trials which G-d tested Avraham our forefather with, we would not be praising Avraham for standing up to these trials, if it were not the case that he had received everything from G-d willingly and with a good heart, as written: "And found his heart faithful before You" (Nechamia 9:8). As for the generation who left Egypt, they were deserving of condemnation and rebuke in the desert only because they became angry and their hearts were not good with G-d and His prophet (Moshe).
As written: "But they flattered Him with their mouth, and lied unto Him with their tongue, but their heart was not right with Him" (Tehilim 78:36). Many times they would show themselves grudging and rebelling against G-d and breaching His covenant, as we find them constantly desiring to return to Egypt, or the like. 
Good bearing is a good character trait but one who bears (begrudgingly) out of force does not receive any reward for it, and he does not attain forgiveness (atonement) from it. 
Consider, my brother, the difference between the two types of bearing suffering, and contemplate the different consequences between them. 
You will see that the matter of bearing (suffering) divides into three categories:
Bearing it in serving G-d.
Bearing it so as not to rebel against Him.
Bearing from the afflictions of the world.
This third category subdivides to two parts:
one: Bearing for a loss
two: Bearing for lacking of something he loves
Either way, it is possible this trouble came in the way of punishment, and through it you will be forgiven for a sin you committed or that G-d wants to bring you to a test and trial, and through this the Creator will increase your reward. 
Whichever way it is of these two ways, it is proper for you to receive what comes to you from G-d willingly and with good acceptance, as King David said: "all the ways of G-d are kindness and truth unto those that keep His covenant and testimonies" (Tehilim 25:10), because the trouble that befell you, if it is to forgive your sin - it is a "truth", and if it is the beginning (of a test) in order to give you in exchange for it good reward for bearing the test - it is a "kindness", therefore it is never other than truth or kindness. 
If you contemplate well these matters, the result of your bearing will be good, and your reward for it is assured.
Therefore, my brother, do not neglect to check your thoughts constantly in this matter, and then your ability to bear properly to G-d will be strengthened, and it will be easier for you when harsh pain and bitter suffering weighs on your heart, to demonstrate your good acceptance of the decree of G-d, and that you find consolation in Him , and that your trust is on Him, as written: "Strengthen yourselves, and He will give your heart courage, all who hope to the L-ord" (Tehilim 31:25). 
<b>THE TWENTY EIGHTH: </b><i>(total acceptance)</i> Making an accounting with oneself if, after putting his trust in G-d, giving himself over to Him, his money, his children, and all his matters to G-d's service, then his matters change and the Creator decrees for him something which is against his wishes. 
He should think to himself: A man gave his friend a house or a field as a gift, and then the recipient of the gift thought in his mind to demolish it and rebuild it differently or to change it from its original manner. Is it right for the donor to mourn what the recipient did, and to grieve for changing it from its original state, after he had already given the house or the field?
Same for you, my brother, if you have given yourself and your possessions to G-d, do not mourn His acting on you as He desires, and conducts Himself towards you as He wishes. And even if it does not appear good to you, nevertheless it is proper for you to be at peace on Him, and rely on His perfect guidance and the judgment of His decree. Do not regret on having given to Him what you think was yours, and do not show anguish for His decree on you - and all the more so being that you are one of His creations, and He is your Maker and the provider of your sustenance, and guides you in what is good for you in your inner and outer matters, even if you don't understand the matter, as written: "I taught Ephraim also to go, taking them by their arms; but they knew not that I healed them" (Hoshea 11:3). 
<b>THE TWENTY NINTH: </b><i>(greatness of the soul) </i>To contemplate the superiority of the soul over the body, and to realize that some men are greater than other men, until one man can be worth as much as a thousand men, and to know that this superiority is not due to superior qualities of his body, but rather due to the higher degree of his soul, as was said to David: "but now you are worth ten thousand of us" (Shmuel II 18:3).
Even for women who are distinguished by physical beauty but are deficient in spiritual qualities, then not only is their beauty not pleasing, but it becomes ugly, as the wise man said: "as a gold ring in a pig's snout, so is a beautiful woman from who (moral) sense has departed" (Mishlei 11:22), and "Charm is deceitful, and beauty is vain: but a woman that fears the L-ord, she shall be praised" (Mishlei 31:30).
According to your understanding of the greatness of your soul over your body, it is proper for you to exert yourself in her rectification and in her salvation, so that she may stay with her L-ord who observes whether she is bright or darkened (by sin), worthy of praise or of blame, whether she has chosen good or evil, and whether she tends to reason or to lust.
Therefore tend to her matters always, more than you tend to the matters of your body, and know, that it is easier to heal your body from the worst of the diseases that befall it, than it is to heal the soul from the sickness of the yetzer (evil inclination) when he overpowers it, as the wise man said: "The spirit of a man will sustain him in sickness; but a wounded spirit who can bear?" (Mishlei 18:14), and "above all things guarded, watch over your heart" (Mishlei 4:23). 
<b>THE THIRTIETH: </b><i>(stranger in a strange land) </i>The thirtieth and concluding accounting - to make an accounting with oneself regarding the conditions which a foreigner in this world. He should consider his status in it like that of a stranger who came from a faraway land and did not know even one of the inhabitants of the country he came to, and not one of them knew him. The king of the country had pity on him in that he was a stranger, and instructed him in that which will further his welfare. He provided him with his daily sustenance, and commanded him not to rebel against his laws, and not to transgress his commands. And he informed him of the benefit and reward if he obeyed him and scared him with the punishments (he would receive if he disobeyed him), appropriate for the time and place. And the king warned the immigrant that a time will come when he must leave there, but he did not reveal to him when this time would be.
Among the conditions he is obligated in:
Submission and humility, and to abandon arrogance, and to distance from pride and haughtiness, as written in this matter: "And they said, 'This one came to dwell with us, and now he is judging us ?'" (Bereishis 19:9). 
To be prepared for the journey and for moving on, and to not become comfortable and settled in, as written: "The land shall not be sold permanently: for the land is Mine; for you are strangers and sojourners with Me" (Vayikra 25:23). 
To investigate the ways and laws of the country and what one is obligated to the king, as David said: "I am a stranger in the land; hide not Your commandments from me" (Tehilim 119:19).
To love another stranger like him, to help and aid him, as written: "you shall love the stranger" (Devarim 10:19), and "But the stranger that dwells with you shall be unto you as one born among you, and you shall love him as yourself; for you were strangers in the land of Egypt" (Vayikra 19:34) 
To hasten and be quick to cling to the service of the king of the land, because he has no friend who can intervene with the king on his behalf if he transgresses the service. His matter is opposite that of the answer the Shunamit gave when the prophet asked her: "Behold, you have been careful for us with all this care; what is to be done for you? would you like to be spoken for to the king, or to the captain of the host?" (Melachim II 4:13,), she answered "I dwell among my people", she meant to say: "my people and my family will speak to him on my behalf in the time of need". This is not so for a stranger. Rather, he is as written: "I looked on my right hand, and beheld, but there was no man that would acknowledge me: refuge failed me; no man cared for my soul" (Tehilim 142:5). 
To be satisfied with whatever food he gets, and with whatever house and clothing he can find, and to conduct himself in all his manners on subsistence level and not to exert himself (for amassing luxuries). 
To prepare for the journey and to consider what provisions he will need on the way.
That it be big in his eyes, a small favor someone does to him, and that he extends praises to someone who benefited him. 
To bear patiently any evil that befalls him, and monetary damage that strikes him - due to being broken and humble of spirit and due to being weak to prevent it from occurring.
Therefore, my brother, take on yourself the conditions of being a stranger in this world, because you are in truth a stranger in it. 
The proof that you are a stranger and all alone in it is that during the time you emerged into the realm of existence and were formed in the belly of your mother - if all human beings in the world were to exert themselves to hasten your formation for even one second or delay it for one second, or to assemble one of your limbs to another one, or to release one from another, or to try to form one of your limbs whether of the external (limbs) or internal ones (internal organs), or to grant movement to a limb which normally cannot move, or to grant rest to a limb which normally moves (ex. heart, lungs), or to advance the time you exit your mother's womb before the time decreed for you, or to delay it for the time to blink an eye, or to make the matter of birth easier for you, or harder - they would not be capable of affecting you on this (unless G-d decreed so).
Likewise, after you entered this world, no human being is capable of bringing you sustenance without the help of G-d. No person can make your body larger or smaller. If you could imagine that no one were left in the world except you, and that the entire world was yours alone, this would not increase by even a mustard seed (tiny amount) the sustenance that would reach you until the end of your days.
Similarly, if the population of the world would double many times over, you would not be lacking even a mustard seed of what was decreed for you, no less and no more. 
So too, none of the created beings (human or otherwise) are capable of benefiting you nor of harming you, and not one of them is capable of adding to the days of your life nor of decreasing them, likewise for all of your traits, your nature, and your good or bad deeds.
If so, what connection is there between you and other creatures? Or, with which kinship are you related to them or they related to you? Are you not in this world just like a stranger to whom its inhabitants however numerous can bring no advantage and whom their small number cannot harm him. Are you not in it like a lonely, solitary individual, who has no association except with his Master, and no one to have compassion on him except for his Creator? 
Therefore, my brother, devote yourself to G-d's service alone, just like He alone created you, guides you, provides for you, and that your life and death are in His hands alone. 
Place His written and oral torah before your eyes, hope to His reward and fear His punishment, take on yourself the conditions of being a stranger which I aroused you on for all the days of your life in this world and you will reach the bliss of Olam Haba, as the wise man said: "[My son eat honey for it is good, and the honeycomb which is sweet to your palate;] So shall the knowledge of wisdom be unto your soul: when you have found it, then there shall be a reward and your hope shall not be cut off" (Mishlei 24:14). 
SUMMATION<br>These, my brother, are thirty ways, among the ways a man should make an accounting with himself before G-d. When you think to yourself on them, and you bring yourself to judgment on them, then their light will rupture through, and their illumination will surround you. Reflect on them constantly. 
Review them in your mind all the days of your life. Do not be satisfied with my short discussion on them, and my mentioning them in a concise manner, because each matter, when it is clarified and explained properly, will expand many times over from what I mentioned. 
I merely aroused attention them, and recalled them to their seeker in a concise manner. I did not speak much on them, so that this book will not become too lengthy, and go out of my intent for it, which was to arouse and teach.
Place them opposite your eyes, and before your vision, establish them in your heart and in your mind - then when you review them, you will see in them, what you did not originally see, of hidden secrets and spiritual mussar.
Do not think that when you examine them, and arrive at an understanding of the meaning of the words, that you have already grasped the full concealed matter, because you will not reach this from them until after you put your thoughts on them diligently and with exertion many times and over a long time.
Straighten yourself through them, and straighten others with them, you will reach the great reward from G-d, as written: "And the wise will shine like the brightness of the sky, and those who bring the multitudes to righteousness like the stars forever and ever" (Daniel 12:3), and the wise man said: "But to them that rebuke shall be delight, and a good blessing shall come upon them" (Mishlei 24:25). 

Chapter 4

The benefit the spiritual accountings we mentioned yields are the results which the soul develops after:
* attaining a clear grasp in the 30 ways of spiritual accounting we mentioned
* understanding their matters
* understanding their actual form
* understanding the truth of their obligation
* the yearning of one's soul to undertake them, according to one's understanding of them and establishing of them in one's thoughts. 
Then, my brother, there will develop in your soul a sublime and lofty result, (1) you will learn from it all the good character traits, and you will reach through it to all the treasured things, namely, (2) purifying the essence of the soul from the obscurity of foolishness, and (3) you will dispel the darkness of doubt that is in your heart. 
You already know that (when learning mathematics), according to the correctness, number, and proper order of the fundamental principles will be the resulting clarity and mastery.
Likewise, for preparing a medication in the field of medicine, the benefit of the medication, and the potency of its effect will be according to the potency of the herbs, which the medication consists of. 
Likewise for the field of engineering, called in Arabic, Il-Handasa, according to the number of fundamental principles learned in the desired field will be the resulting quality and usefulness of the knowledge. 
So it is with many things. For example, a leverage scale cannot be designed without prior knowledge in engineering, mechanics, mathematics and weights.
Likewise for the astronomers' measure called in Arabic, Itztrolab, it cannot be designed without prior understanding in engineering, geometry, astronomical movements, and area of the earth. 
So too, for this matter requested from the soul, it will not be possible for you, my brother, until you first bear accepting what I have aroused you in of the spiritual accountings with yourself in this gate and in the other gates, and are diligent in acting on them. 
And when you do this with a faithful heart and a pure soul, your mind will become illuminated, and you will see the path to all of the exalted qualities, and the yetzer (evil inclination) will not have a way to reach you and entice you, and you will reach the status of one treasured by G-d. A new, strange, supernal sense will arouse in you, unfamiliar to you of all the senses you are used to knowing, as the wise man said: "A man's wisdom makes his face to shine, and the boldness of his face is changed" (Koheles 8:1), then you will perceive the great matters, and you will see the deep secrets, with your pure soul, pure heart, and strong faith. You will not part from a permanent joy in this world and in the next, due to the magnitude of what you observed and the greatness of the secret which was revealed to you, with G-d's help.
I saw proper to give you an analogy, which will clarify for you a bit of what I have mentioned to you: Imagine that you are in a place, above this place and behind you is a wondrous image, and there's no way for you to see it with your eyes, and gaze at it with your sense of sight. A certain person told you that when you make a sheet of metal and polish it until the darkness is removed, and you anoint it with various potions for a long time, and then you place it opposite your face - then you will see the above picture that was previously hidden to you, and you will be able to gaze at it and to enjoy its pleasant appearance and radiant beauty. 
The high picture, which you have no way to gaze at with your eyes, is the wisdom of the Creator, and His power, and the beauty of the upper world whose form and quality is hidden from us. The sheet metal is the soul of man, the polishing is the guiding it in the wisdoms and the intellectual and torah morals. The anointings are the thirty ways of personal accounting, which I have mentioned to you. 
When you put them to your heart, and establish them in your thoughts, your soul will cleanse, and your intellect will illuminate, and all types of hidden matters will picture in your mind, and you will see true forms with open eyes, and the gates of virtue will open, and the separation veil over your eyes which separates between you and between the wisdom of the Creator will be removed from you. And G-d will teach you supernal wisdom and beneficial acts and will grant you Divine powers, as written: "And the spirit of the L-ord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the L-ord" (Yeshaya 11:2), and "But it is a spirit in man and the breath of the Almighty that gives them understanding" (Iyov 32:8), and "If you seek her as silver and search for her as for hidden treasures; Then shall you understand the fear of the L-ord, and find the knowledge of G-d" (Mishlei 2:4-5).

Chapter 5

Whether this accounting is a constant duty on a man or only at some times but not at others, I say in response to this question as follows:
This accounting is a duty on a man according to his intellectual ability and level of understanding, at all times, with every blink of an eye, and if he can, with every one of his breaths, in order that he not part from awe, fear, and shame-facedness of the Almighty, may He be exalted, who constantly observes him. 
Let one learn from what G-d has commanded a king (of Israel) in saying: "And it will be, when he sits upon his royal throne, that he shall write for himself this Torah on a scroll...And it shall be with him always, and he shall read it all the days of his life [so that he may learn to fear the L-ord, his G-d, to keep all the words of this Torah and these statutes, to do them]" (Devarim 17:18), and "This book of the Torah shall not leave your mouth; you shall meditate therein day and night [in order that you observe to do all that is written in it, for then will you succeed in all your ways and then will you prosper]" (Yehoshua 1:8). And also (to every Jew in the Shema): "And these words, which I command you this day, shall be on your heart" (Devarim 6:6), and "you shall bind them for a sign upon your hand, and they shall be Totafos between your eyes" (Devarim 6:8). And He reinforced the matter in the chapter of Tzitzit in saying: "this shall be Tzitzit for you, and when you see it, you will remember all the commandments of the L-ord to perform them, and you shall not wander after your hearts and after your eyes after which you go astray" (Bamidbar 15:39), and then "So that you shall remember and perform all My commandments and you shall be holy to your G-d" (Bamidbar 15:40). 
What is there left, on the matter of arousing us on the spiritual accounting of remembering the Creator that He did not arouse us in?!
According to this, my brother, it is proper for you to conduct yourself, in habituating the accounting with yourself before G-d every hour and every moment. 
Do not consider small in your eyes any good that you do for His Name, even a word, or a gazing of the eye, because a little bit from you is a lot by Him, and likewise, for the matter of sins. 
A familiar analogy for this is the movement of the sun's position in the sky. When it moves one meter, the astronomical distance covered is many, many kilometers, likewise for the movement of the shadow in the astrology tool.
Do not consider big in your eyes the acts that you do, even if you do them with intent for His Name. Because, if you make an exact accounting, you will see that for even a little bit of the smallest favors He has done for you, all the combined good deeds of all the inhabitants of the world doubled over would not be enough to pay Him back for it. 
Therefore, do not neglect from doing your accounting between you and your Creator, on the great favors He has done for you, and His great kindnesses with you each and every day. If your heart does not turn to this during the day, let it be at night. If the entire day (and night) has passed, complete it the second day, as our sages said: "repent one day before your death" (Avos 2:10), and "Let your garments be white (clean) always" (Koheles 9:8). 

Chapter 6

What actions need to follow the accounting with oneself? I say, this will be from a man according to the purity of the essence his soul, and according to what his soul received of the lights of truth which reach it from G-d, blessed be He. Because when the intellect of one who reflects on this accounting is pure, and he will understand the intent and desire in it, and he does it for G-d alone - he will attain the favor of the Creator who will help him to do His commandments, teach him by the light of truth which distances the ways of doubt from his heart, and will illuminate him with the light of wisdom so that his intellect will be bright, and his inner and outer being will be purely devoted to G-d, and he will be similar to what Iyov said: "I put on righteousness and it clothed me; like a coat and a turban was my judgment" (Iyov 29:14).
And then his soul will quiet, and his thoughts will calm from the worries of the world and its desires, and he will rejoice in the service of the Creator, and will delight in what he gazed of the secrets of wisdom and its lights, and will feel fortunate on what has reached him, of knowledge of the truth of the lower world and the upper world, and the good plan of G-d, and His conduct, and the fulfillment of His decrees on His creations, as David said: "The righteous rejoice in the L-ord, and shall take refuge in Him" (Tehilim 64:11), and "let the heart of them rejoice that seek the L-ord" (Tehilim 105:3), and "Thus says the L-ord: Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man glory in his riches; But let him that glory be in this - that he understands, and knows Me" (Yirmiya 9:22-23). 
And this is the highest level in the knowledge of G-d, because one who truly knows Him will cling to His service and to fear of Him, according to the knowledge in his heart and mind, and he will fulfill the duties of the heart and limbs without effort and without hassle, but rather with desire and craving, and zeal, as David said: "I made haste, and delayed not, to observe Your commandments" (Tehilim 119:60), and on this the wise man said: "Happy is the man that finds wisdom, and the man that gets understanding" (Mishlei 3:13), and "Happy are they that keep justice, that do righteousness at all times" (Tehilim 106:3). 
May G-d place us among them, and enter us among their ranks, in His mercy, Amen. 

Ninth Treatise on Abstinence

Introduction

Since our previous discussion dealt with the accounting of a man with himself, and abstinence from this world's interests was one of the ways of such accounting, I deemed it proper to follow with a clarification of the various types of abstinence, and which forms of abstinence are a duty for men of torah (religious people) to adopt. For this furthers the improvement of one's religious and secular pursuits and brings peace of mind and of body in both worlds [here and hereafter].
It is proper for us to clarify seven matters on the subject of abstinence.
1. What is general abstinence and why do human beings need it?
2. The special abstinence for the followers of the torah, and the need for abstinence by them.
3. The classes of abstainers as determined by their type of abstinence.
4. The conditions of special abstinence.
5. The kind of abstinence which is in accord with our torah
6. What the torah and the books of the prophets tell us on abstinence
7. The difference between the early ones and between us regarding abstinence.





Chapter 1

<b>What is general abstinence and why do human beings need it</b><br>Regarding what is general abstinence, and why do human beings need it,
I will answer this question as follows: Abstinence is a term which connotes many matters. The term is commonly used but the true matter is a hidden secret. When the cloak is removed, and the seal is broken - its hidden matter will appear, and its purpose will be revealed.
The plain meaning of abstinence is to bridle the inner lusts and to refrain from something, that one has the ability and opportunity for due to a reason which obligates this. It is said: "the abstainer is one who has the power but does not use it".
The reason which obligates bridling the inner lusts divides into two categories:
1. That which applies to human beings [collectively] and many of the other living creatures
2. That which applies specifically to men of torah (Jews).
General abstinence is that which is practiced for the welfare of our bodies and to keep our secular matters in good order. Examples are: the practice of kings in instituting laws of the land, the regimen prescribed by doctors for the healthy or the sick, the practice of every intelligent person to bridle his lusts for food, drink, marital relations, clothing, speech, and his other activities and pleasures.
The abstinence which applies specifically to men of torah (religious people) is that kind which the torah and reason teaches on for the benefit of the soul in the Afterlife, as I will explain later on with G-d's help.
The need for abstinence in its general sense is due to what I have already introduced in the third gate of this book. Namely, that the Creator's purpose in creating mankind was in order to bring difficulties to the soul and test it in this world so that it purifies itself and attains the form of the holy angels, as written <i>"If you walk in My ways, and if you keep My charge, you, too, shall judge My house, and you, too, shall guard My courtyards, and I will give you a place to walk among these that stand (i.e. the angels)"</i> (Zechariah 3:7).
Divine wisdom necessitated the testing of the soul [by union] in physical earthen bodies which can grow and gain mass through eating foods suitable for it. G-d then implanted in the souls of human beings a desire for the foods appointed to its body in this world in order to sustain and maintain them during the time of their union.
G-d also implanted in human beings another power. Through this, a man longs for marital relations, so that a human being should procreate another individual to take his place. The Creator granted him reward for these functions, namely, the pleasure in this.
G-d instituted on man an inclination which drives him to eat, drink, engage in marital relations, and partake of other pleasures and relaxations, which further the welfare of his body, as written: <i>"also he has set the world in their heart[...that every man should eat and drink, and enjoy the good of all his labor, it is the gift of G-d]"</i> (Koheles 3:11-13).
But when this inclination predominates over the understanding, and the soul is drawn to it, the man turns to the excesses which bring to his detriment and to the destruction of his body. It is necessary because of this, a measure of abstinence from pleasures and relaxations, in order to balance his tendencies, and that his affairs be in proper order in this world, so that he will be considered praiseworthy in them, as written: <i>"A good man shows favor, and lends: he will guide his affairs with judgment"</i> (Tehilim 112:5).
Since it is necessary for human beings to practice abstinence which will further their welfare in this world by taking from it only what is necessary, it follows that there should be in this world complete ascetics which separate and cut themselves off completely from secular occupations. So that all of mankind can learn from them on abstinence, each person according to his need, and according to what is fitting for his customs and tendencies.
It would not, however, further the welfare of mankind if everyone would practice asceticism like them, because this would lead to the abandonment of civilization and to the end of the human race, and the verse already said: <i>"He did not create it to be a deserted but formed it to be inhabited"</i> (Yeshaya 45:18).
Abstinence is one of the cornerstones of the world, and the need of human beings for it is just like their need for other sciences and trades in which some nations excel over others, for the benefit of all of mankind. Each class takes from the world according to its needs and what is suitable for it. It would not further the welfare of the world if everyone devoted themselves to only one field and no others, because the general welfare of the world is furthered by the cultivation of all fields, as the wise man said: <i>"also He has set the world in their heart"</i> (Koheles 3:11), and <i>"everything has a time and place..."</i> (ibid 3:1).
We have explained, with this introduction the concept of general abstinence and the need of human beings for it. So that they may order their affairs in this world through it.

Chapter 2

- The special abstinence for men of torah<br>What is the special abstinence and what need do men of torah have for it? The Sages are divided as to its definition.
Among them, one said abstinence is the renunciation of all that distracts one from G-d.
Another said: to be disgusted by (vanities of) this world and curtailing desires.
Another said: abstinence is tranquility of the soul and curbing its tendency for idle imagination.
Another said: [Abstinence means] Trust in G-d
Another said: To limit oneself to wear only basic clothing of whatever material, and likewise to eat only enough to survive and push off one's hunger, and to abhor everything else.
Another said: Abandoning love of company of human beings and to [instead] love solitude.
Another said: Abstinence means gratitude for the good and bearing difficulty patiently.
Another said: Abstinence means to deny oneself all leasures or pleasures of the body except for what one's nature requires and that one cannot live without, and to remove everything else from the mind.
This last definition is closest to the abstinence prescribed in our torah, and is better than all the other definitions we mentioned.
The need for the torah observant to practice abstinence is as follows:
The torah's aim is to make the understanding rule over and prevail over all the lusts of the [lower] soul.
It is well known that the overpowering of lust over the understanding is the beginning of all sin, and the cause of all that is reprehensible. The people did not incline towards (the lusts of) this world until they had turned away from the torah. Then the evil inclination enticed them to abandon cultivating the world of their salvation. And thus, they turned away from the path of their forefathers who limited themselves to what was necessary and in the amount that was necessary, and who were contented with what was sufficient for their livelihood.
The inclination enticed them by making hoarding and increasing worldly possessions seem beautiful, by making indulgence in worldly pleasures seem desirable, and by inducing pride in owning worldly possessions, until they sank in the depths of its seas.
The evil inclination then forced them to suffer the pain of [being tossed by] its waves. This world rules over them and stops up their ears and shuts their eyes. There is not one of them who does not occupy himself with indulging in its pleasures whenever he can reach it and an opportunity presents itself. This is his torah and his religion, until he is led completely astray from his G-d, as written: <i>"Your own wickedness shall correct you, and your backsliding shall reprove you... [know that it is evil and bitter that you have forsaken the L-ord your G-d]"</i> (Yirmiya 2:19).
Included in this class of people, is also one who has been denied that pleasure, but his mind is set on it, his soul longs for it and lives for it, and he heartily pursues it night and day, as written: <i>"He devises mischief upon his bed; he sets himself in a way that is not good"</i> (Tehilim 36:5).
Both these classes are drowning, each in his matter, and yet they are cut off and weary from ever reaching any good out of it. They are losing in their business trade. Their soul is diminished, and their choice is bad.
They are foolish in their exchange, as written: <i>"They exchanged their Glory for the likeness of an ox eating grass"</i> (Tehilim 106:20).
The incessant call of habit overpowers them. They exert themselves and take pride in their business trade, in which they are losing, and which never ceases to distract their minds from the resulting vanities, and to entrench in their hearts its never-ending desires. The more they become embroiled in this world, the more they distanced themselves; and the further they distanced from the light of truth from which they parted due to their association with the evil inclination, and the more the darkness engulfed them, and the world grew on them.<br>The striving for its improvement became embellished in their eyes, and they ingrained themselves in it to the destruction of their understanding. The more this world was improved, the greater was the destruction of their understanding, until they considered its evil ways to be good, and its straying to be right, and they turned this into a statute and a moral outlook.
Parents then bequeathed this outlook to their children, their teachers aroused them in it. The masses were commanded to follow it. Their nobles vied with each other on it, until the evil inclination became firmly entrenched in them and they filled their homes with vanities. What had been strange to them became familiar to them, while the right way became strange to them. Whoever was contented and refrained from pursuing the superfluous, they considered him to be neglecting his duties.
Each one of them, did as he saw his fellow do. One who only took of this world what was sufficient for himself was called lazy. One who delayed to accumulate of it was considered a slacker. One who was contented with only what he needed was considered a weakling, while he who surpassed this amount was regarded as an industrious man.
And they praise themselves and pride themselves in it, and on its account they befriend, become angry, and congratulate each other. And in order to benefit from it, they appoint their bellies as their god, fine clothing as their torah, and houses in strong condition as their ethics.
They went astray in the depths of folly, moving in the course of idleness, laden with burdens of lusts, and claiming the reward of the worshippers (of G-d) while committing the acts of the transgressors, and the levels of the righteous with the conduct of the wicked, as our Sages said: <i>"they commit the sins of Zimri and seek the reward of Pinchas"</i> (Sota 22b).
Since the evil inclination has brought most of the men of torah (Jews) as far as we have described, it is necessary to stand up to it with the special abstinence which we have described at the beginning of this gate. With the help of abstinence, we should hold firmly against the evil inclination until reaching the proper torah way for religious and secular pursuits.
Therefore it is necessary for there to be among the men of torah, special individuals, bearers of the special abstinence, who take on its conditions, and thereby benefit the other men of torah who turn and tend towards the animalistic lusts of the evil inclination. Thus these special people are the doctors of souls to the religion.<br>They bring healing to those who stray from the good traits and tended towards the disgraceful traits. Then the evil inclination has prevailed over their understanding, and when their occupation with increasing the superfluous of the world distracts them from the things essential in their religion.
If a man with a sickness of faith or who is sick with doubts comes to them, they will hasten to heal him with their genuine wisdom.
If it is one fleeing from the service of G-d, they will return him to it and reassure him in it.
If it is one burdened by his sins, they will reassure him of the forgiveness of G-d when he repents from his sins.
If it is one who has forgotten G-d, they will remind him. If a tzadik (righteous person), they will praise him (to encourage him). If one who loves G-d, they will love him. If one who magnifies G-d's omnipotence, they magnify him. If he sins, they will exhort him to repent immediately. If he is physically sick, they will visit him and if they have more than they need of the world, they will bestow to him of it. If some trouble befalls him, they will come to his assistance.
In this world, they are similar to the sun which shines its light on the world, above it and below it, since it illuminates what is above it and what is below it, of the celestial spheres and planets.
So too they shine on this world as written: <i>"G-d said, If I find in Sodom fifty righteous men within the city, then I will spare all the place for their sake"</i> (Bereishis 18:26). And: <i>"Therefore He said that He would destroy them, had not Moses, His chosen, stood before Him in the breach to turn away His wrath"</i> (Tehilim 106:23), and in the next world, as written <i>"The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life"</i> (Mishlei 11:30), and therefore Devorah said: <i>"they that love Him shall be as the sun when it goes forth in its might"</i> (Shoftim 5:31).
You will find that this conduct of abstinence was practised by the prophets and the early pious ones in previous generations as clearly explained in their books, and as I will expound further in its proper place, with G-d's help, blessed be He.

Chapter 3

- The classes of abstainers<br>As to how many classes the abstainers are divided, I will answer this question as follows.
As we introduced, abstinence from this world is due to one of two reasons, one is religious and the other is secular.
Those who abstain due to religious reasons. They are the true genuine abstainers and are divided into three classes.
1) Men who went after the highest extreme of asceticism, to be like spiritual beings (angels, i.e. non-physical beings). They renounce everything that distracts them from G-d. They left civilization to dwell in the deserts, the wastelands, and the high mountains, places where there is no companionship and no acquaintance. They eat whatever can be found, vegetation growing on the soil and leaves of the trees. They dress in worn garments and raw wool. They take shelter in the rocks. Their fear of the Creator drives away fear of the created beings.
Their delight in love of G-d distracts them so much that they do not think of the love of human beings. They are content with whatever sustenance G-d reserves for them, and they do not expect anything from human beings.
This class is the furthest extreme of all the classes from the middle way prescribed by the torah. For they renounce worldly interests completely and the torah does not bid us to give up social life entirely, as we have introduced earlier from the verse <i>"He did not create it to be a waste but formed it to be inhabited"</i> (Yeshaya 45:18).
2) The second class, men who went in the middle way of abstinence. They are completely repulsed with the superfluous things of this world, and undertake to bridle their lust in them.
The superfluous things are of two types:
One: superfluous things which are outside of a man and separate from him, such material things as food, drink, clothing, and dwelling.
Two: superflous things which cleave to a man whose causes are not outside of him, such as: [superfluous] speech, laughter, relaxation, leisure, watching or listening useless things, and useless musings.
This second class has renounced all things that are "superfluous", but did not deem it fit to withdraw from society. They stayed to provide their bodies with its minimum need, as is their duty. They exchanged the deserts and mountains with confinement in their homes and solitude in their dwelling. They attained both matters and reached both portions. They are closer to the middle way of the torah, than the previous class.
3) The third class consists of those who walk on the lowest level of abstinence. These separated themselves from the world in their hearts and minds. But they associate outwardly with other people in the rectification of the world, such as plowing and sowing. They also actively toil with their bodies in the service of G-d. They realize that a man is being tested in this world, and that he is like a prisoner and a stranger in it, taken from the world of spirits and brought here.
They are repulsed by the (pleasures of this) world and by its wealth, and they long for the next world.
They wait for death, and yet they guard themselves from death (danger). They prepare provisions (torah and good deeds) for the time of their journey, and they consider with what will they arrive to their final abode before their departure. They take from this world, the minimum of their food needs, yet they do not neglect anything of taking and carrying provisions that will be good for their final end, according to their ability.
This class is the closest to the correct balance and right way which is in accord with the torah than the other classes we mentioned..
ABSTINENCE IN SECULAR AFFAIRS<br>Those who practice abstinence in order to secure worldly benefits. Their abstinence is in their limbs but not in their minds and hearts. These fall into three classes:
1) Those who abstain from some of their lusts or pleasures in order to gain a reputation for abstinence, in order to receive praise for their faith and piety, so that through this method they will obtain their full lusts.
They are hypocritical in faith and in abstinence. Doing so, in order that men should trust them, deposit their money by them and reveal their secrets to them. so that they will be able to harm them. They are the worst class of all human beings. They are the furthest removed from the truth, and more disgraceful than anyone else. Of such people, scripture says: <i>"Their tongue is a deadly arrow; It speaks deceit; With his mouth one speaks peace to his neighbor, But inwardly he sets an ambush for him"</i> (Yirmiya 9:7).
2) The second class: Those who obtained a small amount of wealth. When they see how swiftly money is lost and circumstances change, and combined with their little trust in G-d, they pain themselves by eating little and abstaining from their lusts (to save their money). They then claim that abstinence has pushed them to live like this.
But after true inspection, what really brought them to this is their great love for this world, their zeal to increase of its wealth, their worry from poverty, and their little satisfaction with what they have obtained from this world. Of such people, the wise man said: <i>"a man whom G-d has given riches and property and honor, and his soul lacks nothing of all he desires; [yet G-d gives him not power to eat of it, but a stranger eats it: this is vanity, and it is an evil affliction]"</i> (Koheles 6:2).
3) The third class: Those who are not capable of making enough money and have only acquired enough money to live in the poorest of circumstances. They deemed proper to maintain their self-respect and subsist with whatever food they can obtain rather than having to stand to ask and embarrass themselves to beg from other people. They restrained their desires by bearing constant hunger and by covering themselves with basic clothing. They do this in order to avoid receiving charity and to not be ashamed of asking help from others, thereby becoming disgraced. But, they claim to be doing all of this out of asceticism.
If you wish to test the true motive of one who claims to practice abstinence, whether he is doing this for religious or secular improvement, test them with the conditions for perfect abstinence which I will mention, and you will with G-d's help, discern whether they are genuine ascetics or only pretending to be so.

Chapter 4

- The marks of special abstinence<br>The marks of the special abstinence are as one of the pious declared:
The [genuine] ascetic:
* His joy is on his face, and his sorrow is in his heart.
* His heart is exceedingly broad.
* His soul is exceedingly lowly.
* He does not bear a grudge.
* He does not covet.
* He does not speak negatively of anyone.
* He does not discuss anyone.
* He abhors being honored.
* He hates dominion over others.
* He is calm and collected.
* He remembers well.
* He admits the truth.
* Has much shame.
* Avoids damaging.
* If he laughs, it will be little.
* If he becomes angry, he will not be wrathful.
* his laughter is a mere parting of the lips.
* his asking is in learning.
* His wisdom is extensive and his humility is great.
* His resolve is strong.
* He is neither hasty nor foolish in his actions.
* His arguing is polite, his reply is courteous.
* He acts righteously when angry.
* He is compassionate when entreated.
* His friendship is sincere.
* His resolution is strong.
* His covenant is faithful.
* He desires in the judgment of the Creator.
* He rules over his evil inclination.
* He does not speak badly about one who harmed him.
* He does not occupy himself with what is not useful.
* He does not become joyful in the downfall of his enemy.
* He does not remind to anyone a wrong which that person had done him.
* He troubles others lightly but helps them much.
* His gratitude is great at a time of bad.
* His bearing is patient at a time of financial loss.
* If he is asked from, he gives. If he is robbed, he will forgive.
* If others refuse from him something, he will nevertheless volunteer.
* If they keep him at a distance, he will nevertheless bring them close (be friendly to them).
* he is softer than butter, sweeter than honey.
* He exhorts others to adhere to the truth.
* He speaks righteously.
* He relinquishes his desires, and looks forward to his final day.
* What he says, he does.
* He is wise.
* He is energetic.
* His soul is noble.
* His covenant is agreeable.
* He is powerful in the land.
* He is free of all that is blameworthy.
* He is a helper of the poor and a savior of the oppressed.
* He does not expose what is hidden nor reveal a secret.
* His troubles are many, but his complaints are few.
* If he sees good, he will mention it, if he sees bad, he will cover it.
* He is pleasing in his manners and pure in his heart.
* His company is a joy, his absence, a cause for sorrow.
* Wisdom purges him.
* Humility has embellished him
* He is a mentor to the wise.
* He is a teacher to the ignorant.
* Every act of others he considers purer than his.
* Every person he considers more pure than himself.
* He is aware of his own lacking.
* He remembers his iniquity.
* He loves G-d and chases to do His will.
* He does not take revenge for any wrong done to him.
* He does not keep his anger long.
* His company is with those that remind him [of his duty to G-d].
* He sits with the humble.
* He loves men of righteousness, and is faithful to men of truth.
* He helps the poor, is a father to orphans and a protector to the widow, and shows respect to the needy.
To these marks (of a true ascetic) should be added that he undertakes all the duties of the heart we mentioned earlier in this book and which I do not need to repeat them so that this treatise does not become too lengthy. Take note for yourself.

Chapter 5

- What kind of abstinence is in accord with the torah<br>Regarding what kind of abstinence is in accord with our torah, I will answer this question as follows: The abstinence recommended by the torah is on three fronts:
1) When engaged with business relations with other people and when engaged in social interactions with them.
2) In matters which relate to ourselves alone and do not affect other people, with respect to the function of our physical senses and movements of our limbs.
3) In matters which relate to ourselves alone and do not affect others, with respect to our inner being - our traits, our thoughts, whether good or bad, that are hidden in our hearts. All these I will explain in a concise manner as well as I can, with G-d's help.
SOCIAL ABSTINENCE<br>The proper abstinence to adopt in association with other people is as follows:
* To receive them with a cheerful countenance and to exhibit joy when meeting them; at the same time, cultivating humility, gentle speech, and a lowliness of spirit towards all of them.
* Showing them mercy, graciousness, and compassion. Relieving them of their troubles, speaking good of them, doing kindness to them without expecting any benefit from them, and abandoning all thought of receiving anything of what belongs to them.
* To help them with what can further their religious or secular welfare, and to teach them the way which G-d approves.
* To patiently bear their difficult words, and to pour out one's words before G-d and not before them.
* To keep away from gatherings that assemble for eating, drinking, and merrymaking, and avoid anything in association with them that would lead to rebellion against G-d, or going out of the bounds of modesty, traditional morality, or the like.
ABSTINENCE IN THE SENSES AND LIMBS<br>What is proper for us in the second type of abstinence, namely, that which relates to ourselves alone and involves only our physical senses and limbs. This is divided into two categories.
The first refers to what is forbidden to us. These are the prohibitions [negative commandments in the torah].
The second refers to what is permitted to us. These are all the things permitted to us of all the permitted enjoyments.
Both categories subdivide to three divisions.
(Regarding the negative commandments:) Everything that is forbidden to us necessarily falls into one of three classes.
1) That which is in a person's nature to desire these things, such as forbidden relations, theft, taking interest, eating or drinking of forbidden foods.
2) That which is neutral in a person's nature, namely, that he does not desire nor abhor it, such as wearing shatnez (mixtures of linen and wool), sowing Kilaim (diverse seeds together), eating meat and milk together, eating forbidden fat, and many more like this.
3) That which is in a person's nature to abhor and be disgusted by these things, such as eating from an animal carcass (treifa), eating blood or various types of creatures which a man would not want to eat even if these were permitted, such as the eight species of rodents and reptiles (Vayikra 11:29-30), or others like this.
It is proper for you, my brother, to train yourself in abstinence to abstain from all that G-d has forbidden to you until you reach a level that you are equally disgusted by what your nature desires as by what your nature abhors, so that forbidden relations or obtaining things in a forbidden manner seeking to honor yourself through lowering someone else, or holding him in contempt, which, by nature, are things people swiftly desire - should be as repellent to you as eating mice, blood, or reptiles, which your nature abhors and which your soul hates.
When you reach this level of abstinence from prohibited things without needing to force your nature and without resistance from yourself, you will belong to the class of those saved from sin and stumbling which the verse says of them: <i>"no mischief shall befall the righteous"</i> (Mishlei 12:21).
Similarly the permitted things fall into one of three categories.
1) Taking food whereby one does not do so with intent for deriving pleasure, but because one cannot live without it, and one has no other remedy (for his hunger) besides this.
2) Taking permitted food in the way of 'overlooking' (beyond what is necessary), for mere enjoyment, but not to excess or unbridled over-indulgence, in order to compliment the minimum necessary. For example, eating good bread with decently prepared dishes, and drinking good wine in moderation, and likewise for one's clothing, home, and other requirements.
3) Taking much indulgence of the permitted pleasures. This distance a person and leads him to also indulge in the prohibited pleasures, besides the distraction it brings from fulfilling his duties to G-d, as written <i>"Lest he drink and forget that which is decreed"</i> (Mishlei 31:5)
Thus, it is proper for you, my brother, to strive with all of your ability to practice abstinence from the permitted pleasures until they become equal in your eyes to the prohibited pleasures for fear lest you abandon your torah and neglect your duties. You already know what the torah commanded a Jewish king in saying:<br><i>"Neither shall he have many wives to himself, [lest his heart turn away]"</i> (Devarim 17:17), and it says <i>"he shall not have many horses"</i> (ibid 17:16). Furthermore, it says: <i>"Did not Solomon king of Israel sin by these things?"</i> (Nehemiah 13:26), even for him, the women caused him to sin, despite his exceedingly powerful intellect, vast understanding, and greatness. Hence, [how much more so for you] according to your understanding, take heed and guard your soul and abstain (from all unnecessary enjoyments, even those permitted - <i>LT</i>) that will distance you from fulfilling the commandments of G-d.
[At least] do so in your heart and mind, if you are unable to free your body to matters of the next world due to being so fully preoccupied with providing for your livelihood and maintenance, as our Rabbis mentioned on many (great men) who would toil in matters of this world while being separate from it (in heart and mind), such as Aba Chilkiya who would work hoeing the ground (Taanis 23a), Shammai in construction work, and Hillel who would earn his livelihood by chopping trees and selling the wood (Yoma 35b).
Let not your wholehearted abstinence prevent you from working in a secular occupation, since your intent in this is to serve G-d, as we mentioned previously.
But when you will be in a position to give up the secular occupation - leave it and spend all of your time in the service of G-d.<br>But during the times you are unable to serve G-d due to the need to earn a livelihood, do not be satisfied with what we said . Because He who watches your thoughts will help you to fulfill your desire in regard to His service, as our Sages said: <i>"He who fulfills the torah from poverty will eventually fulfill it from wealth, and he who neglects the torah from wealth will eventually neglect it from poverty"</i> (Avot 4:9).
It is proper for you, to train yourself to curb your senses and movements as I will explain to you:
GUARDING THE TONGUE<br>Begin at first by restraining your tongue and clamping down your lips. Refrain from idle words, until you will regard moving your heaviest limb to be easier than moving your tongue. For the tongue sins more quickly than all of the other limbs, and its sins are more numerous than the sins committed by all of them. Because it moves easily and swiftly, it easily completes its deed, and has the power to do good or evil without any intermediary.
Therefore, my brother, it is incumbent on you, to train yourself to restrain and rule over your tongue. Do not unleash it to speak words except for what is indispensable for your torah needs and your worldly needs. Diminish extra words of your tongue as much as you can, perhaps you will be saved from its damage, as the wise man said: <i>"Life and death are in the power of the tongue"</i> (Mishlei 18:21).
They (the Sages) began exhorting on the tongue before the other senses and limbs, because it is more difficult to control than all of them as David said: <i>"Who is the man who desires life... guard your tongue from evil, and your lips from speaking deceit [depart from evil and do good; seek peace and pursue it]"</i> (Tehilim 34:13). In our holy books, the exhortations to minimize speech are so numerous and well known that it is not unfamiliar to anyone.
If you wish to attain a clear understanding of what I mentioned of the many sins of the tongue, take on yourself to remember what comes out of your tongue during the course of one day in your association with other people and consorting with them. If you can write it all, do so. Afterwards, at night, when you are free from your matters, go over it and reflect on it. See which of them were necessary and which of them were superfluous and without benefit; and which of them were harmful to you, such as falsehood, tale bearing, swearing, lashon hara (negative speech about others). Then you will recognize your faults and you will see your iniquity.
Remember them always just like you remember the faults and iniquities of your enemies. Do not be diligent in this for a short time, so that your tongue will be rectified and your words will be few.
And in exchange for much talking, substitute prolonged thinking, continuous reflecting, and spiritual accounting (see previous gate), because reflection is a candle which enters your heart, and the spiritual accounting is like the sun which illuminates the darkness of your interior being, to reveal to you what is hidden inside whether of good or of evil.<br>The tongue is the gate of this inner being. If the tongue is unbridled and does not keep careful guard over what is in the inner being, then the gate to the treasury will be open, and things will go out which you do not wish them to go out, and things will become visible which you do not wish them to be visible. But if you guard the gate, you guard the treasury and what is in it, as the wise man said: <i>"even a fool who keeps silent is considered wise"</i> (Mishlei 17:28). He also said: <i>"do not be quick with your mouth, do not be hasty in your heart to utter anything before G-d"</i> (Koheles 5:1), and: <i>"permit not your mouth to cause your flesh to sin"</i> (Koheles 5:5).
GUARDING THE EYES<br>Afterwards, endeavor to shut your eyes and shut your sense of sight from seeing that which you do not need, or that which will distract your mind from thinking of what will be of use to you. Separate yourself as much as you can from superfluous sights, just like you separate from looking at things which are forbidden to look at. The Creator has already exhorted on this in saying <i>"you shall not wander after your hearts and after your eyes"</i> (Bamidbar 15:39), and our Sages said: "the heart and the eyes are the two agents of sin (the eye sees, then the heart desires...) " (Talmud Yerushalmi Berachos 81). Rather use your eyes to gaze at the works of the Creator, to examine them, to contemplate them, and to understand the omnipotence of the Creator, and His wisdom and benevolence from them, as David said: <i>"When I consider your heavens, the work of Your fingers, the moon and the stars, which You have ordained"</i> (Tehilim 8:4), and <i>"The heavens declare the glory of G-d; and the firmament proclaims His handiwork"</i> (Tehilim 19:2).
GUARDING THE EARS<br>Afterwards endeavor to block your ears from listening to that which you have no need for. Separate as much as you can from listening to anything superfluous. Do not lend ear to listen to what will not be beneficial to hear such as superfluous words, lies, tale bearing, slander. Separate from hearing what will lead you to rebel against G-d or neglect His commandments such as the various types of songs and melodies, comedy and merrymaking, which distract you from fulfilling the commandments and performing good deeds. Rather, lend your ears to the words of the Sages who know G-d and His torah, as the wise man said: <i>"Incline your ear, and hear the words of the wise"</i> (Mishlei 22:17), and <i>"The ear that hearkens to the reproof of life, abides among the wise"</i> (Mishlei 15:31).
GUARDING THE TONGUE (from superfluous food)<br>Afterwards, endeavor to bridle the sense of taste, that you take of food and drink only as much as you need for your sustenance, and abstain from what is beyond this.
The strategy to adopt in this matter is to reduce the various types of accompaniments (to bread) and limit them to only one course if you can. And also to minimize this accompaniment as much as you can, and to also have intent that this (dish) is to facilitate the transfer of bread to your stomach - not for enjoyment.<br>Habituate yourself to sometimes eat your bread without accompaniment in order to lead your nature in this, so that it will be easy for you to do this when the accompaniment is not available (and you have only bread). If you can relinquish accompaniments which require effort and labor to prepare (cooking, etc.), and you rely instead on what needs no labor to prepare such as olives, cheese, dates, grapes, or the like - do so.
Habituate yourself to sometimes eat your bread without accompaniment in order to lead your nature in this, so that it will be easy for you to do this when the accompaniment is not available (and you have only bread). If you can relinquish accompaniments which require effort and labor to prepare (cooking, etc.), and you rely instead on what needs no labor to prepare such as olives, cheese, dates, grapes, or the like - do so.
Afterwards, practice fasting if your body is strong enough, even if this is only one day per week. Whatever you can do to train yourself to be indifferent to matters of eating and drinking, do so. Regard what you eat as a medicine (to heal your hunger) rather than as food. Your drinking should be only water, unless your intent in drinking wine is to benefit your body, or to remove distress from your heart, as written: <i>"Give strong drink to he who is ready to perish and wine to the bitter soul"</i> (Mishlei 31:6).<br>Afterwards, practice fasting if your body is strong enough, even if this is only one day per week. Whatever you can do to train yourself to be indifferent to matters of eating and drinking, do so. Regard what you eat as a medicine (to heal your hunger) rather than as food. Your drinking should be only water, unless your intent in drinking wine is to benefit your body, or to remove distress from your heart, as written: <i>"Give strong drink to he who is ready to perish and wine to the bitter soul"</i> (Mishlei 31:6).<br>
GUARDING THE HANDS<br>Afterwards, endeavor to restrain your hands from touching worldly possessions that are not yours. Separate from the various types of theft, fraud, robbery, and from doing any evil to any human being. Restrain the movements of your hands and think of its consequences. Guard your ethics and modesty by being elevated from doing evil with them, as written: <i>"keeps his hand from doing any evil"</i> (Yeshaya 56:2). It also says: <i>"that shakes his hands from holding bribes"</i> (Yeshaya 33:15). Rather, use your hands for fulfilling the commandments of G-d, open them to give to the poor and needy, as written: <i>"you shall surely open your hand unto your brother, to your poor, and to your needy, in your land"</i> (Devarim 15:11), and it says: <i>"she stretches out her hand to the poor; she reaches forth her hands to the needy"</i> (Mishlei 31:20).
And likewise, you need to use them for what will provide your livelihood, so that you will be saved from borrowing and stealing, and from needing the kindness of people to support you and to benefit you, thereby giving away to them your merits, and giving your piety to he who was pious towards you. Likewise, so that you won't be a burden on people, as one of the Sages said: "G-d will have [great] mercy on His servants who separate from this world, but only if his separation has not become a burden on his friends, because he engaged in a trade thereby freeing them from troubling themselves for him", as written: <i>"For you shall eat the labor of your hands: happy shall you be, and it shall be well with you"</i> (Tehilim 128:2). It has already been said: "the beginning of abstinence is the securing of a livelihood". And it was further stated: "the beginning of abstinence is to think properly on arranging the obtaining of one's needs", which means to work to secure one's needs..
GUARDING THE FEET<br>Afterwards, habituate your feet in this way, and refrain from going with the wicked, who seek the superfluous things, as written: <i>"Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of the wicked, nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornful"</i> (Tehilim 1:1). Rather, hasten to do all good deeds, and to the gatherings of the wise, as written: <i>"He who goes with the wise will become wise [but he who befriends the fools will be broken]"</i> (Mishlei 13:20), and it says: <i>"in order that you go in the way of the good..."</i> (Mishlei 2:20).
Scripture has already gathered together everything we introduced on curbing the senses in saying: <i>"Who among us shall dwell with the consuming fire? ... He that walks righteously, and speaks uprightly; [he that despises the gain of oppression, that keeps his hands from the holding of bribes, that stops his ears from hearing of blood, and shuts his eyes from seeing evil]"</i>(Yeshaya 33:14).<br>And afterwards, the wise man gathered them and added to them the heart in saying: <i>"There are six things that the L-ord hates, and the seventh is an abomination of His soul; Haughty eyes, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood; A heart that thinks wicked thoughts; feet that hasten to run to evil; A false witness who incites quarrels among brothers"</i> (Mishlei 6:16), and likewise they are found in the Psalm 15: <i>"O G-d, who will dwell in Your tent?..."</i>
ALL OR NOTHING<br>It is proper for you to know, my brother, that it will not be possible for you to fulfill any of these things, unless you do all of them and you don't omit even one of them. For they are like a string of pearls. If you release one of them, all of the others will be scattered and their unity will be destroyed.
Therefore, strive to be careful in all of these rules, and then each one of them will help the others, as our Sages said: "a mitzvah brings another mitzvah, and a sin brings another sin" (Avot 4:2), and the wise man said regarding the close connection of all good deeds: <i>"Fortunate is the man that listens to me, watching daily at my gates, guarding at the posts of my doors"</i>(Mishlei 8:34). At first he said: <i>"listens"</i>, and after <i>"watching"</i>, and after <i>"guarding"</i>.
INWARD ABSTINENCE<br>The abstinence which applies to the third type, namely, what applies exclusively to ourselves - our thoughts, inner life, and our inclinations, good and evil.
The beginning of this type of abstinence is to separate in heart and mind from material possessions, except for your food and living needs. Not to engage them (heart and mind) for securing any physical pleasures, or to attain through them leisures, or a position of power, or to feel proud over owning possessions of this fleeting world.
Let your abstinence in them be for G-d, may He be exalted, not to acquire a name, not to feel proud for abstaining from pleasures, and not to save your money due to your abstinence. Do not go out of the bounds of the torah in it, such as fasting on the Sabbath, Holidays, or Rosh Chodesh (new month), or to refrain from what the Creator obligated you in the commandment of having children. Rather, your matters of abstinence should be inwardly and outwardly in line with the torah and the religion.
Afterwards, to diminish your desires for this world, as if you were journeying from it in the evening of this day. Afterwards, make a spiritual accounting with yourself as we mentioned earlier in the gate of spiritual accounting. You should abandon all thought of what belongs to other people while trusting in G-d, and being contented with His decrees and judgments. Realize that you are under obligation [to fulfill] all the duties of the heart, which were previously clarified - and that they are the pillar of abstinence from the world. Investigate them closely and bind them to your heart. You will attain through them to all good.

Chapter 6

- what scriptures says on abstinence<br>The explanation of what is written in the holy books and the words of our Sages regarding abstinence from the world.
Among them, what Yaakov said: <i>"[and Yaakov vowed saying:] If G-d will be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and a garment to wear"</i> (Bereishis 28:20).
Among them, the fasting of Moshe for 40 days and nights three times. Likewise, Eliyahu for 40 days, as written: <i>"And he arose and ate and drank, and he went on with only this meal for forty days and forty nights up to the mountain of G-d"</i> (Melachim 19:8).
Among them what was said of the Nazir, which G-d calls him "holy", as written: <i>"All the days of his abstinence he is holy to G-d"</i> (Bamidbar 6:8). Because he abstained from the fruits of the vine and allowed his hair to grow [long]. All the more so for one who abstains from all physical pleasures that he has greater reward and recompense.
Among them, what was said to Aharon (Vayikra 10:9): <i>"do not drink wine or beer"</i>, and then <i>"to separate between holy and mundane"</i>, and to teach the Jewish people. That through this, G-d exhorted everyone who is engaged in religious service, to not occupy himself with anything that would distract him from completely doing the service (with devotion) to G-d, as our Sages said: "one who drank a reviis (about half cup) of wine is forbidden to teach, if he drank a chamishis (almost same as half cup) should not pray" (Eruvin 64a).
Among them: The matter of the sons of Yonadav ben Rechav whose father commanded them to never drink wine, nor sow, nor plant a vineyard, nor build a house, that they dwell in tents, outside settled places. This is the custom of those who separate themselves from the world. The Creator praised them for this as written: <i>"Therefore Yonadav the son of Rechab shall not lack a man [descendant] to stand before Me forever"</i> (Yirmiya 35:19).
Among them, the story of Elisha when Eliyahu passed by him, as written: <i>"And he went from there and he found Elisha, the son of Shafat, as he was plowing; twelve yoke were before him and he was with the twelfth. And Eliyahu passed over unto him, and cast his mantle upon him"</i> (Melachim 19:19), and Elisha dropped everything and followed Eliyahu as written: <i>"And he left the oxen and ran after Eliyahu and said: 'Let me, please, kiss my father and my mother, and then I will follow you'..."</i> (Melachim 19:20). Likewise, this was the practice of the disciples of the prophets in that generation and in previous ones, that they renounced occupying themselves with affairs of this world and neglected their physical well-being by going out to deserts in order to devote their souls and minds to G-d.
Among them, what the torah has commanded us to fast during the season of repentance and seeking forgiveness, in order to curb our lusts for all the pleasures, which are the greatest causes of sin as written: <i>"According to their pasture, so were they filled; they were filled, and their heart was exalted; therefore have they forgotten Me"</i> (Hoshea 13:6), and it says regarding the opposite: <i>"in their trouble they will seek Me"</i> (Hoshea 5:15).
Among them: what is written <i>"neither shall they wear a robe of coarse hair to deceive"</i> (Zechariah 13:4), and this teaches that it was the attire of the early pious ones, and some of the other [non-pious] men of that generation would wear it to appear pious.
And what David said: <i>"Before I was afflicted, I did err"</i> (Tehilim 119:67), and also: <i>"It is good for me that I have been afflicted, in order that I might learn Your statutes"</i> (Tehilim 119:71), and also: <i>"The torah of Your mouth is better unto me than thousands of gold and silver pieces"</i> (Tehilim 119:72).
Among them the practice of Iyov (Job) who described of himself how he scorned this world and its material wealth, curbed his senses, bound his hands and his tongue from all that may lead to rebelling against G-d, chose the truth, saved the oppressed, provided for the poor and lost - like the practices of those who separate themselves from the world.
Among them, what Daniel did in praying to G-d on the lengthiness of the first exile, and his mourning on it, that he said: <i>"I ate no decent bread, neither came meat nor wine in my mouth"</i>(Daniel 10:3), and the angel said to him: <i>"from the first day that you did set your heart to understand, and to chasten yourself before G-d, your words were heard"</i> (Daniel 10:12), and the rest of the matter. This is the best of all the practices of separation.
Among them, that which the people of Nineveh did, when they heard what the Creator decreed on them, as written: <i>"So the people of Nineveh believed in G-d, and proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth, from the greatest of them even to the least of them"</i> (Yona 3:5), and similarly what our fathers did in the days of Haman, as written: <i>"And in every province, where the king's commandment and his decree came, there was great mourning among the Jews, and fasting, and weeping, and wailing; and many lay in sackcloth and ashes"</i> (Esther 4:3), and many like this in our books, when you investigate it, you will find it scattered frequently in the words of our ancestors.
Among them what Shlomo said: <i>"Be not among wine-bibbers; among gluttonous eaters of flesh"</i> (Mishlei 23:20), and <i>"A little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to lie"</i> (Mishlei 6:10), and what the mother of Lemuel said: <i>"Do not give your strength to women, nor your ways to the pleasures of kings; It is not for kings, Lemuel, it is not for kings to drink wine, neither is strong drink for rulers; Lest he drink and forget what was decreed"</i> (Mishlei 31:3-5).
Among them what is written: <i>"For to the man that is good in His sight He gives wisdom, knowledge, and joy [but to the sinner He has given an occupation to gather and to accumulate]"</i>(Koheles 2:26), and it says: <i>"The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning; but the heart of fools is in the house of merrymaking"</i> (Koheles 7:4).<br><i>"It is better to go to the house of mourning, than to go to the house of feasting: [for that is the end of all men; and the living will lay it to heart]"</i> (Koheles 7:2), and it says: <i>"The sleep of a laboring man is sweet, [whether he eats little or much: but the abundance of the rich will not allow him to sleep]"</i> (Koheles 5:11), and <i>"for childhood and youth are vanity"</i> (Koheles 11:10), and <i>"The end of the matter, all having been heard: fear G-d, and keep His commandments; for this is all of man"</i> (Koheles 12:13).
Regarding what our Sages said in the mishna and talmud. These are too numerous for this book, and most of it is found in the tractate Avot. Our Sages said: "this is the way of the torah - eat bread with salt, drink water in measure, sleep on the ground..." (Beraitha in Avot 6:4), and that which is near their words: "the torah is acquired in 48 ways (ibid 6:6): (minimal business, minimal pleasures, minimal sleep, minimal speech, minimal laughter...)". And in the chapter of the pious in tractate Taanit, many things teaches on their great separation from this world. He who investigates this matter, will find it in scripture, reason, and in the oral tradition.
Put your heart to it, reflect on it in your inner being, you will reach it with G-d's help, as written: <i>"If you seek it as silver, and search for it as for hidden treasures; Then shall you understand the fear of the L-ord, and find the knowledge of G-d"</i> (Mishlei 2:4).

Chapter 7

- The difference between the early ones and us<br>The difference between us and our predecessors regarding separation is as follows. For the early ones such as Chanoch, Noach, Avraham, Yitzchak, Yaakov, Iyov and his company, their intellect was pure and their evil inclination was weak. So their souls were drawn after their intellect. The few mitzvot they had combined with their heartfelt faith in G-d were sufficient for them to complete their service of G-d, as written by Avraham <i>"You found his heart faithful before You"</i> (Nehemiah 9:8). They did not need the abstinence which goes out of the middle way which the torah prescribes.
But when their descendants descended to Egypt, and dwelled there 70 years in peace during Yosef's lifetime, their lust became strong, their desires grew, and their evil inclination overpowered their reason. They then needed, an abstinence, which would be counter to their lusts, and which would allow them to resist their evil inclination. The Creator added on them additional commandments, which reason does not obligate. This would serve as a substitute for the abstinence which was proper for them, according to their ability, and even less than that.
When they conquered the land of Israel and settled it, and enjoyed its good, they started to seek superfluities in food and drink, indulgence with women, and in erecting buildings. The more the land was developed, the more their intellect deteriorated, as written: <i>"Lest when you have eaten and are full, and have built goodly houses, and dwelled therein...[then your heart be lifted up, and you forget G-d..]"</i> (Devarim 8:12). And the more the lusts increased and strengthened, the more the intellect weakened, and delayed grasping the correct way.
Therefore, they were in need for severe abstinence, through which they would be able to resist their lusts, as in the way of the Nazir, and the disciples of the prophets, which we mentioned previously in this book.
In later generations, the intellect has become weaker still while the lusts have strengthened more. Whenever people are occupied in secular matters, they are distracted from being concerned with matters of the next world. Therefore they need separation from this world, to free themselves from it, whenever they are doing anything of the next world.
The early ones, with their strong intellect and pure souls were capable of working for this world and also for the final one. Neither one would be detrimental to the other, as written: <i>"did not your father eat and drink, and do justice and righteousness, and then it was well with him?"</i> (Yirmiya 22:15), and it says: <i>"it is good that you should take hold of this, and also from this you shall not withdraw your hand"</i> (Koheles 7:18).
I saw, my brother, a powerful parable on the matter of separation from one of the pious, who commanded his son in it as his last testament. It pleased my eye, and I placed it as the final words for this gate as I found it, instead of ending with my own rebuke and teaching. Understand it and examine it, you will reach the good and the just with G-d's help.
Here it is:
Now my son, may G-d place you among those that will hear and listen, and that listen and think, and that think and know and do, and not among the people who drown in error, who are drunk with the wine of foolishness, which the evil inclination has enslaved them, and ruled this world over them, and which the lusts have overpowered them, and swayed them towards the pleasures, and enticed them to the desires, and drawn them to coveting.         And they, in their darkness are smitten, and swiftly move dazzled in their error, they hear but don't lend ear, they say but don't do. They sought the leasures but fell in the frustrations, endeavored to reach the pleasing, but reached instead the hard suffering, their soul is tired, and their body is weary. Their minds are empty, and their understanding is shattered. They hoard gold to be lost and fleeting silver, which becomes an inheritance to their enemies or to their traitorous wives. They erect mansions and lie down in graves. They build and don't dwell, they amass and don't spend, each man among them buries his father and his son, yet still does not do religious deeds which endure forever. He forgets his end, but remembers his desires, what will you say of a middle piece, which lost both end pieces, and of a child whose parents abandoned him?
Look my son, at whose heart the Creator has broadened, and who G-d has helped him to rule over his thoughts, opened his eyes for what is good for him, showed him the straight path, and drew him close to it. People are assured of him, and he is assured of them, he is at peace with them, and saved from them. People serve their evil inclination, but he serves the G-d of heaven and earth, who grants life, who brings death, the Creator, who is gracious, and there is no god besides Him.
Look at the difference between them and the men with pure interiors (who serve G-d) - their eyes are at rest, their hearts are secure, and in their solitude, they delight in remembering G-d, thank Him for His goodness in all their situations. They quickly grasp all forms of deep wisdom. They ripped off the veil from their eyes which prevents seeing the interior ways. They reached the true tranquility through their toil. Their tranquility led them to delight, their desire does not distract them, nor does their long life make them procrastinate. They are zealous to prepare for the day of death, and from what is after it. They prepare, call to G-d, seek Him, hope to Him, and serve Him, They speak truth, converse righteousness, without fear of the Sultan, and without being ruled by the Satan. They are more precious (to G-d) than any man, and more guarded than any nation. Their splendor and grandeur is greater than all of them, honored in the houses of G-d, and great in the eyes of men. Nothing distracts them away from remembering G-d, and nothing prevents them from thanking Him. Their tongue is habituated in praises and thanksgivings, and their hearts are full of purity and unity. 
This world disguised itself but they recognized it, and they tread it and told of it. Its deception was not hidden from their eyes, neither was its fraud concealed. This world adorned itself to them with beautiful garments (enticed them to pursue the enchantments of this world), but they considered it naked and empty. It deprived them (of livelihood), but it was forced. It tried to befriend them (with wealth), but they scolded it. It tried to sway them, but they distanced from it. They gazed at its evil deeds, and understood its disgraceful acts, and it has no dominion over them, and nothing with which to approach them. They are the choicest of G-d. The pure ones, and the treasured of the pious, possessors of discerning eyes, noble desires, favored deeds, who dug after G-d and became rich, did business with Him and profited , purified their hearts and became pure. They equipped themselves with fear of G-d in the path of evil and were saved. They rode the wagon of piety and arrived, met with the eternal joy, and the delight which never erodes, were spared from the assembly of judgment, and were saved from the punishments (of gehinom). 
And you, my son, choose the good for your soul, before the regret which will not avail, and the worry which will never end. (end of the letter of the pious man)
May G-d teach us the just path, and incline us to the road of salvation, in His mercy and great kindness, Amen.

Tenth Treatise on Devotion to God

Introduction

Since our previous discussion in the ninth gate dealt with clarifying the subject of separating from this world, and our intent in it was to unify the heart and free it for love of the Creator, and for yearning to do His will, I saw proper to follow with a clarification of the ways of love of G-d, because it is the purpose of all the steps, and the final stage in the levels of the men who serve G-d. I will begin, and I seek from G-d to help me.
It is proper for you, my brother, that you understand and that you know, that everything we previously mentioned of the duties of the heart and limbs, and the volunteering of the soul, they are all rungs and steps leading to this sublime matter, which is our intent to clarify in this gate. It is also proper for you to know that every duty and every good quality, whether it comes through reason, scripture, or tradition, are all steps and stages by which one ascends to this matter, and it is their ultimate purpose and destination. There is no level above it or after it.
Therefore, because of this, the prophet (Moshe), peace be upon him, placed it immediately after the unity of G-d, in saying: <i>"Hear, O Israel: The L-ord is our G-d; the L-ord is one; And you shall love the L-ord, your G-d..."</i> (Devarim 6:4), and he exhorted on it, and returned to it many times, as written: <i>"To love the L-ord your G-d, to hearken to His voice, and to cleave to Him"</i> (Devarim 30:20). The meaning of cleaving is: faithful love, and wholehearted devotion, as written: <i>"there is a friend who cleaves closer than a brother"</i>(Mishlei 18:24).
Frequently the torah places fear of G-d before love of Him, as written <i>"And now, Israel, what does the L-ord your G-d require of you, but to fear the L-ord your G-d, to walk in all His ways, and to love Him"</i> (Devarim 10:12), and it says: <i>"You shall fear the L-ord your G-d; and to Him shall you cling"</i> (Devarim 10:20). It is correct to place fear of G-d before love of G-d because [fear of G-d] is the final purpose and furthest end of abstinence, which in turn is the nearest level approaching the lowest level of love of G-d, and the first gate of its gates, and it is impossible for a man to reach it without preceding fear and fright of G-d.
And therefore, we have preceded the gate of abstinence, because it is impossible to establish love of G-d in our hearts if the love of this world is established there. But when the heart of the believer is empty from the love of this world and free of its lusts, out of recognition and understanding - the love of the Creator will establish in his heart, and it will be set in his soul according to his yearning to Him, and his recognition of Him, as written: <i>"In the way of Your judgments, O L-ord, have we waited for You [the desire of our soul is to Your Name, and to the remembrance of You]"</i> (Yeshaya 26:8).
It is fitting that we clarify of the subject of love of G-d seven matters:
1. What is the matter of love G-d?
2. How many kinds of love of G-d are there?
3. What is the path to it?
4. If it is possible or not for a human being to love G-d
5. matters detrimental to it
6. Its marks, through which it is identified in a believer
7. The practices of those who love G-d.





Chapter 1

What is love of G-d? It is the longing of the soul - and its turning, on its own, to the Creator, so that it can cleave to His supernal light. For the soul is of an essence which is pure and spiritual, it tends towards spiritual things similar to itself. By nature, it removes itself from what is opposite to its nature, namely the coarse physical bodies.
When the Creator, blessed be He, bound the soul to this coarse physical body in order to test it, how it would guide the body. G-d aroused the soul to care for the body, and further its welfare, through the partnership and companionship which was naturally ingrained between them from the beginning of the development (of the body).
When the soul senses something which will benefit the body or further its welfare, she will turn in her thoughts to that thing and desire it, in order to secure for herself peace from the pains of the body and the external things (worries, drives) which pain the body, similar to the desiring of a sick man for an expert doctor who appoints a helper to (the doctor) so that the doctor can focus on him.
But when the soul senses, that there are matters which will increase light in her own essence and power in herself. The soul will then tend instead towards G-d, and will cling to Him in its thoughts, and in its imagination will ponder instead how to come closer to Him, and will desire to Him and long to Him. This is the highest level of pure love (of G-d).
But since the matter is so (that the soul also worries for the needs of the body), and the callings of the body are numerous, and its callings for that which will fill its lackings are constant, at all times, and all periods, and the soul is not able to pause from thinking on all of this, because she has no tranquility and no rest without having peace from the ailings of her body (which always has a demand, lust, or worry) - therefore the soul became constantly distracted with the matters of the body from the things she loves which are fitting for her, and resemble her essence, through which are found her success in the abode of her tranquility (in the afterlife).
But when the light of the understanding penetrates to the soul, and it will reveal to her the disgrace of having turned to the body in love, and having been drawn after it in her thoughts, along with ignoring what will bring her salvation in both worlds - she will desist from this, and leave all of its worldly interests to the gracious Creator, and will turn in her thoughts to seek ways of her salvation from the great trap she is ensnared in, and by which she had been so greatly tempted. Then she will separate from the secular world and all of its pleasures, and will despise the body and its lusts.
Not so long after this, the soul's eyes will open, and her vision will clarify from the cloud of ignorance of G-d and His torah, and she will discern the truth from the false, and the truth of its Creator and Guide will be revealed to her.
When the soul understands His omnipotence, and His infinite greatness, it will kneel down and prostrate before Him, in fear, fright, and awe of His power and greatness, and she will not leave this state until the Creator will reassure her, and quiet her fright and awe - then it will drink from the cup of love of G-d, and will enjoy the bliss of being alone with G-d, devoting herself wholeheartedly to Him, loving Him, putting her trust in Him, and yearning for Him. She will have no other occupation than the occupation of His service, and no musings other than of Him and no thought other than of Him. She will not move any of her limbs except to do something which will gain His favor. She will not unbind her tongue except to recall Him, praise Him, thank Him, and laud Him out of love for Him and out of longing to do His will. If He bestows a benefit on her, she will thank Him. If He brings suffering on her, she will patiently bear it, and will only increase her love for Him and trust in Him, as said about one of the pious who would rise in the middle of the night and say: <i>"My G-d, You have starved me, left me without clothing, and set me in the darkness of night, and I swear by Your might and greatness that if You burn me in fire, I will only increase in love of You and joy in You. This is similar to what Iyov said "</i>Though He slay me, yet will I hope in Him" (Iyov 13:15).
On this matter the wise man alluded to in saying: <i>"a bundle of myrrh is my beloved unto me, between my breasts he shall rest"</i> (Shir Hashirim 1:13), which our sages expounded this verse saying: "even though my beloved is causing me pain and bitterness like myrrh, 'He rests between my breasts' " (Shabbat 88b) . Similarly the prophet (Moshe) said: <i>"And you shall love the L-ord your G-d with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your might"</i> (Devarim 6:5).

Chapter 2

In how many ways is the love of G-d? I will answer this question as follows. The love of a slave for his master is in one of 3 ways:
1. The slave loves him because the master benefits him and shows kindness to him.
2. The slave loves him because the master frequently overlooks his transgressions, abundantly forgives him, and atones for his sins.
3. The slave loves him due to his great and exalted character, and reveres him for his inherent nobility - not out of hope [for benefit] nor out of fear [of punishment].
Analogously is the love of G-d by us.<br>1. Either we love Him due to his abundant kindness on us, and continuous goodness to us. Thus we will love Him out of hope for more future benefit.
2. Or we love Him due to His ignoring of our sins (to give us time to repent), forgiving our transgressions, in spite of our abundantly rebelling against Him and transgressing His commandments.
3. For some, their love of G-d is due to reverence of G-d Himself - His glory, His greatness and His exaltedness - this is the pure love of G-d, blessed be He.
The prophet (Moshe), peace be unto him, has already exhorted us in this [latter way] in saying: <i>"And you shall love the L-ord your G-d with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your might"</i> (Devarim 6:5).
His intent in saying <i>"And you shall love the L-ord, your G-d, with all your heart and with all your soul, and with all your might"</i>, is to correspond to the different types of people, with their different mindsets with respect to their giving of themselves versus not giving of themselves of their bodies, money, and honor. Because some of them are prepared to give of themselves their body and money, but not of their honor, which they withhold. Others, are prepared to give of themselves their money and honor, but not their body. Others, still are prepared to give their body and honor, but not their money, as our sages said: "If it says 'with all your soul', why should it also say, 'with all your might (means)' and if it says 'with all your might', why should it also say 'with all your soul'? (Answer) Should there be a man whose life is dearer than his money, for him it says; 'with all your soul'; and should there be a man whose money is dearer than his life, for him it says, 'with all your might (means)'" (Talmud Berachot 61b).
One can also render the intent of <i>"And you shall love the L-ord your G-d with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your might"</i> (Devarim 6:5) to be referring to the three ways in which people love each other. This can be seen in the three types of friends.
1. One who volunteers towards doing the will of the one he loves with his money only.
2. One who volunteers towards doing the will of the one he loves with his body (by physically helping) or with his money.
3. One who volunteers towards doing the will of the one he loves with his money, body, and life, as the wise man said: <i>"Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it"</i> (Shir HaShirim 8:7), and it is written about Yehonatan and David: <i>"for he loved him as he loved his own soul"</i> (Shmuel 20:17), and <i>"wonderful was your love to me, passing the love of women"</i> (Shmuel II 1:26).
Therefore, the prophet exhorted us in the love of the Creator, that it should include one's life, body, and money, that a man should volunteer all of these out of love of the Creator, and not be sparing in any of them in the fulfillment of the Creator's will. So our Sages said: <i>"'with all your hearts' means with your two inclinations, the good inclination and [resisting] the evil inclination. 'With all your soul' means even if we have to give up our life. 'With all your means', means with all your money"</i> (Talmud Berachot 54a). They also said: "Do His will as if it were your will that He may do your will as if it was His will. Nullify your will before His will that He may nullify the will of others before your will" (Avos 2:4).
One can also explain the intent of <i>"And you shall love the L-ord your G-d with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your might"</i> (Devarim 6:5) to be referring to cleaving to the love of G-d inwardly, and to exhibit it outwardly, until the genuineness of the believer's love will be recognizable inwardly and outwardly, privately and publicly, in a way that it will be manifested uniformly and in the proper way, in the same amount and in the same level, as David said: <i>"my heart and my flesh cry out for the living G-d"</i> (Tehilim 84:3).
One can also explain the intent of <i>"And you shall love the L-ord your G-d with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your might"</i> (Devarim 6:5) to mean that all of your love for anything besides Him and all of your efforts on behalf of someone besides Him be for His sake - to not associate love of someone else with the love of G-d, and if you love someone else, that it be in a way that He would be pleased with, so that this love is a branch of your love for Him. Therefore, he said <i>"with all"</i>, with each of them (love G-d), as I explained in Gate 3 chapter 5 of this book regarding the intellectual urge.

Chapter 3

What is the way to attaining love of G-d? I answer this question as follows:
This request is not possible for the seeker without many prerequisites. When the prerequisites are fulfilled, there will emerge from them the love of G-d. But one who has intent to it directly will not reach it.
The prerequisites which it is proper for the believer to first acquire in his soul are: two types of unity of heart, two types of humility, two types of spiritual accountings, and two types of examinations.
The two types of unity [of heart]:
1) Wholeheartedly acknowledgment of the Creator's unity.
2) Wholehearted devotion of all of his acts to Him, and to serve Him for His honor's sake alone.
The two types of humility:
1) Humility before G-d
2) Humility before the G-d fearing (who turn from bad), and those who choose in Him.
The two types of spiritual accountings:
1) To make a spiritual accounting with oneself on what one owes to G-d in return for His continuous benefits.
2) To make a spiritual accounting with oneself for G-d's hiding of his sins, and withholding (punishment) from him for a long time, and His forgiving.
The two types of examinations:
1) Reflecting on what happened to the early ones, by studying the books of the prophets, and the books of the early ones, as written: <i>"I remember the days of yore; I meditate over all Your works"</i> (Tehilim 143:5).
2) Reflecting on the world, wherein one sees some of the wonders of the Creator exhibited in His creations. I have already clarified in this book, some general principles in this subject, according to my ability, what is sufficient for one who understands and intends for what leads to his deliverance and salvation in this world and in the next.
When one will fulfill all of these and combine them with abstinence from the pleasures and lusts of this world, and he understands the greatness of the Creator, His might and exaltedness, reflects how small is his own worth, how puny and lowly he is, and he comes to realize the great benevolence of the Creator on him, and His great kindness with him - then the love of G-d from the believer will come, with a perfect heart and with genuine purity of soul, and a longing for G-d that will be with exertion, zeal, and passion, similar to what was said: <i>"With my soul have I yearned for You in the night"</i> (Yeshaya 26:9), and <i>"the desire of our soul is to Your Name, and to the remembrance of You"</i> (Yeshaya 26:8), and <i>"My soul thirsts for You"</i> (Tehilim 63:2), and <i>"My soul thirsts for G-d"</i> (Tehilim 42:3).
And the most powerful things which aid in reaching this exalted level are:
* Great awe of G-d
* Dread of Him
* Fear of His commandments
* A constant awareness that He contemplates your hidden and revealed, your inner and outer life, and that He is guiding you, and has compassion on you, and that He knows all of your thoughts and deeds which you did in your past and will do in the future, and that He has promised to you, and has drawn you close to Him.
With all of this, you will not be able to refrain from turning to Him in your heart and in your inner being, with a pure heart and a perfect faith, and you will cling to love of Him, and trust on His compassion, His great grace and His mercy. You will not associate love of Him with love of anyone else. And He will not observe you and see in you fear of something else besides Him. You will never find Him absent in your thoughts, and He will never depart from being opposite your eyes. Your companionship will be in solitude, and He will dwell with you in the deserts. A place full of people will seem in your eyes as if it is not full (that their matters will not frighten you - shinui nusach), and a place empty of them will seem as if it's not empty. You will not feel lonely when they are gone nor worry in their absence You will always be rejoicing with your G-d, delighting to be with your Creator, seeking His favor, and longing for His visitation, as written: <i>"The righteous will rejoice with G-d and take refuge in Him"</i> (Tehilim 64:11), and the prophet said: <i>"Yet, I will rejoice in the L-ord; I will jubilate in the G-d of my salvation"</i> (Chavakuk 3:18), and David said: <i>"G-d is my light and salvation, from who shall I fear"</i> (Tehilim 27:1), and the rest of the Psalm.

Chapter 4

Is love of G-d within a human being's ability or not? I will answer this as follows.
There are three kinds of love:
1. That it is easy in the eyes of the lover to lose money due to his love, but not his body and life.
2. That it is easy in the eyes of the lover to lose money due to his love and also part of his body, provided he will remain alive.
3. Love for which it is easy for the lover to give up his money, his body, and his life due to his love.
We find that Avraham our patriarch, peace be unto him, demonstrated his love of G-d in all these ways, in his willingness to give up his money, his body, and his life.
With his money: He would spend it in hospitality to the wayfarers, in order to give them knowledge of the Creator; what he told the king of Sodom: <i>"Neither from a thread to a shoe strap, nor will I take from whatever is yours"</i> (Bereishis 14:23), all this is proof of his generosity of soul and that money was light in his eyes (for his love of G-d).
With his body: In the brit mila (circumcision), he did not hesitate to fulfill it joyously on himself and on others.
His generosity in willingness to give up his life out of love of G-d, he demonstrated by his energy and zeal in the matter of [offering up] Yitzchak which showed his pure love of G-d, and the faithfulness of his heart in the service of G-d.
This is the highest of the levels of love of G-d. It cannot be reached by every human being because it is beyond the capacity of ordinary flesh since it runs against the nature of a man and is opposite to it.
When it is found among exceptional individuals, it exists only due to the Creator's strengthening them and His helping them so that the evil inclination will not overpower them as a reward for their [great] exertion in His service, and their fulfillment of the commandments of His torah, with a faithful soul, perfect heart, and pure mind. Such were G-d's prophets and His elect and treasured ones. It is not possible for every human being to bear what we mentioned due to love of G-d, because nature and the evil inclination are against it. But the former two kinds are within the ability of most people provided they exert themselves to fulfill the prerequisites we mentioned in this gate.
That which teaches that the first two kinds are evidence of genuine love of G-d in a person, we can see from what Satan said: <i>"Does Iyov fear G-d for nothing? Have not you made a hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that he has on every side? you have blessed the work of his hands, and his possessions are increased in the land. But put forth Your hand now, [and touch all that he has, surely he will blaspheme You to Your face]"</i> (Iyov 1:9), which he meant: "he is like a merchant doing business with You, since with his love and fear of You, his price from you in return is honor and wealth of the world. But if You take away from him what You have bestowed on him and he remains in his piety with You - then he is faithful in genuine love of You". The Creator answered the Satan: <i>"behold, everything of his is in your hands..."</i> (Iyov 1:12). And then Satan did what you know from the text with his money and his children, and Iyov did not change, neither inwardly or outwardly towards G-d. He maintained his faithful love to G-d, as he said: <i>"Naked came I out of my mother's womb, and naked shall I return [to the grave]: the L-ord gave, and the L-ord has taken away; blessed be the name of the L-ord"</i> (Iyov 1:21).
Then the Creator said to Satan: <i>"Have you considered my servant Iyov, that there is none like him on earth, a wholehearted and upright man, that fears G-d, and shuns evil? And he still holds fast his integrity, though you moved Me against him, to destroy him without cause"</i>" (Iyov 2:3). And Satan answered: <i>"Skin for skin, yes, all that a man has will he give for his life; But put forth Your hand, and strike his flesh and bones, and he will curse You to Your face"</i> (Iyov 2:4). What Satan meant was: "many people will give up their money, their wives and their children, in order to keep their own bodies unharmed. But the genuineness of Iyov's love for You can only be demonstrated when he is tried and tested in his own body and flesh, through pains inflicted on him, and which he will resent".
Then the Creator answered Satan: <i>"Behold, he is in your hand; but spare his life"</i> (Iyov 2:6). Satan then did as he said of afflicting Iyov's body, and Iyov beared it patiently and did not change in his faithfulness and good heart to G-d, in saying to his wife: <i>"You speak as one of the foolish women speaks. What? shall we receive good at the hand of G-d, and shall we not receive the bad?"</i> (Iyov 2:10).
Thus the genuineness of his love and his purity of heart to G-d was demonstrated to he who doubted it, in his bearing the loss of his money and the suffering of his body, and he did not condemn the judgment of G-d, and even said in answer to his friends: <i>"Though He slay me, yet will I hope in Him"</i> (Iyov 13:15).
Hence the Creator praised him for this, and did not praise his friends for rebuking him, as written: <i>"the L-ord said to Eliphaz the Temanite, My wrath is kindled against you, and against your two friends: for you have not spoken of Me the thing that is right, as My servant Iyov has"</i> (Iyov 42:7).
You can observe that the Creator associated two righteous men with Iyov and brought them up as examples in saying: <i>"though these three men be in its midst - Noah, Daniel, and Iyov - they would save themselves with their righteousness, says the L-ord, G-d"</i>(Yechezkel 14:14). And afterwards G-d restored to Iyov his prosperity as written: <i>"the L-ord restored the prosperity of Iyov"</i> (Iyov 42:10).
Such too were the sentiments and conducts of the early pious ones who were subjected to trials, such as Daniel in the lion's den and his three companions in the fiery furnace, the ten martyrs, and those who conducted themselves as them.
This degree of love the prophet exhorts on us to attain in saying: <i>"And you shall love the L-ord your G-d with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your might"</i> (Devarim 6:4).
Nevertheless, if one strives always to reach the degree of love of G-d motivated by hope for benefit or fear of punishment in this world and in the next world, which is in the ability of most human beings to attain, the Creator will strengthen and help him, on the genuine love, which springs from reverence of the greatness and exaltedness of the Creator, which is beyond the ability of flesh, as the verse says: <i>"I will cause love to those that love Me; And those that seek Me diligently shall find Me"</i> (Mishlei 8:17), and <i>"But he who sins against Me harms his soul; [all who hate me, love death]"</i> (Mishlei 8:36).

Chapter 5

The things detrimental to the love of G-d are exceedingly numerous.<br>Among them, that a man falls short in fulfilling the prerequisites from which the love of G-d emerges.
Among them, the things detrimental in the previous gates, which we have explained earlier in this book, and it is not necessary to repeat them, so that the matter does not become lengthy.
Among them, hatred of those who love G-d, and love of those who hate Him, as written: <i>"Should you help the wicked, and love them that hate the L-ord?"</i> (Divrei Hayamim II 19:2), and it says: <i>"...justify the wicked"</i> (Yeshaya 5:23), and <i>"He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, [even they both are an abomination to the L-ord]"</i> (Mishlei 17:15), and <i>"Those who forsake the Torah praise the wicked"</i> (Mishlei 28:4), and <i>"He that says unto the wicked, you are righteous; [him shall the people curse, nations shall abhor him]"</i> (Mishlei 24:24).

Chapter 6

The signs of genuine love recognizable in one who loves Him:
* Abandoning every unnecessary thing that distracts him from the service of the Creator.
* That signs of fear and awe of G-d is visible on his face, as written: <i>"that His fear may be before your faces, that you sin not"</i> (Shemos 20:20).
There are two kinds of fear of G-d:
1. Fear of G-d's punishment and trial. This person fears G-d only out of fear of what will bring him suffering and ruin, because if he were assured against the suffering, he would not fear G-d. Of such a person, our sages said: <i>"let us be concerned lest he come to serve out of fear"</i> (Megila 25b). This type of person is falling short in the levels of the fear of G-d, and this is what our sages warned us against in saying: "Be not like servants who minister unto their master for the sake of receiving a reward" (Avos 1:3).
One of the pious would say: "I would be ashamed before G-d to serve Him for receiving reward or to avoid punishment, whereby I would be like a bad servant, that if he fears or hopes for reward - he will do his duty, but if not - he will not do it. Rather, I serve Him because it is befitting to do so."
The second type of fear is awe inspired by His glory, exaltedness, and almighty power. This awe never parts from a man for all the days of his life. It is the highest of the levels of the G-d fearing, which are mentioned in the books which deal with this topic. It is the introductory path to pure love, and the painful yearning. Whoever reaches this level of fear of G-d, will not be frightened by anything nor fear anything besides the Creator, as one of the pious would tell over on a G-d fearing man which he found sleeping in the wilderness. He asked the man: "are you not afraid of lions, that you sleep in a place like this?". The man answered: "I would be ashamed before G-d, if He saw me afraid of other than Him".
MORE SIGNS OF ONE WHO GENUINELY LOVES G-d<br>* Another sign (of love of G-d) is that in fulfilling G-d's will, it is equal in his eyes, if people praise him or scorn him when, to please the Creator, he bids them on doing good or refraining from evil.
* Another sign, that he is willing to give up his life, body, money, and children to do the will of the Creator, as written <i>"For Your sake are we slain all the day long;"</i> (Tehilim 44:23).
* Another sign, that he always has the name of G-d on his tongue, in praise, thanksgiving, and psalms, as written: <i>"And my tongue shall utter Your righteousness, Your praise all day long"</i> (Tehilim 35:28), and <i>"my mouth shall be filled with Your praise"</i> (Tehilim 71:8), and he will not utter the name of G-d in vain, in falsehood, or in a curse.
A vain oath means to utter an oath idly, without need and without necessity such as when not being forced by a Beit Din (court). A false oath is an oath that the court obligates a person in the course of business rulings and he swears falsely.
Out of honor for G-d, one is obligated to guard from everything that might lead to making an oath in the name of the blessed Creator, whether to confirm truth or refute false, and all the more so to confirm false or refute truth, as written: <i>"He who has clean hands and a pure heart, who has not taken My name in vain and has not sworn deceitfully"</i> (Tehilim 24:4), and <i>"to fear this glorious and awesome Name, the L-ord, your G-d"</i> (Devarim 28:58), and <i>"But unto you that fear My Name shall the sun of righteousness arise with healing in its wings"</i> (Malachi 3:20), and our sages said: "this refers to men who are afraid of uttering G-d's name unnecessarily." (Nedarim 8b).
In a curse: They are the curses, insults, blasphemies, in which the name of G-d is uttered. This is a great disgrace for a believer. Common people already permitted themselves on this until they have reached the ultimate in disgrace, and their intent in this is to emphasize their provocations and increase and aggrandize their insults, and they are similar in this to what the wise man said: <i>"It is as sport to a fool to do wickedness"</i> (Mishlei 10:23), and <i>"on his orphans and his widows He shall not have mercy, for all of them are hypocrites and evil doers, and every mouth speaks obscene language"</i> (Yeshaya 9:16), and <i>"The tongue of the righteous is choice silver"</i> (Mishlei 10:23).
* Another sign: That he makes a condition before promising to do something and says: "G-d willing", even when the matter is to be done very shortly, This is due to two things: One, out of fear of the swift coming of his death and he will not be able to fulfill what he promised. Two, because he does not know if it was decreed by G-d that he should carry out the promise.
* Another sign: That he straightens people and teaches them the path to the service of G-d, whether with soft words or with harsh words, according to what is needed for the time and place, and according to the class and level of the people, and that he does so to everyone, from the great men down to the men of the shuk (market), as the wise man said: <i>"a wise man will hear, and will increase in learning;"</i> (Mishlei 1:5), and <i>"To give prudence to the simple, to the young man knowledge and discretion"</i> (Mishlei 1:4).
It is proper for you to know, my brother, regarding the merit of the believer, that even if he reaches the furthest extreme in the rectification of his soul in its devotion to G-d and came near to the prophets, in their good traits, praiseworthy conduct, zeal in the service of G-d and pure love of Him, it is not like the merit of one who leads people to the good path, and straightens the wicked to the service of G-d, because his merits multiply according to their merits, every day and at all times.
The analogy of this is to two merchants who came to a country. One of them profited from the merchandise in his hand ten times the original value (of 10 gold coins), bringing to a total of one hundred gold coins.
The second merchant profited only two times his original value, but he brought many types of merchandise (worth 5,000 gold coins), bringing a total of ten thousand gold coins.
Therefore, the profit of the first merchant, even with his profiting 10-fold amounted only to 90 gold coins, while the second merchant profited 5000 gold coins even though he profited only two-fold.
Likewise, my brother, if one rectifies only himself, he will have a small merit. But if one rectifies himself and many other people, he will have his merit multiplied according to the merits of all the people who he rectified to G-d, as our sages said: "Whoever brings merit to the masses will not come to any sin" (Avot 5:18), and they said: "Moshe was righteous and caused the multitude to become righteous, the merit of the multitudes is attributed to him, as written 'he performed the righteousness of G-d and His judgments with Israel", and the wise man said: <i>"But to them that rebuke shall be delight, and a good blessing shall come upon them"</i> (Mishlei 24:25), and <i>"The law of truth was in his mouth - and turned many away from iniquity"</i> (Malachi 2:6), and <i>"those who bring merit to the multitudes will be like the stars forever and ever"</i> (Daniel 12:3).
Therefore, the Creator commanded us to rebuke those that fall short in the fulfillment of their duties, as written: <i>"you shall surely rebuke your fellow"</i> (Vayikra 19:17), and our sages taught: "until when is it one's duty to rebuke? Rav said: 'until he curses you', Shmuel said: 'until he assaults you' " (Erechin 16b), and it is said: <i>"He that rebukes a man shall find more favor afterwards than he that flatters with the tongue"</i> (Mishlei 28:23).
* Another sign (of love of G-d) is joy and delight in one's merits, not out of pride or arrogance but out of rejoicing in them, while mourning and grieving over his sins, repenting and regretting them as David said: <i>"Rivers of waters run down my eyes, because they did not keep Your Torah"</i> (Tehilim 119:136).
* Another sign: That he prostrates himself at night and fasts by day, if he is able to do this, because prayer at night is purer than prayer by day for several reasons:
1. A man is more free (from his affairs) during the night than he is during the day.
2. the cravings of the body for food and drink are quieter at night than they are by day.
3. Pause from social interaction with other people, such as being visited by a friend, or a neighbor who wants to converse with him, or a lender claiming payment from what is due to him.
4. At night, the senses have tranquility from the numerous sensations, because he does not see things that distract him, nor hear things that interrupt (his thoughts).
5. Being saved and distanced from flattery, due to the few number of people who are awake at night with him, while during the day, it is possible that he will not be able to spend any time in solitude.
6. He is better able to commune with G-d in thinking of Him, and being in solitude with Him, at a time when every lover communes with the one who loves him and every desirer is alone with the one who desires him, as written: <i>"My soul yearns for You in the night"</i>(Yeshaya 26:9), and <i>"By night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loves"</i> (Shir Hashirim 3:1).
Prayer at night is praised in the holy scriptures, such as: <i>"At night I remembered Your name, O L-ord..."</i> (Tehilim 119:55), and <i>"At midnight, I rise to give thanks to You.."</i> (Tehilim 119:62), and <i>"I rose before the dawning of the morning, and cried out"</i> (Tehilim 119:147), and <i>"My eyes preceded the watches to speak of Your word"</i> (Tehilim 119:148), and <i>"at night I was opposite You"</i> (Tehilim 88:2), and <i>"Arise, cry out in the night, Pour out your heart like water before G-d"</i> (Eicha 2:19), and many more like this.
I have already prepared some strong words, which rebuke and shame the soul, so that it be stirred in the service and aroused to pray at night. These are in the Hebrew language, and I called it: "Rebuke" (Tochecha). Afterwards, I have appended to these some poetic words in hebrew of praise and thanksgiving to G-d and request of forgiveness and supplications, soft words, which arouse the heart of the reader, and stir his nature, and I called it: "Request" (Bakasha). I appended them at the end of this book, for one who wishes to recite them as prayers at night or by day.
One who would like to take on himself this matter should do as follows: He should recite the "Rebuke" sitting down after having read some known religious songs or others, and then to stand up and in a bowed posture, to read the "Request" until the end, and then to kneel and say whatever supplications he wishes, and after that Psalm 119 and the Shir Hamaalot Psalms (120-134), until the end. If one would like to say different prayers or use any other order, he may do so. I merely suggested the ideal conduct in it.
The main thing, my brother, is the purity of soul and intent of heart while you are offering up the prayer, and that you recite it slowly, and likewise for the things near it. Let not your tongue hurry before your heart, for a little of it with your heart in it is better than a lot of it with the swift movements of your tongue and a heart empty of it.
One of the pious would say: "do not praise empty praises, meaning, empty of having your heart in it, rather, it should be with your heart in it, as David said: "With my whole heart have I sought You" (Tehilim 119:10), and <i>"I entreated You with all my heart"</i> (Tehilim 119:58), and <i>"my heart and my flesh cry out for the living G-d"</i> (Tehilim 84:3).
* Another sign: Joy and gladness in G-d and in knowing Him, and longing to find favor with Him, delighting in love of Him, clinging to His torah, compassion on those who fear Him, as written: <i>"I am a friend to all who fear You and to those who keep your precepts"</i>(Tehilim 119:63), and <i>"All who seek You shall exult and rejoice"</i> (Tehilim 40:17), and <i>"I have rejoiced in the way of your testimonies, as much as in all riches"</i> (Tehilim 119:14), and <i>"Your testimonies have I taken as a heritage forever: for they are the rejoicing of my heart"</i> (Tehilim 119:111), and <i>"Yet, I will rejoice in the L-ord; I will jubilate in the G-d of my salvation"</i> (Chavakuk 3:18).

Chapter 7

The good practices of those who love G-d are too numerous to enumerate. Nevertheless, I will mention of them a few that occur to me.
These men know their G-d (see Gate 1), and they recognize what He wants from them, and that He guides them, maintains them and provides for them, and that everything religious or secular which He gave them permission and free will to do is still under His control and bound by His rule.
It has become clear to them and they believe that all of their affairs and movements proceed according to the decree and desire of the Creator. Therefore they no longer prefer to be in a different situation than the one they are in, and they trust in the Creator, that He will choose the best and most proper situation for them.
When it became clear to them from the torah, that G-d exhorts them on fulfilling the mitzvot (precepts), commands them to choose the service of the Creator, and warns them to avoid choosing after bodily pleasures, but rather abstain from them - they chose to follow what He wants, namely, to long for Him, to yearn to do His will in their hearts and inner being. In their hearts and souls, they ceased yearning for this world and its enchantments, but they hope to receive help and strength from Him in order to achieve their ambition in His service, and to complete the work they have chosen in fulfilling His commandments.
For what they have accomplished, they will praise and thank G-d for it, and G-d will praise them for their efforts and choice. And for what they were not able to accomplish of their ambitions, due to their weakness in reaching it, they excuse themselves before G-d, and will resolve to do it when they will be more capable. They hope to the time when the Creator will help them to do it, and they will beseech Him on this with a pure soul and a faithful heart. This is their greatest desire, and final wish from G-d, as David said: <i>"My hope is that my ways be established, to keep Your statutes"</i> (Tehilim 119:5). And the Creator will praise their choice of His service, even if they are prevented from fulfilling the acts, as He said to David <i>"Since it was in your heart to build a house unto My name, you did well that it was in your heart"</i> (Melachim 8:18).
In their hearts and minds, they abandoned matters of this world, and care of their body's welfare, except for what is necessary and urgent, due to its pettiness by them, and insignificance in their eyes. They concentrate their hearts and souls to their religious matters and to the service of G-d, due to His glory and exaltedness. Their bodies are on earth but their hearts are in the heavens. Due to the knowledge of the greatness of G-d in their hearts, they serve Him as if they were with the holy angels in the highest heavens.
The [physical] lusts have melted away from their hearts, and the desire for pleasures has been uprooted from them, due to being replaced with the yearning for the Creator's service and their love of Him.
The fire of the evil inclination has extinguished from their hearts, and its heat is gone from their thoughts due to the magnitude of the light of divine service which has engulfed them, similar to a candle in the presence of the light of the sun. They are humbled by awe of their G-d. They confess their shortcomings before Him. They bore their shoulders to His service, not caring about any losses
When coming in contact with them, they seem shy, but when one speaks with them, their wisdom will appear. When one asks them something, they seem knowledgeable. When they are sinned against, their humility will appear.
When you look at them, their faces appear radiant, and if you could peer in their hearts, you will see a broken heart to G-d. In His word they are resident, but in worldly matters they are desolate.
Love of G-d has filled their hearts. They have no desire for joining the conversations of men, nor do they derive any pleasure therein. They are disgusted by corrupt ways, and chose the choicest paths,
In their merits, sufferings go away, and the rains fall. In their merits man kisses the ground (the earth produces food and men are happy), since they refrained themselves from lewdness, retracted their hands from all treats, and their souls have fled from forbidden things, and because they went in the good and righteous path. They reached exalted levels for bearing a short time (the few dozen years allotted to man in this world), profited in both worlds, combined both goods, and achieved two distinctions, as written in the psalm: <i>"Praiseworthy is the man who fears G-d..."</i> (Tehilim 112), until the end.
What is wondrous in their matters, is that the commandments which the Creator has commanded them in seem few in their eyes compared to their duties to repay Him for the good He bestows on them, and compared to the exertion, devotion, bearing, and patience which they took on themselves in order to cling to the Creator, as I will now explain.
According to how the sages counted the commandments of the Creator, the total number was found to be 613. Of these, 365 are negative commandments, to not do, 65 of them are commandments for the congregation but not for the individual. Further, some of them are positive commandments whose fulfillment depends on time, namely, they apply at certain times but not at others, such as the Sabbaths, festivals, fast days. There are also commandments which apply only in the land (of Israel) such as the offerings which an individual is obligated in, the teruma, maaser (tithes), and the offerings of the festivals, or the like. Some commandments depend on other things, and are only obligatory when the things are found, but if they are absent one is exempt from them, such as the mitzva of Brit Mila (circumcision) for one who does not have a son, or pidyon haben (redeeming first born male) for one who has no first born male, and the mitzva of making a roof-fence for one who does not own a house, or honoring father and mother for an orphan, and others like this.
When they counted the commandments, they said: "we will not count in the negative commandments because merely refraining from them is their performance and the fulfillment of their obligation. Such service of G-d seemed too insignificant in their eyes, and their service seemed little to them due to their desire and longing for reaching the favor of G-d. Therefore they sought positive commandments of the limbs for individuals which apply at all times, places, and circumstances. They did not find any precepts that fits this except reading the torah and studying the commandments, as the verse says: <i>"These words, which I command you this day, shall be in your heart; And you shall teach them diligently unto your children, and speak of them.."</i> (Devarim 6:6). And the prophet (Moshe) exhorted on this a second time in saying: <i>"You shall teach them to your sons, speaking of them, when you sit in your house and when you walk on the way and when you lie down and when you rise up"</i> (Devarim 11:19).
And all of this seemed too small in their eyes due to what they perceived of their duties of service and deeds to the Creator. So, they served the Creator with rational precepts (not prescribed in scripture - RMH), special disciplines, and good spiritual customs. In their pure hearts to G-d, they appended to the known commandments and they learned from the ways of the prophets and the regiments of the pious ones, how to seek the favor of G-d by them, and obtain His acceptance of them - these belong to the duties of the heart, which was our intent to clarify their fundamental principles and to speak of their divisions in this book. This is the wisdom hidden in the hearts of the wise and concealed in their interior. If they speak of them, everyone will see that they are correct in them, because all intelligent men can testify that these things are true and just.
By it they reached the lofty heights and the precious levels in the wholehearted service of G-d, in love of Him with a faithful love, with their heart and soul, body and means, as the prophet, peace be unto him, exhorted in saying: <i>"And you shall love the L-ord your G-d with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your might"</i> (Devarim 6:5). Men of these levels are nearer than all other men to the level of the prophets, the pure ones, and the pious one, which scripture has termed them: <i>"those who love G-d"</i>, and <i>"those who love His Name"</i>, and on them it is said: <i>"That I may cause those that love Me to inherit substance"</i> (Mishlei 8:21).
And if, my brother, you desire to be one of them, and to be included in their class - abandon the superfluous things of this world and avoid them. Be contented with taking only your [necessary] food from them. Train yourself to do without the superfluities. Lighten the burden of the affairs of this world from yourself, and free your mind from thinking deeply in them. Hasten to do the things necessary for you with your body only, but not with your heart and will, just like one who drinks a bitter medicine, who drinks it with his mouth, not with his desire, and he abhors the drinking itself, but he allows himself to bear its bitterness in order to cure himself from the illness. Likewise, should be the worldly needs in your eyes.
You know, my brother, that your mental exertions about your secular matters will not add anything to your livelihood in the least [because this is pre-determined by G-d]. So too, minimal exertion and zeal in them will not decrease your allotted portion in the least. Your mental distraction in them will prevent you from thinking in what will benefit you in your torah matters and in the Creator's commandments, which are in your hands, and that you undertook to toil in them all the days of your life. Thus you will wind up losing in this (religious) without gaining from the other (secular).
Therefore desire for yourself that which furthers your salvation and peace in your religious and secular life. Apply your mind to stand with all your strength to [perpetuate] the wellspring of your way of life.
Precede zeal before yourself for matters of your end (the hereafter). Appoint understanding as your king, humility as your deputy, wisdom as your guide, and abstinence as your close friend. Proceed slowly and thoughtfully in acquiring the good traits, according to how your matters allow you to bear. Beware of taking on too much, or too quickly, without moving gradually, lest you become lost, because too much oil in a candle is a cause to extinguish its light.
Beware of becoming neglectful, lazy or lax. Let one level of zeal follow with another level of zeal, and one level of endurance with another level of endurance. Strive to follow each level of good traits, with the next higher level which is near it. Do not neglect checking your heart and making a spiritual accounting always. Engage in the in-depth study of this book, read it, review its matters, and memorize its roots. Investigate its deductions always. You will reach through it to the pinnacle of exalted and treasured qualities, and the utmost of the noble traits that are pleasing to G-d. Straighten yourself with it and then straighten others with it.
Do not hope that you will reach this without having freed your mind of the worries and distractions of this world, even if you abhor them, just like it is not possible for a drunkard to heal himself from his craving for wine until he is completely free from it. One of the pious would say: "if we were truly ashamed of the Creator['s presence], we would not be speaking of love of the Creator, so long as we are drunk from the wine of love of this world".
Therefore, endeavor, my brother, let your mind be free of this world when your body is free of its affairs. Because when your body is in solitude, your soul should also be in solitude. For it is still possible for the mind to be absorbed in worldly affairs even when the body is free from them and is at rest from engaging in them.
Check yourself in this always, my brother, and strive to keep the lusts of this world far from your heart. Replace them with matters of your end and duties of your heart. Ponder them in your thoughts always, you will attain through them that the Creator will be pleased with you. His face will shine upon you, and He will accept your good deeds, forgive your sins, and you will find favor in His eyes, as written: <i>"I love them that love Me; And those that seek Me diligently shall find Me"</i> (Mishlei 8:17), and <i>"those who honor Me shall I honor, and those who despise Me will be disgraced"</i> (Shmuel 2:30).
I saw proper for the completion of your benefit and instruction, my brother, that I summarize the main topics of the matters of this book into ten hebrew stanzas, where each one contains a summary of each of the gates, and according to the order of the book. I conclude my book with them in order that they serve you as a reminder, so that you can memorize them and set them in your heart and mind, day and night, when you rest or are active, so that you will not cease to investigate the matters of this book and remember its fundamental principles.
When you are involved in an act of service, these phrases will remind you to devote your heart wholly to G-d in it. If you are involved in a secular work, they will remind you of your spiritual accounting. If you are in some trouble in a worldly matter, they will remind you of trusting in G-d. If it will be in a situation which brings to arrogance and haughtiness, they will remind you of submission. If your heart is free, they will remind you to reflect on the favors of G-d on you. If you are in a situation of physical joy or pleasure, they will remind you to abstain from the pleasures of this world. If you are involved in some matter where you are rebelling against G-d, they will remind you on repentance. If you are neglecting your torah and faith, they will remind you to cling to the service of G-d. If you are engaged in declaring G-d's Unity, they will remind you that your declaration should be wholehearted.
And likewise they will remind you during your recital of prayers, musings of your heart, bridling your tongue, binding of your senses, ruling over your lusts, restraining your limbs, checking your thoughts, weighing your deeds against your knowledge, and the rest of what I have discussed in this book of good conduct, and higher ethics.
May G-d teach us and you the way to His service in His mercy and greatness, Amen.

Addenda

Ten Sections (Poem)

These are the ten stanzas: Which include the topics of the gates of this book. One stanza per gate.
(Meter: Yated, two Tenuot, Yated, two Tenuot, Yated and Tenuah in the first half of the stanza, and likewise repeated in the second half.)
(Unity of G-d) - My son, devote your unique soul wholly to its Rock, when you declare the Unity of the One G-d who formed you.
(Reflection) - Examine, investigate, and contemplate His wonders, and let understanding and the law of righteousness be your girdle.
(Service) - Fear G-d, and guard His testimonies and laws always, so that your steps shall not stray.
(Trust) - Let your heart be confident and assured, trusting in G-d, the Rock, that He will be your help.
(Devotion) - With a pure heart do His laws for His sake, and exalt no human being in your generation.
(Submission) - See, that the end of a creature is to the dust, be lowly for sand, and dirt will be your dwelling place.
(Repentance) - Let the speech of your understanding contend against your folly, and repent from the brazen of your heart and [evil] inclination.
(Accounting) - The ways of G-d, in just and proper judgment, search with wisdom in your thoughts and inner being.
(Abstinence) - Remove from your heart the childish and adolescent, and do not desire the desires of your youth
(love of G-d) - In your yearning, you will see the face of the everlasting G-d, and your unique soul will commune with your Rock 

Admonition



Prayer

