Avodah Zarah
עבודה זרה
Daf Shevui
http://learn.conservativeyeshiva.org/daf-shevui/

Avodah Zarah



Daf 1a



Daf 1b



Daf 2a

On the three days preceding the festivals of idolaters, it is forbidden to conduct business with them, to lend articles to them or borrow from them, to lend or borrow any money from them, to repay a debt, or receive repayment from them.  Rabbi Judah says:  we should receive repayment from them, as this can only depress them;  But they [the Rabbis] said to him: even though it is depressing at the time, they are glad of it subsequently.
GEMARA. Rav and Shmuel:  One taught edehem (with an aleph)  while the other taught edehem (with an ayin). The one who taught edehem (with an aleph) is not in error while the one who taught edehem (with an ayin) is not in error.
The one who taught edehem (with an aleph) is not in error, as it is written: “For the day of their calamity is at hand” (Deuteronomy 32:35); And the one who taught edehem (with an ayin) is not in error, as it is written: “Let them bring their witnesses [testimonies] that they may be justified” (Isaiah 43:9).
The one who taught edehem (with an aleph) why did he not teach edehem (with an ayin? He could say: Calamity is preferable. he one who taught edehem (with an ayin) why did he not teach edehem (with an aleph)? He might say: What is it that brings about that calamity? The testimony they testify about themselves. Therefore testimony is preferable.
But does the verse, “Let them bring their witnesses that they may be justified,” refer to idolaters? It is written  about Israel; as R. Joshua b. Levi said: All the commandments which Israel performs in this world will come and testify on their behalf in the world to come, as it is said: “Let them bring their witnesses that they may be justified” — this refers to Israel; “And let them hear and say: It is true” this refers the idolaters.
Rather, R. Huna the son of R. Joshua said that the one who says edehem with an aleph derives it from here: “They that fashion a graven image are all nothing, and their delectable things shall not profit, and their own witnesses see not” (Isaiah 44:9).
Hanina b. Papa and some say R. Simlai expounded: In the time to come, the Holy Blessed One will take a Torah scroll and place it in His embrace and proclaim: “Let him who has occupied himself with it, come and take his reward.”
Thereupon all the nations will come and gather in confusion, as it is said,  “All the nations are gathered together” etc. (Isaiah 43:9). The Holy Blessed One will then say to them: “Do not come before Me in confusion, but let each nation 

Daf 2b

come in with its scribes;” as it is said, “And let the peoples (le’umim) be gathered together,” (ibid.) and the word peoples means a kingdom, as it is written, “And one kingdom [u-leom] shall be stronger than the other kingdom” (Genesis 25:23). But can there be confusion in the presence of the Holy Blessed One? Rather it is only that they be not confused, and so hear what He says to them.
Thereupon the Kingdom of Rome entered first. Why first? Because they are the most important. How do we know they are most important? Because it is written: “And he shall devour the whole earth and shall tread it down and break it in pieces” (Daniel 7:23) and R. Yohanan says: This refers to Rome, whose power is known to the whole world.
And from where do we know that the most important ones come in [for judgment] first? This is in accordance with R. Hisda, for R. Hisda said: When a king and a community appear before the [Heavenly] tribunal, the king enters first, as it is said: “To perform the sentence of his servant [King Solomon] and [then] the sentence of His people Israel.” And what is the reason? You may say,  because it is not the way of the world that a king should wait outside; or you may say [in order that the king shall plead] before the anger [of the Judge] is roused.
The Holy Blessed One will then say to them: “With what have you occupied yourselves?” They will reply: “Master of the Universe, we have established many market-places, we have built many bathhouses, we have accumulated much gold and silver, and all this we did only for the sake of Israel, that they might [have leisure] for occupying themselves with the study of the Torah.”
The Holy Blessed One will say in reply: “You foolish ones in the world, all that which you have done, you have only done to satisfy your own desires. You have established marketplaces to place prostitutes in them; baths, to delight yourself in them; silver and gold, that is mine,  as it is said: “Mine is the silver and Mine is the gold, says the Lord of Hosts” (Haggai 2:8).
Are there any among you who have been declaring this? As it is said, “Who among you declares this? (Isaiah 43:9). And “this” is nothing but Torah, as it is said: “And this is the Torah which Moses set before the children of Israel” (Deuteronomy 4:44). They will then depart crushed in spirit.
The kingdom of Rome goes out and the kingdom of Persia enters. Why Persia next? Because they are next in importance. And how do we know this? Because it is written: “And behold another beast, a second like a bear” (Daniel 7:5);  and R. Joseph said: This refers to the Persians, who eat and drink greedily like a bear, are fleshly like a bear, have shaggy hair like a bear, and are restless like a bear.
The Holy Blessed One will ask of them: “With what have you occupied yourselves?  and they will reply, “Master of the Universe, we have built many bridges, we have captured many cities, we have waged many wars, and all this for the sake of Israel, that they might engage in the study of the Torah.”
The Holy Blessed One will say in reply: “All that which you have done, you have only done to satisfy your own desires. You have made bridges, to collect taxes on them; cities, to raise in them the head-tax; wars, I make, as it is said: “The Lord is  a man of war” (Exodus 15:3). Are there any among you who have been declaring this? As it is said, “Who among you declares this? (Isaiah 43:9). And “this” is nothing but Torah, as it is said: “And this is the Torah which Moses set before the children of Israel” (Deuteronomy 4:44). They will then depart crushed in spirit.
But after the Persians saw that the Romans did not achieve anything, why did they go in? They will say to themselves: “The Romans have destroyed the Temple, whereas we have built it.”   And so too every nation.
But after they saw that the first ones did not achieve anything, why should the other nations come forth? They will say to themselves: The others have oppressed Israel, but we have not.   And why are these [two] nations singled out as important, and not the others? Because their reign will last till the coming of the Messiah.
The nations will then say: “Master of the Universe, have you given us the Torah, and have we declined to accept it?” But how can they argue this, is it not written, “The Lord came from Sinai and rose from Seir to them, He shined forth from Mount Paran?” (Deuteronomy 33:2), and it is also written, “God will come from Teman” (Habbakuk 3:3). What did He want in Seir, and what did He want at Mount Paran?
R. Yohanan says: This teaches us that the Holy Blessed One offered the Torah to every nation and every tongue, but none accepted it, until He came to Israel who received it.
Rather, this is what they will say to Him: “Did we accept it and fail to observe it?” But surely to this the response would be: “Then why did you not accept it?” Rather, this is what they will say to Him: “Master of the Universe, did you hold the mountain over us like a tub as You did to Israel and did we still decline to accept it?”
As it is written: “And they stood at the foot (or under) the mountain” (Exodus 19:17), R. Dimi b. Hama said: This teaches us that the Holy Blessed One suspended the mountain over Israel like a tub, and said to them: “If you accept the Torah, it will be well with you, but if not, there you will find your grave.”
Thereupon God will say to them: “Let them tell us of the former deeds,” as it is said, “And let them tell us of the former deeds.” The seven commandments which you did accept, did you observe them?
How do we know that they did not observe them? For R. Joseph taught: “He stood and shook the earth, He saw and made the nations tremble” (Habbakuk 3:6). What did He see? He saw that the nations did not observe even the seven commandments which the sons of Noah had taken upon themselves, and seeing that they did not observe them, He stood up and released them from them. They benefited! If so, it pays to be a sinner!
Mar the son of Rabina said:

Daf 3a

This says that even if they kept them, they do not receive reward for them.
But they do not? Has it not been taught: R. Meir used to say: From where do we know that even a non-Jew who studies the Torah is equal to a High Priest? Scripture says: “You shall therefore keep My statutes and My ordinances which, if a man do, he shall live by them” (Leviticus 18:5). Priests, Levites, or Israelites is not stated here, rather “a man.” This teaches you that even a non-Jew who studies the Torah is equal to a High Priest!”
Rather this teaches that they are not rewarded as greatly as one who does a thing which he is commanded to do, but rather as one who does a thing he is not commanded to do. For, R. Hanina said: One who is commanded and does is greater than one who is not commanded and does
The nations will then say, “Master of the Universe, has Israel, who accepted the Torah, observed it? 
The Holy Blessed One will reply, “I can give testify that they observed the Torah.” Then they will say back to Him,  “Master of the Universe, can a father testify on behalf of his son? For it is written, “Israel is My son, My firstborn” (Exodus 4:22). Then will the Holy Blessed One will say: “Heaven and Earth testify that Israel has fulfilled the entire Torah.”
Then they will say: Master of the Universe, Heaven and Earth are partial witnesses, for it is said, “If I have not made My covenant with day and with night and established the laws of heaven and earth” (Jeremiah 33:25). And R. Shimon b. Lakish further said: What is it that is written, “And there was evening and there was morning the sixth day?” (Genesis 1:31). This teaches that God made a condition with the works of creation, saying,  “If Israel accept my Law it will be well, but if not, I shall reduce you to a state of chaos.”
And this resonates with R Hezekiah  who said, “You caused sentence to be heard from Heaven, the earth trembled and was still” (Psalms 76:9). If the earth trembled, how could it be still, and if it was still, how could it tremble? Rather at first it trembled, and subsequently it became still.
Then the Holy Blessed One will say: You yourselves shall testify that Israel observed the entire Torah. Let Nimrod come and testify that Abraham did not worship idols; let Lavan come and testify that Jacob was not suspected of theft; let Potiphar's wife testify that Joseph was not suspected of sinning; let  Nebuchadnezzar come and testify that Hanania, Mishael and Azariah did not bow down to an image; let Darius come and testify that Daniel never neglected the prayers; let Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite, and Eliphaz the Temanite [and Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite] testify that Israel has observed the whole Torah; as it is said,
“Let them [the nations] bring their [own] witnesses, that they [Israel] may be justified” (Isaiah 43:9). 
The nations will then say: Offer us the Torah anew and we shall obey it.  But the Holy Blessed One will say to them, You foolish ones among peoples, he who took trouble [to prepare] on the eve of Shabbat can eat on Shabbat, but he who has not troubled on the eve of Shabbat, what shall he eat on Shabbat? Nevertheless, I have an easy command which is called Sukkah; go and carry it out.
But how can you say this: Did not R. Joshua b. Levi say: What is it that it is written,  “Which I command you this day” (Deuteronomy 7:11)? Today is the day to do them, and tomorrow is not the day to do them. Today is the day to perform them, but today is not the day to take reward for their performance.
Rather, the Holy Blessed One does not deal harshly with His creatures. And why does He term it an easy commandment? Because it does not cause a financial loss.
Straightaway everyone will go and make a sukkah on the top of his roof; but the Holy Blessed One will cause the sun to burn over them as at the summer season and every one of them will trample down his sukkah and go away, as it is said, “Let us break their bands, and cast away their cords from us” (Psalms 2:3). He caused the sun to burn over them! But did you not just say, “The Holy Blessed One does not deal harshly with his creatures?” True! But with the Israelites, too, it occasionally happens

Daf 3b

that the summer season extends till Sukkot and they are troubled [by the heat]. But didn’t Rava say: He who is troubled is exempt from dwelling in the Sukkah? True he is exempt, but should he trample it.
Thereupon the Holy Blessed One will laugh at them, as it is said, “He that sits in heaven will laugh” (Psalms 2:4). R. Yitzchak said: “Only on that day is there laughter before the Holy Blessed One.”
There are those who teach the comment of R. Yitzchak in connection with the following teaching, as it was taught: R. Yosi says: In the time to come non-Jews will come and convert. But will they be accepted? Has it not been taught: In the days of the Messiah converts will not be accepted; likewise they did not accept converts in the days of David or of Solomon?
Rather, they will be self-made converts, and they will place tefillin on their heads and on their arms, fringes on their garments, and a mezuzah on their doorposts,
but when they see the battle of Gog and Magog, he will ask them, “For what purpose have you come?”  And they will reply: “Against God and His Messiah” as it is said, “Why are the nations in an uproar, and why do the peoples mutter in vain” (Psalms 2:1). Then each of them will throw aside his mitzvah and go away, as it is said,
“Let us break their bands, and cast away their cords from us” (Psalms 2:3), And the Holy Blessed One will laugh at them, as it  is said, “He that sits in heaven will laugh” (Psalms 2:4). R. Yitzchak said: “Only on that day is there laughter before the Holy Blessed One.
But is this so? Has Rav Judah not said in the name of Rav: There are twelve hours in a day; during the first three hours the Holy Blessed One occupies Himself with the Torah, during the second three He sits in judgment of the whole world, and when He sees that the world deserves destruction, He transfers Himself from the seat of Justice to the seat of Mercy;
during the third quarter, He feeds the whole world from the horned ram to the eggs of vermin; during the fourth quarter He is sporting with the leviathan, as it is said, “There is leviathan, whom You have formed to laugh (or play) with” (Psalms 104: 26)? R. Nahman b. Yitzchakh said: With His creatures he does laugh, but he does not laugh at His creatures except on that day. 
Aha said to R. Nahman b. Isaac: Since the day of the destruction of the Temple, there is no laughter for the Holy Blessed One. How do we know that there is no laughter? If we say from the verse, “And on that day the Lord, the God of Hosts, called you to weep and wail” (Isaiah 22:12). Perhaps this refers to that day and no more.
Rather, as it is written: “If I forget you, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth if I do not remember you?” (Psalms 137:5). Perhaps this rules out forgetting, but does not rule out laughter. Rather from the verse, “I have long time held my peace, I have been still, and refrained myself, now will I cry.”
What then does God do in the fourth quarter [of each day]?... He sits and instructs the school children, as it is said, “To whom shall one teach knowledge, and to whom shall one make the message understood? To them that are weaned from the milk, to those just taken from the breast” (Isaiah 28:9).
Who instructed them before that? If you want, you may say Metatron. Or if you want you may say God did this as well as other things.
And what does He do by night? If you want you may say, the kind of thing He does by day. And if you want you may say He rides his light cherub, and floats in eighteen thousand worlds; as it is said, “The chariots of God are myriads, even thousands of thousands (shinan)” (Psalms 68:18) Do not read shinan, [repeated], but she-enan [that are not quite 20,000]. Or if you want you may say, He sits and listens to the song of the Hayyot, as it is said, “By the day the Lord will command His lovingkindness and in the night His song shall be with me” (Psalms 42:9).
Levi says: Anyone who stops [learning] words of the Torah and indulges in idle gossip will be made to eat glowing coals of juniper, as it is said, “They pluck salt-wort with wormwood; and the roots of juniper are their food” (Job 30:4). Resh Lakish said: Anyone who engages in the study of the Torah by night, the Holy One extends a thread of grace  over him by day, as it is said, “By day the Lord will command his lovingkindness, and in the night his song shall be with me” (Psalms 42:9). Why will the Lord command his lovingkindness by day? Because His song shall be with me in the night.
Some say that Resh Lakish said:  Anyone who engages in the study of the Torah in this world, which is like night, the Holy Blessed One extends a thread of grace over him in the future world, which is like day, as it is said: “By day the Lord, etc.”
Rav Judah said in the name of Shmuel: Why is it written, “And You made man as the fishes of the sea, and as the creeping things, that have no ruler over them” (Habbakuk 1:14)?  Why are humans compared to the fishes of the sea? To tell you, just as the fishes of the sea, as soon as they come on to dry land, die, so also people, as soon as they separate themselves from Torah and the commandments die immediately. Another explanation: Just as the fishes of the sea, as soon as the sun scorches them, they die; so too people, when struck by the sun, die.
This can be applied to the present world, or to the future world. If you want you can say that this applies to this world, in accordance with R. Hanina, for R. Hanina says: Everything is in Heaven’s hands, except cold and heat, as is said, “Thorns and snares are in the path of the wicked; He who values his life will keep far from them” (Proverbs 22:5).
And if you want you can say it applies to the world to come, in accordance with R. Shimon b. Lakish, for R. Shimon b. Lakish says: There is no gehenna in the world to come. Rather, the Holy Blessed One brings the sun out of its sheath, and it beats down [on the world]: the wicked are punished by it, the righteous are healed by it. The wicked are punished by it,

Daf 4a

as it is said: “For lo! That day is at hand, burning like an oven. All the arrogant and all the doers of evil shall be straw, and the day that is coming—said the LORD of Hosts—shall burn them to ashes and leave of them neither stock nor boughs” (Malachi 3:19). It shall leave them neither stock — in this world, nor bough — in the world to come.
The righteous are healed by it, as it is said, “But for you who revere My name a sun of victory shall rise to bring healing” (Malachi 3:20). Moreover, they will delight in it, as it is said, You shall go forth and stamp like stall-fed calves” (ibid.).
Another explanation: Just as among fish of the sea, every fish greater than its fellow swallows its fellow, so with men, were it not for fear of the government, every person greater than his fellow would swallow his fellow. And this is what was taught: R. Hanina, the Deputy High Priest, said, Pray for the welfare of the government, for were it not for the fear of it, people would swallow each other alive.
R. Hinena b. Papa pointed to the following contradiction: Scripture says, “Shaddai—we have not found the greatness of his power” (Job 37:23), yet it is written, “Great is our Lord and of abundant power” (Psalms 147:5) and it is also written,  “Your right hand, O Lord, is glorious in power!” (Exodus 15:6). There is no contradiction: the former refers to the time of judgment, the latter refers to a time of war.
R. Hama b. Hanina pointed to another contradiction: It is written, “I have no fury,” (Isaiah 27:4), yet it is also written, “The Lord takes revenge and is furious” (Nahum 1:2). There is no contradiction: the former refers to Israel, the latter to non-Jews. R. Hinena b. Papa said: “I have no fury” for I already vowed, would that I had not so vowed, then, “If one offers Me thorns and thistles, I will march to battle against him, And set all of them on fire” (Isaiah 27:4).
This accords with the following teaching of R. Alexandri: What is it that is written, “And it shall come to pass on that day that I will seek to destroy all the nations” (Zechariah 12:9). “Seek” from whom? The Holy Blessed One said:  I will seek their records: if they have any meritorious deeds to their credit, I will redeem them, but if not, I will destroy them.
This also accords with what Rava said: What is it that is written, “Surely He would not strike at a ruin if, in calamity, one cried out to Him” (Job 30:24)? The Holy Blessed One to Israel: When I judge Israel, I do not judge them as I do the non-Jews concerning whom it is said,  “Ruin, an utter ruin, I will make it,” (Ezekiel 21:32). Rather I only exact payment from them [a little at a time] as the hen does her picking.
Another explanation: Even if Israel does before Me only a few good deeds, like hens picking in a rubbish heap, I will make them accumulate to a large sum, as it is said,  “Though they pick little they are saved” (Job 30:24).  Another interpretation: As a reward of their crying before Me, I save them.
This is similar to what R. Abba said: What is it that is written, “For I was their Redeemer; Yet they have plotted treason against Me?” (Hosea 7:13).  I thought I would redeem them by depriving them of monetary possessions in this world, so that they would be worthy to merit the world to come, yet they have plotted against me.
And this is similar to what R. Papi said in the name of Rava: What is it that is written, “I braced, I strengthened their arms, And they plot evil against Me” (Hosea 7:15)?  The Holy Blessed One says:  I thought I would chastise them with suffering in this world, so that their arm might be strengthened in the world to come, yet they plot evil against me.
Abahu commended R. Safra to the minim as a learned man, and he was thus exempted by them from paying taxes for thirteen years. One day, on coming across him, they said to him; It is written: “You alone have I singled out of all the families of the earth— That is why I will call you to account for all your iniquities” (Amos 3:2). If one is in anger does one take it out on one’s friend? He was silent and could give them no answer; so they wound a scarf round his neck and tortured him.
Abbahu came and found him. He said to them: Why are you torturing him? They said to him: Did you not tell us that he is a great man? Yet he cannot explain to us the meaning of this verse! He said: Say that I told you [that he was learned] in tannaitic traditions; did I tell you [he was learned] in Scripture?
They said to him: How are you different that you know [Scripture]?’ He replied: We who are frequently with you, set ourselves the task of studying it thoroughly, they do not study it carefully.
They said to him: So you tell us the meaning? He said to them: I will draw you a parable. To what may it be compared? To a man who is the creditor of two persons, one of them a friend, the other an enemy; of his friend he will accept payment little by little, whereas of his enemy he will exact payment in one sum!
Abba b. Kahana: What is the meaning of the verse, “Far be it for you to act in such a way, to slay the righteous with the wicked” (Genesis 18:25)? Abraham said in front of the Holy Blessed One: “Master of the Universe, it is profane to act in such a way to slay the righteous with the wicked.”
And God does not act in this manner? Is it not written, “And I will cut off from you the righteous and the wicked” (Ezekiel 21:8)?   That refers to one who is not thoroughly righteous.
But not to one who is thoroughly righteous? Is it not written, “And begin [the slaughter] with my sanctuary” (Ezekiel 9:6) and R. Joseph taught, do not read “my sanctuary” but my sanctified ones, namely the men who fulfilled the Torah from Aleph to Tav? There, too, since it was in their power to protest against [the wickedness of the others] and they did not protest, they are not regarded as thoroughly righteous.
Papa noted the following contradiction: It is written, “God is angry every day” (Psalms 7:12), while it is also written, “Who could stand before His anger” (Nahum 1:6)? There is no contradiction; the latter refers to an individual, the former to the community.
Our Rabbis taught: God is angry every day, but how long does His anger last? A moment. And how long is a moment? One fifty three thousand eight hundred forty eighth of an hour is a moment. And no creature could ever precisely fix this moment, except Bilaam the wicked, of whom it is written,

Daf 4b

“who knew the knowledge of the Most High” (Numbers 24:16). Is it possible that he did not know the mind of his animal, but he did know the mind of the Most High?
What is meant by the words “he did not know the mind of his animal”? At the time when he was seen riding on his donkey, they said to him, “Why do you not ride on a horse?” And he replied, “I consigned mine to the meadow.” Whereupon the donkey said, “Am I not your donkey.” He said back, “You are just for carrying loads.”
She said to him, “Upon whom you rode.” He said back, “Only occasionally.” But she continued, “Ever since I was yours until this very day”? What is more [she added], I have given you rides by day and sexual company at night.” It is written here, “Have I endangered you (hiskanti), and it is written there “and she was for him a companion” (I Kings 1:2).
What, then, is the meaning of “He knew the knowledge of the Most High”?  He knew the exact hour when the Holy One, blessed be He, is angry. This, indeed, is what the prophet was saying to them when he says, “My people, Remember what Balak king of Moab plotted against you, and how Balaam son of Beor responded to him. [Recall your passage] From Shittim to Gilgal— And you will recognize the gracious acts of the Lord.” Elazar said: The Holy Blessed One said to Israel:
My people, see how many righteous acts I did for you, in that I did not get angry with you all those days, for had I become angry, none would have remained or been spared of Israel’s enemies. This is what Bilaam said to Balak, “How can I curse, seeing that God has not cursed, and how can I be wrathful, seeing that the Lord has not been wrathful” (Numbers 23:8)?
And how long is His wrath? A moment [rega]. And how long is a rega? Amemar said (others say, Ravina): As long as it takes to utter this word. And how do we know that His wrath lasts a moment? As it is written, “For He is angry but a moment, and when He is pleased there is life” (Psalms 30:6). Or if you want you can say, from this verse: “Hide yourself for a short moment, until the wrath is past” (Isaiah 26:20).
When is He wrathful? Abaye said: During the first three hours, when the comb of the cock is white. But is it not white at all times? At other times it has red streaks, at that time there are no red streaks in it. Joshua b. Levi used to be troubled by a min about scriptural verses. One day he took a cock and, placed it between the legs of the bed and watched it, thinking,
“When that hour will arrive, I shall curse him.” When that hour did arrive, he was napping. He said:
You can learn from this that it is not proper to act thus. “His tender mercies are over all His works” is what is written, and it also says. “Neither is it good for the righteous to punish” (Proverbs 17:26).
It was taught in the name of R. Meir: At the hour when the kings place their crowns on their heads and bow down to the sun, immediately the Holy Blessed One becomes wrathful. Joseph said: One should not recite the Musaf prayer during the first three hours of the day on the first day of the New Year in private, lest, since judgment is then proceeding, his deeds may be scrutinized and the prayer rejected.
But if that be so, the same should apply to the congregation! The [collective] merits of a congregation are greater. If so, the same should be true with regard to the morning prayer! Since there is a congregation praying at the same time, the prayer will not be rejected.
But have you not said, “During the first three hours the Holy Blessed One is occupying Himself with the Torah, during the second three He sits in judgment over the whole world”?   Reverse [the order];
Or if you want you may say it need not be reversed: The Torah, about which it is written “truth,” as it is written, “Buy the truth and sell it not,” (Proverbs 23:23) the Holy Blessed One will not go beyond the letter of the law; judgment, about which it is not written “truth,” the Holy Blessed One may go beyond the letter of the law [towards mercy].
 [To revert to] the above text: R. Joshua b. Levi said: What is the meaning of the verse, “Which I command you this day to do” (Deuteronomy 7:11)? Today is the time to do them, and tomorrow is not the time to do them. Today is the day to do them, but today is not the day to receive their reward.
Joshua b. Levi also said: All the mitzvot which Israel does in this world will testify on their behalf in the world to come, as it is said, “Let them bring their witnesses that they may be justified; let them hear and say it is truth” (Isaiah 43:9). “Let them bring their witnesses that they may be justified,” this refers to Israel; “let them hear and say it is truth” this refers to the non-Jews.
Joshua b. Levi also said: All the mitzvot which Israel does in this world will come and strike the non-Jews on their heads in the world to come, as it is said, “You shall observe and do them, for this is your wisdom and understanding in the eyes of the peoples” (Deuteronomy 4:6) It does not say in the presence of the peoples, but, in the eyes of the peoples, to teach you that they will come and strike the idolaters in their heads in the world to come.
Joshua b. Levi further said: The Israelites made the [golden] calf only in order to place a good argument in the mouth of those who do teshuvah (repentance), as it is said, “Would that it were possible that this heart would stay with them and they would revere me forever” (Deuteronomy 5:25).
This last statement accords with what R. Yohanan said in the name of R. Shimon b. Yohai: David was not the kind of man to do that act, nor was Israel the kind of people to do that act. David was not the kind of man to do that act, as it is written, “My heart is pierced within me” (Psalms 109:22); nor were the Israelites the kind of people to commit that act, for it is said,
“Would that it were possible that this heart would stay with them and they would revere me forever.” Why, then, did they do these things?

Daf 5a

To teach you that if an individual has sinned, they say to him,  “Look to the individual [David],” and if a community has sinned they say to them,  “Look to the community [of Israel].”
And both these are necessary; for if it had taught only [the case of] the individual, [it might have been thought that teshuvah was possible] because his sin is not well known, but in the case of a community whose sins are well known it might not be so;  if, on the other hand, the case of a community only were mentioned, it might have been thought [that teshuvah is possible] because mercy for them is great, but with an individual, whose merits are not so strong, it is not so; hence both are necessary.
This accords with the following saying of R. Shmuel b. Nahmani, who said in the name of R. Yonathan: What is it that is written,  “The saying of David the son of Jesse, and the saying of the man raised on high” (II Samuel 23:1). The saying of David the son of Jesse, the man who elevated the yoke of repentance.
Shmuel b. Nahmani said in the name of R. Yonatan also said: Every one that one performs a mitzvah in this world, it precedes him and walks in front of him in the world to come, as it is said: “And your righteousness shall go before you; the presence of the Lord shall be your rearguard” (Isaiah 58:8). Similarly, every transgression that one commits clasps him and leads him towards the Day of Judgment, as it is said, “They clasp him in the course of their way” (Job 6:18).
Elazar said: It is tied to him like a dog, as it is said, “He did not listen to her, to lie with her, to be with her” (Genesis 39:10); to lie with her in this world, to be with her in the world to come.
Resh Lakish said: Come let us be grateful to our ancestors, for had they not sinned, we would not have come into the world, as it is said: “I said you are gods and all of you are sons of the Most High; now that you have spoiled your deeds, you shall indeed die like mortals,” etc (Psalms 82:6).
That is to say that if the Israelites had not committed that sin they would not have given birth to children? Was it not written, “And you, be fruitful and multiply” (Genesis 9:7)?  That refers to those who lived up to the times of Sinai. But with regard to those at Sinai, too, it is written, “Go say to them, Return to your tents.” This refers to regular sexual intercourse.
And is it not also said, “That it might be well with them and with their children” (Deuteronomy 5:25)? It refers to the children of those who stood at Sinai.
But did not Resh Lakish say, what is it that is written, “This is the book of the generations of Adam?” (Genesis 5:1). Did Adam have a book? Rather, this teaches that the Holy Blessed One showed Adam every generation with its darshanim, every generation with its sages, every generation with its leaders; when he reached the generation of R. Akiva  he rejoiced at his Torah, but was grieved about his death, and said, “How precious are Your thoughts to me, O God!” (Psalms 139:17).
And R. Yose said: The Son of David will only come when all the souls in the guf have been exhausted, as it is said, “For I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth, for the spirit should fall before me and the souls which I have made” (Isaiah 57:16).
Do not say “we would not have come into the world,” rather  it would have been as if we had not come into the world. Does that mean then that if they had not sinned, they would never have died? But were not chapters written about levirate marriage and inheritance?
These were written conditionally. But are there verses in the Torah that are written on condition?  Certainly; for R. Shimon b. Lakish said:  What is it that is written, “And it was evening and it was morning the sixth day” (Genesis 1:31)? This teaches that the Holy Blessed One made a condition with all creation, saying, If Israel will accept the Torah all will be well, but if not, I will turn the world void and without form.
They raised on objection: “May they always be of such a mind [… that it might go well with them and their children]” (Deuteronomy 5:26). This obviously does not refer to the abolition of the angel of death, since the decree [of death] had already been made?  It means therefore that Israel accepted the Torah only so that no nation or tongue would prevail against them, as it is said,
“That it might be well with them and their children after them.”
He [Resh Lakish] said like the following Tanna, for it is taught: R. Yose said, The Israelites accepted the Torah only so that the Angel of Death would not rule over them, as it is said: “I said you are gods [i.e, immortals] and all of you children of the Most High, now that you have spoilt your deeds, you shall indeed die like mortals” (Psalms 82:6).
But against R. Yose, too, [it may be argued] that the verse “that it may be well with them and their children forever,” there is prosperity, but no death. R. Yose could reply:  Since there is no death, there is nothing greater than this.
Then how does the first Tanna explain the phrase: “You shall indeed die”? What may be meant here by dying? Poverty, for a Master has said: Four are regarded as dead and they are: the poor, the blind, the leprous, and the childless.
The poor, as it is written, “For all the men are dead” (Exodus 4:19). Who are these men? Datan and Aviram. But were they then dead?  Rather they had lost their property.
The blind, as it is said: “He has made me to dwell in darkness, as those that have been long dead” (Job 3:6). The leprous, as it is said, “Let her not, I pray, be as one who is dead” (Numbers 12:12). The childless, as it is said, “Give me children, or else I die” (Genesis 30:1).
Our Rabbis taught: “If you walk in my statutes” (Leviticus 26:3) the word if is nothing but an appeal. So too it says, “Would that my people would listen to Me…that Israel would walk in my ways . . . I should soon subdue their enemies” (Psalms 81:14); And it says, “Had you listened to my commandments: Then your peace would be like a river… your seed like the sand, their issue [as many as its grains]” (Isaiah 48:18).
Our Rabbis taught: “May they always be of such a mind” (Deuteronomy 5:26). Moses said to Israel: You are an ungrateful people, the descendants of ungrateful people. When the Holy Blessed One said to you:  “May they always be of such a mind,” you should have said: “You give.”
Instead they were ungrateful] as it is written, “We have come to loathe

Daf 5b

this miserable food” (Numbers 21:5). The descendants of ungrateful people, as it is written, “The woman whom You gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat” (Genesis 3:12). 
Yet Moses indicated this to the Israelites only after forty years had passed, as it is said, “And I have led you forty years in the wilderness . . .  but the Lord has not given you a heart to know, and eyes to see and ears to hear, unto this day.” Rabbah said:  Learn from this that it takes forty years to learn the mind of one’s master.
Yohanan said in the name of R. Bana’ah: What is that is written, “Blessed are you that plant beside all waters, that send forth the feet of the ox and the donkey” (Isaiah 32:20)? Blessed is Israel; for when they occupy themselves with Torah and acts of kindness their inclination is mastered by them, and they are not mastered by their inclination, as it is said, “Blessed are you that plant beside all waters.” By “planting” is meant doing deeds of righteousness, as it is said, “Plant to yourselves in righteousness, reap according to mercy” (Hosea 10:12). And by “water” is meant Torah, as it is said, “Oh you who are thirsty come to the water” (Isaiah 55:1).
“That send forth the feet of the ox and the donkey”: The Tanna of the House of Eliyahu taught: When it comes to the study of Torah one should always make himself like an ox with a yoke and a donkey with a load.
On the three days preceding their festivals it is forbidden to do any business transaction with them. Is such a long period necessary?
Have we not learned: At four periods of the year one who sells cattle to another for slaughter must let him know if  its mother had been sold or if its young had been sold to be slain [the same day].
And these are the dates: the eve of the last day of Sukkot, the eve of the first day of Pesach, the eve of Shavuot, and the Eve of Rosh Hashanah and, according to R. Yose the Galilean, also on the eve of Yom Kippur in the Galilee.
In those cases where the animals were bought for eating, one day is enough, but here where they were bought for sacrifice, three days are needed. But are three days enough in the case of sacrifices? Have we not learned: The laws relating to Pesah [should be learned] for thirty days before Pesah; R. Shimon b. Gamaliel says two weeks.
We, for whom there are many blemishes that disqualify [animals for sacrifice], even in the lids of the eye, require thirty days. They, who have laws regarding animals missing limbs, require only three days.
As R. Elazar said: How do we know that [an animal] missing a limb is forbidden to Noahides [for use as a sacrifice]? As it is written, “Of every living thing of all flesh two of every kind” (Genesis 6:19). The Torah says.  ‘Bring such cattle whose principal limbs are living.
But is not this phrase needed to exclude such animals that are trefa? The exclusion of the trefa is from the phrase, “to keep seed alive” (Genesis 7:3). This answer works well for the one who said that an animal which is trefa cannot bear any offspring;


Daf 6a

but according to the one who said that a trefa animal can bear offspring what can you say? The verse says, “with you” implying similar to you. But how can we tell that Noah himself was not a trefa?  Because it is written about him “perfect” (Genesis 6:9).
Perhaps this means that he was perfect in his manners? It is also written about him that he was “righteous.”
Perhaps he was “perfect” in his manners and “righteous” in his deeds? You should not think that Noah was a trefa; for if you thought that he was a trefa, would God have said, “sacrifice one like yourself” but do not sacrifice one whole?
Now that we deduce this from the phrase “with you”, why do we need the phrase “to keep seed alive?” If it had just said, “with you” I might have thought that the purpose was just to keep him company, even if they be old or neutered, therefore the Torah wrote “seed.”
The question was asked: Three days, them and the festivals, or perhaps them apart from the festivals?...
Come and hear: R. Ishmael says: On the three preceding and three following [days] it is forbidden. Now if you should think “them and the festivals” does R. Ishmael reckon the day of the festival as one of the days preceding and one of the days following! 
Since he taught “three preceding” he also taught “three following.”
Come and hear that R. Tahlifa b. Avdimi said in the name of Shmuel: According to R. Ishmael, it is always forbidden [to transact business with idolaters because of] Sunday!   Now, if you thought that the festival is to be included, there would still remain Wednesday and Thursday which are permitted.
According to R. Ishmael, there is no question that the period does not include the festivals.
My question is only about the opinion of the rabbis.  Ravina said: Come and hear: These are the festivals of idolaters, Kalenda, Saturnalia and Kratesis. And R. Hanin b. Rava explained that Kalenda [lasts for] eight days after the [winter] equinox, and Saturnalia [is kept on the] eight days before the equinox; and your mnemonic [to remember which comes first and which comes last is], “You have hedged me behind and behind” (Psalms 139:5).
Now if you thought them and their festivals, then there are [at times] ten days. The Tanna may regard the whole Kalenda as one day.
Ashi said: Come and hear: [Our Mishnah says] “on the three days preceding the festivities of the idolaters.” Now if you thought it meant them and the festival itself, let it teach, “the Festivals of the idolaters are three days;”
And if you should say that that which it taught “preceding the festival” are meant to exclude after the festival, let it teach, “The festivals of the idolaters, for three days preceding them…” Rather learn from this, these days, not including the festival. Learn from this.
The question was asked: Is it [forbidden] because of it causes profit, or perhaps because “You shall not place a stumbling block before the blind” (Leviticus 19:14)?    
What is the practical difference [between the two explanations]?... If the idolater has an animal of his own. If you say [the prohibition is] because of profit, here, too, he causes him to profit. If however you say it is because of placing a stumbling block before the blind, here, then, he has [a sacrifice] of his own. 
And if he has one of his own then the Jew does not transgress placing a stumbling block before the blind? Was it not taught that R. Nathan said:

Daf 6b

How do we know that one should not hold out a cup of wine to a Nazirite or a limb from a living animal to a Noachide? Scripture says, “You shall not put a stumbling block before the blind.” Now here, if they did not give it to him he could take it himself, yet the one [who hands it] is guilty of placing a stumbling block before the blind.
Here we are dealing with a case of two people on opposite sides of a river.... This is also implied by the fact that it teaches “one should not hold out” and it does not teach, “one should not give.” Learn from this.
The question was asked: What if one did transact business? R. Yohanan says: [The proceeds of] the transaction are forbidden. Shimon b. Lakish says [the proceeds of] the transaction are permitted. Yohanan raised the following difficulty on Resh Lakish: As to the festivals of idolaters, if one transacts any business [the proceeds] are forbidden. Does this not refer to [the period] preceding the festivals? No, [it refers to] the festival exclusively.
There are those who say that R. Shimon b. Lakish raised a difficulty against R. Yohanan: As to the festivals of idolaters, if one transacts any business [the proceeds] are forbidden. During their festivals it is [forbidden], but before their festival it is not?   No, the tanna refers to both as “their festivals.”
It was taught in a baraita in accordance with Resh Lakish:... When they said it was prohibited to engage in business with them [before their festivals] this applies only to unperishable items but not to perishable items; and even in the case of unperishable items, if the transaction is made, [the proceeds] are permitted. Zevid taught a baraita from the house of R. Oshaia: An item that is perishable may be sold to them, but may not be bought from them.
A certain min sent a Caesarean denar to R. Judah Nesi’a on his festival day. Resh Lakish was sitting before him. He said: “What shall I do? If I accept it, he will go and praise [the idols for it]; if I do not accept it, he will have enmity with me.” ‘ Resh Lakish answered: “Take it and throw it into a well in his presence.” He said back: “But this will cause even greater enmity.” “I meant you should do it by sleight of hand.”
To lend articles to them or borrow any from them. It makes sense to prohibit lending to them, for this benefits them; but borrowing from them deprives them. Abaye said: We forbid borrowing from them lest they come to lend to them. But Rava said: It is all on account of their going to offer thanks.
To lend money to them or borrow money from them. It makes sense to prohibit lending to them, for this benefits them; but borrowing from them deprives them. Abaye said: We forbid the borrowing from them lest they come to lend to them. But Rava said: It is all on account of their going to offer thanks.
To repay a debt, or receive repayment from them. It makes sense to prohibit repaying a debt to them, for this benefits them; but to reclaim a debt from them deprives them. Abaye said: We forbid reclaiming from them lest they come to repay them. But Rava said: It is all on account of their going to offer thanks.
And all [the instances in the Mishnah] are necessary; for if it mentioned only transacting business with them, I might have said [it is forbidden] because it profits them and they will go and thank [their god], but to borrow from them, which deprives them, would be permitted.
If [on the other hand] it had taught borrowing articles from them, I might have thought it is because the importance that he attaches to it, and he would go and offer thanksgiving for it, but borrowing money from him causes anxiety, as he might say, “My money may not be returned again.”
And if it had taught the case of lending money [I might have thought this is prohibited] because he might say, “I can enforce payment,” and now he would go and offer thanksgiving, but to recover from them money which will never return to the lender we might regard this as painful to him, and he would not go offer thanks for it. Hence all the instances are necessary.
Judah says: we should receive repayment from them… Does R. Judah not hold that though it is depressing at the time they are glad of it subsequently?
Is it not taught: R. Judah says: A woman must not smear lime on her face on the intermediate days of the festival because it disfigures her. R, Judah, however, admits that if the lime can still be scraped off during the festival, it may be applied on the festival for though she is troubled by it for the while, it will eventually please her.
Nahman b. Yitzchak said: Leave aside the laws relating to [work permitted on] the intermediate days of the festival: they all cause trouble now, and are pleasant later. Ravina said: To an idolater, the matter of repayment is always troubling.
Our mishnah does not accord with [the opinion of] R. Joshua b. Korha. For it is taught: R. Joshua b. Korha says: One may not recover a loan made through a document, but one may collect a loan made by word of mouth, since this is as if he is rescuing it from their hands.
Joseph was sitting behind R. Abba while R. Abba was sitting in front of R. Huna who, as he was sitting stated: [In one instance] the halakhah follows R. Joshua b. Korha and [in another] the halakhah follows R. Judah.
The halakhah follows R. Joshua b. Korha in the one about which we have just spoken. According to R. Judah: This refers to what we learned:  If one gives wool to a dyer to be dyed red and he dyed it black, or to be dyed black and he dyed it red:

Daf 7a

Meir says: The dyer should refund to the owner the value of his wool. Judah says: If the increase in value [through the dyeing] exceeds the costs, the owner may pay the costs, or if the costs exceed the increased value, he may pay the increase in value.
Joseph turned his face away from R. Abba [and said]: It made sense [to state] that the halakhah is according to R. Joshua b. Karha for we might have said that where an individual disagrees with a majority, the halakhah is according to the majority, so he teaches us that here the halakhah is according to the individual.
But why state that the law is according to R. Judah? It is obvious that where differing opinions [are quoted] and then [one of these] is quoted anonymously, the law is according to the anonymous opinion. The differing opinions are quoted in Bava Kamma, and the anonymous opinion is in Bava Metzia, where it is taught:
The party which changes [an agreement] has the lesser right, and whoever retracts has the lesser right.
And as to R. Huna?  [His statement is necessary] because there may be no order to the Mishnah, so that it could be said that the anonymous statement was quoted earlier and the differing opinions later. But if that were so, every case of differing opinions followed by an anonymous one, we could say there is no order to the Mishnah!
R. Huna [could reply]: When we do not say that there is no order to the Mishnah, that is within one tractate, but in two tractates we do say there is no order. And as to R. Joseph? He holds that all of Nezikin is one tractate;
Or, if you want, you can say, because this rule was taught among legal and fixed decisions, thus: “The party which changes [an agreement] has the lesser right, and whoever retracts has the lesser right.”
Our rabbis taught: One should not say to another [on Shabbat]: “Do you want to work with me this evening?” R. Joshua b. Korha says: One may say to another, “Do you want to work with me this evening.” Rabbah b. Bar Hana said in the name of R. Yohanan: The halakhah is according to R. Joshua b. Korha.
Our rabbis taught: If one consulted a sage who declared [a person or article] impure, he should not consult another sage who might declare it as pure.
If [he consulted] one sage and he declared it forbidden, one should not consult another sage who might declare it permitted. If there were two sages, and one declares it impure and the other pure, one forbids and the other permits, then if one of them is superior to the other in learning and in number of years, follow his opinion. And if not, follow the one holding the stricter view. Joshua b. Korah says: In laws of the Torah follow the stricter view, in those of the scribes follow the more lenient view. Joseph said: The halakhah is according to R. Joshua b. Korha.
Our rabbis taught: And all of these, if they reverted [to their usual practices] they are never accepted, the words of R. Meir. Judah says: If they reverted in secret matters, they are not accepted, but if in things done in public they are accepted. There are those who say if they observed even secret things, they are accepted, but if only things done

Daf 7b

in public they are not accepted. Shimon and R. Joshua b. Korha say:  Whether in the one case or in the other they should be accepted, for it is said,  “Return, O backsliding children” (Jeremiah 3:14). Yitzchak, a man of Kefar Acco, in the name of R. Yohanan: The halakhah is according to the latter pair.
Rabbi Ishmael says on the three preceding days and the three following days it is forbidden;  But the Sages say: before their festivities it is forbidden, but after their festivities it is permitted.
GEMARA. R. Tahlifa b. Abdimi said in the name of Shmuel: According to R. Ishmael it is always be forbidden [because of] Sunday. 
But the sages say, before their festivities it is forbidden, but after their festivities it is permitted. Is not [the opinion of] the sages identical with that of the first tanna? Them without their festivals themselves is the point on which they differ. The first tanna holds that the period is exclusive of the festival, but the latter rabbis hold that it includes the festivals.
Or if you want you can say  that they differ on the question of a case where he did engage in business, the first tanna holds that [the proceeds of] such transactions are permissible, while our later rabbis hold that [the proceeds of] these transactions are forbidden.
If you want you can say that they disagree over Shmuel. For Shmuel said: In the Diaspora the prohibition is limited to their festival day only. The first tanna holds by Shmuel’s ruling, while our later rabbis do not hold like Shmuel.
If you want you may say that they disagree over the ruling of Nahum the Mede. For it is taught: Nahum the Mede says: The prohibition applies to only one day before their festivals. The first tanna does not accept the ruling of Nahum the Mede, and our latter rabbis do agree with Nahum the Mede’s ruling.
To revert to [the above text]: Nahum the Mede says: The prohibition applies to only one day before their festivals. They said to him: Let this matter be suppressed and left unsaid. But are there not our latter rabbis who hold the same opinion?   Our latter Rabbis may be none other than  Nahum the Mede.
Another [baraita] taught: Nahum the Mede says: One may sell [to idolaters] an old male horse in war time. They said to him: Let this matter be suppressed and left unsaid.
But is there not Ben Batera who holds the same opinion; for we learned: Ben Batera permits [the sale of] a horse? Ben Batera does not distinguish between the sale of horses and mares, whereas Nahum the Mede does make that distinction, and thus holds like the rabbis;  and according to the rabbis: This matter ought to be suppressed and left unsaid.
It is [further] taught: Nahum the Mede says: The dill plant is subject to tithe whether [in its state of] seeds, or vegetables, or pods. They said to him: Let this matter be suppressed and left unsaid. But is there not R. Eliezer who holds the same opinion; for we learned: R. Eliezer said: The dill plant is subject to tithe whether in its state of seeds, or vegetable, or pods?  That refers to the garden variety.
Aha b. Minyomi said to Abaye: A great man has come from our place, but whatever he says he is told that it ought to be suppressed and left unsaid! He replied: There is one instance in which we do follow his ruling, as it is taught: Nahum the Mede says: One should ask for one’s own needs in the blessing [concluding with] “Who hears prayer.”
He said: This is an exception, for it is hanging on strong ropes.
As it is taught: R. Eliezer says: One should first ask for one’s own needs and then pray, as it is said; “A prayer for the afflicted when he is faint, and [then] pours forth his meditation before the Lord” (Psalms 102:1) By “meditation,” only prayer is meant, as it is said, “And Isaac went out to meditate in the field” (Genesis 24:63).
Joshua says: One should first pray and then ask for one’s own needs, as it is said, “I pour out my meditation before Him [then] I declare my [own] affliction before Him” (Psalms 142:3).
Now, as to R. Eliezer, is it not written, “I pour out my meditation” etc.! This is what it means, “I pour out my meditation before Him after I have already declared my [own] affliction.” And as to R. Joshua, is it not written, “A prayer for the afflicted when he is faint” etc.! This is what it means: “When should there be prayer for the afflicted? After he had poured forth his meditation before the Lord.”
Since the verses do not prove one master’s statement more than the other, what are they really arguing about?
It as was expounded by R. Simlai; for R. Simlai gave the following exposition: One should always recount the praises of God and then pray. From where do we learn this? From Moshe Rabbenu, as it is written: “O Lord God, You have begun to show Your servant Your greatness,” and afterwards it is written “Let me go over and see the good land” (Deuteronomy 3:24). 

Daf 8a

R. Joshua holds that we learn from [the example of] Moses, while R. Eliezer says we should not learn from the example of Moses; Moses is different for he was a great man. The sages say [the decision is] neither according to the one nor according to the other. Rather one should pray for his personal needs at the blessing [concluding with], “Who hears prayer.”
Judah said in the name of Shmuel: The halakhah is that one should pray for his personal needs at the blessing [concluding with], “Who hears prayer.” Judah the son of Shmuel b. Shilat said in the name of Rav: Even though it was said one should pray for his personal needs at the blessing [concluding with], “Who hears prayer,” nevertheless, if he is wants to say at the of any of the blessing an addition similar to that blessing, he may do so.
Hiyya b. Ashi said in the name of Rav: Even though they said one should pray for his personal needs at the blessing [concluding with], “Who hears prayer,” if [for example] one has a sick person at home, he may say [his supplication] at the blessing for the Sick; or if he is in need of sustenance, he may say [his supplication] at the blessing for [the prosperity] of years.
Joshua b. Levi said: Even though they said one should pray for his personal needs at the blessing [concluding with], “Who hears prayer,” if one wishes to say them after his prayer, even to the extent of the Yom Kippur Service, he may do so.
These are the festivities of the idolaters: <i>Kalenda</i>, <i>Saturnalia</i>, <i>Kratesis</i>, the anniversary of accession to the throne and birthdays and anniversaries of deaths, according to Rabbi Meir. But the sages say: a death at which burning [of articles of the dead] takes place is attended by idolatry, but where there is not such burning there is no idolatry. But the day of shaving ones beard and lock of hair, or the day of landing after a sea voyage, or the day of release from prison, or if an idolater holds a banquet for his son — the prohibition only applies to that day and that particular person.
GEMARA. R. Hanan b. Rava said: Kalenda is kept on the eight days following the [winter] equinox. Saturnalia on the eight days preceding the equinox. As a mnemonic take the verse, “You hedge me behind and before” (Psalms 139:5).
Our rabbis taught: When the first Adam saw the day getting gradually shorter, he said, “Woe is me, perhaps because I have sinned, the world around me is being darkened and returning to its state of chaos and confusion. This then is the death to which I have been sentenced from Heaven!” So he began keeping an eight days fast.
When he saw the winter equinox and noted the day getting increasingly longer, he said, “This is the way of the world,” and he went out and made an eight day festival. In the following year he appointed both as festivals. He established them for the sake of Heaven, but they established them for the sake of idolatry.
This makes sense according to the one who holds that the world was created in Tishrei, for he had seen short days, but he had not yet seen longer days; but according to the one who holds that the world was created in Nisan, Adam must have seen the long days as well as the short ones!  Still, he had not yet seen the very short days.
Our rabbis taught: On the day that the world was created, the first Adam, when he saw the setting of the sun he said, “Woe is me, it is because I have sinned that the world around me is becoming dark; the universe will now become again void and without form. This then is the death to which I have been sentenced from Heaven!” So he sat up all night fasting and weeping and Eve was weeping opposite him. When however dawn broke, he said, “This is the way of the world!” He then arose and offered up a bull whose horns were developed before its hooves, as it is said, “And it [my thanksgiving] shall please the Lord better than a bull that is horned and has hooves” (Psalms 69:32).
Rav Judah said in the name of Shmuel: The bull which Adam offered had only one horn in its forehead, as the verse says, “And it shall please the Lord better than a bull that is horned and hooves.” But does not “horned’ imply two horns? R. Nahman b. Yitzchak said: “Horned” is here spelt [defectively].
Matana asked: When Rome makes a Kalends [festival] and all of the towns in its vicinity are subject to it, is it forbidden or permitted [to transact business etc.] in those towns? Joshua b. Levi said: On the Kalends the prohibition applies to all. Yohanan said: The prohibition applies only to those who celebrate it.
It is taught in a baraita in accordance with R. Yohanan: Even though they said that Rome made Kalends and all of the towns in its vicinity are subjected to it, the actual prohibition applies only to those who celebrate it.  
As to Saturnalia, Kratesis, and the anniversary of accession to the throne, or the day on which a king is proclaimed, the prohibition applies to the period preceding them, but thereafter it is permitted. If an idolater gives a banquet for his son the prohibition is limited to that day and that man.
Ashi said: We have also taught the same thing: for it teaches, the day of shaving one’s beard or lock of hair, or the day of landing after a sea voyage, or the day of release from prison — the prohibition only applies to that day and that particular person.
Now, it makes sense to say “that day” to exclude the preceding and following [days], but what “that man” meant to exclude,  unless it excludes those subjected to him? Learn from this.
It was taught: R. Ishmael says: Israelites who reside outside of Israel are idol worshippers in purity. How so? An idolater gives a banquet for his son and invites all the Jews in his town. Even though they eat of their own and drink of their own and their own attendant waits on them, Scripture treats them as if they had eaten of the sacrifices to dead idols, as it is said, “And he will call you and you will eat of his sacrifice” (Exodus 34:15).
But why not say that this is not true till he actually eats? Rava said: If that were so, the verse would have only said, “And you shall eat of his sacrifice”; what does it mean, “And he will call you”? From the time he calls you. Hence

Daf 8b

during the entire thirty days [following a marriage celebration] whether he said to him that he was inviting him because of the banquet or not it is forbidden. From that time onward, if he invited him because of the marriage, it is forbidden, but if not, it is permitted.
And if he said that the invitation is because of the marriage, until when is it prohibited? Papa said: For twelve months. And from the outset when is it prohibited? Papa said in the name of Rava: From the time when the barley is placed in the tub.
And after twelve months is it permitted? But did not R. Yitzchak the son of R. Mesharsheya, come to the house of a certain idolater more than a year after a marriage, and hear that they were thanking their gods and he refused to eat! Yitzchak the son of R. Mesharsheya is different, for he is an important man.
Kratesis etc. What is Kratesis? Rav Judah said in the name of Shmuel: The day on which Rome seized the kingship.  But was it not taught Kratesis and the day on which Rome seized the kingship? Joseph said: Rome seized the kingship twice; once in the days of Cleopatra, the queen [of Egypt] and in the days of the Greeks.
For when R. Dimi came he said: The Romans fought 32 battles against the Greeks and could not prevail against them until the Romans made an alliance with the Israelites. And these were the conditions made with them:  If the kings are [chosen] from among us, the princes should be chosen from yours, and if the kings are chosen from among you, the princes shall come from us.
Then the Romans sent to the Greeks as follows: Up until now we have been engaging in battle, now let us argue out in logic: A pearl and a precious stone which shall form a setting for which? They sent the reply: The pearl for the precious stone.
And a precious stone and an onyx, which shall form a setting to the other? ‘ The precious stone to the onyx. And an onyx and a Sefer Torah which shall serve as the setting for the other? The onyx for the Sefer Torah.
The Romans then sent word: In that case, the Sefer Torah is in our possession, for Israel is with us. Thereupon the Greeks gave in. For twenty-six years the Romans kept faith with Israel, thereafter they subdued them.
What did they expound at the outset and what did they expound at the end? At the outset they expounded: “Let us start on our journey and I will proceed at your pace” (Genesis 33:12). And at the end they expounded: “Let my lord now pass before his servant” (Genesis 33. 14).
That Rome kept faith with Israel for twenty six years, from where do we know this? [From the following:]  For R. Kahana said: When R. Yishmael b. Yose was ill they sent word to him: Rabbi, tell us two or three things which you told us in your father’s name.
He said to them: One hundred and eighty years before the Temple was destroyed evil Rome cast her rule over Israel; eighty years before the destruction of the Temple they (the rabbis) decreed impurity on the lands of the nations and on glass vessels. Forty years before the Temple was destroyed the Sanhedrin was exiled from [the Temple] and dwelled in Hanut.
What is the legal significance of this? Yitzchak b. Avdimi said: It indicates that [from that time onward] they did not adjudicate the laws of fines. “The laws of fines”! Do you really think so? Has not Rav Judah said in the name of Rav: That man R. Judah b. Baba should be remembered for good, for were it not for him the laws of fines would have been forgotten in Israel? “Forgotten”! Let them study them?
Rather, the laws of fines would have been abolished; for the wicked Kingdom of Rome decreed that he who ordains a rabbi shall be put to death, and he who is ordained shall be put to death, the town in which an ordination takes place shall be destroyed and the border in which the ordination is held shall be laid waste.
What did R. Judah b. Baba do? He went and sat down between two mountains and between two large towns between two borders, namely, between Usha and Shefar’am and there he ordained five elders: R. Meir, R. Judah [b. Il’ai]. R. Yose, R. Shimon and R. Eleazar b. Shammua (R. Avia adds also R. Nehemiah).
Once their enemies saw them, he said to them, “Flee, my children!” They said to him, “Rabbi, what about you?” He replied, “I lie before them as a stone that is not turned.” They say that the Romans did not move from there until they drove three hundred iron spears into his body and made his corpse like a sieve.
Nahman b. Yitzchak said: Do not say “cases of fines” but rather that they did not adjudicate capital cases.
Why? Because when the Sanhedrin saw that murderers were so prevalent that they could not be properly judged, they said: Rather let us be exiled from place to place than pronounce them guilty [of capital offences] for it is written
“And you shall do according to the sentence that they tell you, from that place” (Deuteronomy 17:10). This indicates that the place matters.
One hundred and eighty years prior to the destruction (Rome conquered Israel). But was it not earlier? For R. Yose b. Rabbi taught:

Daf 9a

Persian rule lasted thirty-four years after the building of the Temple, Greece ruled one hundred eighty years during the existence of the Temple, the Hasmonean rule lasted one hundred three years during existence of the Temple, the House of Herod ruled one hundred three years. From this point and onward, one should go on counting the years from the Destruction of the Temple.
Hence we see that it was two hundred six years, yet you say one hundred eighty years! Rather, for twenty six years the Romans kept faith with Israel and did not enslave them, and therefore those years are not reckoned in the period during which Rome cast her dominion over Israel.
Papa said: If a Tanna is uncertain about the details [of what exact year it is] let him ask a notary what year it is according to his reckoning and add twenty to it and he will find his calculation. As a mnemonic sign take the verse, “Thus I have been twenty years in Your house” (Genesis 31:41).
If on the other hand a notary is uncertain, let him ask a Tanna what the year is according to his reckoning and deduct from it twenty years and he will find his calculation. As a mnemonic take, “The Scribe is reducing the Tanna is adding.”
The Tanna of the house of Eliyyahu taught:  The world is to exist six thousand years; the first two thousand years were chaos; the next two thousand years are the period of the Torah, and the following two thousand years are the period of the Messiah. Through our many sins a number of these have already passed [and the Messiah is not yet].
From when are the two thousand years of the Torah to be reckoned? If we say from the giving of the Torah at Sinai it is not so long, for if you reckon the years [from creation to the giving of the Torah] you will find that they comprise two thousand and a part of the third thousand; 
The period is therefore to be reckoned from the time [when Abraham and Sarah] “made souls in Haran” (Genesis 12:5) for we have learned that Abraham was at that time fifty-two years old. 
How much less than [2000 years is the calculation]? Four hundred and forty-eight years! When you reckon it you will find that from the time when they had “made souls in Haran” till the giving of the Torah there are four hundred and forty-eight years.
Papa said: If the Tanna does not know the exact number of years [of the period of the Messiah] that have passed let him ask a scribe what year he uses in his writings, and on adding forty-eight to it he will find his solution. And your mnemonic is, 


Daf 9b

“Forty-eight cities” (Numbers 35:7). If, on the other hand, the scribe is uncertain as to his number, let him ask the Tanna how many he counts and deduct therefrom forty-eight and he will find his solution. As a mnemonic, take the phrase, “The Scribe is sparing, the Tanna is redundant.”
Huna the son of R. Joshua said: If one does not know what the year is in the sabbatical cycle of seven years he is in, let him add one year [to the years since the Destruction of the Temple] and let him reckon the hundreds as Jubilee Cycles and convert the remainder into sabbatical Cycles [of seven years each]
and take two out of every hundred and add it to the years and then calculate the years of the cycle and he will know they year in the current sabbatical cycle. As a mnemonic [for adding two years for every century, think of the verse]. “For these two years has the famine been in the land” (Genesis 46:5).
Hanina said: From the year four hundred after the destruction and onwards, if one says unto you “Buy a field that is worth one thousand denarii for one denar,” do not buy it. In a baraita it was taught: From the year four thousand two hundred and thirty-one of the creation of the world onward, if one says to you, “Buy a a field that is worth a thousand denarii for one denar,” do not buy it. What difference is there between these two [given periods]?There is a difference of three years between them, for the baraita is three years longer.
There was a document which was dated six years ahead.

Daf 10a

six years ahead. The rabbis who were sitting before Rava thought that it should be pronounced a post-dated document. Let us delay it until it’s time arrives and not seize property based on it. Nahman said: This document must have been written by a scribe who was very particular and took into account the six years in which they (the Greeks) ruled in Elam which we do not reckon. The dating is correct, 
for we have learned: Rabbi Yose said, Six years the Greeks reigned in Elam and after that their dominion extended universally.
Aha b. Jacob asked the following difficulty: How do we know that we count according to the rule of the Greeks? Perhaps we count from the Exodus from Egypt, omitting the first thousand years and giving the years of the next thousand, and the document is really post-dated! Nahman said: In the Diaspora they count only according to the rule of the Greeks.
He [R. Aha b. Jacob] thought that  R. Nahman wanted to just turn him away. He went and studied it thoroughly and found that it is indeed taught [in a baraita]: In the Diaspora they count only according to the rule of the Greeks.
Ravina said: Our Mishnah also proves this, for we taught, “The first of Nisan is New Year for reckoning [the reign of] kings and for festivals,” and we said, “The reign of kings,” what is the practical significance of this law? R. Hisda replied: [It affects the dating] of documents. 
And the same mishnah taught, the first of Tishrei is New Year for [counting] years and sabbatical cycles and we said, “for years,” what is the practical significance of this law?” And R. Hisda [again] replied: [It affects the dating of] documents.  The dating documents contradicts the other dating of documents?
And we resolved this by saying: The one refers to Jewish kings, the other to non-Jewish kings. For non-Jewish kings we count from Tishrei, and for Jewish kings from Nisan.
Now, in the present time we count the years from Tishri; were we then to say that we count our from the Exodus from Egypt we would need to count from.  Rather learn from this that we count from the reign of the Greek kings. Learn from this.
The day of the “genosia” of their kings etc. What is “the day of the genosia of their kings”? Rav Judah said: It is the day on which the idolaters coronate their king. But has it not been taught [elsewhere] “The day of genosia and the day they coronate their king.”  This is not a difficulty; the one refers to the king’s own ascension, the other to that of his son.
But do [the Romans] ever appoint a king’s son as king? Did not R. Joseph teach: “Behold I made you small among the nations” (Obadiah 1:2)— in that they do not appoint a king’s son a king. “You are greatly despised,” for they do not possess a script or tongue? What then does “the day of genosia” mean? [The King’s] birthday.
But we learn [elsewhere] “The day of genosia and the birthday.” That, too, is no contradiction. the one refers to the king’s own birthday, the other to that of his son.
But we have also the wording: “The king’s Genosia and his son’s Genosia, his own birthday and his son’s birthday”! What then does “the day of genosia” mean? Then [as said previously] “Genosia means indeed the day they corrronated the kind.” But there is no difficulty, the one applies to his own accession, the other to that of his son;
and as to your question about their not appointing a king’s son as king, if the king requested it, they would appoint him, such as Severus son of Antoninus who did rule.
Antoninus once said to Rabbi: “I want my son Severus to reign in my place and that Tiberias should be declared a Colony.  Were I to ask one of these things, they will grant it, but both they will not grant.” [Rabbi] brought a man and placed him on the shoulders of another, and he gave the man on top a dove and said to the one on the bottom to set the dove free. The Emperor said, “Learn from this that this is what he is saying to me. You should ask them to appoint my son Severus to reign in my place, and tell Severus to make Tiberias a Colony.”
 [On another occasion] Antoninus mentioned to him that some prominent Romans were annoying him.  Rabbi took him into the garden. Every day picked a radish from the garden. [The Emperor to himself] this is what he is saying to me: Kill them one at a time, but do not attack all of them at once.

Daf 10b

But let him speak to him explicitly! He thought  prominent Romans might hear and persecute him. Why then did he not say it in a whisper! Because it is written: “For a bird of the air shall carry the voice” (Ecclesiastes 10:20).
He [Antoninus] had a daughter named Gira who committed a sin. So he sent Rabbi an herb, and Rabbi in return sent him coriander. The Emperor then sent some leeks and Rabbi sent lettuce in return.
Every day Antoninus sent Rabbi gold-dust in a leather bag, with wheat at the top, saying [to his servants]:  “Carry the wheat to Rabbi!” Rabbi sent back to him, “I do not need it, I have enough of my own.” He answered, “Leave it then to those who will come after you, so that they might give it to those who will come after me, for your descendants and those who will follow them will hand it over to them.”
Antoninus had a cave which led from his house to the house of Rabbi. Every time [he visited Rabbi] he brought two slaves. He killed one at the door of Rabbi’s house and the other [who had been left behind] was killed at the door of his own house. Antoninus said to Rabbi: “When I come let no one be found with you.”
One day he found R. Hanina b. Hama sitting there, so he said: “Did I not tell you that when I come let no one be found with you?” And Rabbi replied,  “This is not an [ordinary] human being.” Antoninus said,  “Let him tell that servant who is sleeping outside the door to rise and come in.”
Haninah b. Hama went out but found that the man had been killed. He said to himself, what should I do? If I go and say that the man is dead, one should not bring a bad report. If I leave him and walk away, that would be slighting the king. So he prayed for mercy for the man and he was restored to life. He then sent him in. Antoninus said, “I know that the least one among you can bring the dead to life, still no one should be here when I come.”
Every day [he came] he would attend on Rabbi. He would give him food and drink. When Rabbi wanted to get on his bed Antoninus crouched in front of the bed saying,  “Step on me to get into your bed.” Rabbi said, “It is not proper to treat a king so cheaply.” Antoninus responded: “Would that I would serve as a mattress for you in the world to come.
Once he asked him, “Will I enter the world to come?” He said back,  “Yes.” Antoninus replied, “But is it not written, ‘There will be no remnant to the house of Esau?’ (Obadiah 1:18).   “That applies only to those who do the deeds of Esau”
It was also taught in a baraita: “There will be no remnant to the house of Esau.” This might have been taken to apply to all,  therefore Scripture says, “To the house of Esau,” those who do the deeds of Esau.
Antonius said back, Is it not also written: “There [in the nether world] is Edom, her kings, and all her princes” (Ezekiel 32:29).   Rabbi explained, “Her kings,” but not all her kings; “All her princes,” but not all her officers.
This was also taught in a baraita:  “Her kings,” but not all her kings; “All her princes,” but not all her officers. “Her kings,” but not all her kings — excludes Antoninus the son of Severus; “All her princes,” but not all her officers— excludes Keti’ah bar Shalom.
What about this Keti’ah b. Shalom? There was once a Caesar who hated the Jews. One day he said to the prominent members of the government, “Someone who has a wart on his foot, should he cut it away and live [in comfort] or leave it on and suffer discomfort?” They replied: He should cut it away and live in comfort.”
Then Keti’ah b. Shalom spoke to them: First, you cannot do away with all of them, for it is written, “For I have spread you abroad as the four winds of the heaven” (Zechariah 2:10). Now, what does this verse mean? If it means that [Israel] was to be scattered to the four corners of the world, then instead of saying, “as the four winds,” the verse would have said, to the four winds? Rather just as the world cannot exist without winds, so the world cannot exist without Israel. And what is more, your kingdom will be called a “crippled kingdom.”
The king replied: “You have spoken very well; however, he who contradicts the king is to be cast into a circular furnace.” When they were taking him away, a Roman matron said to him: “Pity the ship that sails without paying the tax. ”he fell on the head of his foreskin and cut it off and said, “You have paid the tax. Pass through.” As he was being cast [into the furnace] he said, “All my possessions [are to go to] R. Akiva and his colleagues.” Akiva went out and interpreted, “And it shall be to Aaron and his sons”–one half is Aaron’s and one half his sons’.
A bat-kol then exclaimed: “Keti’ah b. Shalom is destined for [eternal] life in the world to come!” Rabbi wept, saying: “Some acquire eternity in a single hour, others acquire it after many years!”
Antoninus attended on Rabbi. Artaban attended on Rav. When Antoninus died, Rabbi exclaimed: The bond has been undone. When Artaban died, Rab exclaimed: 

Daf 11a

The bond has been undone.
Onkelos the son of Kalonymus converted. The Emperor sent a regiment of Roman [soldiers] after him, but he enticed them by [citing] verses and they converted to Judaism. The Emperor sent another Roman regiment after him. He said to them, “Do not say anything to him.”
As they were about to take him away with them, he said to them, “Let me tell you just an ordinary thing: A guard carries a light in front of the torch bearer, the torch bearer in front of the leader, the leader in front of the governor, the governor in front of the chief officer; but does the chief officer carry the light in front of the people [that follow]?” They replied, “No.” He said: “The Holy One, blessed be He, does carry the light before Israel, as it is written, “And the Lord went before them . . . in a pillar of fire to give them light” (Exodus 13:21). They converted.
Again he sent another regiment after him. He said,  “Do not say anything at all to him.”   When they took hold of him and started going, he saw the mezuzah which was fixed on the door-frame and he placed his hand on it and said to them, “Now what is this?” They said to him, “You tell us then.”
He said, “In the normal way of the world, the mortal king dwells inside, and his servants keep guard on him without. But [in the case of] the Holy One, blessed be He, it is His servants who dwell within while He keeps guard on them from without; as it is said:... ‘The Lord shall guard you going out and your coming in from this time forth and for evermore.’” They converted. He sent no more after him.
“And the Lord said to her: Two nations [goyim] are in you womb” (Genesis 25:23).  Rav Judah said in the name of Rav: Do not read goyim  [nations] but ge’im [lords].  This refers to Antoninus and Rabbi  from whose table neither lettuce, nor radish nor cucumber was ever absent either in summer or winter; and, as a master has said: Radish helps the food to dissolve, lettuce helps the food to be digested, cucumber makes the intestines expand.
But was it not taught in the house of R. Ishmael: Why are cucumbers are called “kishuin”? Because they are as hard to a person’s body as swords? There is no contradiction here: That was said of large ones, but this is said to small ones.
The birthday and anniversaries of king’s deaths [the words of R. Meir]. This implies that R. Meir holds that at every death, whether there is burning of articles or there is no burning, idol-worship takes place. Consequently, the burning of articles is not an [idolatrous] ritual practice. From which it can be inferred that the rabbis hold that burning [of articles at a funeral] is an [idolatrous] ritual practice.
But has it not been taught, The burning of articles at a king’s [funeral] is permitted and it is not “the way of the Amorites”? ow if it is an idolatrous practice how could such burning be allowed?... Is it not written, “And in their statutes you shall not walk” (Leviticus 18:3)?  
Rather, all agree that burning is not an idolatrous practice. Rather it is a sign of the importance [of the deceased]. And this is what they disagree about: R. Meir holds that at every death, whether burning of articles takes place or does not take place there is idol-worship; but the rabbis hold that a death at which burning takes place is regarded as important and they worship there, but one at which no burning takes place is unimportant and they do not worship there.
[To return to] the main text: “The burning of articles at a king’s [funeral] is permitted and it is not prohibited as ,the ways of the Amorites,’ as it is said, ‘You shall die in peace and as they burned for your fathers, the earlier kings that came before you, so shall they will burn for you’ (Jeremiah 34:5).” And just as it is permitted to burn at the [funerals] of kings so it is permitted to burn in the case of princes.
What do they burn in the case of kings? Their beds and the things that they used. And when R. Gamaliel the elder died, Onkelos the proselyte burned after him seventy Tyrian manehs.  But did you not say “what do they burn in the case of kings? Their beds and the things that they used?”  Say “to the value of seventy Tyrian manehs.”
But nothing else may be burned? Has it not been taught: It is permitted to mutilate [an animal] at royal funerals and this is not prohibited as the “ways of the Amorites”!   Papa said [that refers to]  the horse on which he rode.
And is it forbidden to mutilate clean animals?  Yet it has been taught: Mutilation which renders the animal trefa is forbidden, but such as does not render it trefa is permitted; what kind of mutilation does not render it trefa?

Daf 11b

Trimming the tendons of its hoofs from the ankle downward!  Papa explained that this refers to a calf [employed for] drawing the royal coach.
The day of shaving the beard, etc. The question was asked: How was this taught? The day of shaving of one’s beard when the lock of hair is left, or the shaving of the beard when the lock of hair was removed? Come and hear: Both are taught: The day of shaving one’s beard when one’s lock of hair is left; The day of shaving one’s hair and of removing one’s lock of hair.
Rav Judah in the name of Shmuel: They have yet another festival in Rome [which occurs] once every seventy years. They bring a healthy man and ride him on a lame man. They dress him with the clothes of the first Adam, they place on his head the scalp of R. Ishmael, and on his neck they hang pieces of fine gold weighing four zuzim. They pave the markets with onyx stones, and they proclaim:
“The reckoning of the ruler is wrong. The brother of our lord, the impostor! Let him who will see it see it; he who will not see it now will never see it. How does treason benefit the traitor or deceit the deceiver!” And they conclude: “Woe unto the one when the other will arise.”  
Ashi said: Their own mouths caused them to stumble. Had they said “Our lord’s brother the impostor,” it would have been as they said, but when they say, “The brother of our lord, the impostor,” it may be taken to mean that it is their lord himself who is the impostor.
And our Tanna, why does he not include this [festival in the Mishnah?] Those that are every year, he includes, those that are not every year, he does not include.
Which are the Persian ones? — Mutardi, Turyaskai, Muharnekai, Muharin. These then are those of the Romans and Persians, which are the Babylonian ones? — Muharnekai, Aknayata, Bahnani and the tenth of Adar.
Hanan b. Hisda said in the name of Rav (and some say R. Hanan b. Rava said in the name of Rav): There are five fixed temples of idol-worship and they are: Bet Bel in Bavel, Bet Nevo in Kursi, Tar’ata which is in Mapug, Zerifa which is in Ashkelon, and Nishtra which is in Arabia. When R. Dimi came he said: They added  the fair [with the idol] in En-Beki and the Nidbakah of Akko [some call it  Nitbara of Akko]. Dimi of Nehardea taught these in the reversed order: The market place of Akko, the Nidbakah of En-Beki.
Hanan son of R. Hisda said to R. Hisda: What does it mean that they are fixed? He answered him: This is how your mother’s father explained it: They are fixed permanently; regularly, all the year round they worship there.
Shmuel said: In the Diaspora it is only forbidden [to transact business with idolaters] on the actual festival days alone.   And is it forbidden even on the actual days of the festivals. Did not Rav Judah declare it permissible to R. Bruna to buy wine and to R. Giddal to buy wheat on the Festival of the Merchants?   The Festival of the Merchants is different, as it is not a fixed one. 
When an idolatrous [festival] takes place within a city it is permitted [to conduct business with non-Jews] outside it. If the idolatrous [festival] takes place outside it, [business] is permitted within it. Is it permitted to go there? If the road leads solely to that place, it is forbidden;  But if one can go by it to any other place, it is permitted.
GEMARA. What is a case of “outside it” [where it is permitted to engage in business with pagans]? Shimon b. Lakish said: Such as the fair in Gaza. Some relate this as follows: R. Shimon b. Lakish asked R. Hanina,  How about the fair in Gaza? He replied: Have you never gone to Tyre and seen a Jew and a pagan

Daf 12a

placing two pots on the same stove, and the sages were not concerned. What does it mean “the sages were not concerned”? 
Abaye said: The possibility of eating “flesh of nebelah.”  We are not concerned lest the Jew would turn around and the non-Jew would drop some nevelah into his pot. As a parallel case, here too the Sages were not concerned lest he receive money used in idolatry.
Rava said: What does it mean “the sages were not concerned”? That cooking was done by a non-Jew. As a parallel case, here too the rabbis were not concerned about transacting business on account of the festivity.

Rabbah b. Ulla said: What does it mean “the sages were not concerned”?   About the splashing [of food from the non-Jew’s pot into the Jew’s pot]. As a parallel case, here too the rabbis were not concerned about the days before the festival.

What about going there? etc. Our Rabbis taught: A city that has idolatrous worship taking place there, it is forbidden to enter it, or [to go] from there to another city, the words of R. Meir. But the Sages say, only when the road leads solely to that city is it forbidden; if however the road does not lead exclusively to that place it is permitted.
If a splinter got into his [foot] while in front of an idol, he should not bend down to get it out, because it looks as if he is bowing to the idol; but if this is not apparent  it is permitted. If his coins got scattered in front of an idol he should not bend and pick them up, for it looks as if he is bowing to the idol; but if this is not apparent it is permitted.
If there is a spring flowing in front of an idol he should not bend down and drink, because it looks like he is bowing to the idol; but if this is not apparent it is permitted. Human faces that spout water in the cities one should not place his mouth on them and drink; because he may seem as kissing the idolatrous figure. So also one should not place one’s mouth on a water pipe and drink from it for fear of danger.
What is meant by “not apparent”? If we say that he is not seen [by others], but did not Rav Judah say in the name of Rav that  whatever the Sages prohibited because it looks like he is transgressing, is also forbidden in one’s innermost chamber! Rather, it means that it does not look as if he is bowing to the idol.
And all [three instances given] are necessary. For if it had taught the case of the splinter only, [we would have thought that it is forbidden] because he can walk away from the idol and take it out, but in the case of the coins where this cannot be done, the prohibition does not apply.
If, on the other hand, it had taught the case of the coins only [we might say that the prohibition applies] because there is a loss of money, but in the case of the thorn, where there is pain, the prohibition is not to be applied.  If it had taught both of these cases, [we might still say that the prohibition applied to them] because there is no danger involved, but in the case of the spring where there is danger, for if he does not drink he will die, we might say that the prohibition should be waived, hence all the instances are necessary.

Daf 12b

Why then do we need to learn the case of [placing one’s mouth on the faces of the] figures? That is only because he wanted to teach “so also one should not place one’s mouth on a water pipe and drink from it for fear of danger.”
What is the danger? Swallowing a leech. Our rabbis taught: One should not drink water either from rivers or from pools direct with his mouth or [by drawing the water] with one hand; if he drinks it, his blood shall be upon his head, for it is dangerous. What danger is there? The danger of a leech.
[This statement] supports R. Hanina: for R. Hanina said: One who swallows a leech, it is permissible to heat water for him on Shabbat. It happened that one swallowed a leech, and R. Nehemiah permitted heating water for him on Shabbat. Meanwhile [before the water is heated, what should he do?] R. Huna son of R. Joshua said “let him sip vinegar.”
Idi b. Abin said: One who has swallowed a wasp cannot possibly live. Let him however drink a quarter of strong vinegar; perhaps he will live long enough to set his house in order.
Our rabbis taught: One should not drink water at night; if he does drink his blood is on his head, for it is dangerous. What danger is there? The danger of Shabriri. But if he is thirsty, what can he do? If there is another person with him, he should wake him and say, “I am thirsty for water.” If not, let him knock with the lid on the jug and say to himself: “So and so son of so and so [his mother’s name] said to me, ‘be warned to guard your against Shabriri, briri, riri, iri, ri, in clear vessels.’”
A city in which an idolatrous festival is taking place, some of its shops being decorated and some not decorated  — this was the case with Beth-Shean,  and the Sages said:... in the decorated stores it is forbidden [to buy] but in the undecorated ones it is permitted.
GEMARA. R. Shimon b. Lakish: This refers only to [shops] decorated with roses and myrtle, for he will enjoy the odor, but if they are decorated with produce, it is permissible [to buy in them]. What is the reason? The verse says, “Nothing of that which is proscribed should cleave to your hand” (Deuteronomy 13:18). It is prohibited to derive benefit,

Daf 13a

all the more so it is prohibited to provide benefit. But R. Yohanan said: Even if they are decorated with other types of produce they are also forbidden. For this is an a fortiori argument. If deriving benefit is prohibited, all the more so it is prohibited to provide benefit.
They raised a difficulty: R. Natan says: On the day when the idolaters reduce the taxes, they proclaim: “Whoever takes a wreath and puts it on his head and on the head of his donkey in honor of the idols, his tax will be remitted; otherwise his tax will not be remitted!” A Jew who is found there, what should he do?
If he puts it on, it turns out that he is benefiting! If he does not put it on? Then he is providing benefit!
From here they said: One who engages in business in a market of idolaters, if it be cattle it should be disabled, if fruit, clothes or utensils, they should be allowed to rot, if money or metal vessels he should carry them to the Dead Sea. What is meant by disabling? Cutting the tendons of the hoofs beneath the ankle.
In any case we are taught,  “If he puts it on, it turns out that he is benefiting! If he does not put it on? Then he is providing benefit!”
Mesharsheya the son of R. Idi said: R. Shimon b. Lakish holds that the rabbis disagree with R. Nathan, and I (Resh Lakish) say like the Rabbis who disagree; whereas R. Yohanan holds that they do not disagree.
But do the rabbis not disagree? Was it not taught: One may attend a fair of idolaters and buy from them cattle, slaves, maidservants, houses, fields and vineyards; one may even write the necessary documents and bring them to their courts because this is like rescuing from their hands.
If he is a priest he may be defiled by going outside the Land for the purpose of arguing the matter with them and have it tried in court. And just as he may defile himself [by going] outside the Land, so he may become defiled by walking on a burial ground.
“A burial ground”! Do you really think that? This is biblical defilement! Rather a field that is a doubtful burial ground.
And one may be defiled for the sake of studying Torah or marrying a woman. Judah said: This only applies when he cannot find [a place elsewhere] to learn, but when he can find elsewhere to learn he may not be defiled;
But R. Yose said: Even when he can find elsewhere to learn he may defile himself, for a person may not be able to learn from everyone.
Yose said: It happened that Joseph the Priest went after his master to Zidon. And R. Yohanan said: The halakhah is according to R. Jose.
Hence the Sages do disagree! Yohanan could answer you: The rabbis indeed do not disagree [with R. Natan], yet there is no difficulty here:
The one case refers to purchasing from a dealer, from whom the tax is exacted, the other case refers to purchasing from a private individual from whom the tax is not exacted.
The master stated: “Cattle should be hamstrung.” But is there not the prohibition of causing suffering to a living being? Abaye said: The Torah says, “Their horses you shall hamstring” (Joshua 11:6).
The Master said: “What is meant by disabling [cattle]? The cutting of the tendons beneath the ankle.” The following is cited as contradicting it: One should not sanctify, or devote, or evaluate at the present time; and if one did sanctify, devote or evaluate, then if it be cattle it should be disabled, if fruit, clothes or utensils

Daf 13b

if fruit, clothes or utensils they should be allowed to rot, if money or metal vessels, he should carry them to the Dead Sea. What is meant by disabling?  The door is locked in front of it, so that it dies of itself.
Abaye said: That case is treated differently, because of the prohibition of despising sanctified things. Then let him slaughter it! That may lead to transgression. 
Then let him cut it in half! . Abaye said: Scripture says, “And you shall tear down their altars …You shall not do so to the Lord your God” (Deuteronomy 12:3).
Rava said: [Disabling is here avoided] because it seems like inflicting a blemish on sanctified things.  “Seems!” This is a real blemish! This is true only while the Temple was in existence, so that the animal is fit for being offered up; but at the present time, since it cannot in any case be offered, the prohibition does not apply.
But let it be regarded as inflicting a blemish on a blemished animal which, even though not fit for a sacrificial purpose, is forbidden!  An animal which had been blemished, while it cannot be used for sacrifice, the money obtained for it may be used;  but this excludes our case where the animal is not fit for the money obtained for it nor for actual sacrifice.
Yonah found R. Ilai as he was standing at the gate of Tyre. He said to him: They taught, “Cattle [bought at the idolatrous fair] should be disabled.” What about a slave? I am not asking about a Jewish slave; what I am asking about is a Canaanite slave. What is the law? The other replied: Why do you ask at all? It has been taught; As to idolaters and [Jewish] shepherds of small cattle, even though one is not obligated to take them out [of a pit], one must not throw them in [to a pit to endanger their lives].
Yirmiyah said to R. Zera: It was taught, “We may buy cattle from them, slaves and maidservants.” Is this to be applied to a Jewish slave or to a Canaanite slave as well? He said back: It makes sense that it refers only to a Jewish slave; for were it to apply to a Canaanite slave, why would he want him? When Ravin came he said in the name of Resh Lakish: It may apply even to a Canaanite slave; because he brings him under the wings of the Shekhinah.  
Ashi said: When it comes to buying animals [from idolaters] is this bringing them under the wings of the Shekhinah? Rather, it is allowed because this diminished [the possessions of the idolaters], and here too it is allowed because this diminishes their possessions.
Yaakov once bought sandals [at the idolatrous fair], while R. Yirmiyah bought bread. One said to the other: “Orphan! Would your master act thus?” The other said back: “Orphan! Would your master act thus?” Both in fact had bought of private individuals, but each one thought that the other had bought from a dealer; for R. Abba the son of R. Hiyya b. Abba said: The prohibition was taught only in the case of buying from a dealer from whom tax is exacted, but buying from a private person from whom no tax is exacted is permitted.
Abba son of R. Hiyya b. Abba said: Had R. Yohanan been present once in a place where taxes were exacted even from private persons he would have forbidden [even such purchase]. How is it then that they made the purchase? They bought from a private individual who was not a permanent resident.
The following things are forbidden to be sold to idolaters: iztroblin, bnoth-shuah with their stems, frankincense, and a white rooster. Rabbi Judah says: it is permitted to sell a white rooster to an idolater among other roosters; but if it be by itself, one should clip its spur and then sell it to him, because a defective [animal] is not sacrificed to an idol.
As for other things, if they are not specified their sale is permitted, but if specified it is forbidden. Rabbi Meir says: also a “good-palm,” hazab and niklivas are forbidden to be sold to idolaters. Gemara:

Daf 14a

What is an itztroblin? Cedar wood. But this is contradicted [by the following]:  ‘To these  have been added Alexandrian nuts, iztroblin, cordia myxa  and bnot-shuah.” Now should you think that iztroblin is cedar wood, is cedar wood subject to laws of the sabbatical year?
Has it not been taught: This is the general rule: Everything which has a [perennial] root is subject to the laws of the sabbatical Year  but anything that has no [perennial] root is not subject to the law of the Sabbatical Year. Rather R. Safra said: It means fruit of the cedar. So also when Rabin came [from Eretz Yisrael] he said in the name of R. Elazar [It means] fruit of the cedar.
Bnot Shuah: Rabbah b. Bar-Hana said in the name of R. Yohanan: White figs. Stems: Rabbah b. Bar-Hana said in the name of R. Yohanan: They taught “with their stems.”
Frankincense. R. Yitzchak said in the name of R. Shimon b. Lakish: Pure frankincense. A tanna taught: But of any of these they may sell them a package. And how much is a package? R. Judah b. Batera explained: A package is no less than three manehs.
But we should be concerned lest he goes and sells it to others who will burn it [before idols]? Abaye said: We are commanded not to [place a stumbling-block] before [the blind]   but we are not commanded not to place one before one who may place it before the blind.
And a white rooster. R. Jonah said in the name of R. Zera who said in the name of R. Zevid (And some teach that, R. Jonah said in the name of R. Zera): [If an idolater asks,] “Who has a rooster?” It is permitted to sell him [even] a white rooster. If he asks, “Who has a white rooster?” It is forbidden to sell him a white rooster.
It was stated in the mishnah: R. Judah said: One may sell him a white rooster among [other] roosters. Now what is the precise circumstance? If we say that he asked: Who has a white rooster, who has a white rooster? In that case, even among other roosters it is prohibited!
Rather, it means that he was asking: Who has a rooster, who has a rooster? And even then according to R. Judah a white one may be sold him only among others but not by itself, while according to the first tanna it may not be sold even among others!
Nahman b. Yitzchak said: What are we dealing with here? Where he said, “I want this (a white rooster) and this (a rooster).”
It was also taught:  R. Judah said: When is this so? If he asks for ‘this [white] rooster” but if he asks for this and another one it is permitted [to sell both together]. An idolater who gives a banquet for his son or has a sick person in his house it is permitted [to sell him a white rooster even if he asks for a white rooster].
But have we not learned “If an idolater gives a banquet for his son it is prohibited to sell only on that day and to that man alone,”  but in any case, that man and that day are prohibited! Yitzchak son of R. Mesharsheya said: That refers
to an ordinary party We have learned: As for other things, if they are not specified their sale is permitted, but if specified it is forbidden.  Now what is meant by “specified” and by “unspecified”? f we say that “unspecified” means if he asks [for example] for white wheat, and “specified” means he states that [he requires it] for idolatry?

Daf 14b

In that case it is neither necessary to state that the unspecified may be sold, nor is it necessary to state that the specified may not be sold. Rather, “unspecified” means if he asks for wheat and “specified” when he asks for white wheat.
This implies that in the case of a rooster it is forbidden even when unspecified! We may indeed say that “unspecified” is when he asks for white wheat, and “specified” is when he states [that it is required] for idolatry;
yet it is necessary to state that the “specified” is forbidden lest I say that that man does not really require it for idolatry. Rather, he is attached to idolatry, and he thinks to himself that just I am attached to it everyone is attached to it, and therefore I will say this so that they might readily give it to me. It is therefore necessary to state [that its sale is forbidden].
Ashi asked: [If he asks,] “Who has a mutilated white rooster?” may one sell him an unblemished white rooster? Do we say that since he asks for a mutilated one, he is not asking for it for idolatry, or perhaps he is merely acting cunningly?
And if you should say that this one is acting cunningly, [what about the following,] “Who has a white rooster? Who has a white rooster?” and when a black one is given to him he accepts it or when a red one is given to him he accepts it, may a white one be sold to him? Do we say, since when he was given a black one or a red one he accepted it, he is not asking for one for idolatry, or perhaps he is merely acting cunningly? This stands undecided.
Meir says: Also a good palm etc. R. Hisda to Abimi: There is a tradition that the [tractate] Avodah Zarah of our Abraham our father consisted of four hundred chapters; we have only learnt five, yet we do not know what we are saying.
And what difficulty is there? It is taught: R. Meir says: also a good palm, hatzav and niklas are forbidden to be sold to idolaters– a “good palm” may not be sold to them, but we may sell them a bad palm. But have we not taught: One may not sell them anything that is attached to the ground! He replied: What is meant by “good-palm”? Fruit of a “good-palm.” And so too said R. Huna: The fruit of a good-palm.
Hatzav is the species of dates called kashba. Niklas: When R. Dimi came he said in the name of R. Hama b. Joseph that it is kuryati. Abaye said to R. Dimi: We taught niklas, and do not know what it is, so you tell us it is kuryati which we do not know either, where then have you benefited us? He said: I have provided you with benefit for were you to go to there (to Eretz Yisrael) and say niklas they would know what it is; but if you say kuryati they will know and will show it to you.
In a place where it is the custom to sell small domesticated animals to non-Jews, such a sale is permitted; but where the custom is not to sell, such a sale is not permitted. In no place however is it permitted to sell large animals, calves or foals, whether whole or maimed. Rabbi Judah permits in the case of a maimed one. And Ben Bateira permits in the case of a horse.
GEMARA. This is to say that there is no actual prohibition, but that it is only a matter of custom; so that where the custom is to prohibit, it is to be followed, and where the custom is to permit it is to be followed?
But this contradicts the following [Mishnah]: One should not place cattle in inns kept by idolaters, because they are suspected of bestiality! Rav said: In places where it is permitted to sell, it is permitted to leave them together alone, but in places where leaving them together alone is forbidden, it is also forbidden to sell.


Daf 15a

But R. Elazar said: Even in a place where it is forbidden to leave them together it is permitted to sell. Why? The idolater cares that his beast will not become sterile. And Rav too changed his opinion for R. Tahlifa said in the name of R. Shila b. Abimi, who said in the name of Rav: An idolater cares that his beast will not become sterile.
In all places it is forbidden to sell them large animals  etc. What is the reason for this? While we may not fear bestiality, maybe there is the fear of his making the animal work [on Shabbat]?
Then let him make it work; since he has bought it, he owns it! The prohibition is because of lending and because of renting.
[But, surely] when he borrows it he owns it, or when he rents it he owns it [during that period]!
Then said Rami the son of R. Yeba: The prohibition is because of ‘trying [the animal out].”  For sometimes it might happen that he sells it to him close to sunset on the eve of Shabbat and he might say to him, “Come let me try it out,” and hearing the owner’s voice it will walk because of him, and he indeed desires it to walk, so that he acts as a driver of his beast on the Sabbath and he who drives his beast on Shabbat is liable for a sin-offering.
Shisha the son of R. Idi objected: But does renting cause an acquisition? Have we not learned, “Even in a place where they said it was permitted to rent [a house to an idolater], they did not say it in regard to a dwelling house, because he will bring idols into it.”
It is different with idols, for this is a strict matter, as it is written, “And you shall not bring abomination into your house” (Deuteronomy 7:26).
Yitzchak the son of R. Mesharsheya objected: But does rent really constitute acquisition? Have we not learned:  An Israelite who rents a cow from a priest may feed it terumah vetches; but a priest who rents a cow of an Israelite, even though he is obligated to feed it, may not feed it terumah vetches.
Now, were we to hold the opinion that renting constitutes acquisition, why should he not feed it? Surely the cow belongs to him! From here you can deduce that renting does not constitute acquisition. Now, since you have declared that renting does not constitute acquisition, the prohibition is both because of “renting,” and because of “lending” and because of “trying.”
Adda permitted selling a donkey [to an idolater] through an agent: If we are concerned about “trying,” it is not familiar with his voice that it should walk because of him. And as to “lending” or “renting” since it is not his own he will neither lend nor rent it; Also, lest some fault be discovered in it.
Huna sold a cow to an idolater. R. Hisda said to him: Why did you act in this way? He replied: I assume that he bought it for slaughtering.

Daf 15b

How do we know that we can say such a thing? Beth Shammai says: One should not sell a plowing cow during the Sabbatical Year; but Beth Hillel permits it, because he may possibly slaughter it.
Rabbah said: Are the two cases similar? In that other case, one is not commanded to let one’s cattle rest on the Sabbatical year, whereas in our case, one is commanded to let one’s cattle rest on the Sabbath!
Abaye said to him: And in every case when one is commanded [concerning a thing] he is forbidden [to sell it to one who may disregard the commandment]? Take then the case of a field, for one is commanded to let his field lie fallow on the Sabbatical Year. Yet it has been taught: Beth Shammai say: One may not sell a field meant for plowing on the Sabbatical year, but Beth Hillel permit it, because it is possible that he will let it lie fallow [during that year]!
Ashi objected: And in any case where a person is not commanded [concerning a thing] he is permitted [to sell it to one who will not observe the prohibition]? Take then the case of implements, for one is not commanded to let one’s implements rest in the Sabbatical year. Yet we have learned: The following are the implements which one is not allowed to sell in the Sabbatical year:  the plough and all its accessory vessels, the yoke, the winnowing-fan and the mattock!
Rather R. Ashi said, where there is reason for the assumption [that proper use will be made] we assume it, even though a command is involved, and where there is no reason for such assumption, we do not assume it, even where there is no command involved.
Rabbah once sold a donkey to a Jew who was suspected of selling to idolaters. Abaye said to him: “Why have you acted thus?” He replied, “I sold it to a Jew.” He said back, “He will go and sell it to an idolater!” [He replied], “He will sell it to an idolater and he won’t sell it to a Jew.”
He [Abaye] objected to him [from the following baraita]: In a place where it is the custom to sell small cattle to Samaritans, one may sell, but where they do not sell, one may not sell. What is the reason [for the prohibition]? If we say because they are suspected of bestiality, are they to be suspected? Has it not been taught: One may not place cattle in inns kept by idolaters even male-cattle with men and female-cattle with women, and it is needless to say that female-cattle with men and male-cattle with women [are forbidden]; nor may one hand over cattle to one of their shepherds; nor may one be alone with them; nor may one entrust a child to them to be educated, or to be taught a trade.
One may however place cattle in inns kept by Samaritans even male-cattle with women and female-cattle with men, and it goes without saying that males with males and females with females are permitted; so also may one hand over cattle to one of their shepherds and be alone with them, or hand over a child to them to be educated or to be taught a trade.  
This shows indeed that they are not to be suspected.  
And it has further been taught: One should not sell them either weapons or accessories of weapons, nor should one sharpen any weapon for them, not may one sell them either stocks or neck-chains or ropes, or iron chains — neither to idolaters nor Samaritans.
What is the reason? We might say because they are suspected of murder? But are they suspected,  seeing we have just said that one may be alone with them! Rather it is because he might sell it to an idolater.
And if you think to say that whereas a Samaritan will not repent an Israelite will repent? But has R. Nahman not said in the name of Rabbah b. Abbuha: Just as it was said that it is forbidden to sell to an idolater, so is it forbidden to sell to a Jew who is suspected of selling it to an idolater! He [Rabbah] ran three parasangs after the buyer (some say one parasang in sand) but failed to overtake him.
Dimi b. Abba said: Just as it is forbidden to sell to an idolater, so it is forbidden to sell to a robber who is an Israelite. What is the case? If he is suspected of murder, then this is obvious; he is the same as an idolater!
If [on the other hand] he has never committed murder, why not [sell them to him]? It refers indeed to one who has not committed murder; but we may be dealing here with a sneaky thief who is apt at times [when caught] to save himself [by committing murder].
Our Rabbis taught: It is forbidden to sell them shields; some say, however,  that shields may be sold to them. What is the reason [for this prohibition]? If we say because they protect them, then even wheat or barley should not [be sold to them].  Rav said:

Daf 16a

If it is possible, these, too, should not.
There are some who say that the reason for not permitting [the sale of] shields is this: When they have no weapons left, they might use these for killing [in battles]. But there are others who say that shields may be sold to them, for when they have no more weapons they run away. Nahman said in the name of Rabbah b. Abbuha: The halakhah accords with the “others say.”
Adda b. Ahavah said: One should not sell them bars of iron. Why? Because they may hammer weapons out of them. If so,spades and pick-axes too [should also be forbidden]! Zebid said: This refers to [bars of] Indian iron. Why then do we sell it now? Ashi said: [We sell it] to the Persians who protect us.
Calves and foals. It has been taught: R. Judah permits [the sale of] a maimed one, since it cannot be cured or restored to health.  They said to him: But won’t they breed her and she will give birth, and since they breed her, she will be kept? He replied: Wait till she gives birth. This is to say, an animal [in such a state] will not let the male get near her.
Ben Batera permits in the case of a horse. It has been taught: Ben Batera permits in the case of a horse, because it performs the kind of work for which one is not obligated for a sin-offering.  Rabbi forbids it for two reasons: One, because it comes under the prohibition of selling weapons, the other, because it comes under the prohibition of big cattle.
It makes sense regarding the prohibition of weapons, for there are [horses] which kill by trampling, but the prohibition of large cattle, how does that apply?  Yohanan said: When the horse gets old, they will make him grind on a mill on Shabbat. Yohanan said: The halakhah follows Ben Batera.
The following question was asked: What about a fattened ox? This question can be asked both of R. Judah and the Rabbis.
It can be asked of R. Judah, for R. Judah permits only in the case of a maimed one, which is not at all fit for work, whereas this one, which if kept long enough may be fit for work, might be forbidden;
or it might be said that even according to the Rabbis it is only in that case [of a maimed one], which is ordinarily not intended for slaughter, that they forbid, but this one, which is ordinarily intended for slaughter, maybe they permit?
Come and hear: Rav Judah said in the name of Shmuel that the House of Rabbi had to present a fatted ox for their festival, and they paid a sum of forty thousand [coins] so that they would not have to offer on the day of the festival but the next day; then they paid another forty thousand so that they would not have to present it alive but slaughtered; then they paid another forty thousand to so that they would not have to present it at all.
Now what is the reason [for not presenting it alive] if not to avoid its being kept? But if that is the reason, what is the purpose of [paying them such that is should not be presented] today, but rather tomorrow?   Rather, Rabbi was anxious to abolish the thing entirely, but he considered it advisable to do it little by little.
But can [a fatted ox] be kept [and slimmed] and made healthy enough to do work? Ashi said: Zavida told me that a young bullock [that was fattened] they can hold on to it [and slim it] and it will do the work of two.
One should not sell them bears, lions or anything which may injure the public. One should not join them in building a basilica, a scaffold, a stadium, or a platform. But one may join them in building public or private bathhouses. When however he reaches the cupola in which the idol is placed he must not build.
GEMARA. R. Hanin son of R. Hisda said (and some say R. Hanan b. Rava said in the name of Rav): A large wild animal has the same rule as a small beast as regards struggling but not as regards selling.
But in my opinion this applies  to selling also, so that in such places where it is the custom to sell, such sale is permitted, but where the custom is not to sell, it is forbidden.
Our Mishnah says:  One should not sell them bears, lions, or anything which may injure the public. The reason is because they might injure the public, but if they will not injure the public it should be permitted?   Rabbah b. Ulla said: [Our Mishnah may refer] to a mutilated lion

Daf 16b

in accordance with the opinion of R. Judah.  Ashi said: Generally, any lion may be regarded as “maimed” in regard to work.
They objected: Just as it is forbidden to sell them large cattle, so it is forbidden to sell them large wild animals; and even in such places where they do sell them small cattle, large wild animals should not be sold to them.  This is a refutation of R. Hanan b. Rava. Refutation.
Ravina cast our mishnah against a baraita and then resolved the contradiction: We learned: one should not sell them bears, lions or anything which may injure the public. The reason is because they may injure the public, but if they may not injure the public they may be sold!
Against this he cast [the following baraita]: Just as it is forbidden to sell them large cattle, so it is forbidden to sell them large wild animals, and even in such places where they do sell them small cattle, they may not sell them large wild animals. Rabbah b. Ulla said: [Our Mishnah may refer] to a maimed lion in accordance with the opinion of R. Judah.  Ashi said: Generally, any lion may be regarded as “maimed” in regard to work.
Nahman objected: Who says that a lion is to be regarded as a big animal? Perhaps it is a small animal.
Ashi read the mishnah precisely and raised the following refutation: We learned: one should not sell them bears, lions or anything which may injure the public. The reason is that it is a danger to the public, but if it is not a danger to the public it can be sold.
And the reason why “lion” is mentioned, is because a lion is generally regarded as “maimed” vis a vis workd, but any other animal which can perform work, the prohibition does apply. This refutes R. Hanan b. Rava. Refutation.
But what kind of work can a large wild animal perform? Abaye said: Mar Judah told me that at the house of Mah Yohani they work mills with wild asses.
Zera said: When we were at the school of Rav Judah he said to us: Learn from me this matter for I have heard it from a great man, but I do not know whether from Rav or from Shmuel: “A large wild beast is like small cattle with regard to struggling.”
When I came to Korkunia I found R. Hiyya b. Ashi who was sitting [in the academy] and saying in the name of Shmuel, “A large wild beast is like small cattle with regard to struggling” and I said, “Learn from this that it was stated in the name of Shmuel.” But when I came to Sura I found Rabbah b. Yirmiyah who was sitting and saying in the name of Rav, “A large wild beast is like small cattle with regard to struggling.” Then I said, “That means that this has been stated in the name of Rav as well as in the name of Shmuel.”
Now, when I went up there I found R. Assi sitting and saying: R. Hama b. Guria said in the name of Rav: “A large wild beast is like small cattle with regard to struggling.” I said to him, “Do you not hold, then, that the one who reported this teaching in the name of Rav is Rabbah b. Yirmiyah?” He said back to me: “You black-pot.’  Through me and you this report will be completed.”
It has indeed been stated so: R. Zera said in the name of R. Assi, in the name of Rabbah b. Yirmiyah, in the name of R. Hama b. Guria, in the name of Rav: “A large wild beast is like small cattle with regard to struggling.”
One should not join them in building a basilica, an executioner’s scaffold, a stadium or a tribune. Rabbah b. Bar-Hana said in the name of R. Yohanan: There are three kinds of basilica-buildings: those of kings, baths, or store-houses. Rava said: Two of these are permitted and one is forbidden; as a reminder, “To bind their kings with chains” (Psalms 149:8).
There are those who say: Rava said:  All [basilicas] are permitted. But have we not learned, “one should not join them in building a basilica, an executioner’s scaffold, a stadium or a tribune”? Say a basilica attached to an executioner’s scaffold, a stadium or a tribune.
Our Rabbis taught: When R. Eliezer was arrested because of heresy (minut) they brought him up to the tribune to be judged. The governor said to him, “How can a elder man like you occupy himself with those idle things?”
He replied, “I acknowledge the Judge as right.” The governor thought that he referred to him, but he was only speaking about his father in heaven. The governor said to him, “Because you have acknowledge me as right, I pardon you. You are dismissed.”
When he came home, his disciples called on him to console him, but he would accept no consolation.   Akiba said to him, “Master, will you allow me to say one thing of that which you have taught me?” He replied, “Say it.” He said back, “Master, perhaps you came across some teaching of the minim and you enjoyed it,

Daf 17a

and for that you were arrested He exclaimed: “Akiva, you have reminded me. I was once walking in the upper-market of Tzippori when I came across one [of the disciples of Yeshu] Jacob of Kefar-Sekaniah is his name, who said to me: ‘It is written in your Torah, “You shall not bring the hire of a harlot . . . into the house of the Lord your God” (Deuteronomy 23:19).  Can one use this money be to build a toilet for the High Priest?’ I did not say anything back.
He said to me: ‘Thus was I taught [by Yeshu], “For of the hire of a harlot hath she gathered them and unto the hire of a harlot shall they return” (Micah 1:17). They came from a place of filth, let them go to a place of filth.”’ Those words pleased me very much, and that is why I was arrested for apostasy and I thereby transgressed what is written in the Torah,
‘Remove your way far from her’ — which refers to minut : ‘And do not come near the door of her house,’  — which refers to the ruling power” (Proverbs 5:8). There are those who say, “Remove your way from her” this refers to minut as well as to the ruling power, and, “and do not come near the door of her house” this refers to a harlot. And how far is one to keep away? R. Hisda said: Four cubits.
And the rabbis, how do they expound on the words “the hire of a harlot”? Like R. Hisda, for R. Hisda said: Every harlot who allows herself to be hired will at the end have to hire, as it is said, “And in that you give hire, and no hire is given to you, thus you are reversed” (Ezekiel 16:34).
This is contrary to what R. Pedat said; for R. Pedat said: The Torah forbids close approach only to those prohibited as incest as it is said, “No man shall approach any that is near of kin to him to uncover their nakedness” (Leviticus 18:6).
Ulla, when he would return from the academy, used to kiss his sister on the hand;  some say, on the breast. But he contradicts himself, for Ulla said: Mere approach is forbidden because we say to a Nazarite, “Go, go, around vineyard; but do not approach.”
“The leech has two daughters: Give, give” (Proverbs 30:15):  What is meant by “Give, give”? Mar Ukba said: It is the voice of the two daughters who cry from Gehenna calling to this world: Bring, bring! And who are they? Apostasy and the ruling authority. Others say: R. Hisda said in the name of Mar Ukba: It is the voice of Gehenna crying and calling: Bring me the two daughters who cry and call in this world, “Bring, bring.”
Scripture says, “None that go to her return neither do they attain the paths of life” (Proverbs 2:19). But if they do not return, how could they attain [the paths of life]? This is what it means:  Even if they do turn away from it they will not attain the paths of life.
Does it mean then that those who repent from minut die? Was there not a woman who came before R. Hisda confessing to him that the lightest sin that she committed was that her younger son is the offspring of her older son? Whereupon R. Hisda said: Get busy in preparing her shrouds — but she did not die.
Now, since she says that this was the lightest of her sins, it may be assumed that she had also acted had minut in her [and yet she did not die]! That one did not altogether renounce her evil-doing, that is why she did not die.
Some say as follows: [Is it only] from minut that one dies if one repents, but not from other sins? Was there not a woman who came before R. Hisda who said, Prepare her shrouds and she died?  Since she said that this was the lightest of her sins, it may be assumed that she was guilty of minut as well.
And does not one die on renouncing sins other [than minut]? Surely it has been taught: It was said of R. Elazar b. Dordia that he did not leave leave any harlot in the world without coming to her. Once, on hearing that there was a certain harlot in one of the towns by the sea who accepted a purse of denarii for her hire, he took a purse of denarii and crossed seven rivers for her sake.  As he was with her, she passed and said: As this passed gas will not return to its place, so Elazar b. Dordia never be received in repentance.
He went and sat between two hills and mountains and exclaimed: O, ye hills and mountains, plead for mercy for me! They replied: Rather than pray for you, we should pray for ourselves, for it is said, “For the mountains shall depart and the hills be removed” (Isaiah 54:10).   So he exclaimed: Heaven and earth, plead for mercy for me! They, too, replied: Rather than pray for you, we should pray for ourselves, for it is said, “For the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wear out like a garment” (Isaiah 51:6).  
He then exclaimed: Sun and moon, plead for mercy for me! But they also replied: Rather than pray for you, we should pray for ourselves, for it is said, “Then the moon shall be ashamed and the sun abashed” (Isaiah 24:23).   He exclaimed: Stars and constellations, plead for mercy for me! They said: Rather than pray for you, we should pray for ourselves, for it is said, “And all the hosts of heaven shall molder away” (Isaiah 34:4).  
He said: The matter then depends upon me alone! He placed his head between his knees, he wept aloud until his soul departed. Then a heavenly was heard proclaiming: “Rabbi Eleazar b. Dordai is destined for the life of the world to come!” Now, here was a case of a sin [other than minut] and yet he did die! In that case, too, since he was so addicted to [fornication] it is as [if he had been guilty of] minut.
Rabbi [on hearing of it] wept and said: One may acquire eternal life after many years, another in one hour! Rabbi also said: Repentants are not alone accepted, they are even called “Rabbi”!
Hanina and R. Yonatan were walking on the road and came to two paths, one of which led by the door of a place of idol-worship and the other led by a brothel. One said to the other:  Let us go [through the one leading] by the place of idolatry,

Daf 17b

for the inclination has been destroyed. The other however said: Let us go [through that leading] by the brothel and defy our inclination and we will receive a reward. As they approached the place they saw the prostitutes withdraw from before them.
One said to the other: How did you know this?  The other said back, “Foresight (mezimah) will protect you, and discernment will guard you” (Proverbs 2:11).
The rabbis said to Rava: What does the word “mezimmah” mean?  If we render it “Torah” since the word zimmah in Scripture is translated in the Targum, “It is a counsel of the wicked” and Scripture has the phrase, “Wonderful is His counsel and great His wisdom” (Isaiah 28:29)?  But in that case the word should have been zimmah. This is what it therefore means, “Against matters of licentiousness (zimmah) she shall watch over you, and discernment will guard against you.”
Our rabbis taught: When R. Elazar b. Perata and R. Hanina b. Teradion were arrested, R. Elazar b. Perata said to R. Hanina b. Teradion: Happy are you, for you have been arrested on one charge; woe is me, for I have been arrested on five charges.
Hanina replied: Happy are you, for you have been arrested on five charges, but you will be saved; woe is me who was arrested on one charge and I will not be saved; for you have occupied yourself with the study of Torah and acts of loving kindness, whereas I occupied myself with Torah alone.
This accords with the opinion of R. Huna. For R. Huna said: He who occupies himself only with the study of the Torah is as if he had no God, for it is said: “Now for many days Israel was without the true God” (II Chronicles 15:3).  What is meant by “without the true God”? It means that he who only occupies himself only with the study of the Torah is as if he had no God.
But did he not occupy himself with acts of loving kindness? Surely it has been taught: R. Eliezer b. Jacob says: One should not put his money into a charity-bag, unless it is supervised by a disciple of the sages such as R. Hanina b. Teradion!   He was indeed trustworthy, but he did not practice [“gemilut hasadim”].
But has it not been taught: He said to him: I accidentally mixed up charity collected for Purim with ordinary charity money, so I distributed it to the poor!   He did indeed practice, but not as much as was required.
When they brought up R. Elazar b. Perata [for his trial] they asked him, “Why have you been studying [the Torah] and why have you been stealing?” He answered, “If one is a scribe, one is not a robber, if a robber, one cannot be a scribe, and as I am not the one I am neither the other.” “Why then are you titled Master”?   “I am a Master of Weavers.”
Then they brought him two coils [of spun wool] and asked, “Which is for the warp and which for the woof?” A miracle occurred and a female-bee came and sat on the warp and a male-bee came and sat on the woof. He said to them, “This is of the warp and that of the woof.”
Then they asked him, “Why did you not go to the House of Aveidan?”   He replied, ‘I am old and I am afraid you will trample me under your feet.” [They said] “And how many old people have been trampled till now?” A miracle happened–on that very day an old man was trampled.
 “And why did you let your slave go free?”  He replied, “No such thing ever happened.” One of them rose to testify against him. Elijah came, appearing as one of the dignitaries of Rome. He said to that man, “Since a miracle was worked for him in all the other matters, a miracle will also happen in this one, and you will only come out looking bad.”
He, however, disregarded him. He stood up to tell them [that R. Elazar had freed his slave]. There was a written communication from important members of the government that had to be sent to the Emperor and they sent it by that man. [On the road] Elijah came and hurled him a distance of four hundred parasangs. So that he went and did not return.
They then brought up R. Hanina b. Tradion and asked him, “Why have you occupied yourself with the Torah?”   He replied, “This is what the Lord my God commanded me.” At once they sentenced him to be burned, his wife to be killed, and his daughter to be sent to a brothel. He was sentenced to be burned because


Daf 18a

he renounced the Name in its full spelling. But how could he do so? Have we not learned: The following have no portion in the world to come: He who says that the Torah is not from Heaven, or that the resurrection of the dead is not taught in the Torah. Abba Shaul says: Also he who pronounces the Name in its full spelling?
He did it in order to practice, as we have learned: “You shall not learn to do” (Deuteronomy 18:9). But you may learn [about them] in order to understand and to teach.
Why then was he punished? — Because he was pronouncing the Name in public. His wife was punished by being slain, because she did not protest against him. From here they said: Anyone who has the power to prevent [one from doing wrong] and does not prevent, is punished for him.
His daughter was consigned to a brothel, as R. Yohanan said that once his daughter was walking in front of some great men of Rome. They remarked,  “How beautiful are the steps of this maiden!” Immediately she took particular care of her step. And this accords with what Resh Lakish said: What is the meaning of the verse, “The sin of my heel encompasses me” (Psalms 49:6). Sins which one treads under one’s heels in this world encompass him on the Day of Judgment.
As the three of them went out [from the tribunal] they declared the righteousness of the judgment. He quoted, “The Rock, His work is perfect; for all his ways are justice” (Deuteronomy 32:4). His wife continued: “A God of faithfulness and without iniquity, just and right is He” (ibid). And the daughter quoted: “Great in counsel and mighty in work, whose eyes are open upon all the ways of the sons of men, to give everyone according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doing” (Jeremiah 32:19). Rabbi said: How great were these righteous ones, in that the three passages, expressing the righteousness of judgment, readily occurred to them just at the appropriate time for the declaration of such righteousness.
Our Rabbis taught: When R. Yose b. Kisma was ill, R. Hanina b. Teradion went to visit him. He said to him: “My brother, Hanina, do you not know, that this nation, Heaven has ordained that they reign?  For though she laid waste to His House and burned His Temple, and slew His pious ones and caused His best ones to perish, she still is firmly established! Yet, I have heard that you are sitting and occupying yourself with the Torah, publicly gather assemblies, and a Torah Scroll is resting.”
He replied, “Heaven will show mercy.” He responded, “I am making reasonable statement, and you say, ‘Heaven will show mercy!’ It will surprise me if they do not burn you and the Torah scroll with fire.” He said back, “What is my status with regard to the world to come?”
He said, “Is there any particular act that you have done?” He replied: “I once mistook Purim-money for ordinary charity-money, and I distributed [of my own] to the poor.’  He said then, “If so, would that your portion were my portion and you lot my lot.”
They said that not many days passed before R. Yose b. Kisma died and all the great men of Rome went to his burial and offered a great eulogy for him. On their return, they found R. Hanina b. Tradion sitting and occupying himself with the Torah, publicly gathering assemblies, and keeping a Sefer Torah in his lap.
They took hold of him, wrapped him in the Sefer Torah, placed bundles of twigs round him and set them on fire. They then brought tufts of wool, which they had soaked in water, and placed them over his heart, so that he should not die quickly. His daughter exclaimed, “Father, that I should see you in this state!” He replied, “If I being burned alone it would have been difficulty for me; but now that I am burning together with the Sefer Torah, He who will have regard for the injury done to the Torah will also have regard for the injury to me.”
His disciples called out, “Rabbi, what do you see?” He answered them, “The parchments are being burned but the letters are flying away.” “Open your mouth so that the fire can enter you.” He replied, “It is better that the one who gave me [my soul] take it away, but no one should injure oneself.”
The Executioner then said to him, “Rabbi, if I increase the flame and take away the tufts of wool from over your heart, will you bring me to life in the world to come?”
“Yes,” he replied. “Then swear to me.” He swore to him. He thereupon increased the flame and removed the tufts of wool from over his heart, and his soul departed speedily. The Executioner then jumped and threw himself into the fire. And a heavenly voice came forth and exclaimed: R. Hanina b. Teradion and the Executioner are invited to life in the world to come. Rabbi wept and said: One may acquire eternal life in a single hour, another after many years. 
Beruria, the wife of R. Meir, was the daughter of R. Hanina b. Teradion. She said [to her husband], “I am ashamed to have my sister sitting in a brothel.” So he took a tarkav full of denarii and set out. He said to himself, “If any sin has not been committed with her, a miracle will happen for her, but if a sin has been performed with her, no miracle will happen for her.”
He went and disguised himself as a cavalryman. He came to her and said, “Prepare for me.” She replied, “I am menstruating.” He said back, “I will wait for you.” She replied, “But there are many here that are prettier than I am.” He said to himself, that proves that she has not committed any wrong, for she says that to all who come.”
He then went to her jailer and said, “Hand her over to me.” He replied, “I am afraid of the government.” He said, “Take the tarkav of dinars. One half give to the government [as a bribe], the other half take for yourself.” “And what shall I do when these dinars run out?” he asked. He replied, “Say, ‘O God of Meir, answer me!’ and you will be saved.”

Daf 18b

“But who can assure me that this will work?” He replied, “You will see now.” There were there some dogs who would bite everyone. He took a stone and threw it at them, and when they were about to bite him he exclaimed, “O God of Meir answer me!” and they let him alone.  The warder then handed her over to him.
At the end, the matter became known to the government. And they brought [the jailer] to hang him up on the gallows. He exclaimed, “O God of Meir answer me.” They took him down and asked him what that meant, and he told them the incident that had happened.
They then engraved R. Meir’s likeness on the gates of Rome and proclaimed that anyone seeing a person resembling it should bring him there. One day [some Romans] saw him and ran after him, so he ran away from them and entered a brothel. Others say he happened just then to see food cooked by heathens and he dipped in one finger and then sucked the other. Others say that Elijah the Prophet appeared to them as a prostitute and embraced him. They said, “Heaven forbid, were this R. Meir, he would not have acted thus!”
He then arose and ran away and came to Babylon. Some say it was because of that incident that he ran to Babylonia; others say because of the incident about Beruria.
Our Rabbis taught: Those who visit stadiums or a sieges and witness there [the performance] of sorcerers and enchanters, or of bukion and mukion, lulion and mulion, blurin or salgurin, behold this is “a gathering of the scornful,” and about them Scripture says, “Happy is the man that has not walked in the counsel of the wicked . . . nor sat in the gathering of the scornful, but his delight is in the law of the Lord” (Psalms 1:1).  From these things cause one to neglect the Torah. 
They contrasted the above with the following: It is permitted to go to stadiums, because by shouting one may save [the victim]. [It is also permitted to go] to a siege camp because of those who dwell there, as long as he does not conspire [with the Romans]. But if it is for the purpose of conspiring, it is forbidden. There is thus a contradiction between [the laws relating to]stadiums as well as between [those relating to] siege camps!
It makes sense that there is no contradiction between those relating to camps, because the one may refer to where he conspires with them, and the other to where he does not; but the laws relating to stadiums are surely contradictory!
They represent the differing opinions of tannaim. For it has been taught: One should not go to stadiums because [they are] “a gathering of the scornful.” But R. Natan permits it for two reasons: first, because by shouting one may save [the victim], secondly, because one might be able to give evidence [of death] for the wife [of a victim] and so enable her to remarry.
Our Rabbis taught: One should not go to theaters or circuses because they offer sacrifices to foreign gods there, the words of R. Meir. But the Sages say: Where they offer sacrifices, it is prohibited because he will be suspected of idol worship, and where they do not offer sacrifices, it is prohibited because of being in the “gathering of the scornful.”
What is the practical difference between these two reasons? Hanina of Sura said If he engaged in business is the difference between them.
Shimon b. Pazi expounded [the foregoing verse as follows]: What is it that is written, “Happy is the man who has not walked in the counsel of the wicked, or stood on the path of sinners, or sat in the company of the insolent” (Psalms : )? 
If he did not walk [in the counsel of the wicked] how could he stand there? And if he did not stand there how could he sit [among them], and if he did not sit among them he could he have scorned! Rather it teaches you that if one walks [in the path of the wicked] he will subsequently stand with them, and if he stands he will at the end sit with them, and if he does sit, he will also come to scorn, and if he does scorn the about him it is written, “If you are wise, you are wise for yourself; If you are a scoffer, you bear it alone” (Proverbs 9: 2).
Elazar said: He who scoffs, affliction will befall him, as it is said, “Now therefore do not scoff lest your punishment be made severe” (Isaiah 28:22). Rava said to say to the Rabbis: With pleading, I ask of you, do not scoff, so that suffering does not come to you.”
Katina said: He who scoffs, his sustenance will be reduced, as it is said, “He withdraws His hand in the case of scoffers” (Hosea 7:5). Shimon b. Lakish said: He who scoffs will fall into Gehennom, as it is said, “The proud, insolent man, scoffer is his name, Acts in a wrath of insolence” (Proverbs 2 :24). And “wrath” refers to Gehennom; as it is said, “That day is a day of wrath” (Zephaniah : 5).
Oshaia said: He who is haughty falls into Gehennom, as it is said, “The proud, insolent man, scoffer is his name, Acts in a wrath of insolence” (Proverbs 2 :24). And “wrath” refers to Gehennom; as it is said, “That day is a day of wrath” (Zephaniah : 5). R. Hanilai b. Hanilai said: He who scoffs brings destruction upon the world, as it is said, “Therefore, refrain from scoffing, Lest your bonds be tightened. For I have heard a decree of destruction” (Isaiah 28:22). R. Elazar said: It is indeed a grievous sin, since it first incurs “affliction” at first and “destruction” at the end. 
Shimon b. Pazi expounded: “Happy is the man that has not walked” to theatres and circuses of idolaters; “nor stood in the way of sinners,”—this refers to the one who does not attend contests of wild beasts; “nor sat in the gathering of the scornful,” that is he who does not participate in [evil] conspiracies. 
And lest one say, “Since I do not go to theatres or circuses nor attend contests of wild animals, I will go and indulge in sleep,” Scripture therefore says, “And in His Torah he meditates day and night.”
Samuel b. Nahmani in the name of R. Yonatan: “Happy is the man that has not walked in the counsel of the wicked” — this 

Daf 19a

refers to Abraham our father who did not follow the counsel of the men of the generation of the division of the world who were wicked, as it is said, “Come, let us build us a city, and a tower, with its top in heaven” (Genesis 11:4); “Nor stood in the way of sinners” — for he did not stand with the people of Sodom, who were sinful, as it is said, “Now the men of Sodom were exceedingly wicked and sinful against the Lord” (Genesis 13:13); 
“Nor sat in the seat of the scornful” — for he did not sit in the company of the Philistines, because they were scoffers; as it is said, “And it came to pass, when their hearts were merry, that they said: “Call for Samson that he may make us sport” (Judges 16:25).
“Happy is the man that fears the Lord” (Psalms 112:1):  Happy is the “man” and not the woman? Amram said in the name of Rav: Happy is he who repents while he is still a “man.” Joshua b. Levy said: Happy is he who overcomes his inclination like a “man.”
“Who desires his commandments exceedingly:” R. Elazar said: “His commandments,” but not the reward of His commandments.  This is what was taught, “He used to say, Be not like servants who serve the master on the condition of receiving a reward; but be like servants who serve the master without the condition of receiving a reward.”
“But whose desire is in the Torah of the Lord.” Rabbi said: One can learn Torah only in a place which his heart desires, for it is said, “But whose desire is in the Torah of the Lord.”
Levi and R. Shimon the son of Rabbi were once sitting before Rabbi learning verses.   When the book was concluded, Levi said: Let the book of Proverbs now be brought in. R. Shimon the son of Rabbi however said: Let the book Psalms be brought. They forced Levi and the book of Psalms was brought. When they came to this verse, “But whose desire is in the Torah of the Lord,” Rabbi said: One can learn Torah only in a place which his heart desires Whereupon Levi remarked: Rabbi, You have given me the right to rise.
Avdimi b. Hama said: He who occupies himself with the Torah will have his desires granted by the Holy One, blessed be He, as it is said: “But he who [is occupied] with the Torah of the Lord, his desire [shall be granted].” Rava said: One should always study Torah in a place which his heart desires, as it is said, “But whose desire is in the Torah of the Lord.”
Rava also said: At the beginning [of this verse] the Torah is called by the name of the Holy One, blessed be He, but at the end it is called by the name of he [who studies it], for it is said, “Whose desire is in the Torah of the Lord and in his [own] Torah he meditates day and night.”
Rava also said: One should always study the Torah first and meditate in it afterwards, as it is said, “In the Torah Law of the Lord,” and then, “and in his [own] Torah he meditates.”
Rava also said: A person should always recite, even though he is liable to forget and even if he does not fully understand all the words which he says, as it is said, “My soul recites for desire of Your rules at all times” (Psalms 119:20).  “Recites” is what Scripture says, it does not say “grinds.”
Rava pointed to the following contradictions:  Scripture says, “Upon the highest places,” (Proverbs 9:3) and then it says, “On a seat” (vs. 14). At the beginning [the student occupies] any place, but ultimately [he will occupy] a seat.  
It is written, “In the top of high places” (Proverbs 8:2) and then it says by the road! At first he is in the top [out of the way] high places, yet ultimately [he will] be by the road.
Ulla pointed to the following contradiction: It is written, “Drink waters out of you own cistern” (Proverbs 5:15) and then it says, “and running waters out of your own well!”  At first drink from your own cistern, and by the end running waters from your own well.
Rava said in the name of R. Sehorah who said it in the name of R. Huna: What is the meaning of the verse, “Wealth gotten by vanity shall be diminished, but he that gathers little by little shall increase” (Proverbs 13:11)?  If one learns his Torah heaps and heaps it will be decreased, but if one gathers [knowledge] little by little he will gain much.
Rava said: The Rabbis know this thing, and yet they transgress it. Nahman b. Isaac said: I did this and it stood for me.
Shizbi said in the name of R. Elazar b. Azariah: What is the meaning of the verse, “The slothful man shall not hunt his prey” (Proverbs 12:27)? A deceitful hunter [in matters of learning], will not live or have length of days.  
Sheshet said: [It means that] the deceitful hunter will roast [his prey]. When R. Dimi came he said: This may be likened to one who hunts birds; if he breaks the wings of each one in turn, they will all remain in his possession, but if not they will not remain with him.
“And he shall be like a tree transplanted by streams of water” (Psalms 1:3). Those of the school of R. Yannai said: “A tree transplanted,” not “a tree planted:” whoever learns Torah from one master only will never see a blessing.
Hisda said to the rabbis: I would like to tell you something, but I am afraid that you might leave me and go elsewhere: “Whoever learns Torah from one master only will never see a blessing.” They abandoned him and went [to sit] before Rabbah. He said to them: These words apply only to logic, but when it comes to oral traditions it is better to learn from one master only,

Daf 19b

so that one is not confused by the variance in language. “By streams of water”: R. Tanhum b. Hanilai:  One should divide one’s years [of study] into three: one third of them devoted to Scripture, one third to Mishnah, and one third to Talmud. 
But does a person know how many years he will live? When they said this they were referring to days.
“That brings forth its fruit in its season and whose leaf does not wither” (Psalms 1:3): Rava said: If he brings forth his fruit in its season, then, his leaf will not wither, otherwise, concerning the one who learned and the one who taught the verse says, “Not so the wicked; but they are like the chaff which the wind drives away” (vs. 4).
Abba said in the name of R. Huna, in the name of Rav: What is meant by what is written, “For she has cast down many wounded” (Proverbs 7:26). This refers to the student who has not yet reached the age of instruction and yet issues an instruction; “Mighty are all those that she has slain:” this refers to the student who has reached the age of instruction but does not yet issue instruction.
And what is the age? Forty years. But did not Rava issue instruction? That was a case of being equal [to anyone].
“And whose leaf will not wither” (Psalms 1:3):  Aha b. Ada said in the name of Rav (and some say R. Aha b. Abba said in the name of R. Hamnuna who said in the name of Rav): Even the ordinary talk of scholars needs studying, for it is said, “And whose leaf does not wither.”
“And whatever he does shall prosper” (Psalms 1:3). R. Joshua b. Levi said: This matter is written in the Torah, repeated in the Prophets and mentioned a third time in the Writings: Whoever occupies himself with the Torah, his possessions shall prosper. It is written in the Torah, for it says, “You shall observe the words of this covenant, and do them, that you may make all that you do prosper” (Deuteronomy 29:8). 
It is repeated in the Prophets, for it is written, “This book of the Torah shall not depart from your mouth, but you shall meditate upon it day and night, that you observe to do according to all that is written in it; for then you will make your ways prosperous, and then you shall have good success” (Joshua 1:8). It is mentioned a third time in the Writings, for it is written, “But his delight is in the Torah of the Lord, and in His Torah he meditates day and night. And he shall be like a tree planted by streams of water, that brings forth its fruit in its season, and whose leaf does not wither; and in whatever he does he shall prosper” (Psalms 1:2-3).
Alexandri would call out, “Who wants life, who wants life?” All the people came and gathered round him saying: “Give us life!” He then said to them, “Who is the man who desires life …? Guard your tongue from evil and your lips from speaking deception, turn from evil and do good, seek peace and pursue it” (Psalms 34:13). Lest one say,
“I guarded my tongue from evil and my lips from speaking deception. I may therefore indulge in sleep,” Scripture therefore tells us, “Turn from evil and do good.” Good means Torah is meant; as it is said, “For I have given you a good teaching, do not forsake my Torah” (Proverbs 4:2).
When he reaches the cupola in which the idol is placed [he must not build]. Elazar said in the name of R. Yohanan: If he did build, the pay he received is permitted. This is obvious: it is a case of things used in the worship of idols, and things used in the worship of idols, whether according to R. Ishmael or according to R. Akiba, are not forbidden till actually worshipped.
Yirmiyah said: It is necessary in the case of the idol itself. This accords with the one who holds that it is prohibited to derive benefit from an idol made for an Israelite immediately, but if the idol is made for an idolater, [it is not prohibited] until it is worshipped. In that case the statement goes well. But according to the one who holds that even when made for an idolater [any benefit] is forbidden immediately, what can be said?
Rather Rabbah b. Ulla said the statement is necessary in regard to the last stroke of work; for what is it that makes the idol fit for worship? It is its completion; And when is work completed? With the last stroke. But the last stroke does not constitute the value of a perutah.
Thus he holds that the wage is earned from the beginning to the end [of the work].
One should not make jewelry for an idol [such as] necklaces, ear-rings, or finger-rings. Rabbi Eliezer says, for payment it is permitted. One should not sell to idolaters a thing which is attached to the soil, but when cut down it may be sold. Judah says, one may sell it on condition that it be cut down.
 GEMARA. From where do we derive this? Yose b. Hanina:


Daf 20a

For the verse says, “Grant them no quarter (lo tehonem)” (Deuteronomy 7:2): Do not give them a hold on the land.But this phrase “lo tehonem” needed to convey that the Torah taught not to provide them with grace?
If so, it should have said “lo tehunem.” What does lo tehonem mean? It means both.
But still it is needed, to convey that the Torah teaches not to give them any free gift! If so it should have said lo tehinnem. Why then does it say lo tehanem? So as to imply all these interpretations.
It has indeed been taught in a baraita: “lo tehannem” you shall not give them possession on the soil. Another interpretation: “lo tehannem” you shall not give them grace; Another interpretation “lo tehannem” you shall not give them any free gift....
The giving of free gifts [to idolaters] is itself a matter of dispute between Tannaim, for it has been taught:  [The verse], “You shall not eat anything that has died a natural death; give it to the stranger in your community to eat, or you may sell it to a foreigner.” We know only that it may be given away to a stranger or sold to an idolater. How do we know that it may be sold to a stranger? Because Scripture says, “You may give it — or sell it.” 
How do we know that it may be given away to an idolater? Because Scripture says, “You may give it that he may eat it or you may sell it to an idolater”: It turns out that it may be given or sold to either a stranger or an idolater, the words of R. Meir. R. Judah says: The words should be taken as they are written, it may be given to a stranger, or sold to an idolater....
But R. Meir’s interpretation is right! R. Judah could say to you: If you thought that what R. Meir said was correct, the Torah should have written: “You shall give it so that he may eat it and you may sell it.” Why then does it say “or?” It comes to teach that the words are written precisely.
And R. Meir?  [He might reply that “or”] indicates that it is preferable to give it away to a stranger than to sell it to an idolater. And as to R. Judah? He might say that, since you are commanded to maintain a stranger  but you are not commanded to maintain an idolaters no verse is needed to give [the stranger] preference.
[It has been stated above.] “Another interpretation: “lo tehannem:” Do not give them grace. This supports the view of Rav. For Rav said: One is forbidden to say, “How beautiful is that gentile woman!”
They objected: It happened that R. Shimon b. Gamaliel was standing on a step on the Temple Mount and he saw a gentile woman who was particularly beautiful. He exclaimed: “How great are Your works, O Lord” (Psalms 104:24). So too R. Akiva saw the wife of the wicked Turnus Rufus, he spat, then laughed, and then wept. He spat because of her originating only from a putrefying drop. He laughed because he foresaw that she would convert and be married to him; “Wept,” that such beauty should [ultimately] decay in the dust.
But what about Rav?  They were merely offering thanksgiving, for the Master said: He who sees beautiful creatures should say, “Blessed be He who has created such in His universe.”
But is even looking permitted? They objected: “You shall guard yourself from every evil thing   [implies] that one should not look at a beautiful woman, even if she be unmarried, or at a married woman even if she is ugly,

Daf 20b

nor at a woman’s colored garments, nor at male and female donkeys, or a pig and a sow or at fowls when they are mating; even if one be all eyes like the Angel of Death!
It is said of the Angel of Death that he is all full of eyes. When a sick person is about to depart, he stands above his head with his sword drawn out in his hand and a drop of gall hanging on it. As the sick person beholds it, he trembles and opens his mouth [in fright]; he then drops it into his mouth. It is from this that he dies, from this that [the corpse] deteriorates, from this that his face becomes greenish.
[In that case] the woman turned round a corner. 
“Nor at a woman’s colored garments!” R. Judah b. Shmuel said: Even when they are lying against the wall. Papa said: But only if knows their owner. Rava said This is also proved by the wording which teaches, “Nor at a woman’s colored garments,” but does not teach “at colored garments.”  This proves it.
Hisda said: This refers only to worn clothing, but in the case of new clothing it does not matter; for were you not to say so, how could women’s dresses be handed to a launderer; he must needs look at them!
And according to your reasoning, that which Rav Judah said that in the case of animals of the same kind he may bring them to mate like putting a painting stick in the tube; surely he, too needs to look! Rather, this is not a problem because he is occupied with his work, so too here he is occupied with his work.
The Master said: “From it he dies.” Shall we say that this differs from the statement of Shmuel’s father?  For Shmuel’s father said: The Angel of Death told me, Were it not for the regard I have for people’s honor, I would cut the tear open the throat of men like that of an animal!” Possibly, that very drop cuts into the organs of the throat.
“From it the corpse deteriorates.” This supports the view of R. Hanina b. Kahana. For R. Hanina b. Kahana stated: They say in the school of Rav that if one wants to keep a corpse from deteriorating, he should turn it on its face.
Our Rabbis taught: “Guard yourself from all evil things” (Deuteronomy 23:10), this means that one should not think [sexual] thoughts during the day that would to uncleanliness by night.
From here R. Pinchas b. Yair said: Torah leads to caution, caution leads to eagerness, eagerness leads to cleanliness, cleanliness leads to separation, separation leads to purity, purity leads to righteousness, righteousness leads to humility, humility leads to fear of sin, fear of sin leads to holiness, holiness leads to the holy spirit, the holy spirit leads to resurrection, and righteousness is greater than any of these, as its says, “Then you spoke in visions to Your righteous ones” (Psalms 89:20).
This disagrees with the view of R. Joshua b. Levy. For R. Joshua b. Levy said: Humility is the greatest of them all, as it says, “The spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me to bring good tidings to the humble” (Isaiah 61:1).   It does not say, “to the righteous,” but “to the humble” from which you learn that humility is greater than them all.
One should not sell them anything attached to the soil. Our Rabbis taught: One may sell them a tree with the stipulation that it be felled and he then he felles it, the words of R. Judah. R. Meir says: We may sell them only a tree that has already been felled. Low-growth, with the stipulation that it be cut and he then cuts it, the words of R. Judah. R. Meir says: We may sell them only when it has already been cut. Standing grain, with the stipulation that it be reaped and he thens reap it, the words of R. Judah. R. Meir says: We may sell them only when it is reaped.
And all three disputes are necessary; for were we told of the case of a tree only [we might think that] in that case R. Meir states his rule, for, since the non-Jew will not lose by letting it remain in the ground, he might leave it there, but in the other case, where he would lose by letting it remain in the soil, we might think that R. Meir would agree with R. Judah.
And if we were we told about the tree and the grain only [we might have thought that] it is because it is not obvious that he benefits by leaving them in the soil [that R. Judah permits], but in the case of low-growth where he obviously benefits by leaving it to grow on, we might think that he agrees with R. Meir.
And were we told of the case of [low-growth] only, we might have thought that it is only in that case that R. Meir states his rule, but in the other two cases, he agrees with R. Judah; hence all these are necessary.
The question was asked: What is the rule about selling them cattle with the stipulation that it be slaughtered?
Shall we say that in those other instances the reason why R. Judah permits is because the land is not in the non-Jew’s domain and therefore he may not be able to leave it there, whereas cattle, which is in his own domain, he might keep it [unslaughtered], or perhaps it makes no difference?
Come and hear: It has been taught: Cattle with the stipulation that he should slaughter it, and he then slaughters it, the words of R. Judah. R. Meir says: We may only sell it to them when slaughtered.
One should not let houses to them in the land of Israel; and it is not necessary to mention fields. In Syria houses may be let to them, but not fields. 

Daf 21a

Outside of the land of Israel, houses may be sold and fields let to them, these are the words of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yose says: in the land of Israel, one may let to them houses but not fields; In Syria, we may sell them houses and let fields; Outside of the land of Israel, both may be sold.
Even in such a place where the letting of a house has been permitted, they did not say [that this was permitted if it was] for the purpose of a residence,  since the idolater will bring idols into it; for it says, “you shall not bring an abomination into your house” (Deut. 7:26). In no place may one let a bath-house to an idolater, as it is called by the name of the owner.
GEMARA. What does it mean “and it is not necessary to mention fields”? If we say that it is for two reasons, first of all that the non-Jew settles on the soil, and second that the [produce] becomes exempt from tithes? 
If so, then houses too have two reasons: first, that he settles on the soil, and second they become exempt from having a mezuzah. R. Mesharsheya said: Mezuzah is an obligation of the resident.
In Syria they may rent them houses, but not fields. Why is selling [of houses] different in that it is not allowed? Lest it lead to selling [houses] in the Land of Israel. If so, we should prohibit letting them houses as well? Letting itself is a decree; shall we then go make a decree on a decree?
But is not the letting of a field in Syria is a decree on another decree, and yet we still make that decree? That is not a decree, for it follows the opinion that even the annexation by an individual is to be regarded as annexed [to Israel].
For a field for which there are two problems, the rabbis made a decree. But in the case of houses, where there are two problems, the rabbis made no decree.
Outside of the land, houses may be sold and fields rented to them. A field, which has two problems, the rabbis decreed; but in the case of a house, since there is only one problem they did not decree.
R. Yose says: In the land of Israel, we may let them houses but not fields. What is the reason? In the case of fields, for which there are two problems, the rabbis made a decree, but in the case of houses, for which there are not two problems, the rabbis did not make a decree:
In Syria, we may sell them houses and let them fields, What is the reason? [R. Yose] holds that the conquering made by an individual is not regarded as a proper conquering; hence in the case of fields, for which there are two problems, the rabbis made a decree, but in the case of houses, for which there are not two problems, the rabbis did not make a decree.
But abroad, the one as well as the other may be sold. What is the reason? Because it is far from Israel they do not make any decree.
Rav Judah said in the name of Shmuel: The halakhah follows R. Yose. R. Joseph: As long as he does not make it a community. And how many [residents] constitute a community? It was taught a community constitutes no less than three.
But should we not fear lest one Israelite go and sell a property to one non-Jew, and then another sell to two? Abaye said: We are commanded not to place a stumbling block, but we are not commanded to not to place a stumbling block before stumbling block.
Even in a place where they said that renting is permitted. This implies that there
are places where renting is not permitted. 

Daf 21b

Thus the anonymous mishnah accords with R. Meir for R. Yose allows renting in all places.
In all places one should not rent them a bath-house. It has been taught: Rabban Shimon b. Gamaliel said: One should not rent his bath-house to a non-Jew, for it is called by the owner's name, and the non-Jew will work in it on Shabbat and festivals.
But to a Samaritan is it permitted? Say that he might do work on the intermediate days of the festival. On the intermediate days we too do such work.
But renting a field to a non-Jew is permitted! What is the reason? Because people will say that he is merely a tenant working for his tenancy. With regard to a bath-house people will also say that he is working for his tenancy? People do not generally rent a bath-house on terms for tenancy.
It was taught: R. Shimon b. Elazar says: One should not rent one's field to a Samaritan, for it is called by the owner's name and the Samaritan will do work on it on the intermediate days of the festival. But what about to a non-Jew? It is permitted? Because they will say that he is a tenant working for his own tenancy. If so, why should it not be said in the case of a Samaritan, too, that he is a tenant working for his own tenancy?


Daf 22a

R. Shimon b. Elazar is not thinking about tenancy. Rather why is it permitted in the case of a non-Jew? Because if he is told [not to work on forbidden days] he obeys. The Samaritan will not listen to a Jew who tells him not to work on hol hamoed. The Samaritan believes that he knows more than the Jew, and in their system of laws, working a field on hol hamoed is permitted. 
The Talmud notes that there is an additional reason for why it is prohibited to rent a field to a Samaritan. This will give the Samaritan an opportunity to work the field on hol hamoed. Providing a person with an opportunity to transgress is considered placing a stumbling block before the bling. Thus there are really two reasons why one should not do this.
Two saffron-growers, the non-Jew took charge of the field on Shabbat, and the Israelite took charge on Sunday. They came before Rava; and he permitted the partnership.
Ravina raised a difficulty on Rava: If an Israelite and a non-Jew leased a field in partnership, the Israelite should not say subsequently to the non-Jew, Take your portion of the profit for the work on Shabbat, and I will take as mine for the week day. 
But if they made such a condition at the outset, it is permitted. But if they calculate the profit it is forbidden. Rava was embarrassed. Subsequently, it was revealed that the partners had indeed laid down that condition originally.
R. Gavihah of Be-Katil said: That was a case of orlah plants, the non-Jew ate the produce during the orlah years and the Israelite during [a corresponding number of] permitted years. They came before Rava who permitted it.
But did not Ravina raise a difficulty on Rava? [No,] it was in order to support it. Then why was Rava embarrassed? That never occurred at all. 
What if the partners did not make any arrangements, neither before nor after? Can the Jew take the profits from Sunday and the non-Jew from Saturday?
In the end, the baraita cannot answer this question. The first half would lead to the ruling that without any explicit arrangements it is prohibited. And the second half would lead to the opposite. 
May we return to you, chapter “Before their festivals”
Non-Jewish idolaters are suspected of bestiality. Therefore Jews should not place animals in their inns. By doing so they would be encouraging the non-Jew to engage in bestiality, which according to Jewish ideology is also forbidden to non-Jews. It is one of the seven “Noahide” commandments which are incumbent upon non-Jews to observe. Jewish women should not be alone with non-Jewish idolaters for they are suspected of being rapists. Jewish men should not be alone with non-Jewish idolaters for they are suspected of being murderers.

Daf 22b

GEMARA. They raised the following in contradiction: One may buy from them cattle for a sacrifice, and we need not fear lest they engaged in bestiality with it, or lest they designated as an offering to idols, or lest it had been worshipped.
Now it makes sense not to fear that it was designated as an offering to idols or made an object of worship, since if it had been so designated or worshipped, its owner would not have sold it; but we should be concerned lest it engaged in bestiality! R. Tahlifa said in the name of R. Shila b. Avina in the name of Rav: A non-Jew would have regard for his cattle, lest it becomes barren.
This makes sense in the case of female cattle but what do you say about the males? R. Kahana said: Since it weakens their flesh.
Then what about that which was taught: “One may buy cattle of from their shepherd” let us be concerned lest he engage in bestiality with it? Their shepherd would be afraid of losing his wages.
What then about that which was taught: “One should not turn over cattle to a non-Jewish shepherd” why not say that their shepherd would be afraid of losing his wages?
They who know each other, would fear. We who do not know about this, would not be afraid. Rabbah said: This is what people, “As the stylus penetrates the stone so the spy knows the other.”
In that case, we should not buy male cattle from women, for fear that they will use the animal for bestiality! She would be afraid of being followed about by the animal.
Then what about that which R. Joseph taught: “A widow should not rear dogs, nor accommodate a student as a guest”? Now this makes sense in the case of a student, as she might rely on his modesty, but in the case of a dog why not say that she would be afraid of being followed about by it?
Since when she throws it a piece of meat, people will say that it is following her because of the piece of meat.
Why then should we not leave female animals alone with female non-Jews? Mar Ukba b. Hama said: Because non-Jews frequent their neighbors’ wives, and should one by chance not find her in, and find the cattle there, he might engage in bestiality with it.
You may also say that even if he should find her in he might engage in bestiality with the animal, as a Master has said: Non-Jews prefer the beasts of Israelites to their own wives, for R. Yohanan said: When the serpent came unto Eve he infused pollution into her. If that be so [the same should apply] also to Israel! When Israel stood at Sinai their pollution was eliminated, but the non-Jews, who did not stand at Sinai, their pollution did not cease.
The question was asked: How about birds? Come and hear: Rav Judah said in the name of Shmuel in the name of R. Hanina: I saw a non-Jew buy a goose in the market, have sex with it, and then strangle it, roast, and eat it. R. Jeremiah of Difti said: I saw an Arab who bought a side [of meat], pierced it in order to have sex with it, and then roast it and eat it.


Daf 23a

Ravina said: There is no contradiction; the one teaching [prohibits it] ab initio; the other [permits it] ex post facto.
And from where do we know that a difference is made between ab initio and ex post facto? From the following: We have learned: A woman should not be alone with them, because they are suspected of fornication; and against this they cast the following: A woman who had been imprisoned by non-Jews in connection with monetary matters, is permissible to her husband, but if on a capital charge, she is forbidden to her husband.
Does this not prove that we differentiate between ab initio and ex post facto? But how would you know this! Perhaps I could say to you that the prohibition applies even after it happened, but here the reason is that the non-Jew will be afraid to lose his money!
You can indeed prove it by what is stated in the second clause: “If on a capital charge, she is forbidden to her husband.” So there is no more [to be said about this].
Pedat said: There is no contradiction; the one is [according to] R. Eliezer, the other is [according to] the rabbis. For we have learned in connection with the red heifer: R. Eliezer says: It must not be bought from a non-Jew, but the sages permit it. Do they not disagree over this: R. Eliezer holds that we are concerned about bestiality while the rabbis hold that we are not concerned about bestiality?
From where [do you we know this]? Perhaps all agree that we are not concerned about bestiality, and here the reason for R. Eliezer’s opinion is like that which was said by Rav Judah in the name of Rav, for Rav Judah said in the name of Rav: [In the case of the red heifer] even if a bundle of sacks was laid on her she is disqualified, but in the case of the calf, only if she had been made to draw a burden.
[It may thus be that] one master is of the opinion that we should be concerned, and the other that we should not be concerned! Do not let this enter your mind; for the sake of a small comfort one would not risk a big loss.
Let us then say likewise that for the sake of a little enjoyment one would not risk so big a loss! In that instance his inclination impels him.
But [still] it may be that all agree that we are not suspicious about adultery, but here the reason for R. Eliezer's ruling is as was taught by Shila? For Shila taught: What is the reason for R. Eliezer's ruling? “Speak to the children of Israel, and they shall bring to you” (Numbers 19:2), [which implies that] Israelites shall bring, but non-Jews should not bring.
Do not think this; for it is taught in the second clause: So too R. Eliezer disqualified all other kinds of sacrifices. Now were you to reason as Shila taught, it would make sense in the case of the [red] heifer, for “bringing,” is written in connection with it, but does Scripture ever mention “bringing” in connection with other sacrifices? But perhaps the rabbis disagree with R. Eliezer


Daf 23b

only in the case of the [red] heifer which is very valuable, but in the case of other sacrifices they agree with him?
But then whose opinion would be that which was taught: We may purchase from them cattle for [ordinary] sacrifices? Neither that of R. Eliezer nor that of the rabbis!
Moreover, it is explicitly taught: How did the rabbis refute R. Eliezer, “All the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered together to you . . . they shall come up with acceptance on my altar” (Isaiah 60:7).
The difference of opinion up until here is only in regard to suspicion [of bestiality], but if we know for certain that he had bestiality with it, it is unfit. From here then you can deduce that the [degree of sanctity of the red heifer] is that of sacrifices offer on the altar; for if it had only the sanctity of those [dedicated] to repairs of the temple, even bestiality would not disqualify it.
The red heifer may be different for the Torah calls it a sin-offering.
If that be so, it should be disqualified if born through caesarean: and were you to say that it is so indeed, why then are we taught: If one dedicates [as a red heifer] born through a caesarean section, it is unfit, but R. Shimon declares it as fit?
And were you to say that R. Shimon follows here the opinion he expressed elsewhere that one born of caesarean section is to be regarded as a properly born child, has not R. Yohanan said that R. Shimon agreed, in regard to sacred things, that it is not sacred?
Rather the case of the red heifer is different; since a blemish renders it unfit, bestiality and idolatrous worship also render it unfit; as it is written, “[nor shall you accept such [animals] from a foreigner for offering as food for your God], for they are corrupted, they have a defect” (Leviticus 22:25) and the School of R. Ishmael taught: Wherever “corruption” is mentioned it only means fornication and idolatry:
“fornication,” as it is said, “for all flesh had corrupted its way upon the earth” (Genesis 6:12); and “idolatry,” or Scripture says, “Lest you corrupt and make yourself a graven image” (Deuteronomy 4:16), and since a blemish renders the red heifer unfit, bestiality and idolatrous worship also render it unfit.
The above text stated: Shila taught: What is the reason for R. Eliezer's ruling? It is as it is written, “Speak to the children of Israel and they shall bring” (Numbers 19:2), [which imply that] Israelites shall bring, but non-Jews should not bring. According to this, “Speak to the children of Israel that they bring for me an offering” (Exodus 25:2) Israelites should bring and non-Jews should not bring.
And were you to say that this is indeed so, surely Rav Judah said in the name of Shmuel: They asked R. Eliezer: To what extent must one go to honor one's father and mother? He answered: Go forth and see how a certain gentile in Ashkelon, Dama the son of Natina was his name, acted. Once they asked him about selling precious stones for the ephod 

Daf 24a

at a profit of six hundred thousand [denarii]. (R. Kahana says eight hundred thousand); but the keys were lying under his father's head-pillow, so he would not disturb him!
The words “onyx stones” are detached from the preceding words. But are they not followed by “and stones to be set” which again connects them?
Moreover, it teaches at the end of that tradition: In a subsequent year a “red heifer” was born in his herd. The sages of Israel called on him. He said to them: I know that if I were to demand from you all the money in the world, you would give it to me, but all I ask of you now is that money that I had lost because of my father!
In that case it was purchased through [the agency of] Israelite merchants.
R. Eliezer is not then concerned about bestiality?
Has it not been taught: They said to R. Eliezer: It happened that they bought [a red heifer] from a non-Jew named Dama — or, as some say, named Remetz . R. Eliezer replied: What does that prove? Israelites were watching the heifer from the hour of its birth? R. Eliezer has two reasons [why the red heifer may not be bought from a non-Jew]: the word “bought” as well as the suspicion of bestiality.
The Master said: Israelites watched the heifer from the time of its birth. But we should be suspicious that they had bestiality with its mother when she was pregnant, for Rava said: The young of a goring cow is unfit, for it was both the cow and her young that did the goring. Likewise the young of an animal that had engaged in bestiality is unfit, since the animal and the young were ill-used together? Rather, say that Israelites watched it from the time it was first formed.
Let us be concerned that they had bestiality with them mother, for we have learned: All [animals] which are forbidden to be offered on the altar — their young are permitted. And on this it was taught that R. Eliezer forbade.
Now, this makes sense according to Rava, for Rava said in the name of R. Nahman: The dispute only applies to a case of an animal which engaged in bestiality when already dedicated as a sacrifice; but if when still non-sacred, all agree that [the young] is permitted.
But to R. Huna b. Hinena who said in the name of R. Nahman that the dispute applies to a case of an animal with which they engaged in bestiality while still non-sacred, but if when already dedicated all agree that [the young] is forbidden what could you say?
Rather we must say that the mother, too, was watched by Israelites since the time it was first formed. But let us suspect that they had bestiality with the mother's mother? This suspicious we are not.
The Master said: “It was watched by Jews from the time it was first formed.’ How did they know it [would be born a red heifer]? R. Kahana said: A red cup would be passed before [the mother] when the male is mating with her.
If that is so, why should [a red heifer] be so costly? Because even two hairs [of another color] disqualify her. Then why [use this means] on their [animals]? R. Kahana said: When it was assumed [to be of the breed that could form a red heifer].
R. Ammi and R. Isaac Nafha were sitting in the tent of R. Isaac Nafha. One of them began and said: Thus R. Eliezer forbade [animals bought from a non-Jew] for all sacrifices.
Thereupon the other one began and said: What difficulty did the others raise against R. Eliezer, “All the flocks of Kedar shall be assembled for you, [The rams of Nebaioth shall serve your needs; They shall be welcome offerings on My altar] (Isaiah 60:7). R. Eliezer replied: All these will become self-made proselytes in the time to come.
R. Joseph said: What is the verse [for this]? For then will I turn to the peoples a pure language, [that they may all call upon the name of the Lord]” (Zephaniah 3:9). Abaye said to him: Perhaps this merely means that they will turn away from idolatry? And R. Joseph answered him: The verse continues, “and to serve Him with one consent.”
This is how R. Papa reported it; but R. Zevid reported thus: Both [R. Ammi and R. Isaac Nafha] said: Thus, R. Eliezer forbade [animal bought from non-Jews] for all sacrifices. And both of them said: How did his colleagues refute R. Eliezer? “All the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered etc.”, and R. Eliezer said: They will all become self-made proselytes in the time to come,
And what is the verse? “For then will I turn to the peoples a pure language, that they may all call upon the name of the Lord” R. Joseph objected: Perhaps this merely Perhaps this merely means that they will turn away from idolatry? Abaye said to him: The verse continues, “to serve Him with one consent.”
They raised an objection: “And Moses said: You must also give into our hand sacrifices and burnt-offerings” (Exodus 10:25). It was different before the giving of the Torah.
Come and hear: “And Jethro, Moses’ father-in-law, took a burnt-offering and sacrifices for God” (Exodus 18:12). Jethro also occurred before the giving of the Torah This works according to the one who says that Jethro's [visit to Moses] came before the giving of the Torah, but according to the one who says that

Daf 24b

Jethro's [visit] came after the giving of the Torah, what can you say? Rather, Jethro bought it from an Israelite.
Come and hear: “And Saul said, They have brought them from the Amalekites; for the people spared the best of the sheep and of the oxen, to sacrifice to the Lord your God!” (I Samuel 15:15). What is meant by the best is the price of the best. 
Then why bring the best? So that they find eager buyers.
Come and hear: “And Araunah said to David, Let my lord the King take and offer up what seems good unto him: behold the oxen for the burnt offering and morigim and the furniture of the oxen for the wood” (II Samuel 24:22). R. Nahman said: Araunah was a resident alien.
What are morigim? Ulla said: A “turbil bed.” And what is a “turbil bed”? A “goat with hooks” which is used for threshing. R. Joseph said: What verse shows this? “Behold I will make you a new sharp threshing instrument [morag] having teeth; you shall thresh the mountains, and beat them small, and shall make the hills as chaff” (Isaiah 41:15).
They raised an objection: “And they sacrificed the cattle as a burnt-offering to the Lord” (I Samuel 6:14)! This was a temporary ruling. 
This also makes sense, for had not that been the case, how could a female be used as a burnt offering?
What is the difficulty? Perhaps this was a private “high place,” and it accords with the opinion of R. Adda b. Ahava; for R. Adda b. Ahava said: How do we know that a female sacrifice is fit as a burnt offering on a private high-place? As it is said, “And Shmuel took a suckling lamb and offered it for a burnt offering” (I Samuel 7:9).
“But he offered him” implies that it was a male! R. Nahman b. Yitzchak said: It is written, and offered her.
R. Yohanan said: There are limits: under the age of three years [an animal] becomes infertile, but from the age of three years it does not become infertile.
They raised all of the above difficulties as refutation, and he replied that they referred to animals under the age of three years.
Come and hear: “And the cattle they offered as a burnt offering unto the Lord” (I Samuel 6:14). This, too, refers to those under the age of three years.
R. Huna the son of R. Natan objected: In that case the words, “and their calves they shut up at home,” refer to those under three years; but does a cow under three years give birth? Have we not learned: In the case of a cow or of a donkey which is three years old [the one born] certainly belongs to the priest; from that age upward it is doubtful. Rather, it is clear that the earlier resolutions were correct.
“And the cattle took the straight way [vayisharnah] on the way to Bet Shemesh” (I Samuel 6:12). What is the meaning of the word vayisharnah? R. Yohanan said in the name of R. Meir: They sang. R. Zutra b. Tobiah said in the name of Rav: They directed their faces towards the Ark and sang. 
And what did they sing? R. Yohanan said in the name of R. Meir: “Then Moses and the Children of Israel sang” (Exodus 15:1). R. Yohanan himself said: “And on that day you shall say, Give thanks unto the Lord, call upon His name, make known His doings among the peoples” (Isaiah 12:4) etc.
R. Shimon b. Lakish said: [They sang] the “orphaned” Psalm: “A Psalm. Sing unto the Lord a new song, for He has done marvelous things; His right hand, and His holy arm, have wrought salvation for Him” (Psalms 98:1). R. Eliezer said: “The Lord reigns, let the peoples tremble” (Psalms 99:1). R. Shmuel b. Nahmani said: “The Lord reigns; He is clothed in majesty” (Psalms 93:1).
R. Yitzchak Nafha said: [They sang:] Sing, sing, acacia; ascend in all your glory; overlaid with golden embroidery, exalted by the book [devir] of the palace, and magnificent with jewels.
R. Ashi taught this statement made by R. Isaac on the following: And it came to pass, when the Ark set forward, that Moses said, Rise up, O Lord etc. What did the Israelites say? R. Yitzchak said: Sing, sing, acacia….
Rav said: According to whom do the Persians calling a book “devir”? From here: “Now the name of Devir before time was Kiryat-Sefer” (Judges 1:11).
R. Ashi said: According to whom do the Persians call a menstruant a “Dashtana”? From here, “For the way of a woman is upon me” (Genesis 31:35).

Daf 25a

“And the sun stood still, and the moon stayed until the nation had avenged themselves of their enemies. Is not this written in the book of Yashar” (Joshua 10:3). What is the book of Yashar? R. Hiyya b. Abba said in the name of R. Yohanan: It is the book of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, who are designated as righteous, as it is said, “Let me die the death of the righteous” (Numbers 23:10).
And where is this incident hinted at [in Genesis]? “And his seed shall fill the nations” (Genesis 48:19): When shall [Ephraim's fame] fill the nations? At the time when the sun will stand still for Joshua. “And the sun stayed in the midst of the heaven and hastened not to go down for about a whole day” (Joshua 10:13). How long [did the sun stand still]?
R. Joshua b. Levi said: Twenty four hours: [The sun] moved for six hours and stood still for six, then it moved for six and stood still for six, then it moved for six and stood still for six; the whole thing took about a whole day
R. Elazar said: Thirty-six hours; it moved for six hours and stood still for twelve, it then moved for six and stood still for twelve so that its ceasing alone equaled a whole day. R. Shmuel b. Nahmani said: Forty-eight; it moved for six and stood for twelve, it then moved for six and stood still for twenty-four, as its says, “and hastened not to go down for about a whole day,” which implies that the previous stoppage did not equal a whole day.
There are those who say that that it was over the additional hours which they disputed. R. Joshua b. Levi said: They were twenty-four; it moved for six and stood for twelve, then moved for six and stood for twelve — its halt thus equaled a whole day; R. Eleazar said: Thirty-six; it moved for six and stood for twelve, then moved for six and stood for twenty-four, “and hastened not to go down about a whole day.”
R. Shmuel b. Nahmani said: Forty-eight; it moved for six and stood for twentyfour, then moved for six and again stood for twenty-four; comparing its standing still [at noon] with that of setting time; just as the one at setting time equaled a whole day, so the standing still [in the middle of the sky] equaled a whole day. 
A Tanna taught: Just as the sun stood still for Joshua, so did the sun stand still for Moses and for Nakdimon b. Gorion. [As to the case of] Joshua, there are the scriptural verses; [that of] Nakdimon b. Gorion is a tradition; From where do we know about Moses? It may be derived from the identical [expression] “I will begin” [used in both cases]. Here it is written, “I will begin to put the dread of you” (Deuteronomy 2:25), and there, referring to Joshua, it is written, “I will begin to magnify you” (Joshua 3:7). 
R. Yohanan said: It may be derived from the identical expression “put” [used in both cases]. Here is written, “I will begin to put the dread of you”, and there, concerning Joshua, it is written, “In the day when the Lord put the Amorites” (Joshua 10:12). 
R. Shmuel b. Nahmani said: You can detect it in the very wording of the verse itself, “[This day will I begin to deliver the dread of you and the fear of you upon the peoples that are under the whole heaven, who,] when they hear the report of you, shall tremble and be in anguish because of you” (Deuteronomy  2:25): When did they tremble and were in anguish because of you? When the sun stood still for Moses.
They raised a difficulty: [Does not it say in the case of Joshua] “And there was no day like that before it or after it?” (Joshua 10:14). If you want you may explain that there was no day that lasted as long as that one; Or if you want, you may say it means that there were no hailstones [as in the case of Joshua], of which it is written, “And it came to pass, as they fled from before Israel, while they were in the descent of Bet-Horon, that the Lord cast down great stones from heaven upon them unto Azeka and they died” (Joshua 10:11).
It is written, “And said to teach the Children of Judah [to handle] the bow, behold it is written in the Book of Yashar” (II Samuel 2:18). What is the book of Yashar? R. Hiyya b. Abba said in the name of R. Yohanan: It is the book of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, who are designated as righteous, as it is said, “Let me die the death of the righteous” (Numbers 23:10).
And where is this fact hinted at? “Judah, you, your brothers shall praise; your hand shall be on the neck of your enemies” (Genesis 49:8).  kind of fighting requires hand to be directed at the [enemy's neck]? Say that this is archery.
R. Elazar said: It is the book of Deuteronomy, which is here called the Book of Yashar, because it is written, “And you shall do that which is right [yashar] in the sight of the Lord” (Deuteronomy 6:18). And where does it hint [at Judah's archery]? “His hands shall contend for him” (Deuteronomy 33:7): What kind of fighting requires both hands? Surely, archery.
R. Shmuel b. Nahmani said: It is the Book of Judges. And why do they call it Sefer Hayashar, because it contains the verse, “In those days there was no King in Israel; every man did that which was right [“yashar”] in his own eyes. And where is this hinted at? “That the generations of the Children of Israel might know, to teach them war” (Judges 3:2). What kind of warfare requires teaching? Surely, archery.
But how do we know that this verse refers to Judah? From the scriptural verse, “Who shall go up for us first against the Canaanites, to fight against them? And the Lord said, Judah shall go up” (Judges 1:1).
“And the cook took up the thigh, and that which was upon it and set it before Saul” (I Samuel 9:24). What means, “that which was upon it’? R. Yohanan said: the thigh and the tail. And what does “that which was upon it” mean? The thigh which is next to the tail; 
R. Elazar said: the thigh and the breast. And what does “that which was upon it” mean? The placing of the breast upon the thigh when these have to be formally waved. R. Shmuel b. Nahmani said: the leg and the cap; and what does “that which was upon it” mean? The cap which is above the leg.
A woman should not be alone with idolaters. What are we dealing with here? If to one idolater, then in the case of an Israelite would it be permitted? Have we not learned, “One man should not remain alone even with two women”?

Daf 25b

It must therefore refer to three idolaters. But would this be permitted in the case of loose Israelites? Have we not learned: “But one woman may be alone with two men,” and Rav Judah said in the name of Shmuel: This refers only to moral men, but as to loose ones, it is not permitted, even if they are ten. And it happened that ten men took her out on a bier [for an immoral purpose]!
It is necessary in a case where the man's wife is present. An idolater, his wife will not prevent him, but the wife of an Israelite will prevent him.
But derive that this is prohibited for fear of murder? R. Yirmiyah said: We are here dealing with a woman of high repute, so that he would be afraid of killing her. R. Idi replied: Every woman has her weapons on her. 
What is the practical difference between them? The practical difference is the case of a woman who is considered important among men but not among women.
It was taught in agreement in accordance with the opinion of R. Idi b. Abin: A woman, even though she in a state of peace, should not be alone with them, because they are suspected of fornication.
No man should be alone with them. Our Rabbis taught: If an Israelite happens to be joined by an idolater while on the road, he should let him (the idolater) walk on his right. R. Ishmael the son of R. Yohanan the son of R. Yohanan b. Berokah says: [If  the idolater is armed] with a sword, he should let him walk on his right; if with a stick on the left.
If they are ascending or descending, the Israelite should not be on the lower level and the idolater on the higher. Rather the Israelite should be higher and the idolater lower; Nor should the Israelite bend down in front of him, lest he smashes his skull
If the idolater asks him where he is going, he should say towards a place beyond his actual destination, just as our father Jacob acted towards the wicked Esau; as it is written, “Until I come unto my lord to Seir” (Genesis 33:14),
while it is written, “And Jacob journeyed to Succoth” (Genesis 33:17). 
It once happened that some disciples of R. Akiva were journeying to Khziv. They were overtaken by bandits who asked them where they were going. They replied, “To Acco.” On reaching Khziv they separated from them. The bandits then said to them, “Whose disciples are you?” And they replied, ‘The disciples of R. Akiva” They said, “Happy are R. Akiva and his disciples, for no evil man has ever encountered them.
R. Menashe was once going

Daf 26a

to Be-Toratha. Thieves met him on the road. They asked him where he was going. He said, “Toward Pumbeditha.” When he reached Be-Toratha he separated. They said to him, “You are a disciple of [Rav] Judah the deceiver.” He to them, “Do you really know him? May it be the [Divine] will that these men be under his ban.” 
For twenty-two years they went on stealing but did not meet with any success. When they saw this, they all came to ask for the ban to be revoked. Now there was among them one weaver who did not come to have his ban annulled, and he was devoured by a lion. This is what is meant by what people say: A a weaver who is not shy, a year is deducted from his allotted years
Come now and see what difference there is between mere thieves of Babylon and robbers of Eretz Yisrael!
A Jewish woman should not act as midwife to a non-Jewish woman, because she would be delivering a child for idolatry. But a non-Jewish woman may act as midwife to a Jewish woman. A Jewish woman should not suckle the child of a non-Jewish woman, But a non-Jewish woman may suckle the child of a Jewish woman in her premises.
GEMARA. Our Rabbis taught: An Israelite woman should not act as midwife for an idolatrous woman, because she delivers a child to idolatry; nor should an idolatrous woman act as midwife to an Israelite woman because they are suspected of murder, the words of R. Meir.
But the sages say: An idolatrous woman may act as midwife to an Israelite woman so long as there are others standing by, but not if she is acting on her own. But R. Meir says: Even if others are standing by her [she may not act as midwife], for she may find an opportunity to put her hand on the [infant's] soft spot and kill it, and they will not see her.
Like the incident of that woman who, on called her neighbor, “Jewish midwife, the daughter of a Jewish midwife!” She said back, “May many evils befall that woman, as I have spilled their blood like the froth of the river.”
The Rabbis could say to you: This is not so; she may have merely given her some kind of retort.
An Israelite woman should not nurse etc. Our Rabbis taught: An Israelite woman should not nurse the child of an idolater, because she is raising a child for idolatry; nor should an idolatrous woman nurse  child of an Israelite woman, because she is liable to murder it, the words of R. Meir. But the Sages say: An idolatrous may nurse a child of an Israelite woman, so long as there are others standing by her, but not if she is on her own. R. Meir says: Even if others are standing by her [it is still prohibited] for she may take the opportunity to rubbing in poison on her breast beforehand and so kill the child.
And both cases are necessary; for if we were told about a midwife only [we might have thought that] only in that case do the Sages permit for others see her, but in the case of nursing, where it is possible for her to apply poison to the breast beforehand and kill the child, they might agree with R. Meir.
If [on the other hand] we were told only about nursing, [we might have thought that] only in that case does R. Meir forbid, because she could kill the child by applying poison to her breast beforehand, but in the case of a midwife, where she could do no harm while others are standing by her, he might agree with the Rabbis; [hence both are] necessary.
The following was cited in contradiction: A Jewish woman may act as midwife for a non-Jewish woman for payment but not for free. R. Yoseph said: Payment is permitted to prevent enmity.
R. Joseph thought that even on Shabbat it is permitted to act as midwife for a non-Jew for payment, so as to avoid enmity. Abaye said to him: The Jewish woman could say [in excuse], “For our own, who keep the Shabbat, we desecrate it, but for you, who do not observe Shabbat, we do not desecrate it.”
R. Joseph thought that even nursing for payment should be allowed because of enmity Abaye said to him: She can say to him [in excuse], if she is unmarried, “I want to get married,” or, if she is married, “I will not pollute myself before my husband.”
R. Joseph thought to say in regard to what has been taught: Idolaters and shepherds of small cattle one is not obligated to bring them up [from a pit] but one should not cast them in it; but for payment it is permitted to bring them up to prevent enmity. 
Abaye said to him: He could say [in excuse], “My son is on the roof’, or, “I have to keep an appointment at the court.”
R. Abahu taught in front of R. Yohanan: Idolaters and [Jewish] shepherds of small cattle need not be brought up [from a pit]

Daf 26b

though they should not be cast in, but heretics, informers, and apostates may be cast in, and need not be brought up.
R. Yohanan said to him: I have been teaching “And so shall you do with every lost thing of your brother's” (Deuteronomy 22:3) that this comes to include the apostate, and you say he may be cast down. Erase [from this list] apostates! 
But let him resolve that the one might apply to the kind of apostate who eats carrion to satisfy his appetite, and the other to an apostate who eats carrion to provoke? In his opinion, an apostate eating carrion meat to provoke is the same as a heretic.
It was stated: [In regard to the term] “apostate” there is a disagreement between R. Aha and Ravina; one says that [he who eats forbidden food] to satisfy his appetite, is an apostate, but [he who does so] to provoke is a heretic; while the other says that even [one who does so] to provoke is merely an apostate. And who is a “heretic”? One who actually worships idols.
They objected: If one eats a flea or a gnat he is an apostate. Now here this must have been done to provoke, and yet we are taught that he is merely an apostate! Even in there he may just be trying to see what a forbidden thing tastes like.
The Master said: They may be cast in and need not be brought up — if they may be cast in, does it need to say they need not be brought up?  R. Joseph b. Hama said in the name of R. Sheshet: It is only necessary to teach that if there was a step in the sides of the pit, one may scrape it off, giving as a reason for doing so that a wild animal should not go down in there.
Raba and R. Joseph both of them said: It was only necessary that if there is a stone lying by the pit opening, one may cover the pit with it, saying that he does it for [the safety] of passing animals. Rabina said: It is was only necessary that if there is a ladder there, he may remove it, saying, I want it for getting my son down from the roof.
Our Rabbis taught: An Israelite may circumcise a non-Jew for the purpose of becoming a proselyte, but not for [the purpose of] removing a worm. But a non-Jew may not circumcise an Israelite, because they are suspected of murder, the words of R. Meir.
The Sages said: A non-Jew may circumcise an Israelite, so long as others are standing by him, but not while he is on his own. R. Meir said: Not even when others are standing by him, for he may find occasion to let the knife slip and so cut off his genitals.
Does then R. Meir hold that a non-Jew is not [to be allowed to circumcise]? But the opposite is proved by the following: In a town where there is no Jewish physician, but there is a physician who is a Samaritan and one who is a non-Jew, let the non-Jew circumcise and not the Samaritan, the words of R. Meir. R. Judah said: Let the Samaritan circumcise and not the non-Jew. 
Reverse [the names]: R. Meir says that the Samaritan and not the non-Jew can circumcise, and R. Judah says the non-Jew and not the Samaritan.
Does then R. Judah hold that a non-Jew may circumcise? But has it not been taught: R. Judah said: From where can it be deduced that circumcision performed by a non-Jew is invalid? From this verse, “And as for you, you shall keep my covenant” (Genesis 17:9).
Indeed, do not reverse the positions, but say that we are here dealing

Daf 27a

with an expert physician. For when R. Dimi came he said in the name of R. Yohanan that if [a non-Jewish physician] is recognized as an expert by the public, it is permissible [for him to circumcise an Israelite]. Does then 
R. Judah hold that a Samaritan may [circumcise an Israelite]? But has it not been taught: An Israelite may circumcise a Samaritan, but a Samaritan may not circumcise an Israelite, because he performs the circumcision for the sake of Mount Gerizim, the words of R. Judah.
R. Yose said to him: Where in the Torah do we find that circumcision must be performed specifically for its purpose? Rather he may go on performing it until the day of his death.
Rather we must then reverse names as we did before, and as to the difficulty that R. Judah contradicts R. Judah— the former opinion should be ascribed to
R. Judah the Prince. For it has been taught: R. Judah the Prince says: From where do we learn that circumcision performed by a non-Jew is invalid? Scripture says, “And as for you, you shall keep my covenant.”
R. Hisda: What is the reasoning of R. Judah? As it is written, “To the Lord, he shall circumcise” (Exodus 12:48). And R. Yose, “Circumcise, he shall circumcise” (Genesis 17:13)
But as to the other [R. Yose], is it not written “the Lord he shall circumcise? That refers to the Pesah sacrifice.  as to the other [R. Judah] is it not written, “Circumcise, he shall circumcise”? The Torah speaks in human language.
It has been stated: From where do we know that circumcision performed by a non-Jew is invalid? Daru b. Papa said in the name of Rav: [From the words,] “And as for you, you shall keep my covenant.” While R. Yohanan: “Circumcise, you shall surely circumcise” [which he reads as if it says “he who is circumcised shall circumcise.”
What practical difference is there between these two? The case of a circumcised Arab or a circumcised Gibeonite: According to the one who said, “he who is circumcised shall circumcise” he may, but according to the one who says, “And as for you, you shall keep my covenant.”
But according to the one who says, “He who is circumcised shall circumcise” is he really allowed, have we not learned, [He who says], “I vow not to derive benefit anything belonging to uncircumcised persons,” may derive benefit from uncircumcised Israelites, but may not derive benefit from circumcised non-Jew. Thus, even though they are circumcised it is as if they are uncircumcised.
Rather they differ in the case of an Israelite whose brothers died because of circumcision so that he was not circumcised: according to the one who says, “You shall keep my covenant” he may: while according to the one who says, “He who is circumcised shall circumcise,” he may not.
And to the one who said, “He who is circumcised shall circumcise” he may not? Have we not learned: [He who says,] “I vow not to derive benefit from anything belonging to circumcised persons, must not derive benefit from uncircumcised Israelites, but may derive benefit from circumcised non-Jews: which proves that Israelites who are not circumcised are considered as circumcised.
Rather they differ in the case of a woman. According to the one who says “You shall keep my covenant,” she may not circumcise, since a woman is not subject to circumcision, while according to the one who says “He who is circumcised shall circumcise,” she may, for a woman it is as if she is circumcised.
But does anyone really hold that a woman is not [qualified to perform circumcision]. Is it not written, “Then Zipporah took a flint” (Exodus 4:25)? Read it, “she caused to be taken.” But it also says, “And she cut off!” Read it, “And she caused it to be cut off,” by asking another person, a man, to do it. Or you may say it means that she only began and Moses came and completed it.
We may allow them to heal us when the healing relates to money, but not personal healing; Nor should we have our hair cut by them in any place, this is the opinion of Rabbi Meir. But the Sages said: in a public place it is permitted, but not when the two persons are alone.
GEMARA. What is “healing relating to money” and what is “personal healing”? Shall we say that “healing relating to money” means for payment and “personal healing” free? Then the Mishnah should have said: We may allow them to heal us for payment but not free!
Rather “healing related to money” must therefore mean where no danger is involved and “personal healing” where there is danger. But has not Rav Judah said: Even the wound over a bloodletting incision should not be healed by them?
Rather, “healing related to money” therefore relates to one's cattle, and personal healing to one's own body, about which Rav Judah said: Even the wound over a bloodletting incision should not be healed by them.
R. Hisda said in the name of Mar Ukba: But if he said to him that such and such medicine is good for him and such and such medicine is bad for him, it is permitted [to follow his advice]

Daf 27b

for he will think that he is merely asking him, and just as he is asking him so he will also ask others, so that if he gives the wrong advice, he will come to spoil his reputation.
Rava said in the name of R. Yohanan [and some say R. Hisda in the name of R. Yohanan]: In the case where it is doubtful whether [the patient] will live or die, we must not allow them to heal; but if he will certainly die, we may allow them to heal.
“Die”! Surely there is still the life of the hour [to be considered]? The life of the hour is not to be considered.
How do you know that the life of the hour is not to be considered? As it is written, “If we say: we will enter into the city, then the famine is in the city, and we shall die there” (II Kings 7:4). Now is there not the life of the hour [which they might lose]! This implies that the life of the hour is not to be considered.
An objection was raised: ‘No man should have any dealings with the heretics, nor is it allowed to be healed by them, even to save an hour’s worth of life.
It once happened that Ben Dama the son of R. Ishmael's sister was bitten by a snake and Jacob, a man of Kefar Sekaniah, came to heal him but R. Ishmael did not let him; whereupon Ben Dama said, “My brother R. Ishmael, let him, so that I may be healed by him. I will even cite a verse from the Torah that he is to be permitted,” but he did not manage to complete his saying, when his soul departed and he died.
R. Ishmael said about him, Happy are you Ben Dama for your body was pure and your soul left you in purity and you did not transgress the words of your colleagues, who said, “He who breaks through a fence, a snake shall bite him” (Ecclesiastes 10:8).
It is different with the teaching of the heretics, for he may come to be drawn after it.
The Master said: Nor have you transgressed the words of you colleagues who , “He who breaks through a fence, a snake shall bite him”? But a snake did indeed bite him! The snake of the rabbis [did not bite him] which can never be cured.
Now, what is it that he might have said? “He shall live by them,” (Leviticus 18:5) but not die by them.
And R. Ishmael? This is only meant when in private, but not in public; for it has been taught: R. Ishmael used to say: From where can we deduce that if they say to one, “Worship idol worship and you will not be killed,” that he may worship it so as not to be killed? Scripture says, “He shall live by them,” but not die by them. This might mean even in public, therefore Scripture says, “And you shall not profane My holy name” (Leviticus 22:32).
Rabbah b. Bar Hanah in the name of R. Yohanan: Any wound for which Shabbat may be profaned should not be healed by them (by non-Jews). Others say that Rabba b. Bar Hanah said: Any

Daf 28a

internal wound should not be healed by them. Hand and foot wounds are considered serious wounds for which one may break Shabbat even though they are not internal wounds. According to the first version, one may not be healed by a non-Jew for them, but according to the second version, one may since they are not truly internal wounds.
R. Zutra b. Tuvyah said in the name of Rav: Any wound which requires a [medical] opinion one may profane Shabbat for it. R. Shemen b. Abba said in the name of R. Yohanan: This burning fever is to be regarded as an internal wound for which Shabbat may be profaned.
Where does an internal wound begin? R. Ammi explained: On the lip and inward. R. Elazar asked: How about the gums and the teeth: Since they are hard, should they be regarded as external; or do we say that, since they are placed within [the mouth], they are to be regarded as internal? 
Abaye said: Come and hear: One who is troubled with his teeth must not rinse them with vinegar [on Shabbat]. If he is only “troubled” he must not [rinse them] but if they hurt him very much he may do it. Perhaps this Tanna would call “being troubled” even if they hurt very much.
Then come and hear this: R. Yohanan was troubled with scurvy [on his gums] and he went to a certain [non-Jewish] lady. She attended to him on Thursday and the Friday. He said: What about tomorrow? She replied: You will not need [the treatment]. But what if I do need it? he asked. She replied: Swear to me that you will not reveal [the remedy]. He said: I swear, to the God of Israel I will not reveal it. She revealed it to him. The next day he went out and expounded on it in his public lecture.
But did he not swear to her? He swore: “To the God of Israel I will not reveal it,” but I may reveal it to His people Israel. But is this not a desecration of God’s Name? He said this to her originally.
Now is it not evident then that [a sore on the gum] is regarded as an internal sore? R. Nahman b. Yitzchak said: Scurvy is different, because though starting in the mouth it extends to the intestines.
What is its symptom? If he places anything between his teeth, blood comes from the gums. What causes it? The chill of cold wheat and the heat of hot barley, also the remnant of fish-hash and flour. What did she apply to it? R. Aha the son of Rava said: Leaven-water with olive oil and salt. Mar son of R. Ashi said: Geese-fat smeared with a goose-quill.
Abaye said: I did all this but was not cured, until a certain Arab told me to get seeds of an olive not one third ripe and burn them on a new spade and spread [the ashes] on the gums. I did this and was cured.
But how could R. Yohanan do this: Did not Rabbah b. Bar Hanah say in the name of R. Yohanan: Any sore for which Shabbat may be transgressed should not be healed by a non-Jew? It is different with an important man.
What about R. Abahu, who too was a distinguished man, yet Jacob the heretic prepared for him a medicine for his leg, and were it not for R. Ammi and R. Asi who licked his leg, he would have cut his leg off?
The one [who attended] R. Yohanan was an expert physician. R. Abahu’s [doctor] was also an expert physician! It was different in the case of R. Abahu, for heretics establish within themselves the attitude of “let me die with the Philistines” (Judges 16:30).
Shmuel said: This gash is to be regarded as dangerous and Shabbat may be desecrated to heal it. What is the remedy? For stopping the bleeding, cress with vinegar; for cause [flesh] to rise on the wound, scavla scrapings and thornbush scrapings, or a salve made from the worms of the trash.
R. Safra said: These grapelike boils are the forerunners of the Angel of Death. What is the remedy? A tigna plant soaked in honey or parsley soaked in wine. In the meantime, one should bring a grape of the same size and rub it on the boil, a white grape for a white boil, and a black grape for a black boil.
Rava said: This abscess is a forerunner of fever. What is the remedy for it? One should snap it sixty times with his thumb and then cut open crosswise; But this is only so if the head is not yet white, but if its head is white, it matters not.
R. Jacob suffered


Daf 28b

from hemorrhoids and R. Ammi — some say R. Assi — directed him to take seven grains of ice plant, wrap them up in the collar of a shirt, tie it round with a white thread [of cattle-hair], dip it in white naphtha and burn it, and apply [the ashes] to the sore. While preparing this he should take the kernel of a bramble nut and apply its split side to his split side. But this is with regard to the upper crevice. What [is one to do] if it is the lower crevice?
One should take some fat of a goat that has not yet been opened [by birth], melt it and apply it.
And if he cannot do this, he should take three melon leaves which have faded in the shade, burn them and apply the ashes. In the absence of these, he should bring snail-shells, or else take olive-oil mixed with wax and he should smear it on a rag of linen in the summer and cotton wool in the winter.
R. Abahu had an earache and he was given some directions by R. Johanan — others say, by those in the House of Study. What were the directions? Similar to those of Abaye [who said]: My Mother told me that kidneys were only made to [heal] the ear. Rava also said: Minyomi the physician told me that any kind of fluid is bad for the ear except the juice from kidneys. One should take the kidney of a bald ram, cut it cross-wise and place it on glowing coals, and pour the water which comes out of it into the ear, neither cold nor hot, but tepid.
And if he can’t do this, one should take the fat of a large-size beetle, melt it and drip it [into the ear]. And if he can’t do this, he should fill the ear with oil, then he should make seven wicks out of green blades of wheat-stalks at the one end of which dry garlic ends and some white thread should be set alight while the other end is placed within the ear, the ear should be exposed to the light but care should be taken that no spark falls on it, each wick [when done with] should be replaced by another.
Another version is: And if this is not possible, he should prepare seven wicks of white thread and dip them in oil of balsam-wood setting light to the one end and placing the other end in the ear, each one, when done with, should be replaced by another, care being taken to avoid any sparks. 
And if this is not possible he should take tow cotton which has been dyed but not combed and place it within the ear, which should be placed above a fire, taking precaution against sparks. Another remedy: Take a tube of an old cane [which has been detached from the soil] for about a century and fill it with rock salt, then burn it and apply the ashes [to the sore part]. [Take as] thy mnemonic [to remember how to apply the foregoing,] in liquid form to a dry sore, and in dry form to a wet sore.
Rava b. Zutra in the name of R. Hanina: It is permissible to restore the ear into its proper position on Shabbat. R. Shmuel b. Judah taught: With the hand, but not by applying medicines. There are those who say: By applying medicine, but not with the hand. Why not? He might come to injure him.
R. Zutra b. Tuvyah in the name of Rav: An eye that got out of order, it is permissible to put blue paint on it on Shabbat. They thought that this is true only when the medical ingredients had been ground the previous day, but if it is necessary to grind them on the Sabbath and carry them through the public domain, it would not be permitted. One of the rabbis, and R. Jacob was his name, remarked to him: It was explained to me on behalf of Rav Judah that even grinding on the Sabbath and the carrying through the public street are permissible.
Rav Judah permitted painting one’s eye on Shabbat. R. Shmuel b. Judah said: He who acts according to Judah desecrates Shabbat. In the end he had an eye sore. He sent to ask of Rav Judah: Is it permitted or forbidden? He sent back [the following reply:] “To everyone else it is permitted — but to you it is forbidden.”
[Rav Judah said]: Was it on my own authority [that I permitted it?] It was on that of Mar Shmuel. It once happened to a maid-servant in Mar Shmuel's house that her eye became inflamed on a Sabbath. She cried, but no one attended her and her eye dropped. The next day Mar Shmuel went out and expounded that if one's eye gets out of order it is permissible to paint it on Shabbat. What is the reason? Because the tendons of the eye are dependent upon the valves of the heart.
What, for example [is considered a life-threatening eye injury]? R. Judah said: Such as discharge, pricking, congestion, watering, inflammation or the first stages of sickness, excluding the last stage of sickness or the brightening of the eyesight in which cases it is not permitted.
Rav Judah said: The sting of a wasp, the prick of a thorn, an abscess, a sore eye or an inflammation — for all these a bath-house is dangerous. Radishes are good for fever, and beets for cold shivers: the reverse is dangerous. Warm things [are good] for a scorpion [bite] and cold things for that by a wasp: the reverse is dangerous.

Daf 29a

Likewise warm things for a thorn prick and cold for an eruption: the reverse is dangerous.
Vinegar [is good] after letting blood and small fish in brine after fasting; the reverse is dangerous. Cress [after] blood-letting is dangerous. Fever is dangerous for blood-letting; so also are sore eyes dangerous for bloodletting. The second [day] after [eating] fish [may be used] for [the letting of] blood; the second day after bleeding, for [eating] fish; on the third day it is injurious.
Our rabbis taught: One who has his blood let should abstain from HGBSH: milk (H), cheese (G), onions (B) and pepperwort (SH). If one has eaten any of these: Abaye said: he should take a quarter of vinegar and a quarter of wine, mix them together and drink; and when he has to defecate, he should not defecate to the east of the town for the smell is bad.
R. Joshua b. Levi said: It is permitted to lift the unkali on Shabbat. What is the unkali? R. Abba said: The cartilage [in front] of the heart. What is the remedy for it? Take cumin, caraway, mint, wormwood, satureja and hyssop.
For [problems of] the heart, [mix it] in wine. And your mnemonic is “wine gladdens the heart of man” (Psalms 104:15). For [problems in] breathing, [mix it] in water. And your mnemonic is: “The breath of God hovered over the face of the water” (Genesis 1:2); For childbirth, mix it in beer. And your mnemonic is, “her pitcher on her shoulder” Genesis 24:15).
R. Aha the son of Rava ground all these together and took a fist-full [of the mixture] and drank it. R. Ashi ground each one separately and took a full pinch of it with his thumb and little finger. R. Papa said: I did all these but was not cured till an Arab told me to take a new jug, fill it with water and throw in a spoonful of honey, which stood overnight under the stars and the next day to drink the contents. I did this and was cured.
Our Rabbis taught: Six things help the sick to recover from sickness and their cure is real. And these are they: cabbage, beets, water in which dried chamomile had been soaked, the stomach [of an animal], the womb [of an animal] and the lobe above the liver; some say, also small fish; moreover small fish keep the whole human body in a fit condition. 
Ten things return the sick to his sickness, and to make his illness severe. And these are they: to eat ox-meat, fat, roast meat, birds’ meat, roast egg, pepperwort, shaving, bathing, cheese or liver. Some say also nuts, others add also melons. In the School of Ishmael it was taught: Why are they called kishuim [melons]? Because they are kashin [injurious] to the whole human body as swords.
The Jew must keep his eye on the non-Jew cutting his hair, lest the non-Jew try to murder him. And a Jew may cut a non-Jew’s hair, but not his special forelock for this is associated with idolatry. The Jew should not be seen as helping groom this special part of the hair.
The Master said: When an Israelite is having his hair cut by a non-Jew he must look in the mirror? What is the specific case? If it is done in a public domain, why does he need a mirror? If in a private domain, even if he looks into it, how does this help? [It refers] indeed to a private domain, but since he is using the mirror he will look like an important person.
R. Hana b. Bizna was having his hair cut in the road leading to Nehardea by a non-Jew. He said to him: Hana, Hana, your throat is fine for the scissors. He answered: I deserve it for transgressing the words of R. Meir.
And did he not also transgress the words of the rabbis, for the rabbis only permit it in a public place but not in a private place? He thought that the roads leading to Nehardea, where there are usually many people there, are to be regarded as a public place.
And a non-Jew having his hair cut from a Jew, when he reaches the forelock, he must leave it alone. How much [of it is he to leave]? R. Malkiah said in the name of R. Adda b. Ahava: Three fingers’ length on every side.
R. Hanina the son of R. Ika: [The statements about] a spear, maid-servants, and small holes, are by R. Malkio; [but those about] the forelock, burnt ashes, and cheese are by R. Malkiah. 
R. Papa however said: If referring to a mishnah or baraita, it is R. Malkiah, but if in reference to an amoraic statement, it is R. Malkio. And your mnemonic is, “The tannaitic statement is queen.” What is the difference between the two? They differ in regard to the statement about maid-servants. 

Daf 29b

The following things belonging to non-Jews are forbidden [for Jews to use] and the prohibition extends to any benefit that may be derived from them: wine, or a non-Jew’s vinegar that was formerly wine, Hadrianic earthenware, skins pierced at the animal’s heart. Rabban Shimon Gamaliel says: when its tear is round, [the skin] is forbidden, but if oblong it is permitted.
 Meat which is being brought into a place of idol worship is permitted, but that which is brought out is forbidden, because it is like a sacrifice to the dead, this is the opinion of Rabbi Akiba. With non-Jews going on a pilgrimage [to worship idols] it is forbidden to have any business transactions, but with those returning it is permitted.
Skin-bottles or flasks belonging to non-Jews in which wine of a Jew is kept are forbidden and the prohibition extends to any benefit that may be derived from them, this is the opinion of Rabbi Meir. But the Sages say that the prohibition does not extend to deriving benefit. Grape seeds and grape-skins of non-Jews are forbidden, the prohibition extending to any benefit that may be derived from them, this is the opinion of Rabbi Meir. But the Sages say, when fresh they are forbidden but when dry they are permitted.
Fish brine and Bithynian cheese of the non-Jews are forbidden, the prohibition extending to any benefit that may be derived from them, this is the opinion of Rabbi Meir. But the Sages say that the prohibition does not extend to deriving benefit.
Rabbi Judah said: Rabbi Ishmael put this question to Rabbi Joshua as they were walking on the way, “Why have they forbidden the cheese of non-Jews?” He replied, because they curdle it with the rennet of a nevelah (an animal that was not properly slaughtered.” 
He (Rabbi Ishmael) said: “but is not the rennet of a burnt-offering more strictly forbidden than the rennet of a nevelah? [and yet] it was said that a priest who is not fastidious may suck it out raw.” (Though the Sages disagreed with this opinion, and they said that no benefit may be derived from it, although one who consumed it did not trespass [temple property]).
Rabbi Joshua responded: “The reason then is because they curdle it with the rennet from calves sacrificed to idols.” He (Rabbi Ishmael) said to him: “If that be so, why do they not extend the prohibition to any benefit derived from it?
He (Rabbi Joshua) diverted him to another matter, saying: “Ishmael, how do you read — ‘for your [masc.] love is more delightful than wine’ or ‘your [fem.] love’ etc. (Song of Songs 1:2)?” He replied: “your [fem.] love is better . . .” 
He said to him: “This is not so, as it is proved by the parallel verse, ‘Your ointments [masc.] have a goodly fragrance … [therefore do the maidens love you]’ (Song of Songs 1:3).” 
GEMARA. From where do we learn [the prohibition of] wine? Rabbah b. Avuha said: The verse says, “Who did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and drank the wine of their drink-offering,” (Deuteronomy 32:38). Just as it is forbidden to derive benefit from [idolatrous] sacrifice so too it is forbidden to derive benefit from their wine.
But from where do we know that an [idolatrous] sacrifice itself is prohibited? As it is written, “They joined themselves to Baal Peor, and ate the sacrifices of the dead” (Psalms 106:28): Just as deriving benefit from the dead is forbidden so too idolatrous sacrifices are prohibited.
And from where do we know this about the dead? We deduce it from the similar expression “there” used in connection with the heifer whose neck was to be broken. Here it is said, “And Miriam died there” (Numbers 20:1), and there it is said, “And they shall break the heifer's neck there in the wadi” (Deuteronomy 21:4). Just as in the case of the heifer, it is prohibited to derive benefit from it, so too here it is prohibited to derive benefit from it.
But how do we know that it is so in that case? Those of the school of R. Yannai said: Because atonement is written about it, as with sacrifices.
Or the wine of a non-Jew that was originally wine. This is obvious! Just because it turned sour its prohibition is removed? R. Ashi said: This comes to teach that vinegar belonging to us being held by a non-Jew does not require double sealing. If we are concerned lest he libate it, [vinegar] is generally not libated. And if we are concerned that he might exchange it for his own — since there is one seal, he would not take the trouble to falsify it.
R. Elai said: We have taught: Boiled wine belonging to a non-Jew, which was formerly wine is forbidden. This is obvious! Just because it was cooked, its prohibition is removed? R. Ashi said: This comes to teach that vinegar belonging to us being held by a non-Jew does not require double sealing. If we are concerned lest he libate it, [cooked wine] is generally not libated. And if

Daf 30a

if we are concerned that he might exchange it for his own — since there is one seal, he would not take the trouble to falsify it.
Our Rabbis taught: Boiled wine or alontit belonging to a non-Jew is forbidden, but prepared alontit is permitted. What is alontit? As it was taught in connection with Shabbat: We may make anomalin but not alontith. What is “anomalin” and what is “alontit”? Anomalin [is a mixture of] wine, honey and pepper; alontit [is a mixture] of old wine, clear water and balsam, which is made for use in the bath-house.
Rabbah and R. Joseph both of them said that diluted wine does not become forbidden through being left uncovered; nor is boiled wine to be suspected of being libated. The question was asked: Does boiled wine become forbidden by being left uncovered or not? Come and hear: R. Jacob b. Idi testified in regard to boiled wine that it does not become forbidden by being left uncovered.
R. Yannai b. Ishmael was sick and R. Ishmael b. Zirud and other rabbis came to ask about him. As they sat, the question was asked of them: Does boiled wine become forbidden by being uncovered? To which R. Ishmael b. Zirud replied: Thus said R. Shimon b. Lakish on behalf of a great man — and his name is R. Hiyya: Boiled wine does not become prohibited by being left uncovered. They said, “Shall we rely on it?” R. Jannai b. Ishmael motioned [as if to say], “The responsibility is on me and on my neck.”
Shmuel and Avlet were sitting together when boiled wine was brought up for them. [The latter] withdrew his hand. Shmuel said to him: Behold, they said that boiled wine is not to be suspected of idolatrous use.
R. Hiyya's maid-servant found that some boiled wine had been left uncovered. She came [to ask about it] in front of R. Hiyya. He told her: Behold they said that boiled wine is not rendered unfit by being left uncovered. The servant of R. Adda b. Ahavah found some diluted wine had been left uncovered. He said to him: Behold they said that diluted wine is not rendered unfit by being left uncovered.
R. Papa said: This has only been said [of wine] that is well diluted; but if it is only slightly diluted [a snake] might drink it. But does it indeed drink wine that is slightly diluted? But was not Rabbah son of R. Huna travelling in a boat and had some wine with him. He saw that a snake was cutting through the water and approaching. He said to his attendant,  “Put out its eyes!” The attendant took some water and poured it into the wine and the snake turned back!
For pure wine [the snake] will even endanger its life, while for diluted wine it will not endanger its life.
And it does not endanger its life for diluted wine? What about R. Yannai who was at Akhborei’s house (others say it was Bar-Hadaya that was at Akhborei’s) where people were sitting and drinking diluted wine. Some of it was left in the   cask they tied a rag over it? He then saw a snake carrying water which it poured into the cask till the cask was so filled that the wine came above the rag, and [the snake then] drank!
We can say that what [the snake] itself dilutes it will drink, but it will not drink what others dilute. 
R. Ashi (and some say, R. Mesharsheya) said: A resolution for a matter of danger! Rava said: The law is that diluted wine is rendered unfit by being left uncovered and is to be suspected of idolatrous use, but boiled wine does not become unfit by being left uncovered nor is it suspected of idolatrous use.
R. Hilkiah b. Tobi’s servant [found that] he had been sleeping next to a tank of water that had been left uncovered. He came to [ask about it from] R. Hilkiah b. Tobi. He said to him: It has been stated that snakes are afraid of a sleeping person. But this is true only during the day time but not at night. But this is not the case. It does not matter whether it is day or night, there are afraid of a sleeping person.
Rav did not drink water from a non-Jew’s house, saying that they are not cautious about the laws of leaving liquid uncovered. From a widow's house he did drink, saying, she follows her husband's practice.
Shmuel [on the other hand] would not drink water from the house of a widow. He said: The fear of her husband is not on her and she will not necessarily keep the water covered. But he would drink from the house of a non-Jew. Even if they are not particular about [the prohibition relating to] uncovered liquids, they are particular about cleanliness. Some say that Rav would not drink the water from a non-Jew’s house, but would drink that of a widow's house, while Shmuel would not drink the water from either the house of a non-Jew or that of a widow.
R. Joshua b. Levi said: There are three kinds of wine to which the prohibition of being left uncovered does not apply: strong, bitter, and sweet. “Sharp” is the acrid tila which makes the wine-skin burst; “Bitter” is wine made of unripe grapes; “Sweet” is wine made of grapes sweetened [by the heat of the sun]. R. Hama taught [that those three] are improved wines: “Sharp”-is wine mixed with pepper; “Bitter” is wine mixed with wormwood; ‘Sweet’ — is sparkling wine.
R. Shimon b. Lakish: Karina does not become prohibited by being left uncovered. What is Karina? R. Abbahu said: Karina is a sweet wine from Asia. Rava said: In its own place, however, it is rendered unfit if left uncovered, the reason being that it is the “local wine.”Rava said: Wine which has formed a film—for the first three days it is made unfit by being left uncovered and it is suspected of idolatrous use;

Daf 30b

from this point and onwards, it is not made unfit by being left uncovered nor it is suspected of idolatrous use. The Nehardeans say that even after three days we must be concerned about it being left uncovered. What is the reason? Occasionally even such wine is drunk [by snakes]. 
Our Rabbis taught: Wine in the first stage of fermentation does not become prohibited by being left uncovered. And how long is it considered to be fermenting? Three days. Cress-dish does not become prohibited by being left uncovered. But those in the Diaspora have a custom to forbid it it [if left uncovered]. But this was said only if there was no vinegar in it; but if there is vinegar in it, it deters snakes.
Babylonian kutah does not become prohibited by being left uncovered, but those in the Diaspora have a custom to prohibit it. R. Manashi said: If it has traces of biting we must suspect [it of being bitten by a snake]. R. Hiyya b. Ashi said in the name of Shmuel: Dripping water does not become prohibited by being left uncovered. R. Ashi said: That is if the dripping is continuous.
R. Hiyya b. Ashi said in the name of Shmuel: The opening of a fig does not become prohibited by being left uncovered. This is like the following Tanna: For it has been taught: R. Eliezer says, One may eat grapes and figs at night without suspecting any harm, for Scripture says, “The Lord guards the simple” (Psalms 116:6).
R. Safra said in the name of R. Joshua of the south: There are three kinds of  venoms [of snakes]: that of a young one sinks to the bottom; that of a middle aged one bubbles in the middle; while that of an old one floats on top. That is to say that the older a snake gets the more his strength diminishes. But  has it not been taught: There are three whose strength increases as their age advances: a fish, a snake and a swine! Its strength indeed increases, but its venom becomes weaker.
The venom of a young one sinks to the bottom. What practical application does this have? As it is taught: If a barrel was uncovered, even if nine persons drank from it and did not die, the tenth person is still forbidden to drink from it. It happened indeed that nine people drank from it and did not die but the tenth one died; and R. Jeremiah said: It was a case of the venom sinking to the bottom.
Likewise if a [cut] melon was left uncovered and nine persons ate of it without dying, it is forbidden for a tenth person to eat from it, for it once happened that nine persons ate of such a one and did not die and the tenth one who ate it died; and Rav said that it was a case of venom that sank to the bottom.
Our Rabbis taught: Water which had been left uncovered should not be poured out in a public road, or used for sprinkling the floor of a house, or for kneading mortar; nor should one give it to his animal or to his neighbor's animal to drink; nor should one wash one's face, hands or feet therewith. Others said: Only a part of the body that has an opening must not [be washed with] but where there is no opening it is permitted.
The “others” hold the same as the first opinion? They differ in regard to the back part of the hand and of the foot, or the upper part of the face.
The Master said: “Nor should one give it to his own animal or to his neighbor's animal to drink.” But has it not been taught: One may, however, give it to his own animal to drink? That teaching refers to a cat. Why then not to his neighbor's? Because it weakens it. Then his own, too, would it not weaken it? But it subsequently recovers. Then his neighbor's would also recover? It might so happen that he might wish to sell it and would suffer loss through it.
R. Assi said in the name of R. Yohanan who said it in the name of R. Judah ben Batera: There are three kinds of wine: [1] Wine that has been libated. It is forbidden to derive any benefit from this wine, and the quantity of the size of an olive causes serious impurity;


Daf 31a

[2] Ordinary wine belonging to non-Jews, from which it is likewise forbidden to derive any benefit, and a quarter [of a log] of which renders drinks [or foods] impure. [3] One who deposits his wine with a non-Jew, it is forbidden to drink it, but it is permitted to derive benefit from it.
If one deposits his fruit with an idolater it is considered as if it were the idolater's own fruit as regards tithes or Sabbatical year's produce. In our instance he assigned a separate corner to it.
In that case it should be permitted to drink it as well! For when R. Yohanan came to Parud he asked if there was any teaching (mishnah) of Bar-Kappara, and R. Tanhum of Parud quoted to him [the following]: Wine which had been deposited with an idolater is permissible for drinking.
He applied to him the verse, “In the place where the tree falls, there shall it be.” “There it shall be”— how can that be? But it means that there shall its fruit be.
R. Zera said: There is no contradiction: the one is according to the opinion of R. Eliezer and the other according to that of the rabbis,
For it has been taught: If one buys or rents a house in a court of an idolater and stores wine in it, and the key or seal is in the charge of an Israelite: R. Eliezer permits it, but the Sages forbid it.
R. Hiyya the son of R. Hiyya b. Nahmani said in the name of R. Hisda [who said it] in the name of Rav (and some say that R. Hisda said it in the name of R. Ze'iri, while others say that R. Hisda said, I was told by Aba b. Harina that Ze'iri said it: The halakhah follows R. Eliezer.
R. Elazar said: Everything is considered guarded by one seal, except wine which is not considered guarded by one seal. R. Yohanan however said: Even wine is considered guarded by one seal. And they are not arguing with one other: one follows the opinion of R. Eliezer, and the other, that of the rabbis.
Some say [the following version]: R. Elazar said: Everything is sufficiently guarded by a seal within another seal, except wine which is not guarded even with a seal within a seal. R. Yohanan said: Even wine is guarded by a seal within a seal. Both these follow the opinion of the rabbis, the one holding that the rabbis disagree with R. Eliezer only when there is only one seal, but if there is a seal within another seal they, too, permit it; while the other holds that even in the case of a double seal they forbid.
What, for example, is a seal within another seal? Rava said: A basin placed over the opening of a barrel and joined to the barrel with a seal on it, is a seal within another seal, otherwise it is not so; A basket fastened [over the stopper] is a seal within a seal, but if it is not fastened it is not a seal within a seal. A skin bottle within a bag with the closed opening of the skin bottle on the bottom, is a seal within a seal, but if the opening is on the top, it is not a seal within a seal; if he bends in the closed opening of the skin bottle within and then ties the bottle up again and seals it, it is considered a seal within a seal.
Our rabbis taught: Formerly the ruling was that wine of En-Kushi is forbidden  because of Birat-Sirika, that of Borkata is forbidden on account of KefarParshai, and that of Zagdar is forbidden because of Kefar-Shalem; subsequently they said: Open casks are forbidden, but closed ones are permitted.
What did they hold at first and what did they hold at the end? At first they held  that a Samaritan does not care if a non-Jew has contact [with the wine] whether the casks are open or closed; but subsequently they held that only in the case of open ones they are not particular, but in the case of closed casks they are very particular.
Is it then permitted in the case of open barrels?

Daf 31b

But the following contradicts it: One who sends a cask of wine by the hand of a Samaritan, or of brine or murias by the hand of a non-Jew, if he can identify his seal and the [spot and manner of] his closing up, it is permitted, but if not it is forbidden!
R. Zera said: There is no contradiction: The one refers to the town, the other to the open road.
R. Yirmiyah raised a difficulty on this: But did not those in the town come by the road? Rather R. Yirmiyah said: They taught this in reference to [casks found in] the vicinity of the wine presses; since all the people are milling around there, he would be afraid [to let a non-Jew touch it] saying, “if they see this, I will lose money.”
It has been stated: Why did they prohibit the beer of idolaters? Rami b. Hama said in the name of R. Yitzchak: Because of fraternization. R. Nahman said: Because it might have been left uncovered.
 “Uncovered” when? If while in the vat, we also keep it uncovered; and if while in the barrel, in that state, too, we keep it uncovered! It may only refer to a place where the water is allowed to settle.
In that case it should be permitted when it matures, for Rav said: [Wine which is] matured is permitted, for [the venom] would not allow it to mature; [so also wine which has] gone to vinegar is permitted, for it would not have allowed it to go to vinegar! Matured is forbidden as a safeguard against the fresh.
R. Papa used to drink beer when it was brought out to him to the door of the shop; R. Ahai used to drink it when it was brought to his house. Both of them held that the reason [for the prohibition] is intermarriage. R. Ahai was extra precautious.
R. Shmuel b. Bisna happened to be in Marguan: They brought him wine but he would not drink it, they then brought him beer but he did not drink it either. It is makes sense that he did not drink the wine, as there is a suspicion, but what objection is there to the beer? There is the suspicion of a suspicion.
Rav said: Non-Jewish beer is permitted, but still I would not allow my son Hiyya to drink it. Which way will you have it? If it is permitted then it should be permitted to all; if it is forbidden, it should be forbidden to all!
Rav suspects it of being left uncovered; but the bitter taste of the hops counteracts any venom that might be in it. One who is weak, it would injure him greatly, and his son Hiyya, since he is weak, should not drink it.
Shmuel said to Hiyya b. Rav: Son of a lion, come and I will tell you an excellent thing which your father Rav used to say. Thus said your father: Those swollen Arameans who drink what is kept uncovered suffer no fatal consequences because through eating abominable and creeping things, their bodies become immune from it.
R. Joseph said: