Avodah Zarah
עבודה זרה
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Avodah_Zarah
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Daf Shevui
-http://learn.conservativeyeshiva.org/daf-shevui/
-Come and Hear
-http://www.come-and-hear.com/zarah/zarah_64.html
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Avodah Zarah



Daf 1a



Daf 1b



Daf 2a

On the three days preceding the festivals of idolaters, it is forbidden to conduct business with them, to lend articles to them or borrow from them, to lend or borrow any money from them, to repay a debt, or receive repayment from them. 
Rabbi Judah says: 
we should receive repayment from them, as this can only depress them; 
But they [the Rabbis] said to him:
even though it is depressing at the time, they are glad of it subsequently.
GEMARA. Rav and Shmuel: 
One taught edehem (with an aleph) 
while the other taught edehem (with an ayin).
The one who taught edehem (with an aleph) is not in error while the one who taught edehem (with an ayin) is not in error.
The one who taught edehem (with an aleph) is not in error, as it is written:
“For the day of their calamity is at hand” (Deuteronomy 32:35);
And the one who taught edehem (with an ayin) is not in error, as it is written:
“Let them bring their witnesses [testimonies] that they may be justified” (Isaiah 43:9).
The one who taught edehem (with an aleph) why did he not teach edehem (with an ayin?
He could say:
Calamity is preferable.
he one who taught edehem (with an ayin) why did he not teach edehem (with an aleph)?
He might say:
What is it that brings about that calamity? The testimony they testify about themselves. Therefore testimony is preferable.
But does the verse, “Let them bring their witnesses that they may be justified,” refer to idolaters? It is written 
about Israel; as R. Joshua b. Levi said:
All the commandments which Israel performs in this world will come and testify on their behalf in the world to come, as it is said:
“Let them bring their witnesses that they may be justified” — this refers to Israel; “And let them hear and say: It is true” this refers the idolaters.
Rather, R. Huna the son of R. Joshua said
that the one who says edehem with an aleph derives it from here:
“They that fashion a graven image are all nothing, and their delectable things shall not profit, and their own witnesses see not” (Isaiah 44:9).
Hanina b. Papa and some say R. Simlai expounded:
In the time to come, the Holy Blessed One will take a Torah scroll and place it in His embrace and proclaim:
“Let him who has occupied himself with it, come and take his reward.”
Thereupon all the nations will come and gather in confusion, as it is said, 
“All the nations are gathered together” etc. (Isaiah 43:9). The Holy Blessed One will then say to them:
“Do not come before Me in confusion, but let each nation 

Daf 2b

come in with its scribes;” as it is said,
“And let the peoples (le’umim) be gathered together,” (ibid.) and the word peoples means a kingdom, as it is written,
“And one kingdom [u-leom] shall be stronger than the other kingdom” (Genesis 25:23).
But can there be confusion in the presence of the Holy Blessed One?
Rather it is only that they be not confused, and so hear what He says to them.
Thereupon the Kingdom of Rome entered first.
Why first?
Because they are the most important.
How do we know they are most important?
Because it is written:
“And he shall devour the whole earth and shall tread it down and break it in pieces” (Daniel 7:23) and R. Yohanan says:
This refers to Rome, whose power is known to the whole world.
And from where do we know that the most important ones come in [for judgment] first?
This is in accordance with R. Hisda, for R. Hisda said:
When a king and a community appear before the [Heavenly] tribunal, the king enters first, as it is said:
“To perform the sentence of his servant [King Solomon] and [then] the sentence of His people Israel.”
And what is the reason?
You may say, 
because it is not the way of the world that a king should wait outside; or you may say
[in order that the king shall plead] before the anger [of the Judge] is roused.
The Holy Blessed One will then say to them:
“With what have you occupied yourselves?”
They will reply:
“Master of the Universe, we have established many market-places, we have built many bathhouses, we have accumulated much gold and silver, and all this we did only for the sake of Israel, that they might [have leisure] for occupying themselves with the study of the Torah.”
The Holy Blessed One will say in reply:
“You foolish ones in the world, all that which you have done, you have only done to satisfy your own desires. You have established marketplaces to place prostitutes in them; baths, to delight yourself in them; silver and gold, that is mine, 
as it is said:
“Mine is the silver and Mine is the gold, says the Lord of Hosts” (Haggai 2:8).
Are there any among you who have been declaring this?
As it is said,
“Who among you declares this? (Isaiah 43:9).
And “this” is nothing but Torah, as it is said:
“And this is the Torah which Moses set before the children of Israel” (Deuteronomy 4:44).
They will then depart crushed in spirit.
The kingdom of Rome goes out and the kingdom of Persia enters.
Why Persia next?
Because they are next in importance.
And how do we know this?
Because it is written:
“And behold another beast, a second like a bear” (Daniel 7:5);  and R. Joseph said:
This refers to the Persians, who eat and drink greedily like a bear, are fleshly like a bear, have shaggy hair like a bear, and are restless like a bear.
The Holy Blessed One will ask of them:
“With what have you occupied yourselves?
 and they will reply,
“Master of the Universe, we have built many bridges, we have captured many cities, we have waged many wars, and all this for the sake of Israel, that they might engage in the study of the Torah.”
The Holy Blessed One will say in reply:
“All that which you have done, you have only done to satisfy your own desires. You have made bridges, to collect taxes on them; cities, to raise in them the head-tax; wars, I make, as it is said: “The Lord is  a man of war” (Exodus 15:3). Are there any among you who have been declaring this?
As it is said,
“Who among you declares this? (Isaiah 43:9).
And “this” is nothing but Torah, as it is said:
“And this is the Torah which Moses set before the children of Israel” (Deuteronomy 4:44).
They will then depart crushed in spirit.
But after the Persians saw that the Romans did not achieve anything, why did they go in?
They will say to themselves:
“The Romans have destroyed the Temple, whereas we have built it.”  
And so too every nation.
But after they saw that the first ones did not achieve anything, why should the other nations come forth?
They will say to themselves:
The others have oppressed Israel, but we have not.  
And why are these [two] nations singled out as important, and not the others?
Because their reign will last till the coming of the Messiah.
The nations will then say:
“Master of the Universe, have you given us the Torah, and have we declined to accept it?”
But how can they argue this,
is it not written,
“The Lord came from Sinai and rose from Seir to them, He shined forth from Mount Paran?” (Deuteronomy 33:2), and it is also written,
“God will come from Teman” (Habbakuk 3:3).
What did He want in Seir, and what did He want at Mount Paran?
R. Yohanan says:
This teaches us that the Holy Blessed One offered the Torah to every nation and every tongue, but none accepted it, until He came to Israel who received it.
Rather, this is what they will say to Him:
“Did we accept it and fail to observe it?”
But surely to this the response would be: “Then why did you not accept it?”
Rather, this is what they will say to Him:
“Master of the Universe, did you hold the mountain over us like a tub as You did to Israel and did we still decline to accept it?”
As it is written:
“And they stood at the foot (or under) the mountain” (Exodus 19:17), R. Dimi b. Hama said:
This teaches us that the Holy Blessed One suspended the mountain over Israel like a tub, and said to them:
“If you accept the Torah, it will be well with you, but if not, there you will find your grave.”
Thereupon God will say to them:
“Let them tell us of the former deeds,” as it is said,
“And let them tell us of the former deeds.” The seven commandments which you did accept, did you observe them?
How do we know that they did not observe them?
For R. Joseph taught:
“He stood and shook the earth, He saw and made the nations tremble” (Habbakuk 3:6).
What did He see? He saw that the nations did not observe even the seven commandments which the sons of Noah had taken upon themselves, and seeing that they did not observe them, He stood up and released them from them.
They benefited!
If so, it pays to be a sinner!
Mar the son of Rabina said:

Daf 3a

This says that even if they kept them, they do not receive reward for them.
But they do not?
Is it not taught: R. Meir used to say. 
‘Whence do we know that even an idolater who studies the Torah is equal to a High Priest? 
From the following verse: 
Ye shall therefore keep My statutes and My ordinances which, if a man do, he shall live by them. It does not say "If a Priest, Levite, or Israelite do, he shall live by them," but "a man"; here, then, you can learn that even a heathen who studies the Torah is equal to a High Priest!’ 
What is meant, then, is that they are rewarded not as greatly as one who does a thing which he is bidden to do, but as one who does a thing unbidden. For, R. Hanina said: 
He who is commanded and does, stands higher then he who is not commanded and does....
The nations will then say,
“Master of the Universe, has Israel, who accepted the Torah, observed it? 
The Holy Blessed One will reply,
“I can give testify that they observed the Torah.”
Then they will say back to Him, 
“Master of the Universe, can a father testify on behalf of his son?
For it is written,
“Israel is My son, My firstborn” (Exodus 4:22).
Then will the Holy Blessed One will say:
“Heaven and Earth testify that Israel has fulfilled the entire Torah.”
Then they will say:
Master of the Universe, Heaven and Earth are partial witnesses, for it is said,
“If I have not made My covenant with day and with night and established the laws of heaven and earth” (Jeremiah 33:25). And R. Shimon b. Lakish further said: What is it that is written,
“And there was evening and there was morning the sixth day?” (Genesis 1:31).
This teaches that God made a condition with the works of creation, saying, 
“If Israel accept my Law it will be well, but if not, I shall reduce you to a state of chaos.”
And this resonates with R Hezekiah 
who said,
“You caused sentence to be heard from Heaven, the earth trembled and was still” (Psalms 76:9).
If the earth trembled, how could it be still, and if it was still, how could it tremble?
Rather at first it trembled, and subsequently it became still.
Then the Holy Blessed One will say:
You yourselves shall testify that Israel observed the entire Torah.
Let Nimrod come and testify that Abraham did not worship idols; let Lavan come and testify that Jacob was not suspected of theft; let Potiphar's wife testify that Joseph was not suspected of sinning; let  Nebuchadnezzar come and testify that Hanania, Mishael and Azariah did not bow down to an image; let Darius come and testify that Daniel never neglected the prayers; let Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite, and Eliphaz the Temanite [and Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite] testify that Israel has observed the whole Torah; as it is said,
“Let them [the nations] bring their [own] witnesses, that they [Israel] may be justified” (Isaiah 43:9). 
The nations will then say:
Offer us the Torah anew and we shall obey it. 
But the Holy Blessed One will say to them,
You foolish ones among peoples, he who took trouble [to prepare] on the eve of Shabbat can eat on Shabbat, but he who has not troubled on the eve of Shabbat, what shall he eat on Shabbat?
Nevertheless, I have an easy command which is called Sukkah; go and carry it out.
But how can you say this:
Did not R. Joshua b. Levi say: What is it that it is written, 
“Which I command you this day” (Deuteronomy 7:11)? Today is the
day to do them, and tomorrow is not the day to do them. Today is the day to perform them, but today is not the day to take reward for their performance.
Rather, the Holy Blessed One does not deal harshly with His creatures.
And why does He term it an easy commandment?
Because it does not cause a financial loss.
Straightaway everyone will go and make a sukkah on the top of his roof; but the Holy Blessed One will cause the sun to burn over them as at the summer season and every one of them will trample down his sukkah and go away, as it is said,
“Let us break their bands, and cast away their cords from us” (Psalms 2:3).
He caused the sun to burn over them!
But did you not just say,
“The Holy Blessed One does not deal harshly with his creatures?”
..

Daf 3b

that the summer season extends till Sukkot and they are troubled [by the heat].
But didn’t Rava say:
He who is troubled is exempt from dwelling in the Sukkah?
True he is exempt, but should he trample it.
Thereupon the Holy Blessed One will laugh at them, as it is said,
“He that sits in heaven will laugh” (Psalms 2:4).
R. Yitzchak said:
“Only on that day is there laughter before the Holy Blessed One.”
There are those who teach the comment of R. Yitzchak in connection with the following teaching, as it was taught: R. Yosi says:
In the time to come non-Jews will come and convert.
But will they be accepted?
Has it not been taught:
In the days of the Messiah converts will not be accepted; likewise they did not accept converts in the days of David or of Solomon?
Rather, they will be self-made converts, and they will place tefillin on their heads and on their arms, fringes on their garments, and a mezuzah on their doorposts,
but when they see the battle of Gog and Magog, he will ask them,
“For what purpose have you come?” 
And they will reply:
“Against God and His Messiah” as it is said,
“Why are the nations in an uproar, and why do the peoples mutter in vain” (Psalms 2:1). Then each of them will throw aside his mitzvah and go away, as it is said,
“Let us break their bands, and cast away their cords from us” (Psalms 2:3), And the Holy Blessed One will laugh at them, as it  is said,
“He that sits in heaven will laugh” (Psalms 2:4).
R. Yitzchak said:
“Only on that day is there laughter before the Holy Blessed One.
But is this so?
Has Rav Judah not said in the name of Rav:
There are twelve hours in a day; during the first three hours the Holy Blessed One occupies Himself with the Torah, during the second three He sits in judgment of the whole world, and when He sees that the world deserves destruction, He transfers Himself from the seat of Justice to the seat of Mercy;
during the third quarter, He feeds the whole world from the horned ram to the eggs of vermin; during the fourth quarter He is sporting with the leviathan, as it is said,
“There is leviathan, whom You have formed to laugh (or play) with” (Psalms 104: 26)?
R. Nahman b. Yitzchakh said: With His creatures he does laugh, but he does not laugh at His creatures except on that day. 

Daf 4a



Daf 4b








...immediately
... "and the she-donkey said: 'Haven't I been your donkey?'"
... he said to her




























































R. Yehoshua ben Levi said
Israel made the (golden) calf only to provide an opening for those who seek to return (ba'alei t'shuvah) as it is written:
'Would that it were possible that these feelings would stay with them and they would revere me forever...'

Daf 5a



Daf 5b



Daf 6a



Daf 6b



Daf 7a



Daf 7b



Daf 8a






















The Tannaitic sages taught:
When the first person saw the days shortening, he said:
"Woe to me! Perhaps it is on account of my sin that the world is becoming dark and it is returning to a state of void and chaos! This must be the death penalty that heaven decreed upon me."
He sat for eight days of fasting and prayer.
When he saw, after the solstice of the month of Tevet, that the days were lengthening, he said:
"This must be the way of the world."
He went and celebrated eight days of festival.
The next year, he established eight days of festival for all.
He established them for the sake of heaven, but they [idolators] kept them for idol worship.

Daf 8b



Daf 9a



Daf 9b



Daf 10a



Daf 10b



Daf 11a



Daf 11b



Daf 12a



Daf 12b



Daf 13a



Daf 13b



Daf 14a



Daf 14b



Daf 15a



Daf 15b































And it has further been taught: ...
One should not sell them either weapons or accessories of weapons, nor should one grind any weapon for them, not may one sell them either stocks or neck-chains or ropes, or iron chains — neither to idolaters nor Cutheans.
What is the reason for this (not selling to Cutheans)?
If we say they are suspect of murder, are they really suspect?
Did you not say
one can seclude themselves with them
rather it is since they will sell them to non-Jews.
And if you will say
a Cuthean does not repent wheras a Jew does repent
Rav Nachman said in the name of Rabbah bar Avuha 
"Just as it is forbidden to sell to a non Jew so it is forbidden to sell to a Jew who is suspected of selling to a non Jew"


Rav Dimi bar Abba said:
Just as it is forbidden to sell weapons to a non Jew it is also forbidden to sell to a Jewish robber. 
what is the case?
If he is suspected of murder then it is obvious, it is no different then a non Jew
If he is not suspect of murder, why not?
Rather the case is that he is not suspect of murder and what is the case here? He is a Mashmuta (Artscroll: sneak thief), sometimes he will use to save himself

Daf 16a



Daf 16b



Daf 17a



















This disagrees with the opinion of Rabbi Pedas for R' Pedas said
The Torah only prohibited the closeness of physical intimacy, as it says:
Every man shall not come near to any close relative to uncover nakedness

Daf 17b



Daf 18a



Daf 18b



Daf 19a

Abraham, our father, did not walk in the ways of the Dor HaFlaga (Generation of the Dispersal), for they were wicked as it says:
"Let us build for ourselves a city" (Genesis 11:4) 













......
A person only learn Torah in a place that his heart desires










Rava said,
"Truly, a person should study Torah in the area that his heart desires, as it is stated, 
'But in the Torah of God is his desire.'"
And Rava  said, 
"At first it is associated with the name of the Holy One, blessed be He, and finally it is associated with his name, as it is stated 
'In the Torah of God is his desire, and in His (read here as 'his') Torah he will toil day and night.'"
































(Psalms 1:3) "And he shall be like a tree replanted by streams of water." The disciples of R. Yanai said, 
"[It says] 'a tree replanted' and not 'a tree planted' [to teach us that] anyone that only learns Torah from one teacher will never see any blessing."

Daf 19b



Daf 20a

For Scripture says (Deuteronomy 7:2) "nor show mercy unto them" - do not grant them occupation of the land.
But "nor show mercy unto them" is needed for this: The Merciful One is saying,
"Do not grant them favor."
If so, Scripture should have said
"nor show mercy unto them" [spelled with a vav]. What does "nor show mercy unto them" [spelled without a vav] mean?
This implies two things.
But it is still [otherwise] required, for this is what the Merciful One is saying:
"Do not give them free gifts."
If so, Scripture should have said "nor give freely unto them" [spelled with a yod]. What does "nor show mercy unto them" [spelled without a yod] mean?
This implies all of the above.
There is also a <i>beraita</i> accordingly:
"Nor give freely unto them" - do not grant them occupation of the land.
Alternatively,
"nor give freely unto them" - do not grant them favor.
Alternatively,...
"nor give freely unto them" - do not give them free gifts.

Daf 20b



Daf 21a



Daf 21b



Daf 22a



Daf 22b



Daf 23a



Daf 23b



Daf 24a



Daf 24b



Daf 25a



Daf 25b



Daf 26a



Daf 26b



Daf 27a

It has been stated: From where do we know that circumcision by a non Jew is invalid? Daru b. Papa said in the name of Rav: You shall keep my covenant (Gen 17:9). R. Yohanan said: Circumcised he hall be circumcised (Gen 17:13) - he who is circumcised shall circumcise.
Rather there is between them - a woman. He who said: You shall keep my covenant - this isn't a possibility, for a woman isn't a bat- mila, and he who said Circumcised he shall be circumcised - this is a possibility, for  a woman, too, is as if she is circumcised. 
And is there anyone who could say that a woman isn't able to? But it says: "So Zipporah took a flint an cut off her son's foreskin" (Ex 4:25)! Read it as:"she caused someone to take". But is says, "and cut off"! Read it as:"she caused someone to cut off". And if you want, you can say, she started it, and Moshe came and finished it.

Daf 27b
























...(Leviticus 18:5) "And live by them." That one shouldn't die by (doing) them.

Daf 28a



Daf 28b



Daf 29a



Daf 29b



Daf 30a



Daf 30b



Daf 31a



Daf 31b



Daf 32a



Daf 32b



Daf 33a



Daf 33b



Daf 34a



Daf 34b



Daf 35a




















What is the reason for the rabbinic prohibition [of non-Jewish cheese?]
Rav Shimon ben Pazi says in the name of Rav Yehoshua ben Levi
Because of removing [the sciatic nerve]

Daf 35b



Daf 36a



Daf 36b



Daf 37a



Daf 37b



Daf 38a



Daf 38b



Daf 39a



Daf 39b



Daf 40a



Daf 40b



Daf 41a



Daf 41b



Daf 42a



Daf 42b



Daf 43a

A man may not make a house after the design of the Temple…a table after the design of the table or candelabrum after the design of the candelabrum.

Daf 43b



Daf 44a



Daf 44b

Proclos, son of a philosopher, asked a question to R. Gamliel in Acco when the latter was bathing in the bath of Aphrodite. He said to him: It is written in your Torah, you shall make you graven images. Why are you bathing in the bath of Aphrodite? He replied to him, we may not answer [questions relating to Torah] in a bath. When he came out, he said to him, I did not come into her domain, she has come into mine. Nobody says, The bath was made as an adornment for Aphrodite. But he says, Aphrodite was made as an adornment for the bath.  

Daf 45a



Daf 45b



Daf 46a



Daf 46b



Daf 47a



Daf 47b



Daf 48a



Daf 48b



Daf 49a



Daf 49b



Daf 50a



Daf 50b



Daf 51a



Daf 51b



Daf 52a



Daf 52b



Daf 53a



Daf 53b



Daf 54a



Daf 54b



Daf 55a



Daf 55b



Daf 56a



Daf 56b



Daf 57a



Daf 57b



Daf 58a



Daf 58b



Daf 59a



Daf 59b



Daf 60a



Daf 60b



Daf 61a



Daf 61b



Daf 62a



Daf 62b



Daf 63a



Daf 63b



Daf 64a



Daf 64b

Who is a ger toshav? Any [Gentile] who takes upon himself in the presence of three haverim not to worship idols. Such is the statement of R. Meir; but the Sages declare: Any [Gentile] who takes upon himself the seven precepts which the sons of Noah undertook; and still others maintain: These do not come within the category of a ger toshav; but who is a ger toshav? A proselyte who eats of animals not ritually slaughtered, i.e., he took upon himself to observe all the precepts mentioned in the Torah apart from the prohibition of [eating the flesh of] animals not ritually slaughtered.