Tosefta Peah
תוספתא פאה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Tosefta Peah



Chapter 1

These are the things that have no set amount: the peah, the bikkurim, the r'iyah, charity, and learning Torah. Peah has a minimum amount but does not have a maximum amount. [If] one makes his entire field peah, it is not peah.
These are the things that are [constantly] subtracting from a person['s ultimate reward] in this world while the principal remains for him in the world to come: idolatry, sexual perversion, and murder; and slander is equal to all of them.
A good deed has immediate and future benefit, as it is stated (Isaiah 3:10), "Say ye of the righteous, that it shall be well with him, for they shall eat the fruit of their doings." A transgression has immediate damage but no future damage [for the transgressor], as it is stated (Isaiah 3:11), "Woe unto the wicked! It shall be ill with him, for the work of his hands shall be done to him." How, then, am I to understand "[The wicked] shall eat of the fruit of their own way" (Proverbs 1:31)? Rather, when a transgression damages, it has immediate damage, and when it does not damage, it has no immediate damage.
A good thought [Hashem] combines to action; a bad thought Hashem does not combine to action, as it is stated, "If I had regarded iniquity in my heart [the Lord would not hear]." How, then, am I to understand "Behold I am bringing evil, fruit of your thoughts?" Rather, a good thought that does good Hashem combines to action, and that which does not do good Hashem does not combine to action.

Chapter 2

If he took a little Peah and threw it upon the remaining (Peah), he does not get any of it (the Peah). Rebbi Meir says, "they penalize him and take them (from him), both this (what he threw) and that (what he threw it upon)."

Workers that were cutting into their baskets, behold these (ones) remove them (the workers).

The owner of the house [who gave Peah to poor people, and they said to him, "Give us from this side" and he gave to them this (side) and that (side), behold (all of) this is Peah.