The Wisdom of Solomon
חכמת שלמה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

The Wisdom of Solomon



Chapter 1

O judges of the land, love justice! Think well of YHWH, and seek Him with purity of heart.
For He will be found by those who have not  tested him, reveal himself to those who believe in Him.
And malicious thoughts separate from YHWH, and on the day of vengeance will the fools' foolishness become known. 
For wisdom will not come to an evil heart, and will not rest in a sinning soul.
For a spirit of comprehension hates duplicity and flees foolish thought, and Sin will defy it.
Good is a spirit of wisdom, the one who blasphemes with his lips it shall not deliver, for YHWH is a witness to his thoughts, investigates thoroughly his heart and listens to his tongue.
For the Honor of YHWH fulfills the entire Earth, and the One who sustains all understands everything.
Therefore, the one who loves evil schemes will not [be able to] hide from Him, from judgment and reprehension he shall not be absolved.
For the words of the wicked will surely be demanded, and the voice of their words will come to YHWH to return them from their rebellion.
His ear hears [every] word in fury, and the voice of protest is not concealed from Him.
Thus, beware and do not protest, for it holds no avail, and guard your tongue from speaking evil, what you mutter to yourself shall not fall to the earth, a deceitful tongue kills a person.
Do not seek death with the twistedness of your ways, and do not bring about annihilation with the action of your hands.
For YHWH has not chosen death, and He does not desire the annihilation of life.
To support them forever has He created them, and the peace of the peoples of the earth is in their hands; the venom of annihilation is not between them, and the netherworld is not on the dust of His regin.
For righteousness will not die, but the yield of wickedness is death.
Which the wicked brought about by their words and their exploits, as on a friend did they trust in it [i.e. death], and they met their end and ceased from it, with it they were among the conspirators, and their future is to be with it.

Chapter 2

For those who have slipped spoke in their hearts, and with their tongues, saying: "The days of our lives are short, and full of toil. A man is not saved from death, and there is known no man who has returned from it."
"We were born in mishap, and we shall be as though we were not. For the spirit of our nostrils is smoke, and our words are as a spark rising from our hearts."
"For it is extinguished. The flesh returns to dust, and the soul disperses like a light breeze."

Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16

