Vayikra Rabbah
ויקרא רבה
merged
http://www.sefaria.org/Vayikra_Rabbah
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-http://www.sefaria.org

Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11

"And it was on the 8th day" [Leviticus 9:1] - Rav Ahava bar Kahane opened with: [Proverbs 9:1-4] "Wisdom has built her house, [she has hewn out her seven pillars]" "She has prepared her food, [she has mixed her wine, she has even set her table]" "She has sent forth her maidens, [she calls out from the heights]" "Whoever is simple [will turn here, whoever is lacking understanding]..." Rabbi Yirmiya bar Ilai interpreted these [difficult] verses with the creation of the world. "Wisdom has built her house..." - That is the Holy One, Blessed be He, as it is written, [Proverbs 3:19] "God has founded the earth with wisdom." "She has hewn out her seven pillar" - That is the seven days of creation, as it says, [Exodus 20:11] "For six days..." [Genesis 2:3] "And God blessed the seventh day." "She has prepared her food", [that refers to] [Genesis 1:24] "And God said, Let the earth bring forth..." "She has mixed her wine", [that refers to] [Genesis 1:9] "And God said, Let the waters be gathered..." "She has even set her table" - [that refers to] [Genesis 1:11] "And God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is in itself..." "She has sent forth her maidens" - that is Adam and Eve. "She calls out from the heights" - [this refers to] that God moved them, and he called them divine, and that's what is written [Genesis 3:5] "and you will be like gods". After all of this praise, "whoever is simple will turn here", they will leave aside the intent of God, and follow after the intent of the serpent, and therefore are "lacking understanding". She says to him, [Genesis 3:19] "For you are dust, and to dust you shall return."

Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14

"A woman when she gives seed (conceives)" [Leviticus 12:2]: That's what is written, "You have created me behind and before." [Psalms 139:5] Said Rabbi Yochanan: If man merits, he inherits two worlds, this one and the coming one, that's what is written: "You have created me behind and before (front)." And if not, he comes to give reckoning, as it says, "And You laid your hand (kapcha) on me." [ibid], as it is written, [Job 13:21] "Withdraw your hand (kapcha) far from me." Said Rav Shmuel bar Nachman: When the Holy One, blessed be He, created the first man, he created him as an androgynous being. Reish Lakish: When it was created, dual faces [together] were created, and it was cut, and two were made. [One] back was male, [one] back was female. They challenged him: [Genesis 2:21] "And He took one of his ribs (tzela)"!? He said to them, it is of his sides, as it is written, "and to the side (tzela) of the Tabernacle" [Exodus 26:20]. Said Rabbi Berachiya and Rabbi Chelbo and Rabbi Shmuel bar Nachman: When God created the first man, from one end of the world to the other end, He created him to fill the entire world. How do we know from east to west? As it says, "You created me back to east (kedem)." How do we know from north to south? As it says, [Deuteronomy 4:32] "From the ends of the heavens to the ends of the heavens." How do we know that it was the expanse of the world? As it says, "And You laid your hand on me." Said Rabbi Elazar: "Behind" - that's the first day [of creation]. "Before" - that's the last day. For the opinion of Rabbi Elazar, there is the verse, [Genesis 1:24]: "Let the earth bring forth the living soul (nefesh chaya) to its kind." "Living soul" - that's the spirit of the first man. Said Reish Lakish: "Behind" - that's the last day. "Before" - that's the first day. For the opinion of Reish Lakish, there is the verse: [Genesis 1:2] "And the spirit of God wavered upon the water" - that is the spirit of the king messiah. If man merits, we say to him: "You were created before all of creation." If not, we say to him, "The mosquito preceded you." Said Rabbi Yishmale b'Rabbi Tanchum: "Behind" on all creation, "before" (first) in all punishments. Said Rabbi Yochanan: Even man's praise only comes last, as it says [Psalms 148:110]: "Beasts and all cattle creeping things and flying fowl". And afterwards, [Psalms 148:11]: "Kings of the earth and all peoples." Said Rabbi Simlai: "Just like man's formation was after beast, cattle, and bird, so too his laws are after beast, cattle, and bird, and that's what is written, "This is the law of cattle" [Leviticus 11:46], and afterwards, "A woman when she gives seed..."

... Another possibility:  "When a woman conceives and gives birth to a male" [Leviticus 12:2]   Thus when it is written "Life and lovingkindness you have given me, Your care has guarded my spirit" [Job 10:12]  Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said three [things]:  In the way of the world if a person takes a purse of money and places the opening downward, does not the money scatter?!  A fetus that rests in the womb of his mother, The Holy Blessed One guards him so he does not fall and die, is this not praiseworthy?!  Thus - "Life and lovingkindness you have given me."  Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said also: It is the way of the world that an animals breasts are in the place of the womb and the newborn nurses in a shameful place.  But a woman, her breasts are in a beautiful place, and the newborn nurses in a place of honor.  Is this not "life and lovingkindness?"  Thus - "Life and lovingkindness you have given me."  Rabbi Elazar said, if a person tarries in a hot place for one hour, does he not die?   Yet the womb of the woman boils, and the fetus which is placed inside the womb, The Holy Blessed One protects it, it is not aborted in the shape of a bag, it is not aborted as the placenta, nor aborted in the shape of a sandal - is this not "life and lovingkindess?"  Thus - "Life and lovingkindness you have given me."  Rabbi Tachalifa of Cesaerea If a person eats one portion of food after another portion of food, does not the second portion expel the first?  But no matter how much food a woman eats or how much liquid she drinks, the fetus is not expelled - is this not "life and lovingkindness?"   Rabbi Simon said, the womb of a woman is made with many cavities, many coils, and many bands.  At the moment that a woman sits on the birth chair, (the baby) does not get cast out all at once. There is a saying, "If one band is loosened, two bands are loosened".  Rabbi Meir said: All nine months that a woman does not see blood, she really should have seen it.  What did The Holy Blessed One do?  He removed (the blood) upward to her breasts and made it milk, so that when the baby was born there would be food for him to eat.  Even more if it was a male child, as it says: "When a woman conceives and gives birth to a male."  

Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



...The wicked Titus entered the sanctum of the Holy of Holies, and with his sword brandished in his hand he slashed the two curtains, and taking two whores he spread out a scroll of the Law beneath them and ravished them on top of the altar, and his sword came out full of blood, and some say from the blood of Yom Kippur [sprinkled by the Kohen Gadol on the curtains].  He [Titus] began to revile and blaspheme saying, “He who wages battle with a king in the desert and triumphs is different from him who wages battle in the king's own palace and vanquishes him.” What did he [Titus] do? He gathered all of the Temple vessels and put them in a sack and descended to a ship.  At sea, a wave rose up to drown him.  He said, “It would appear that this nation's god has power only on water.  He [God] only punished the generation of Enosh with water, likewise He could only punish the generation of the flood with water, the generation of the Dispersal and Pharaoh and his army were only punished with water.  So I, when I was in His house and domain He had no power to stand against me, and now he opposes me here!”  The Holy One said, “By your life, I will punish you with the most insignificant of my creatures.”  Immediately God hinted to the sea and it stayed its anger. When he arrived in Rome, all of the citizens came out and acclaimed him: “Conqueror of the Barbarians.”  Immediately they heated the bath-house and he entered and washed himself.  When he came out they poured for him the double glass for after the bath, and God appointed a mosquito for him and it entered his nose and gnawed its way up until it reached his brain.  He said, “Call for the doctors to split open the head of that man [Titus] so I can know with what the God of that nation has punished him.”  Forthwith they summoned the doctors, and they split open his brain and found in it the likeness of a young dove and its weight was two litras.  R. Elazar son of R. Yosi said: I was there, and they put the young bird on one side [of the scales], and two litras on the other, and they balances one another.  They took it and put it in a bowl, and as the mosquito withered so Titus deteriorated.  The mosquito flew away, and away flew the soul of the wicked Titus....




Rabbi Pinhas in the name of Rabbi Levi stated: This is comparable to a king’s son who strayed and was accustomed to eat non-kosher meat. The king declared, “let him always eat at my table and on his own he will eventually become disciplined.” Similarly, because Israel was attached to idolatry in Egypt and would bring their sacrifices to the goat-demons, as it is written (Leviticus 17:7) "No longer shall you sacrifice to goat-demons, which refer to the shedim they sacrificed to (Deuternomy 32:17) "and they sacrificed to shedim", and those shedim refer to the goat-demons, as it says, (Isaiah 13:21) "and the goat [demons] shall prance there." And they would offer sacrifices on high places and retribution would befall them, the Holy One blessed be He said “let them offer sacrifices before Me at all times in the Tent of Meeting and they will be separated from idolatry and be saved.” This is the meaning of what is written (Leviticus 17:3-7): “Any man of the House of Israel who slaughters an ox or sheep or goat... and does not bring it to the entrance of the Tent of Meeting as a sacrifice to God.... that man will be cut off from among his people… so that they no longer offer their sacrifices to the goat-demons that they are wont to stray after."

Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25

Vayikra Rabbah 25:3: Rabbi Yehudah ben Shimon began his discourse with the text, “After the Lord your G-d shall you walk” (Deuteronomy 12:5). But can a man of flesh and blood walk after the Holy One, blessed be He(?)… But in truth the Holy One, blessed be He, from the very beginning of the creation of the world, was before all else occupied with plantation, as is proved by the text, “And the Lord G-d planted a garden in the first instance in Eden” (Genesis 2:8), and so do you also, when you enter into the land, occupy yourselves first with nothing else but plantation; hence it is written, “And when you shall come into the land, then you shall plant.

Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29



Chapter 30






To what is one who takes a stolen lulav compared to? To a thief [... who] one time stole everything a tax collector had on him. Eventually he was caught [...] the tax collector came to him said to him and said, "Return the money to me, and I will defend you before the king. The thief said, "I have nothing left from what I took except for a saddle." [...] The next day, the thief was brought before the king, and the king asked him if he had anyone to defend him. The thief says that the tax collector would. The tax collector said, “I was out collecting, and this thief took all of my money. The saddle still in his possession is proof that he stole it all.” All those present cried, “Woe to the one whose defense attorney becomes his prosecutor!” So too someone who takes a lulav to gain merit – if the lulav was stolen, it cries out to Hashem saying “I’m stolen property!” and the angels say, “Woe to the one whose defense attorney becomes his prosecutor!”





The four species are likened to different categories in the Jewish people. The Esrog, which has both taste and smell, is likened to those that study Torah and do mitzvot. The palm branch, which has taste, but no smell, is likened to those who have only Torah study. The myrtle, which has smell but no taste, is likened to those who have only mitzvot. The willow, which has neither taste nor smell, is likened to those who are without Torah study and without mitzvot. [...] And Hashem says "bind them all together and let them atone one for the other." [...]

[...] The spine of the palm frond is similar to the spine of man. The myrtle is similar to an eye. The willow is like a mouth. And the etrog (citron), is like a heart. [...]

... Rabbi Brachya in the name of Rabbi levi says. in the merit of fulfilling the verse you should take for yourself on the first day.I wil reveal myself to you and take revenge for you from the first -the Beis Hamikdash- of which it is written " A gloriuos throne on high from the first the place of the sanctuary"(yermiah 17:12). And bring for you the First-King moshiach-  of whom it is written "The first shall say to Tzion(Isiah 41:17)

Chapter 31



Chapter 32



Chapter 33



Chapter 34



Chapter 35



Rabbi Elazar said: In the way the world functions, a king of flesh and blood decrees a decree; if he wants to fulfill it, then he fulfills it, if he doesn’t [want to], ultimately it will be fulfilled by others. But the Blessed One is not like this, rather, if God decrees a decree, God will fulfill it first, as it says in the verse: (Leviticus 19:32) “You shall rise up before the hoary (greyish white) head, and honor the face of the old, and you shall fear your God: I am the LORD.” I fulfilled the commandment of standing up for the old first, “If you will walk in My statutes.” 