Vayikra Rabbah
ויקרא רבה
Rabbi Mike Feuer, Jerusalem Anthology
https://www.sefaria.org

Vayikra Rabbah



Chapter 1


R’ Abahu opened and said ‘“Those who dwelt in its shade shall return…” (Hoshea 14:8) This refers to the converts who come and take shelter in the shade of the Holy One. “…they shall revive [like] corn…” (ibid.) They will become primary, just as Israel as it says “…Corn [will give strength to] young men, and new wine will cause maids to speak.” (Zechariah 9:17) “…and blossom like the vine…” (Hoshea 14:8) As it says “You uprooted a vine from Egypt; You drove out nations and planted it.” (Tehillim 80:9)’ Another explanation. “…they shall revive [like] corn…” (Hoshea 14:8) in their Talmudic learning, “…and blossom like the vine…” (ibid.) in their aggadic learning. “; it (fragrance) will recall the wine of Lebanon.” (ibid.) The Holy One said ‘the names of converts are beloved to Me like idolatrous wine which was offered before Me on the altar.’ And why is its name Lebanon? Because of the verse “…this good mountain and the Lebanon.” (Devarim 3:25) R’ Shimon bar Yochai taught: why is it called Lebanon, because it bleaches out (malbin) the sins of Israel like snow, as it says “…If your sins prove to be like crimson, they will become white as snow; if they prove to be as red as crimson dye, they shall become as wool.” (Yeshayahu 1:18) R’ Teviyumi said ‘because all hearts (levavot) rejoice in it, as it says “The fairest of branches, the joy of the entire earth- Mount Zion…” (Tehillim 48:3) The Rabbis say ‘because “…and My eyes and My heart (libi) shall be there at all times.” (Melachim I 9:3)

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11








... R’ Bibi and R’ Reuven said in the name of R’ Chanina: in the future the Holy One will appoint a yeshiva for His elders. This is what is written “…for the Lord of Hosts has reigned in Mount Zion…” the end of the verse is not written ‘and before elders will be glory’ but rather “…and before His elders will be glory.” (Isaiah 24:23)

Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21







What is written above this? “And the Lord said to Moses: Speak to your brother Aaron…” (Leviticus 16:2) R’ Avin said: He said to him - go and comfort him with words, as it says “Speak to the heart of Jerusalem…” (Isaiah 40:2) “…that he should not come at all times…” (Leviticus 16:2) R’ Yehudah bar R’ Simon said: Moshe was greatly distressed by this. He said: oy! Perhaps Aharon my brother has been driven out from the inner space at all times! There is a time corresponding to the hour “…that he should not come at all times…” (ibid.) There is a time corresponding to the day “And water by measure you shall drink…” (Ezekiel 4:11) There is a time corresponding to the year, as it says “And it was, at the return of the year…” (Samuel II 11:1) There is a time corresponding to twelve years “Until the time when His word came…” (Psalms 105:19) There is a time corresponding to the seventy years, as it says “…since the destruction of Jerusalem seventy years.” (Daniel 9:2) And it says “…until the time of his own land come…” (Jeremiah 27:7) There is a time corresponding to eternity “You gave joy into my heart from the time that their corn…” (Psalms 4:8) The Holy One said to Moshe: it is not as you think. This is not a time of the hour, the day, the year, of twelve years, seventy years or of eternity. Rather, at any time which he wants to enter he may enter, but he must do it with this procedure. R’ Yehudah bar R’ Elazar said: with thirty-six bells and thirty-six pomegranates. The Rabbis say: with seventy-two bells and seventy-two pomegranates. 

Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24




Another explanation. “May He send your aid from His sanctuary, and may He support you from Zion.” (Psalms 20:3) R’ Levi said: all the good and blessings and consolation which the Holy One will give to Israel in the future only come from Zion. Salvation is from Zion, as it says “O that the salvation of Israel would come out of Zion…” (Psalms 14:7) Might is from Zion, as it says “The staff of your might the Lord will send from Zion…” (Psalms 110:2) Blessing is from Zion, as it says “May the Lord bless you from Zion…” (Psalms 134:3) The shofar’s blast is from Zion, as it says “Sound a shofar in Zion…” (Yoel 2:1) Dew, blessing and life are from Zion, as it says “As the dew of Hermon which runs down on the mountains of Zion, for there the Lord commanded the blessing, life forever.” (Psalms 133:3) Torah is from Zion, as it says “…for out of Zion shall the Torah come forth…” (Isaiah 2:3) Help and assistance are from Zion, as it says “May He send your aid from His sanctuary…” from the sanctity of the acts which you have done “…and may He support you from Zion,” (Psalms 20:3) from the distinguished actions which you have done. The Holy One said to Moshe: go and tell Israel ‘my son, just as I am separate, so too you be separate. Just as I am holy, so too you be holy.’ This is what is written “You shall be holy…” (Leviticus 19:2)

Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29



Chapter 30



Chapter 31



Chapter 32



Chapter 33



Chapter 34



Chapter 35






R’ Aba ben Elyashiv said: the statutes (chukkim) which bring a man to the life of the world to come, as it is written “And it shall come to pass that every survivor shall be in Zion, and everyone who is left, in Jerusalem; "holy" shall be said of him, everyone inscribed for life in Jerusalem.” (Isaiah 4:3) Those who are occupied with Torah, which is the tree of life…