Maggid Mishneh on Mishneh Torah, Forbidden Intercourse
מגיד משנה על משנה תורה, הלכות איסורי ביאה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Maggid Mishneh on Mishneh Torah, Forbidden Intercourse



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Halakhah 1



Halakhah 2



Halakhah 3



Halakhah 4



Halakhah 5



Halakhah 6



Halakhah 7



Halakhah 8



Halakhah 9



Halakhah 10

But one who came and said, etc.  This is the distinction which I mentioned above quoting the majority of commentators of blessed memory that when we say one must bring proof (of being Jewish), this applies when it is known that the person was an idolator from the beginning but otherwise we do not need (to resort to the argument) that "the mouth that forbade was the mouth that permitted," and we can derive this from the fact that of course we do not check after every person who says "I am a Jew," as is demonstrated from the ocurrance in the first chapter of Pesahim (page 3b) that a certain idolator would go to Jerusalem and eat the paschal offerings (because of) a presumtion (that those present were) Jews, and therefore (the person address in this halakhah) is believed (when the person claims to have converted) through (the principal of) migo (i.e. since the person could simply have claimed to be Jewish, we believe the person when the person said they converted).  Ramban and Rashba wrote similarly.  And our teacher (i.e. Rambam) added a stricture that even though one is believed because of migo, outside of the land (of Israel) we do not marry him to a woman until he brings proof (of being Jewish), and it is possible that this conclusion came (to Rambam) because the incident (in Pesahim 3b) was in Israel and they were all (presumably) Jewish, but outside of the land (of Israel) one must bring a proof (of being Jewish) even according the the sages who believe that all families have a presumption of having proper pedigree, because this person does not have a presumptive pedigree he needs to bring proof.  And Ramban and Rashba of blessed memory also wrote our master's opinion in his name and did not raise a challenge on him, and I will also write on this in chapter 20.  And in the Objections (i.e. Raavad's notes on Mishneh Torah) [Raavad wrote]: "Abraham says: this is not in accordance with halakhah etc."  But Raavad of blessed memory did not consider the distinction that I wrote that the rule of the brayta appplies when the person was originally known to be an idolator, and our master already wrote that rule above; and the matter is clear.