Halakhot Gedolot
הלכות גדולות
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Halakhot_Gedolot
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Halakhot Gedolot

Introduction

(as printed in all patterns)
Blessed are you, O Lord our God, King of the world, who sanctified us with his commandments and commanded us according to the words of the Torah.  Tonight, O God, let us divine the words of your Torah in our mouths and in the folds of your people, the house of Israel, in our descendants and your descendants, the house of Israel, and let us all be learners of your Torah, blessed are you, O Lord, the giver of the Torah.  Blessed are You, O Lord, our God, the King of the world, who chose us from all the nations and gave us His Torah. Blessed are You, O Lord, the Giver of the Torah: One of my questions from God is that I will ask my daughter in the house of God all the days of my life to witness God's good pleasure and to visit His temple.  God created a pure heart for me and a new right spirit within me.  Inform me of your ways, O Lord, and teach me your ways.  Blessed are you, O Lord, learned in your laws.  You are good and a good scholar of your law.  My heart is warm inside me in my thoughts I will kindle a fire I have spoken with my tongue.  I will never forget your commands because in them I lived.  The Lord Kenani, the beginning of his path, has preceded his works ever since.  Torah said until the world was created I was created.  Rav Hona said in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish. Two thousand years the Torah preceded the creation of a hated world, and I will be with him Amon, and I will be an amusement every day, Amon Oman, the Torah said, I was the vessel of the Almighty's guardianship. In me we will look, and the creator of the world, which the Lord hates, is the beginning of his path. Day  The day of God's day is a thousand years, because a thousand years in your eyes are yesterday, and one scripture says, "Remember His covenant forever, a commandment for a thousand generations," teaching that the Torah was created for nine hundred and seventy-four generations until the world was created, and twenty-six generations from the time the world was created from Adam to Moses.  And when you calculate nine hundred and seventy-four generations into two thousand years, each generation is found to be two years and nineteen days and eleven hours and two-thirds and fourteen parts, and that is a generation.  Hesed said to her, "Even though you preceded me, you need me, for the world was created for me, as it is said, for I said, "A world of kindness will be built; prepare your faith in them."  Grace and there is a Torah that is not of grace Ar Eleazar Torah for the sake of this is a Torah of grace that is not for the sake of it is a Torah that is not of grace.  Another thing is a Torah that is not taught is a Torah that is not of grace. A Torah that is taught is a Torah of grace.  Rabbi Shmlai said that six hundred and thirteen mitzvos were commanded Israel, Rabbi HaMuna said: "Moses commanded us to read the Torah, the Torah in the Gematria of the highest, six hundred and eleven, O, I am, and you shall not have from the mouth of the hero Shemoam, three hundred and sixty-five mitzvos you shall not do, and two hundred and forty  And do eight mitzvos, whoever fulfills them wins the next life and whoever transgresses them is sentenced to seven punishments:
These are the Hansekins.  Bring on the mother and the father's wife and the bride and bring on the male and the animal and the woman who is sacrificed to the animal and the blasphemer and the idolater and the one who gives his seed to your father and the one who is observant and knowledgeable and who desecrates the Sabbath and curses his father and his mother and the bringer on a girl from Orsha and the instigator and the slanderer and a sorcerer and a disobedient son and a teacher.  These are eighteen in stoning:





Siman 1



Siman 2



Siman 3



Siman 4



Siman 5



Siman 6



Siman 7



Siman 8



Siman 9



Siman 10



Siman 11



Siman 12



Siman 13



Siman 14



Siman 15



Siman 16



Siman 17



Siman 18



Siman 19



Siman 20



Siman 21



Siman 22



Siman 23



Siman 24



Siman 25



Siman 26



Siman 27



Siman 28



Siman 29



Siman 30



Siman 31



Siman 32



Siman 33



Siman 34



Siman 35



Siman 36



Siman 37



Siman 38



Siman 39



Siman 40



Siman 41



Siman 42



Siman 43



Siman 44



Siman 45



Siman 46



Siman 47



Siman 48



Siman 49



Siman 50



Siman 51



Siman 52



Siman 53



Siman 54



Siman 55

(Page 121) (Avodah Zarah 29b) And these are the items of Gentiles that are forbidden, and their prohibition is a prohibition of benefit: The wine and vinegar of Gentiles that was originally wine. Wine—how do we know it is prohibited? Rav Nachman said in the name of Rabba bar Avuha: For it is written, "The fat of their sacrifices they eat, and they drink the wine of their libations" (Deut. 32:38). Just as the sacrifice is forbidden, so too the wine is forbidden. And the sacrifice itself—how do we know it is forbidden? For it is written, "And they joined themselves to Baal Peor and ate sacrifices of the dead" (Ps. 106:28). Just as the dead is forbidden, so too the sacrifice is forbidden. And the dead itself—how do we know it is forbidden? It is derived through a verbal analogy (gezeirah shavah) of the word "there" (sham) from the law of the heifer whose neck is broken (Deut. 21:4). It is written here, "And Miriam died there" (Num. 20:1). And it is written there, "And they shall break the neck of the heifer there in the valley" (Deut. 21:4). Just as there it is forbidden, so too here it is forbidden. And there—how do we know it is forbidden? The school of Rabbi Yannai said: "Atonement is written concerning it, like sacrifices." And the vinegar of Gentiles that was originally wine— Isn’t this obvious? Does it lose its prohibition because it became vinegar? Rav Ashi said: This teaches us that our vinegar in the possession of Gentiles does not require a double seal. What is the reason? If it is due to libation, it is not libated. If it is due to falsification, since there is one seal, they do not bother to falsify it.