Tur
טור
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Tur
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-YU Torah miTzion Beit Midrash
-http://www.torontotorah.com
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Tur

Orach Chaim



Siman 1

Judah ben Tema says: "Be as strong as a panther, as light as an eagle, running like a gazelle and mighty as a lion to perform the will of your Father in heaven."  He specified four things concerning the service of the Creator, may He be blessed. And he began with ‘strong as a panther’ since it is a great general principle of service to the Creator, may He be blessed, since sometimes a person desires to perform a mitzvah but is prevented from performing it because of people who mock him; therefore he warned that he should have fortitude against the mockers and not refrain from performing the mitzvah. So said Rabban Yohanan ben Zakkai to his students: “May it be your will that the fear of heaven be upon you like the fear of flesh and blood.” And so he says concerning the subject of shame, that sometimes a person is ashamed before a person more than he is ashamed before the Creator, may He be blessed. Therefore he warned that you should have fortitude against the mockers and not be ashamed. So too did David, peace be upon him, say “I will speak of your decrees in the presence of kings and not be ashamed,” though he was pursued and he fled among the nations, he had taken strength in his Torah and learned, though they had mocked him. And he said ‘as light as an eagle’ corresponding to the eye’s vision, and compared it to an eagle because just as the eagle soars through the air, so too does the eyes’ vision, meaning that you should shut your eyes from seeing evil, for it is the beginning of transgression, for the eye sees, the heart covets and the person's limbs complete the act. And he said ‘as strong as a lion’ corresponding to the heart, for the might of service of the Creator, may he be blessed, is in the heart, and he stated that you should strengthen your heart for His service. He stated ‘run like a gazelle’ corresponding to the legs, for your legs shall run toward the good. So too would David the king, peace be upon him, pray for the three of them, but he changed the sequence, “Lead me in the path of your commandments” about legs. Following that he said “Turn my heart to your decrees.” And after that he said “Avert my eyes from seeing falsehood.” Concerning the heart he mentioned ‘turn,’ whereas concerning the eye, ‘avert,’ for the heart is in his power to turn toward the good path or the evil one, even after he has seen an evil action. Thus he prayed that he should help him to turn to the good path. But (avoiding) seeing an evil action is not in his power, for it is possible that it will come upon him suddenly, and he will see it. Thus he prayed that he avert his eyes from seeing falsehood, so he would not invite it before him at all. Thus a person needs strengthen himself as a lion to stand in the morning for the service of his Creator, even if his evil impulse taunts him in winter, saying ‘How can you get up in the morning when the cold is so great?’ or taunts him in summer, saying ‘How can you get up from your bed when you have not had enough sleep?’ he should strengthen himself to rise, for you should awaken the dawn, but it should not awaken you, as David, peace be on him, stated “Awake, my soul, awake, harp and lyre; I will awaken the dawn,” ‘I awaken the dawn, but the dawn does not awaken me.’ So much the more so had he awakened prior to the morning light to rise and offer supplications before his Creator, how great His beauty, and how good. And it is good that one who begins early should aim for the hours when the guard shifts change, which are at a third of the night, and at the end of two thirds of the night and at the end of the night, for at these times does the Holy One, blessed be He, recall the destruction of the Temple and the dispersion of Israel among the nations, and the prayer which a person offers at that hour for the destruction and the dispersion is propitious and close to acceptance. His supplication shall fall before God whether drawn out or cut short, it is only that he should orient his heart toward heaven in his supplications, for better a little with intention than increasing them out without intention. It is well to say the section of the Akedah and the section of the manna, and the Ten Commandments and the section of the sacrifices, namely the section of the burnt offering and the meal offering and the offering of well being and the sin offering and the guilt offering. Of course it is preferable to say the section of the sacrifices during the day, for they are in place of the offering of the sacrifice, whose time is during the day. When he concludes the section of the burnt offering, he shall say ‘Master of the universe, may it be your will that this be considered and accepted before you as if I had offered a burnt sacrifice in its time. So too shall he say after the section of the meal offering and the offering of well being and the guilt offering. But after the section of the sin offering, he shall not so say, since it does not come freely. And if he is not able to rise early, prior to morning light, in any case he designates the time of the prayer which he is designates for all of life, and should not tarry. And he should well consider in his heart, if he had been in the service of a flesh and blood king who commanded him to rise early at the morning light to his service, he would have taken care and rushed to arise for the service which he commanded him, so much the more so, all the more and all the more so much the more so  before the King of kings of kings, the Holy One blessed be He.

Siman 2

2.	He should hasten to arise vigorously, and should not dress seated, but rather should take his garment and insert his head and arms through it while still laying down, and as a result when he arises he is covered, as Rabbi Yose used to adorn himself: ‘The walls of my house have never seen the edge of my garment.’ And he should not say ‘I am in my innermost room; who is aware of me and who sees me?’ for the holy one blessed is he, his glory fills the whole world; any darkness before him is as light. And he should be painstaking with his garment, putting it on in its proper way, not reversing the inside out, as (evidenced) in (tractate) Shabbat, (in) the chapter (entitled) ‘Which are tied?:’  Rabbi Yohanan said ‘Who is a sage’s student? One who is painstaking in his garment in reversing it to its proper way.’ And when he dons his shoes, he should put on the right first, but not tie it, and subsequently put on the left and tie it, then return to tie the right, for Rabbi Yohanan stated: ‘As tefillin, so too shoes. Just as tefillin are on the left, so too he puts on the left shoe first. Yet it is taught in a baraita: One puts on the right first. Therefore, in order to fulfill both of them, he puts on the right first and ties the left first. He should arise and walk in a stooped posture, as is (evidenced) in the first chapter of (tractate) Kiddushin: Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi stated: ‘It is prohibited to walk with an upright posture, as "His glory fills the land" is written. And he should cover his head as is (evidenced) there too: Rav Huna would not walk four cubits with an uncovered head, saying ‘God’s presence is above my head.’ And he should inspect his orifices, as Rabbi Yohanan stated: ‘One who wishes to accept the complete yoke of the heavenly kingdom should relieve himself, wash his hands, put on tefillin and engage in the recitation of the Shema and pray.

Siman 3

3.	And upon his entrance to the bathroom he should say ‘May the honored and holy ones who accompany the most high be esteemed! Guard me, guard me, help me, help me, wait for me until I enter and exit, for such is the way of human beings,’  and so should he say every time that he enters. He should be modest in the bathroom and not uncover himself until he sits. And he should clean out his anus and then sit. He should uncover two handbreadths before him and one handbreadth behind him. And a woman: a handbreadth behind her and nothing at all before her. And when he sits he should orient himself so that he faces to the south with his behind to the north, but should not sit between the east and west.  However, this is specifically where he relieves himself in an open area, but in a place in which there are barriers, such as a bathroom which is in a house, he need not be so exacting. And when he relieves himself in a field: If he is behind a fence, he may relieve himself immediately. But in a valley he must distance himself until such point where his associate is not able to see him uncovered. And he should not force himself to push too much. He should wipe with the left hand, and not with the right.  And he should not wipe with a clay shard because of sorcery, nor with dry grass, nor with the piece of leather with which his companion wiped. He should relieve himself modestly at night in the same manner that he does during the day. He should not urinate standing, so that the drops not drip on his feet and he appear like a eunuch, resulting in slander about his children, except where he can stand in a high place or will urinate into overturned soil. He should take care concerning the prohibition not to take hold of the member and urinate, except from the crown down to the ground side, even if he is married, and should not make his needs wait.

Siman 4

4.	He should wash his hands clean and recite the blessing ‘Blessed are you, Lord our God, king of the universe, who sanctified us with His mitzvot and commanded us concerning hand washing.’ He should be exacting in pouring over them three times on account of the evil spirit alighting upon the hands prior to washing, which is not vitiated until he has poured over them three times. Therefore, he needs to refrain from touching with his hand, prior to washing, to the mouth, to the nose, and to the ears and to the eyes, on account of the evil spirit alighting upon them. But if he has no water, he should wipe his hands with a stone chip or with any type of wiping implement and recite the blessing ‘concerning the cleaning of the hands.’

Siman 5

5.	He should truly intend in the words of his blessings the meaning of the words which come out of his mouth. And concerning his mentioning the name, he should truly intend the meaning of his recitation of the letters aleph daled as the terminology of lordship for He is the Lord over all. He should further truly intend the meaning of his writing ‘yud hay’ as the terminology of being, that He was and is and shall be. And upon mentioning ‘Elohim,’ he should truly intend that He is mighty and firm,  as he possesses capacity over the upper and the lower (realms), for 'El' is the terminology of power and domination, as in "He carried away the gods (elim) of the land."

Siman 6

6.	He should recite the blessing "He who created...empty cavities (hallulim hallulim)" But he should not say ‘empty cavities’ (hal’lim hal’lim) as an allusion to the subject of ‘empty cavities’ (hallulim hallulim) which counts 248, like the sum of a person’s parts. (See in chapter 6 of Oholot, where he enumerates all 248 of a person's parts.) It is impossible to exist, as it is (stated) in tractate Niddah: ‘The entire time that an infant is in its mother’s womb, its navel is open and its mouth is closed; when it emerges into the world’s air, the closed opens and the open closes, for where it not so, it is impossible to endure. It is a wonder to create such as is (stated) in the midrash: ‘For you are great, creating wonders: A person is like a water skin full of air; should a person make a perforation in a water skin the size of a needle point, the air comes out. Yet a person is full of openings, yet his spirit is kept within him, which is ‘performing wonders.’ But if he goes immediately to the synagogue and wishes to delay reciting ‘concerning hand washing’ and until he comes to the synagogue, when he will put them in order with the rest of the blessings, he has the authority. Indeed, if he should immediately recite the blessing ‘concerning hand washing’ and ‘He who created,’ there are those who say that he needs to say immediately after it ‘The soul, my God’ until ‘Blessed are you, Lord, who returns souls to lifeless bodies,’ since it is in tandem with the blessing ‘He who created,’ and subsequently does not open with ‘Blessed.’ But there are those who say that he does not need to say (it) immediately after it; the reason that it does not open with ‘Blessed’ because it is a thanksgiving blessing, like the rain blessing, which does not open with ‘Blessed.’ This is logical, for it is proven in (tractate) Brakhot, in the chapter (entitled) ‘One who sees,’  which says ‘When he awakens from his sleep, let him say ‘The soul, my God;’ later it says thus: ‘When he washes his hands let him say ‘concerning hand washing.’’ Thus did Rambam order them, may his memory be a blessing.

Siman 7

The entire day, when he performs his needs, there are those who say that for urination, he recites the blessing ‘He who created,’ and for bowel movements ‘concerning hand washing.’ And there are those who say whether bowel movements or urination he recites the ‘concerning hand washing’ blessing and ‘He who created,’ for since he needs to say ‘He who created,’ which is a subject of holiness, he needs to recite the blessing ‘concerning hand washing.’  All the more so if he wishes to study after bowel movements, for he needs to say ‘concerning hand washing.’ My master, my father the Rosh, may the memory of his righteousness be a blessing, would not recite the blessing even for bowel movements, only ‘He who created,’ even when he wished to study, if it was not when he performed his needs and wiped or urinated and wiped himself off, and would pray immediately after it. Then he would recite the blessing ‘concerning hand washing.’ And this is his language, which he wrote in response to a question: “If he performed his needs and wiped or the it was the minors who wiped off, and wishes to pray, he should rinse his hands and recite the blessing ‘concerning hand washing.’ But the entire day when he performs his needs, or urinates, even if he wishes to study, he need not recite the blessing ‘concerning hand washing,’ but rather ‘He who created.’

Siman 8

Immediately after hand washing he should wrap himself in tzitzit while standing. The geonim explained the order of wrapping as being like that of the Ishmaelites, which is complete wrapping. The master of the Ittur wrote that we do not require such an extent, but rather like the way people who wear coverings and engage in their work; sometimes with a covered head and sometimes with an uncovered head. The manner of wrapping: its width is a man’s height. He places two tzitzit before him and two tzitzit behind him, so that he is surrounded with mitzvot, and he covers his head in order that he not be of uncovered head. He should recite the blessing ‘to be wrapped in tzitzit.’ It is called a tzitzit on account of the threads which separate from it, as is written "He took me by the tzitzit on my head."  Accordingly, he needs to separate them one from another. He should truly intend with his wrapping that God commanded him to wrap in order that he be reminded to perform all of His commandments. He should examine the tzitzit prior to this that they be complete, for if one of them had been ruined, it is a vain blessing. And should he wish to wrap himself immediately upon arising in order that he not walk four cubits without a tzitzit or where he has a tzitzit on his garment, he is able to don it immediately without a blessing and when he washes his hands he should clutch the tzitzit and recite the blessing ‘to wrap in a tzitzit.’ Or, if he should wrap himself afterward in another tallit, he should recite the blessing over it and intend to also exempt that which he has already put on. If he has many garments of four corners, they are all subject to tzitzit. If he wears them simultaneously, one blessing is sufficient for them. If he makes a division between them, he needs to recite a blessing on every single one. Therefore, one who is accustomed to wrapping in the synagogue in a large tallit needs to recite a blessing over it, even though he recited a blessing over the smaller tallit which he had already put on. If he removed his tallit, and did not have it in mind to put it on immediately, when he goes back and puts it on he needs to recite a blessing. But if he had it in mind to put it on immediately, such as where he removed it in order to go into the bathroom, in such a case I am in doubt as to whether he needs to recite a blessing, for there is a basis for interpreting either way, for it is possible to say that since we have derived all of the instruction (concerning tzitzit) from tefillin, and for tefillin, every time that one handles them, he recites a blessing, meaning if they moved from their position and he handles them to return them to their position, if so, all the more so here should he recite a blessing. However it is possible to say that it is different there (in the case of tefillin), for they moved from their position and he did not know that they were not in their position. But if he moved them from their position knowingly to return them immediately, there too he would not need to recite a blessing; my opinion inclines to this. One who sleeps in his tallit at night does not need to recite a blessing on it in the morning.

Siman 9

9.	All types of garments are under the obligation of tzitzit, and tzitzit of wool or flax fulfill (the obligation) for all types. But the rest of the types (of garments,) such as those of silk or cotton, do not fulfill the obligation unless the tzitzit will be of the tallit’s type. The Rambam wrote that it is required to make the tzitzit the color of the wool: if it is red, the tzitzit should be made red, and if it is green, the tzitzit should be made green. And Rashi explained similarly, but Ri explained that it is not required. In The Small Book of Mitzvot, he wrote, “However it is correct to take care not to make flaxen tzitzit with that of silk. Even though the Geonim and Rabbeinu Tam forbid making even tzitzit of flax on a tallit of flax, Rabbeinu Shlomo and Rav Alfas permitted, and with this did my master, my father the Rosh, his memory be pious and a blessing, agreed.

Siman 10

A tallit which does not have four corners is exempt (from tzitzit). One which has more than four corners is obligated and one makes four tzitzit for it on four of its corners. If it has four and he cut one diagonally, making it two, or lifts its corners and sews them in such a way that no corner remains on it, it is not thereby exempted. That of a cloth whose corners are of hide is obligated. That of a hide whose corners are of cloth is exempt. If it had three corners and he made them three tzitzit, and then went back and made it a fourth corner, and also made it a tzitzit, it is invalid. If it was square and he folded it: The Rambam, may his memory be a blessing, wrote: One does not place its tzitzit on its corners when folded, unless he sewed it all, even from one direction. But from the language of my teacher, my father the Rosh, his memory be a blessing, it seems that it is obligated even if he did not sew it at all. If it had four tzitzit on its four corners and he made it another later and cut the former, the latter are kosher. The Rambam, his memory be a blessing, wrote: Placing tzitzit on tzitzit: if it was intended to nullify the former, he cuts the former and it is kosher, but if it was intended to add, even if he cut one of the two of them, it is disqualified. And my teacher, my father, the Rosh, his memory be a blessing, did not differ.

Siman 11

11.	The mitzvah of tzitzit in the time when teheilet existed: Its mitzvah was to take two doubled threads of dyed wool and two doubled threads of white wool or of flax, which would be spun for the purpose of tzitzit; had they not been spun for that purpose, they are unusable. And it is required that they be interwoven. Their length, doubled, should be three hand breadths of four fingers, with the thumb in each hand breadth. And if he wishes to add to its length he may add. One of the threads should be of longer length in order that he may wrap the fringe in it. Had he made it from thorns, meaning from the threads which are hanging on a sheet like a kind of thorn, which one customarily cuts off, or from threads, meaning the threads which extrude from the garment to sew, or from the threads which extrude from the edge of the garment, it is unusable. Had he made it from stolen wool, it is unusable. One who bows down to a beast, its wool is unusable for tzitzit, but one who bows down to planted flax, it is fit for tzitzit. He should make a perforation in the tallit within three fingers of the corner, lengthwise, and a distance from the corner in the measure from the thumb knuckle to the end of the nail. That which fills and above, up to three fingers from the corner, is the place for tzitzit. And had the distance from the corner been the space occupied by the thumb knuckle, and he severed it from the woof threads to the point where there did not remain the measure from the corner, it is fit for use. In any case, it is well to make a hem on the edge of the cloth so that he not sever it. Within the width of the garment there is no set measure, only that he should not put it on the threads that one makes on the edge of the garment. Ba’al haItur wrote that there is no upward measure; if he desires he may add as he wishes. The Ri explained that he may add up to eight doubled, which are sixteen, but no more. He should cut off the ends of the threads and insert them into the corner piece and double them over, at which point their length should be twelve fingers, which is the set length of tzitzit. He should take four threads from one side and four from the other side and tie two times one atop the other. Next, he should wrap the long thread around the seven. In the time when the teheilet existed, he was required to take great care with the wrapping, making seven sections as they are described in the gemara. At the present, when we do not have teheilet, one does not make it of mixed species, but rather of wool and wool, or flax and flax. There is also no need to take great care concerning the sections. Rambam, may his memory be a blessing, wrote: Our practice is to wrap the sections in it in the same manner which one wraps in teheilet. My master, my father, the Rosh, may his memory be a blessing, would not take such great care. The Ba’al haItur wrote that nowadays one does not need to take such great care concerning wrapping, and even if he wrapped the majority of it or only wrapped one section in it, it is fit for use; rather, the essence of its mitzvah is that he should wrap until the wrapping with the knot the width of a thumb. He ties two times and goes back and wraps; thus should he do until he completes five knots with four wrappings between them. The entire wrapping should be a hand breadth in width and the remainder two hand breadths. Further, there are other customs concerning its making, but that which I have written is the essence. He should be careful to cut the ends of the threads, making them eight prior to wrapping, for if he wrapped them and afterward cut the ends of the threads, it is unusable. But if he inserted them into the corner and subsequently cut them, it is usable; it is only that he should cut them before wrapping.

Siman 12

12.	If he cut short all of its threads, yet there remains enough of them for looping, it is fit for use, provided that he leave enough that he can loop them all together, for this is more than enough looping for each one alone. Rashi explained that we require enough for looping from the corner piece. The Ri explained even if the entire corner piece is cut off and only enough remains for looping from the fringe, it is fit for use. If there does not remain enough of them for looping even one thread, where it was cut entirely, it is unusable. Therefore, when every one is doubled in two, if he cut short the ends of two, it is unusable, lest one thread be cut. But if the end of one was cut, it is fit for use. There are those who says that if three threads were cut short, it is unusable, even if there remained enough of them for looping, but if two were cut short, it is fit for use if there remains enough for looping. Accordingly, even if two ends were cut short, it is fit for use if they have enough for looping, up to the point where they cut three. My teacher, my father, the Rosh, may his memory be a blessing, agreed with the first line of reasoning.

Siman 13

13.	The four tzitzit impede one another, so that the entire time that all four are not present, it is not fringed according to its legal prescription, and one who goes out into the public domain on Shabbat is liable for a sin offering. But if it has all four, it is permissible to go out into the public domain in it, even though nowadays we do not have the teheilet.

Siman 14

14.	If a non–Jew made it, it is unusable. But a woman is fit to make it. One who borrows a tallit from his associate is exempt from affixing tzitzit to the entire thirty days; after thirty days, he is obligated. It is a question he is obligated to recite a blessing over it’s tzitzit immediately. There are those who say that he does not recite a blessing over it until after thirty days; it is unclear to my teacher, my father, the Rosh, may his memory be a blessing. Making use of his associate’s tallit without his knowledge and reciting a blessing over it: There are those who say that it is permissible, for it does well for a person to fulfill a mitzvah with his property; it is only that he should fold it if he found it folded. A jointly held tallit is liable for tzitzit.

Siman 15

15.	It is permissible to remove tzitzit from one tallit and place them on another, but he cannot take the corner piece as is, with the tzitzit, and sew it onto another garment. Had he hung the threads between two corner pieces and tied one corner piece according to its legal prescription, and the other corner piece according to its legal prescription, and subsequently cut it in the middle and separated one from the other, it is unusable. Had the tallit been torn within three fingers of the corner piece, he does not have the authority to sew it; outside three fingers, he can sew it.

Siman 16

16.	The measurement by which a tallit is made liable for tzitzit: Any in which a minor of nine years of age is able to cover his head and the majority (of his body) in it, and an adult is not ashamed to go out and about in it in the market place. But if the minor’s head and the majority (of his body) is not covered in it, even though an adult goes out and about in it in the market place, it is exempt.

Siman 17

17.	A blind man is obligated for tzitzit, but women and slaves are exempt. Hermaphrodites and androgynous persons are obligated out of doubt. Rambam wrote: “They wrap themselves without a blessing.” He goes on, according to his method, explaining that women cannot recite a blessing over something for which they are exempt. But Rabbenu Tam wrote that they may recite a blessing, even though they are exempt, but it is better that they not recite a blessing. A minor who knows how to wrap himself: His father is required to buy tzitzit for him, to teach him.

Siman 18

18.	Night is not the time for tzitzit. There are those who say that anything which he wears at night is exempt, even if it is particular to the day, and what he wears during the day is liable even if it is particular to the night. And so wrote Rambam: It is permissible to wear tzitzit at night; it is only that he should not recite a blessing. So from what time does he recite a blessing over it in the morning? From (the time) when he can recognize (the difference) between the teheilet which is in it and the white which is in it. And my teacher, my father, may his memory be a blessing, explained that this limits only that covering particular to the night, for it is exempt even if he wears it during the day, whereas covering particular to the day or to (both) day and night is liable even if he wears it at night, and should recite a blessing over it. Sheets: Even though a person sleeps in them in the morning, the essence of their use is at night, and night covering is out of dignity.

Siman 19

19.	The obligation of tzitzit is only for a tallit which he desires to wear, but what he does not wish to wear is exempt. Therefore, he does not recite a blessing over its making ‘who sanctified us with his mitzvot and commanded us to make tzitzit,’ for the only mitzvah for its making is that of its wearing.

Siman 20

20.	One who purchases a fringed tallit from a Jew or from a non–Jewish trader, it is fit for use, but if he purchased it from a non–Jew who is not a trader, it is unusable. One does not sell a fringed tallit to a non–Jew.

Siman 21

21.	Tzitzit do not have inherent sanctity, for their mitzvah is in their use, and it is possible to throw them away or enter the bathroom in them. And it seems that even if he is currently engaged with their mitzvah it is permissible to have sexual relations in them. But in the Sheiltot, in the section (entitled) Shelah Lecha, he wrote that: "It is prohibited for Jews to use things that were made to fulfill the obligation of a mitzvah, such as the threads affixed to a tallit to tie some trifle. Alternatively, a hoshana for its scent, or to eat an etrog, whose mitzvah is to eat it, which we derive from blood, for the scripture stated "Pour out...and cover:" With the thing you used to pour you shall cover it. For one should not cover with his feet, in order that mitzvot not be thereby degraded. For it is specifically the use of the mitzvah; for after we have used them we may dispose of them.” Yet it is possible to differ, as it is not akin to blood, for it is different in that case, when he covers with the foot he performs the mitzvah in a degrading fashion, which is not the case here. So too did the Rambam, may his memory be a blessing, wrote: "It is permissible to enter a bathroom in tzitzit, or a bath house; should his tzitzit be rent, he may throw them into the trash heap if he wishes. But it is well to be strict.

Siman 22

22.	One who makes tzitzit for himself recites the ‘shehekhianu’ blessing. Upon wrapping himself in it, he recites the blessing ‘to wrap oneself in tzitzit.

Siman 23

23.	One who walks in the cemetery needs to lift his tzitzit, in order that it not be dragged through the cemetery, as it is in (tractate) Brakhot: Rabbi Hiya and Rabbi Yonatan were walking among graves; Rabbi Yonatan’s blue wool alighted upon graves. He said to him ‘Raise it, lest they say ‘Tomorrow they come among us, yet at present they revile us,’ meaning that it appears that he reviles that they are not able to uphold the mitzvot. Learn from this that it is permissible to walk in the cemetery in clothing which contains tzitzit, provided that he take care to raise them.’ And the master Rabbenu Yonah wrote: ‘Specifically in their days, when there were four corners on all their clothing, where it is impossible that he remove his clothing when he walks to the cemetery. But we, who do not intend them as clothing, but rather as a mitzvah, it is prohibited on account of ‘rebuking the poor.’

Siman 24

24.	Even though a person is only obligated to purchase a four cornered tallit in order to obligate himself for tzitzit, precisely where he wishes to be covered with a tallit of four corners, he is liable to put tzitzit on it. In any case, it is well and right for every person to take care and hasten in regard to the mitzvah of tzitzit, that he will have a small fringed garment which he will wear all day, for the essence of its mitzvah is in remembering the mitzvot, and in every hour and in every moment he therefore requires a physical representation of the thing, like a person who cautions his fellow about one matter, where he ties a knot on his belt in order that he remember it. Accordingly, there are five knots, corresponding to the five books of the Torah, and four corner pieces, where for every side to which he turns, he will remember. And greater is the punishment at this time for one who nullifies than what the punishment was at the time when the teheilet was in existence, for at that time it was not so easy to find, and not every one was able to pursue it, which is not so now. Even one who is not able to wrap himself the entire day needs to take care with it at the time of prayer. The Ba’al HaItur wrote: "As for those who gather up the tzitzit at the time of the recitation of the Shema and place (them) on the eyes, it is possible that they are accustomed to do so because of "You shall see them," on account of them being under his garments. Great is the mitzvah of tzitzit, for it is weighed against all of the mitzvot, as "You shall see it and you shall remember all the mitzvot of the Lord" is written.  ‘Tzitzit’ adds up to six hundred, and eight threads and five knots are thirteen, which is six hundred and thirteen. Even though it is written lacking a ‘yud,’ he explains in the Tanhuma: "Three times ‘tzitzit’ is written in the section concerning tzitzit, yet one of them is ‘l’tzitzit,’ whereby ‘l’ (thirty) is sufficient for all of them, and it fills out the counting."  Rabbi Shimon ben Yochai says: Anyone who had taken care concerning the mitzvah of tzitzit is well accounted, and sees the face of the Shekhinah. Here "You shall see it" is written and elsewhere "(The face) of the Lord your God (shall be seen)," you shall see and Him shall you serve. Resh Lakish said:  Anyone who had taken care concerning the mitzvah of tzitzit is well accounted, for two thousand eight hundred servants shall attend him, as "Ten men from nations of every tongue will take hold – they will take hold of every Jew by a corner of his cloak" is stated. And of anyone who nullifies the mitzvah of tzitzit is said "So that it seizes the corners of the earth, etc." "At every moment, let your clothes be white," this is the mitzvah of tzitzit; "and your head never lack ointment," this is the mitzvah of tefillin. Rabbi Eleazar ben Yakov says: One who has tefillin on his head and on his arm, and a mezuzah on his entrance and tzitzit on his garment is assured that he will not sin, as "A threefold cord is not readily broken" is stated. And it states: "The angel of the Lord camps around those who fear Him and rescues them."

Siman 25

25.	After he has wrapped himself in tzitzit, he immediately puts on tefillin in order that they be present for him at the time of the recitation of the Shema and tefillah, for Rabbi Yohanan said: ‘One who wishes to accept the yoke of God’s sovereignty upon himself in toto should relieve himself, rinse his hands, put on tefillin and engage in the recitation of the Shema and tefillah.’ And Ulla said: ‘Anyone who engages in the recitation of the Shema without tefillin is as if he is giving false testimony against himself.’ Rabbi Hiya bar Abba said in the name of Rabbi Yohanan: ‘It is as if he brought a burnt offering without a meal offering; a sacrifice without libation.’ But if he relieved himself, rinsed his hands, put on tefillin and engaged in the recitation of the Shema and tefillah, it is as if he built an altar and brought all the sacrifices onto it, as "I wash my hands in cleanness and walk about your altar, Lord" is stated. And I observed of my lord, my father the Rosh, may his memory be for a blessing, that he would be punctilious about putting them on when going through the blessings, and would recite them one after the other until ‘Who crowns Israel in glory,’ and thereafter would put them on and recite the blessing ‘Who crowns Israel in glory,’ since the tefillin are called ‘glory,’ as "Put on your headdress" is stated, and are called tefillin, the terminology of pelilah, for they are a sign and witnesses for all we see, for the shekhinah alights upon us, as "And all the peoples of the earth will see that the Lord’s name is proclaimed over you" is written. We have expounded these are the head tefillin. He should have the intention when putting them on that God commanded us to insert these four sections (of the Torah) in which there are the unification of Your name and the Exodus from Egypt on the arm facing the heart, and on his head facing the brain, in order that he be reminded of the Exodus from Egypt on account of miracles and wonders which He performed on our behalf, for they instruct about His unity, that He is alone in His universe and is in possession of the power and the governance on high and below, to do with them according to His will. He should put on that of the hand first and recite the blessing ‘Who sanctified us with His mitzvot and commanded us to put on tefillin,’ and afterward that of the head, reciting the blessing ‘Who sanctified us with His mitzvot and commanded us concerning the mitzvah of tefillin.’ Even though Rav Alfas ruled that one recites only one blessing over them both, namely ‘to put on,’ lest he should make a verbal interruption between them when he recites the blessing for the head, ‘concerning the mitzvah of tefillin.’ So too did Rashi and many of the commentators write. And my lord, my father the Rosh, may his memory be for a blessing, agreed that it is acceptable to recite two blessings, even with no interruption. But if he interrupted verbally, he goes back and recites the blessing over that of the head, ‘to put on,’ and also ‘concerning the mitzvah of tefillin.’ He recites the blessing over them from the moment that he begins to put them on until the moment that he fastens them on his head and on his arm. He should not interrupt between them to speak, even to answer ‘Amen, may His exalted name be sanctified,’ or the kedushah. If he spoke, it is a transgression accounted to him, and he needs to go back and recite the blessing as explained. I observed my lord, my father the Rosh, may his memory be for a blessing, that immediately after he tied that of the hand on his arm, he would situate that of the head before he would wrap the strap around his arm, for he would say “Since the second blessing is also effective for that of the hand.” And from this reason - one does not interrupt between them - it is advisable to diminish the interruption in any way possible. But the wrapping around the arm is not based on the mitzvah. Therefore, it is best to delay until after he puts on that of the head. And any time that he puts them on during the day, he recites a blessing. Even if they loosen from their place and he handles them to return them to their place, he needs to recite a blessing.

Siman 26

26.	If he has only the one, whether that of the head or that of the hand, he puts it on and recites the blessing over it, for every single mitzvah is for its own sake. And he recites a blessing on that of the hand alone, one, and on that of the head alone, two. Even if he has two, yet has any sort of thing preventing, where he is not able to put both of them on, such as where he needs to go out on the road and is not able to do them in tandem, he may put one of them on, for neither prevents the other.

Siman 27

27.	The area of placement of that of the hand is on the left arm on the thickest part of the flesh, which is in the section between the forearm and the shoulder. He should incline it slightly to the right side, in order that when he bends his arm it will be facing his heart. There should not be anything interposed between them and his flesh. A left handed man: his ‘right’ hand places on his ‘left,’ which is everyone’s right.  The master Rabbi Yehiel of Paris explained it is specifically where he does all of his work with his left, but if he writes with his right, even though the rest of his work with his left, its ruling is like every person. One who is ambidextrous places on the left (like) every person. He should wrap the strap around his arm until he reaches the middle finger and wrap it around it three times. The area of the head tefillin is from the beginning of the roots of his forehead hair until the end of the area where the brain of an infant pulsates, which is the entire height of the head. It is required that the knot be behind the head above the lower edge of the skull, but not below the neck, for it should be truly facing the neck, aligned with the middle of the head, and should not incline toward the side of the face in this direction or that. And it is required that it be his ornament, that the place where it appears is the form of a dalet, on the exterior side and not on the ‘head’ side. He should also take care that the straps which wind around his head, that they not become reversed, in order that they be ornamental on the exterior, meaning the white is toward the hair, which is smoother, and the black color recognizable on the exterior. He should drape the straps so that they hang before him, reaching, on the right, until the navel and on the left until the breast. Some say that of the right side until the (site of the) circumcision and that of the left until the navel. The measure of their width is the length of a hair, but if he lessened or added, it does not abrogate.

Siman 28

28.	He should handle them every hour. He should handle that of the hand first and afterward that of the head. When he removes them, he should remove that of the head first and put it in its bag, and afterward remove that of the hand and put it on top of them, so that when he comes to put them on, that of the hand will come out first and he can put it on.

Siman 29

29.	He should not recite the blessing ‘Who sanctified us with his mitzvot and commanded us to keep his laws’ when he removes them, for the halakha is not according to the westerners, who would recite the blessing ‘to keep his laws’ at the time of their removal, for they hold that night is not the time for tefillin, and explain it ‘This institution shall be kept at its set time from day to day,’  for they explain ‘days’ but not nights. But we have established for ourselves that night is time for tefillin; therefore, one does not recite the blessing even when he removes them at night. Even on Shabbat eve at twilight, when one needs to remove them, one does not recite the blessing there, for he has to remove them at that time, it is not kept. We learn it, rather, because it is written of them “It shall be a sign on your hand,”  and Shabbat and Yom Tov do not require a sign; therefore, one does not recite a blessing at all. And I have seen written in the name of Rav Hai Gaon that he has permission if he wishes to recite a blessing. Yet I am amazed, for certainly where he is not obligated to recite a blessing, if he does so, it is a vain blessing.

Siman 30

30.	The time of their donning in the morning is from when he can see a colleague who is frequently with him a bit, at a distance of four cubits, and can recognize him. Despite the fact that we have established for ourselves that night is time for tefillin, nevertheless one does not instruct such. Such is the instance of where they were on his head when it darkness fell, that he does not need to remove them, but at the outset, one does not don them prior to this time. But if he needs to walk on the road, he can put them on before this time without a blessing, and when their time arrives, he should handle them and recite the blessing. And the Rav Peretz wrote: ‘Since we established for ourselves that night is the time for tefillin, it is only that one does not put them on at night on account of a decree, lest he sleep in them. One who wishes to go out on the road may put them on before their time and recite a blessing over them immediately.’  My lord, my father the Rosh, may his memory be a blessing, did not write so. If he should come onto the road with tefillin on his head, when the sun sets on him he should place his hand on them until he reaches his house. But if there is a house close to the wall where he stores them, he removes them and deposits them there. Had he been sitting in the Beit Midrash with tefillin on his head, and the day was meanwhile sanctified, he places his hand over them until he reaches his home.

Siman 31

31.	Shabbat and Yom Tov are not the time for tefillin. There is cause to have doubts whether its intermediate non–sacred day is the time for tefillin and one puts them on without a blessing. But my lord, my father the Rosh, may his memory be a blessing, would put them on and recite a blessing over them.

Siman 32

…and so too shall one do with the arm tefillin, fold over the leather to make the opened passageway, which should be made square with even diagonals. The number of stitching should be three to each side, as it is with the tefillin for the head. The strap should be place through the passageway and a knot should be made to hold it in place on one’s arm, and at the end of that strap one should fashion a small knot in the shape of the letter yod which completed the letter of the divine name Shaddai, along with the letter shin imprinted in the boxes and the letter daled in the knot for the tefillin for the head. There are those who cut the end of the knot to make it look like the letter yod. There is a custom to put hide on the box covering the area of the arm that it is on . The reason for the custom is that the boxes of the arm tefillin are ‘taller and narrower’ (than the box for the head tefillin) and they are place under the clothes and they tend to move under the clothing and get ruined. It is because of this that they will put a strap of hide(s) on top of them. 

Siman 33



Siman 34



Siman 35



Siman 36



Siman 37



Siman 38



Siman 39



Siman 40



Siman 41



Siman 42



Siman 43



Siman 44



Siman 45



Siman 46



Siman 47



Siman 48



Siman 49



Siman 50



Siman 51



Siman 52



Siman 53



Siman 54



Siman 55



Siman 56



Siman 57



Siman 58



Siman 59



Siman 60



Siman 61



Siman 62



Siman 63



Siman 64



Siman 65



Siman 66



Siman 67



Siman 68



Siman 69



Siman 70



Siman 71



Siman 72



Siman 73



Siman 74



Siman 75



Siman 76



Siman 77



Siman 78



Siman 79



Siman 80



Siman 81



Siman 82



Siman 83



Siman 84



Siman 85



Siman 86



Siman 87



Siman 88



Siman 89



Siman 90



Siman 91



Siman 92



Siman 93



Siman 94



Siman 95



Siman 96



Siman 97



Siman 98



Siman 99



Siman 100



Siman 101



Siman 102



Siman 103



Siman 104



Siman 105



Siman 106

All who are exempt from shma, e.g., those who are involved in a mitzvah or in the preparation for a mitzvah, are exempt from prayer.  In addition, replacement pall-bearers that are not immediately needed are exempt from prayer even though they are obligated in recitation of the shma.  Women and slaves are obligated in [prayer].

Siman 107



Siman 108



Siman 109



Siman 110



Siman 111



Siman 112



Siman 113



Siman 114



Siman 115



Siman 116



Siman 117



Siman 118



Siman 119



Siman 120



Siman 121



Siman 122



Siman 123



Siman 124



Siman 125



Siman 126



Siman 127



Siman 128



Siman 129



Siman 130



Siman 131



Siman 132



Siman 133



Siman 134



Siman 135



Siman 136



Siman 137



Siman 138



Siman 139



Siman 140



Siman 141



Siman 142



Siman 143



Siman 144



Siman 145



Siman 146



Siman 147



Siman 148



Siman 149



Siman 150



Siman 151



Siman 152



Siman 153



Siman 154



Siman 155



Siman 156



Siman 157



Siman 158



Siman 159



Siman 160



Siman 161



Siman 162



Siman 163



Siman 164



Siman 165



Siman 166



Siman 167



Siman 168



Siman 169



Siman 170



Siman 171



Siman 172



Siman 173



Siman 174



Siman 175



Siman 176



Siman 177

Rava Papa said the Halacha is as follows. Items that come due to the meal, during the meal do not require a blessing, not before consumption or after. For example meat, fish, eggs, vegetables, cheese or a pounded grain dish. It is not necessary to compliment the bread with the item (as in a dip), rather if the dip/ complimenting food item is eaten alone, it does not require a blessing before hand, as the blessing on the bread exempts it. Further, one doesn't need to make an after blessing, as the after bread blessing exempts it. Items that are brought to the meal, not due to the meal like dates or grapes, and all species of fruits and items not brought due to the meal because they are not like meat, fish and cooked dishes that are generally brought as the essence of the meal, require a blessing, as the blessing on bread does not exempt them since they are not part of the essence of the meal. Further, these items are not exempt from an after blessing as the after blessing of bread only exempts that which is eaten in the meal. Explanation: everything that we have mentioned above regarding coming due to the meal, or not due to the meal, if it is brought after the meal but before the after blessing, as is regularly done in large meals, that after they have withdrawn their hand from eating bread, they remove it and cover the table in fruit and desserts, and set themselves to drink anything that is brought to them, therefore whether it is something that comes due to the meal or not due to the meal, it requires a blessing before it and after it, as the blessing of bread and the after blessing can only exempt what is eaten during the meal. The Rosh writes that there is a question on one who sets his meal on fruits, if he eats from them at the beginning (of his meal), whether he needs to make a blessing on them. And there is good reason not to make a blessing, that according to me it is like items that came due to the meal, since the essence of the meal is reliant on the fruit, the bread will exempt them from a blessing, even if he eats a little of the fruit without bread. But when they bring fruits in the middle of the meal, since the essence of the meal is not on the fruit, even though it comes to compliment the bread, if it is eaten even a little without bread, one must say a blessing on them. 

Siman 178



Siman 179



Siman 180



Siman 181



Siman 182



Siman 183



Siman 184



Siman 185



Siman 186



Siman 187



Siman 188



Siman 189



Siman 190



Siman 191



Siman 192



Siman 193



Siman 194



Siman 195



Siman 196



Siman 197



Siman 198



Siman 199



Siman 200



Siman 201



Siman 202



Siman 203



Siman 204



Siman 205



Siman 206



Siman 207

The difference in blessings between tree fruit and fruit of the earth and something which does not originate from the earth, is specific to the prior blessing. but the after blessing is the same for all of these and it is: Baruch ata Hashem Eloheinu melech ha'olam boreh nefashot rabot v'chesronan al kol mah shehbara l'hachayot bahen nefesh kol chai baruch ata hashem chai haolamim. therefore if one at tree fruit that is not from the seven species and fruit of the earth, because the after blessing is the same for them, one makes one blessing on both. the meaning of the blessing is: who makes many beings and everything they are missing and on all other things that he created in the world that had God not created them they would not be missing from them [the beings], for they are only meant for pleasure, to imbue life of every being. and there are those who say "boreh nefashot rabot v'chesronan al kol mah shebarata l'hachayot bahem nefesh kol chai". and in our gemara it does not mention a conclusion for her [this blessing], but in the Jerusalem [Talmud] it concludes the blessing "baruch ata hashem chey ha'olamim" and this was the custom of my master my father, the Rosh, may his memory be a blessing.   

Siman 208



Siman 209



Siman 210



Siman 211



Siman 212



Siman 213



Siman 214



Siman 215



Siman 216



Siman 217



Siman 218



Siman 219



Siman 220



Siman 221



Siman 222



Siman 223



Siman 224



Siman 225



Siman 226



Siman 227



Siman 228



Siman 229



Siman 230



Siman 231



Siman 232



Siman 233



Siman 234



Siman 235



Siman 236



Siman 237



Siman 238



Siman 239



Siman 240

And if he was married he should not be too regular (often) with his wife, and if as they say "that talmidai chachomim should not be found by their wifes and roosters" (this ment) not sposificly talmidai chachomim but the same law is also every man, they wrote "talmidai chachomim" since abstinent if found by them, ...

Siman 241



Siman 242



Siman 243



Siman 244



Siman 245



Siman 246



Siman 247



Siman 248



Siman 249



Siman 250



Siman 251



Siman 252



Siman 253



Siman 254



Siman 255



Siman 256



Siman 257



Siman 258



Siman 259



Siman 260



Siman 261



Siman 262

And one should prepare her table and make beds and arrange all of the matters of the home in order that it will all be found arranged and orderly when everyone comes home from synagogue. Rabbi Yose Bar Yehuda said: two ministering angels escort a person on Erev Shabbat from the synagogue to her home, one good and one evil. When she comes home, she will find a lit candle, the table set, and a made bed. The Good angel says, “May it be God’s will that it will be like this next Shabbat.” and the Evil angel must answer, “amen” because the angel has no choice (but to say amen). And he should make an effort to wear nice things for Shabbat as it is said in Torah: “its honor.” And we explain this to mean that one should not be dressed for Shabbat like one is dressed on the weekday. And if he does not have other clothes, he should allow his clothes at least to hang low in an honorable way. And she should wear nice clothes and have happy Shabbat sex like one would accept a king, or a bride and groom as it is said in the Talmud in Shabbat: “Rabbi Hanina would wrap himself in a nice garment and would face evening on Friday and say, ‘come and lets go out to meet accept the Shabbat queen.’ Rabbi Yanai would say, ‘come bride, come bride.’” And one should eat a lot of meat and drink wine and sweets as much as she can. And anyone who can increase their honor of Shabbat in body, clothes, or eating, or drinking, she should be praised.

Siman 263

And he should be cautious to make a fine lamp, as R. Huna said: One who is regular [to light] a Shabbat lamp, to strive to perform this, and to make it attractive, will have sons who are scholars. And there are those who make two wicks, one to correspond with "Remember" and one to correspond with "Observe." But if he cannot afford to buy a lamp for Shabbat and a lamp for Hannukah, Shabbat takes priority. Similarly if he cannot afford to buy a candle and wine for Kiddush, the candle takes priority because of domestic tranquility, for there is no domestic tranquility without a lamp. And he should not hurry to light it while the day is still long, for then it won't be known that he lights it for the honor of Shabbat. Nor should he light late. And when he lights he blesses: Blessed are you, Lord our God, King of the universe who has sancitified us with his commandments and commanded us to light the Sabbath lamp. Both men and women are commanded to light this, but women are more commanded than men, as it says in the Midrash: Since she extinguished the lamp of the world, meaning she caused the death of the first human. And the Rambam explains [that women are more obligated] because they are found at home and they take care of household needs. And there are those who says that we should not recite a blessing over it, and they explain that if the lamp was already lit he need not extinguish it in order to go back and light it again, nor need he light another lamp. But this is not a good reason, for with regard to covering the blood [of a bird or wild animal that was slaughtered] we taught: If the wind covered [the blood] he need not go back and cover it again, and nevertheless we bless the covering. Furthermore, Rabbenu Tam said that if it was already lit he must extinguish it and go back and light it again. For an elder said: We have taught: As long as he doesn't do it too early or too late. And so too wrote Rav Amram: One who lights the Shabbat candle blesses. And so too wrote the Halakhot Gedolot that the acceptance of Shabbat is dependent upon the lighting of the candle, for once he has lit the Shabbat candle Shabbat has begun for him. And for this reason he wrote that one must first light the Hannukah lamp before the Shabbat candle for if he does Shabbat first, he cannot afterwards light the Hannukah candle. But the Tosafot wrote that [the beginning of Shabbat] is not dependent on the lighting of the lamp for even after he lights, Shabbat has not begun for him. Rather it is dependent on the maariv prayer, for Shabbat begins once he has prayed maariv.   

Siman 264



Siman 265



Siman 266



Siman 267



Siman 268



Siman 269



Siman 270



Siman 271



Siman 272



Siman 273



Siman 274



Siman 275



Siman 276



Siman 277



Siman 278



Siman 279



Siman 280



Siman 281



Siman 282



Siman 283



Siman 284



Siman 285



Siman 286



Siman 287



Siman 288



Siman 289



Siman 290



Siman 291



Siman 292



Siman 293



Siman 294



Siman 295



Siman 296



Siman 297



Siman 298



Siman 299



Siman 300



Siman 301



Siman 302



Siman 303



Siman 304



Siman 305



Siman 306



Siman 307



Siman 308



Siman 309



Siman 310



Siman 311



Siman 312



Siman 313



Siman 314



Siman 315



Siman 316



Siman 317



Siman 318



Siman 319



Siman 320



Siman 321



Siman 322



Siman 323



Siman 324



Siman 325



Siman 326



Siman 327



Siman 328



Siman 329



Siman 330



Siman 331



Siman 332



Siman 333



Siman 334



Siman 335



Siman 336



Siman 337



Siman 338



Siman 339



Siman 340



Siman 341



Siman 342



Siman 343



Siman 344



Siman 345



Siman 346



Siman 347



Siman 348



Siman 349



Siman 350



Siman 351



Siman 352



Siman 353



Siman 354



Siman 355



Siman 356



Siman 357



Siman 358



Siman 359



Siman 360



Siman 361



Siman 362



Siman 363



Siman 364



Siman 365



Siman 366



Siman 367



Siman 368



Siman 369



Siman 370



Siman 371



Siman 372



Siman 373



Siman 374



Siman 375



Siman 376



Siman 377



Siman 378



Siman 379



Siman 380



Siman 381



Siman 382



Siman 383



Siman 384



Siman 385



Siman 386



Siman 387



Siman 388



Siman 389



Siman 390



Siman 391



Siman 392



Siman 393



Siman 394



Siman 395



Siman 396



Siman 397



Siman 398



Siman 399



Siman 400



Siman 401



Siman 402



Siman 403



Siman 404



Siman 405



Siman 406



Siman 407



Siman 408



Siman 409



Siman 410



Siman 411



Siman 412



Siman 413



Siman 414



Siman 415



Siman 416



Siman 417



Siman 418



Siman 419



Siman 420



Siman 421



Siman 422



Siman 423



Siman 424



Siman 425



Siman 426



Siman 427



Siman 428



Siman 429



Siman 430

The Sabbos before Pesach is called "Shabbat HaGadol" (The Great Shabbos). And the reason is because a miracle occurred during the Exodus from Egypt. On the 10th [they took a sheep] as it says: "On the tenth of this month you shall take for yourselves a sheep into your homes."<br>And the year that the Exodus took place was on a Thursday as we see in Seder Olam, and therefore the "10th of the month" was Shabbos, and [on that Shabbos] every Jew took a sheep as a Paschal offering and tied it to their bedposts. And the Egyptians asked them "Why is this so [why do you have a sheep (the Egyptian god) tied to your bed]?" And they responded: "To slaughter for a Pesach offering for HaShem." And they got upset that they were going to slaughter their gods, but they could not say anything due to the miracle. And thus it is called Shabbat HaGadol.

Siman 431



Siman 432



Siman 433



Siman 434



Siman 435



Siman 436



Siman 437



Siman 438



Siman 439



Siman 440



Siman 441



Siman 442



Siman 443



Siman 444



Siman 445



Siman 446



Siman 447



Siman 448



Siman 449



Siman 450



Siman 451



Siman 452



Siman 453



Siman 454



Siman 455



Siman 456



Siman 457



Siman 458



Siman 459



Siman 460



Siman 461



Siman 462



Siman 463



Siman 464



Siman 465



Siman 466



Siman 467



Siman 468



Siman 469



Siman 470



Siman 471



Siman 472



Siman 473



Siman 474



Siman 475



Siman 476



Siman 477



Siman 478



Siman 479



Siman 480



Siman 481



Siman 482



Siman 483



Siman 484



Siman 485



Siman 486



Siman 487



Siman 488



Siman 489



Siman 490



Siman 491



Siman 492



Siman 493



Siman 494



Siman 495



Siman 496



Siman 497



Siman 498



Siman 499



Siman 500



Siman 501



Siman 502



Siman 503



Siman 504



Siman 505



Siman 506



Siman 507



Siman 508



Siman 509



Siman 510



Siman 511



Siman 512



Siman 513



Siman 514



Siman 515



Siman 516



Siman 517



Siman 518



Siman 519



Siman 520



Siman 521



Siman 522



Siman 523



Siman 524



Siman 525



Siman 526



Siman 527



Siman 528



Siman 529



Siman 530



Siman 531



Siman 532



Siman 533



Siman 534



Siman 535



Siman 536



Siman 537



Siman 538



Siman 539



Siman 540



Siman 541



Siman 542



Siman 543



Siman 544



Siman 545



Siman 546



Siman 547



Siman 548



Siman 549

It is written in the final chapter of Taanit‏ ‏‎(4:6), “Five events happened to our‎‏ ‏ancestors on the ‎seventeenth of Tammuz, and five on the ninth of Av. Onthe seventeenth of Tammuz the tablets‏ ‏were broken [by Moshe Rabbeinu upon‏ ‏seeing the golden calf], the Tamid [twice-daily] offering ‎ceased, the city‏ ‏‎[Jerusalem] was breached, Apostomus‎‏ ‏burned the Torah and an idol was‏ ‏erected ‎in the sanctuary. On the ninth‏ ‏of Av, it was decreed that our ancestors‏ ‏would not enter the land ‎‎[of Israel, due‎‏ ‏to the sin of the spies], the first and‏ ‏second Temples were destroyed, Beitar‏ ‏was ‎captured, and the city [Jerusalem]‎‏ ‏was plowed over, [specifically regarding‏ ‏when] Turnus Rufus ‎plowed over the‏ ‏sanctuary.”‎ Rabbi Akiva explained (Rosh HaShanah‏ ‏‎18b), “Thus said Hashem: the fast of the‎‏ ‏fourth and the fast ‎of the fifth and the‏ ‏fast of the seventh and the fast of the‏ ‏tenth will become days of joy and ‎rejoice‏ ‏for the house of Judah.” (Zechariah‏ ‏‎8:19) The fast of the fourth is the‎‏ ‏seventeenth of ‎Tammuz, upon which the‏ ‏city was breached, as it is written, “In‏ ‏the fourth month, on the ninth of ‎the‏ ‏month, the famine in the city become‎‏ ‏stronger,” and it is then written, “And‏ ‏the city was ‎breached”. (Yirmiyahu‏ ‏‎52:6‎‏ ‏‎-7) And why is it the fast of the fourth?‎‏ ‏Because it is in the fourth ‎month, as we‏ ‏count the months from Nisan‏ ‏‎…‎‏ ‏Even though the text (Yirmiyahu 39:2)‎‏ ‏says ‎regarding the fast of the fourth‏ ‏month, “On the ninth of the month the‏ ‏city was breached,” now ‎we fast on the‏ ‏seventeenth of the month. Initially the‏ ‏fast was established on the ninth of the‏ ‏month, since the ninth is the day the‏ ‏city was breached in the first [Temple].‎‏ ‏However, in the ‎second [Temple] the city‏ ‏was breached on the seventeenth, and‏ ‏so they established [the fast] on ‎the‏ ‏seventeenth. This is because the‏ ‏destruction of the second Temple is‏ ‏harsher for us. In any ‎event, the fast of‏ ‏the fourth is due to the breaching of the‏ ‏city, and for the pains that were‏ ‏multiplied on that day.‎

Siman 550



Siman 551



Siman 552



Siman 553



Siman 554



Siman 555



Siman 556



Siman 557



Siman 558



Siman 559



Siman 560



Siman 561



Siman 562



Siman 563



Siman 564



Siman 565



Siman 566



Siman 567



Siman 568



Siman 569



Siman 570



Siman 571



Siman 572



Siman 573



Siman 574



Siman 575



Siman 576



Siman 577



Siman 578



Siman 579



Siman 580



Siman 581



Siman 582



Siman 583

In the first chapter of Keritot, we have the text (Keritot 5b): Rabbah said, "That person that wants to know whether he will take out the year or not, should bring a candle during the ten days between Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur  into a room where the wind is not blowing. If its light (its flame) continues, he will know that he will continue the year. And a person that wants to conduct a business deal and wants to know if the deal will be a successful one or not, should feed a chicken. If it becomes nicely fat, he will know that it will be successful... Abbaye said,"Now that you have said that a sign is a [correct] matter, a man should accustom himself to eating citron, squash, beans (<i>rubia</i>), leeks (<i>karti</i>), beets (<i>silkei</i>) and dates (<i>tamrei</i>) on Rosh Hashanah." Rashi explains that <i>rubia</i> is clover.  <i>Rubia</i> - our merits should increase (<i>yirbu</i>); <i>karti</i> - (the enemies) should be cut off (<i>yikaretu</i>), etc.; <i>silkei</i> - removed (<i>yistalku</i>), etc.; <i>tamrei</i>  finished (<i>yitamu</i>), etc.; squash because it is quick to grow. And from this grew the [various] customs, every place according to its custom; as in Germany, where they are accustomed to eating sweet apple with honey at the beginning of the meal, to say, "Let this new year be sweet for us." And in Provence they are accustomed to bring all types of novelties [to the meal] and to eat a sheep's head and lung, to say, "Let us be at the head and not at the tail;" and the lung because it is light. And our teacher, Rabbi Meir of Rothenberg was accustomed to eat the head of a ram to commemorate the ram of Yitzchak.  

Siman 584



Siman 585



Siman 586



Siman 587



Siman 588



Siman 589



Siman 590



Siman 591



Siman 592



Siman 593



Siman 594



Siman 595



Siman 596



Siman 597



Siman 598



Siman 599



Siman 600



Siman 601



Siman 602



Siman 603



Siman 604



Siman 605



Siman 606



Siman 607



Siman 608



Siman 609



Siman 610



Siman 611



Siman 612



Siman 613



Siman 614



Siman 615



Siman 616



Siman 617



Siman 618



Siman 619

In the evening, they enter the synagogue and it is the custom in Ashkenaz that before they pray, the permit all of the sinners in order to pray with them, and even if they do not ask to be permitted.

Siman 620



Siman 621



Siman 622



Siman 623



Siman 624



Siman 625



Siman 626



Siman 627



Siman 628



Siman 629



Siman 630



Siman 631



Siman 632



Siman 633



Siman 634



Siman 635



Siman 636



Siman 637



Siman 638



Siman 639



Siman 640



Siman 641



Siman 642



Siman 643



Siman 644



Siman 645



Siman 646



Siman 647



Siman 648



Siman 649



Siman 650



Siman 651



Siman 652



Siman 653



Siman 654



Siman 655



Siman 656



Siman 657



Siman 658



Siman 659



Siman 660



Siman 661



Siman 662



Siman 663



Siman 664



Siman 665



Siman 666



Siman 667



Siman 668



Siman 669



Siman 670



Siman 671



Siman 672



Siman 673



Siman 674



Siman 675



Siman 676



Siman 677



Siman 678



Siman 679



Siman 680



Siman 681



Siman 682



Siman 683



Siman 684



Siman 685



Siman 686



Siman 687



Siman 688



Siman 689

All are required in the Reading of the Megillah: Cohens, Levites, Israelites, slaves, an invalidated Cohen, a mamzer, a natin, a tumtum, an androgynous person; children are also educated in this commandment, and women are also required to fulfill [the Megillah's] reading. Rashi interprets that women can fulfill men's obligation to read the Megillah, but the author of the [halachic work] Halachot Gadolot says that even though this may be the case, they do not fulfill men's obligation. The Ba'al HaItur wrote that it makes sense, because just like women say Grace After Meals to themselves and don't make a zimun, so too here they do not join the communal reading from the outset. An androgynous person fulfills the obligation of both those like him and others; a tumtum, and a one who is half free and half slave, he does not fulfill the obligation even of others like him. A deaf person, someone with mental handicaps, and a child, even one who has reached the age of education, do not fulfill the obligation of others. Rabbi Yehuda allows a child, because he has reached the age of education. The Ba'al HaItur held like [Rabbi Yehuda]. My father brought the Mishnah in its form, and established the law like the first opinion [that a child cannot fulfill the obligation of others], and the author of Halachot Gadolot held similarly. In the Jerusalem Talmud it says that Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi gathered all the members of his household and read in front of them. From here we learn that in some places, it is the custom to bring little children to listen to the Megillah.

Yoreh Deah



Siman 1

it was taught in a brita "and you shall sacrifice from you sheep and cattle as i have commanded you" this teaches us that moses was commanded by heart the laws of slaughtering. and i am organizing their law's, for example: who is fit to slaughter, and the intention one must have while doing so, and a thought witch will invalidate the slaughtering, with what does one slaughter, and when does one slaughter, and which animals can be slaughtered, and a fetus which is found in the mothers stomach, and the rule that you cant slaughter and animal and its son on the same day, and checking the knife, and the blessing recited over slaughtering. everyone may slaughter: woman and freed slaves and any person, even if we don't know that he is a authentic butcher, meaning: that he wont faint while doing it. and that we don't know that he knows  the laws of shcheta. this is because most people who regularly shecht are assumed to be experts and trustworthy. When is this true,when the person isn't in front of us, then we can eat from his shechting and we rely on the assumption, but if he is in front of us we must check if he is a expert and to ask him if he fainted.and the smag writes in the name of r tam that he dosent need to know all the laws,rather if he says "on this thing i was unsure and i asked" we do call this knowing(the laws of shechita). only when he says the forbidden is permitted then he is not valid to shecht and we cant eat from his shcheta. however we can initially rely on a person with the knowledge that we will check him later,and we don't worry that we may come to eat without checking and asking him first. but if there is a person of who we know that he dosent know the laws of shechita even if he shechted in front of us two or three times,and then shechted by himself, his shechting is invalid even if we ask him did you do the following things and it seems from his answer that he did shecht properly,we canot rely on him. and even if he says "i am confident that i shechted properly it is invalid(and cant be eaten from).but anything which he does infront of us is valid, and even initially we can give him to slaughter as long as there is somone standing over him and this is provided that he sees him shechting from the begning until the end. and the bal itur wrote: if we know that he has learnt the laws of shechita even if he has not gotten a trustworthy status then he can initially shecht, and if we don't know wehter he has learnt the laws or not, then he should not initially shecht but if he did then his shechting is kosher and we don't have to check even if he is in front of us. and the rambam made a difference between a person who know the laws and a person who we have knowledge that that knows how to shecht regarding wether we must ask him or not. as he writes: one who knows the rules of shechita should shecht by himself in the beginning until he has shechted in front of a wise man many tines and is quick and accustomed (to shechita), butif he did his shechita is kosher. and he did not write that we ask him,however concerning a person who dosent know the laws of shechita he writes that if he shechts by himself we ask him, if he knows the laws of shechita then his shechita is kosher. and my master and father the rush may his memory be blessed did not make this differentiation(the one that the rambam made)rather he said that if he in front of us then we check him and ask him if he fainted, and if hes not, than we rely on the assumption concerning both of them (one who knows the laws and one who dosent).and this also the opinion of r elfas. and since most pepole are valid to shecht, if one finds a animal that is shechted properly,in a place with mostly Jews it is kosher. and even if it was stolen from him and he finds it shechted(it is kosher)because even if he is suspected to steal he isnt suspected for improper shechting.and the rambam writes that this is only if it is found ina house, but if he found it in the garbage of a house or in the street it is forbidden.and my father the rosh permited it even if it was found in the garbage of a house and he only forbade it in a garbage which was on the street, and so to the  rashba permitted it unless it was found in the garbage of a street. a deaf person wich is somone who does not hear or talk and a retarded peson wich is one who goes out alone at night, or tares his clothing, or he sleeps ina cemetery, or he loses what is given to him, even in one of these instances if he does this in a fashion of retardation he is called a retarded person,and a minor that cant use his hands to shecht properly, all of these pepole cannot initially shecht even if others are watching them, but  if they did anyway then it is kosher. and in any case we don't initaly give them a animal to shecht if there is no one watching them even if he wants to give it to the dogs to eat.and a deaf person who speaks but dosent hear even though he talks he shold not initaly shecht because he doesn't hear the blessing  but if he did shecht even by him himself hes shechita is kosher. butd if one hearsand does not speak if he is a expert than even initially he can slaughter if another makes the blessing and a minor who isa expert should not shecht inittaly but if hr did than it is losher. and if a older person is standing and watching he can shecht even inittaly. and a person who reached the drukinis of loot the rule regarding himis like a retarded person

Siman 2



Siman 3



Siman 4



Siman 5



Siman 6



Siman 7



Siman 8



Siman 9



Siman 10



Siman 11



Siman 12



Siman 13



Siman 14



Siman 15



Siman 16



Siman 17



Siman 18



Siman 19



Siman 20



Siman 21



Siman 22



Siman 23



Siman 24



Siman 25



Siman 26



Siman 27



Siman 28



Siman 29



Siman 30



Siman 31



Siman 32



Siman 33



Siman 34



Siman 35

A lung that is punctured is a triefah. First I shall explain the structure of the lungs and afterwards the triefot of them. Rava stated: "There are 5 lobes of the lungs; 3 on the right and 2 on the left." Explanation: to the right of the animal. This is to the right of the butcher when the animal is hanging (upside down) by its feet and its organs are facing the butcher, and if the butcher were to take the organs in his hand and the face of the lungs was facing his face, facing the left side of the man would be 3 (lobes) and facing his right would be 2 (lobes). There is an additional small lobe on the right side called the "Inunita d'varda" (Accessory lobe, lit. "Eye of the rose") and it does not stand in the order of the other lobes but rather is distant from them towards the inside. If one of the lobes from either the left side or the right side are missing or there were two on the right and three on the left it is a treifah. If the varda is  missing, Rashi says it is kosher but if it has two it is treifah. Rabbeinu Efraim forbids consuming the animal when it is missing its varda but permits it when there are two. The Geonim permit the animal whether it has no vardot or two vardot, and this is the main opinion. If their are extra lobes in their count, such as four lobes on the right lung or three on the left, if the extra lobe stands in the order of the other lobes the animal is kosher and if not it is treifah. The Baal HaIttur writes that the animal is not kosher unless the extra lobe is directly in the order of the lobes but if it is somewhat in between the other lobes, not in the order of the other lobes, like the varda, it is treifah, whether the extra lobe is on the right or left side. The Rambam, however, writes that as long as the extra lobe is facing the inside of the lung it does not render the animal forbidden. (It is only forbidden)if the extra lobe is on the back (of the lungs). My father, the Rosh, agreed with the opinion of the Baal HaIttur, who stated that if the varda is found on the left side the animal is treifah. If the extra lobe was on the backside of the lungs, in any location, even a small extra lobe the size of a myrtle leaf, it is treifah. If, however, it is smaller than a myrtle leaf after the lung has been inflated, it is not considered an extra lobe. The Baal HaIttur writes that we learn from this that the minimum size of a lobe is the size of a myrtle leaf. If one of the lobes is missing and there is nothing left of it but a piece the size of a myrtle leaf the animal is kosher. If one of the lobes of the right side is missing, the Rambam writes that the varda fills in for it. Rashi writes that the varda does not fill in for it. It is better to be stringent. If the lungs were two rows without divisions of lobes the animal is a triefah. Rashi explains that this is referring to when there are not complete divisions between the lobes of the lungs. When there are recognizable divisions between the lobes the animal is kosher (opinion of the Rosh). Rambam writes that if one finds two lobes attached as one and they are not identifiable as two lobes that are stuck together; if there was between them (a section) the size of a myrtle leaf, whether at their point of origin, in the middle, or at their ends, so that it can be seen that these are two lobes that are attached, the animal is permitted, but if not the animal is forbidden. There are those who wrote that if the lobes are attached along their complete lengths, one takes a sharp knife and separates the two lobes. If a strand of meat comes out from separating them they are one lobe and the animal is treifah and if not the animal is kosher. The language of the Talmud sounds like Rashi's explanation, that if there is any recognition of the lobes being separate the animal is kosher, and this is the main opinion. 

Siman 36

The lung has two membranes. If one was punctured but not the other, it is kosher. It is kosher until both membranes are punctured. Even if the entire outer membrane was peeled off it is kosher. However it would require checking (the lower membrane for a hole). The Rashba writes that if both are punctured but the punctures are not facing one another it is kosher. If both membranes were punctured and membrane grew back over the punctures and sealed them, it is still considered a treifah. A lung from which a sound emanates when the lungs are inflated: if one knows from where the sound is emanating one can place a piece of straw or a feather on that place and inflate the lungs. If the straw or feather pops out its a treifah and if not it is kosher. If one does not know from where the sound emanates one puts the entire lung in a vessel that contains water and blows into the lung. If the water bubbles it is a treifah. If it does not it is kosher. The water should be neither cold nor hot but tepid, like the tepidness of water in the summer that has stood indoors a bit after it was drawn and warmed slightly from the heat of the air. If the hole was found in a place where it was possible that the hole was made after the the shechittah, such as in a place that the butcher has passed his hand or has pulled with force  or if a wolf took the lung and returned it pierced, we assume leniently and it is kosher. So too if worms were found on the lungs that punctured them and it is unclear whether the lungs were punctured before shechittah or after shechittah, it is kosher. If there is nothing to rely on and it is unclear if the lungs were punctured while alive or not, one makes another hole in front of him; if the holes are similar it is kosher, since just as this hole was made after shechittah so too was the first hole, and if they are not similar it is treifah, since it is certain that the first hole was made before shechittah.  We compare holes in lungs from the large lobes to large lobes and small lobes to small lobes but not from large lobes to small lobes or small lobes to large lobes. Rav Alfasi explains that one can compare from one lung to another lung as long as it comes from a similar animal; if it is a large animal, then compare to lungs of a large animal, and if it is a small animal then compare to the lungs of a small animal. Rashi explains that one does not compare the lungs of one animal to the lungs of another animal and even within the same animal one may only compare the small lobes to other small lobes and a large lobe to the other large lobe, but not a large lobe to a small lobe or a small lobe to a large lobe. This is also the conclusion of my father the Rosh.  If one of the bronchi were punctured that was in front of the other bronchus such as in the place where they separate from one another and there is no meat between them, it is treifah, as the other bronchus is hard and does not protect it. If the bronchus was punctured going into the meat of the lung, the meat protects the bronchus and its meat. The Rambam says that if one of the bronchi are punctured, even into the other bronchus, it is treifah, and it would appear from his language that all the more so if it was punctured into the meat of the lung, and this doesn't make sense. If some meat of the lung is missing but the membrane is intact it is kosher. Therefore if some of the meat has rotted from within and is missing, even if the area that is empty is large, until the missing area can hold a reviis of volume it is kosher. If the inside of the lungs have rotted and liquefied it is kosher, so long as all the bronchi still exist.  Rav Alfasi explains that this is true specifically when character of the liquid is pure, but if the liquid is murky or putrid it is treifah.  So too writes the Rambam. My father, the Rosh, wrote that it is kosher even if the liquid is murky or putrid. How does one check if all the lungs bronchi still exist (intact)? One brings a bowl that is covered with a limb that is white and one punctures it and pours into it; if one sees inside it an outline similar to blood vessels that are white, it is certain that they are from the bronchi and it is treifah and if not it is kosher. The Rambam writes that if the bronchi are separated from the body of the lung, even though they are not punctured, it is as if it is missing from the count of the lobes (and is treifah). The Baal HaIttur writes that it is kosher since the tissue is still intact, even though it is damaged, and this makes sense. A lung that happened to go through an event in which the lung was inflated and there remains a portion that is sealed that does not rise even when the lung is inflated, one rips

Siman 37



Siman 38



Siman 39



Siman 40



Siman 41



Siman 42



Siman 43



Siman 44



Siman 45



Siman 46



Siman 47



Siman 48



Siman 49



Siman 50



Siman 51



Siman 52



Siman 53



Siman 54



Siman 55



Siman 56



Siman 57



Siman 58



Siman 59



Siman 60



Siman 61



Siman 62



Siman 63



Siman 64



Siman 65



Siman 66



Siman 67



Siman 68



Siman 69



Siman 70



Siman 71



Siman 72



Siman 73



Siman 74



Siman 75



Siman 76



Siman 77



Siman 78



Siman 79



Siman 80



Siman 81



Siman 82



Siman 83



Siman 84



Siman 85



Siman 86



Siman 87



Siman 88



Siman 89



Siman 90



Siman 91



Siman 92



Siman 93



Siman 94



Siman 95



Siman 96



Siman 97



Siman 98



Siman 99



Siman 100



Siman 101



Siman 102



Siman 103



Siman 104



Siman 105

All halachos that apply to cooking issur with heter also apply if one soaks one in the other for one complete day -- 24 hours -- because soaking is considered like cooking. But if one soaks for less than one day: if they are cold, one only needs to wash off the item; if they are scalding hot then they are assur by cooking. 

Siman 106



Siman 107



Siman 108



Siman 109



Siman 110



Siman 111



Siman 112



Siman 113



Siman 114



Siman 115



Siman 116



Siman 117



Siman 118



Siman 119



Siman 120



Siman 121



Siman 122



Siman 123



Siman 124



Siman 125



Siman 126



Siman 127



Siman 128



Siman 129



Siman 130



Siman 131



Siman 132



Siman 133



Siman 134



Siman 135



Siman 136



Siman 137



Siman 138



Siman 139



Siman 140



Siman 141



Siman 142



Siman 143



Siman 144



Siman 145



Siman 146



Siman 147



Siman 148



Siman 149



Siman 150



Siman 151



Siman 152



Siman 153



Siman 154



Siman 155



Siman 156



Siman 157



Siman 158



Siman 159



Siman 160



Siman 161



Siman 162



Siman 163



Siman 164



Siman 165



Siman 166



Siman 167



Siman 168



Siman 169



Siman 170



Siman 171



Siman 172



Siman 173



Siman 174



Siman 175



Siman 176



Siman 177



Siman 178



Siman 179



Siman 180



Siman 181



Siman 182



Siman 183



Siman 184



Siman 185



Siman 186



Siman 187



Siman 188



Siman 189



Siman 190



Siman 191



Siman 192



Siman 193



Siman 194



Siman 195



Siman 196



Siman 197



Siman 198



Siman 199



Siman 200



Siman 201



Siman 202



Siman 203



Siman 204



Siman 205



Siman 206



Siman 207



Siman 208



Siman 209



Siman 210



Siman 211



Siman 212



Siman 213



Siman 214



Siman 215



Siman 216



Siman 217



Siman 218



Siman 219



Siman 220



Siman 221



Siman 222



Siman 223



Siman 224



Siman 225



Siman 226



Siman 227



Siman 228



Siman 229



Siman 230



Siman 231



Siman 232



Siman 233



Siman 234



Siman 235



Siman 236



Siman 237



Siman 238



Siman 239



Siman 240



Siman 241



Siman 242



Siman 243



Siman 244



Siman 245



Siman 246



Siman 247



Siman 248



Siman 249



Siman 250



Siman 251



Siman 252



Siman 253

One who has (enough) food for two meals does not take from the Tamchui, for fourteen meals does not take from the Kupah. If one has one hundred zuz, even if one does not to business with them, or has fifty (zuz) and does do business with them, one doesn't take from the tzedakah at all.

Siman 254



Siman 255



Siman 256



Siman 257



Siman 258



Siman 259



Siman 260



Siman 261



Siman 262



Siman 263



Siman 264



Siman 265



Siman 266



Siman 267



Siman 268

THE LAWS OF CONVERTS
A foreigner, from among those who worship stars [and idols] who has come in order to convert, is no convert until he has been circumcised and he has immersed [in a mikveh, {i.e., ritual bath}]. If he had been circumcised [but not immersed]...


Siman 269



Siman 270

It is a mitzvah incumbent on every Jewish man to write a Torah scroll, and it is extremely important to seek [an opportunity] to perform it as Rabbi Joshua ben Levi says,  "one who buys a [ready made] Torah Scroll is like one who grabs a mitzvah in the market place." [On the other hand] One who writes it himself or corrects even one letter is counted as if he received it directly from Mt. Sinai. It goes without saying that he shouldn't sell his Torah, even if he has many, and it is even forbidden to sell an old scroll in order to buy a new one, or even to buy food. However it is permitted to sell a Torah scroll in order to learn Torah or to get married if he has nothing else to sell.

Even HaEzer



Siman 1

Blessed be the name of the Holy One, blessed is He, who desired goodness for his creations. For He knew that it is not good for man to be alone and therefore He made a fitting helper for him, for the intent of the creation of man is to be fertile and to increase, and this is impossible without a helper. Therefore He commanded him to cling to the helper whom He made for him. Thus every man is obligated to marry a woman in order to be fertile and increase, for anyone who is not involved in reproduction is like one who sheds blood, as it is written, "Whoever sheds the blood of man," and juxtaposed to it , "Be fertile, then, and increase." And it is as though he is diminishing the [Divine] image, for it is written that in the image of God did He create him, and you shall be fertile and increase. And he causes the Divine Presence to be removed from Israel. And anyone who remains without a wife remains without goodness, without blessing, without a dwelling, without Torah, without a wall, without peace. Rabbi Elazar said, "Anyone who does not have a wife is not a man." When he marries, his sins become unreliable, as it is said, "He who finds a wife has found happiness And has won the favor of the LORD." It is an extremely great commandment, for we only sell a Torah scroll in order to be able to learn Torah and to marry a woman. A man is commanded to marry a woman when he is eighteen years old, as it is taught, "eighteen years for the [wedding] canopy," but one who does so earlier at the age of thirteen, this is a choice [fulfillment of the] command. Our Rabbis have taught, one who marries off his sons and daughters close to their period of puberty, regarding him Scripture states, "You will know that all is well in your tent, etc." Abaye said, I am better than my colleagues because I married at the age of sixteen, but had I married at fourteen, it would have been an arrow in the eyes of Satan. But one must not marry them before thirteen, for this is like lewdness. Under no circumstance should one pass twenty years without a wife, as Raba said, and the school of Rabbi Ishmael taught, until the age of twenty the Holy One, blessed is He, waits for a man to marry. When he passes twenty years without marrying, the Holy One, blessed is He, says, "His bones shall swell." My father wrote of a single man who has passed twenty years and does not want to marry, that the court forces him to marry so that he may fulfill the commandment of reproduction. However, one for whom it will be impossible to study should he marry is not obligated to marry by twenty. The words of the Rambam: If he is busy with Torah and is occupied by it, and is afraid to marry because the burden of providing sustenance will distract him from Torah, he may delay, as one who is involved in a mitzvah is exempt from another mitzvah, and all the more so in the study of Torah. One whose soul has constantly desired Torah, such as Ben Azai, and he clung to it all his days and did not marry, he has not sinned as long as his desire does not overcome him. My father the Rosh says this refers to when it would be impossible for him to study [after marrying]--then he should study and afterward marry. I do not know the extent of this study, but it cannot be that one could abstain from reproduction all his days, for we have not seen such a thing other than Ben Azai, whose soul desired Torah. Therefore, because man consists of male and female, there is a commandment of reproduction. Should the son be a eunuch or the daughter an ailonyit [a woman with arrested sexual development who cannot have children], he has not fulfilled the command of reproduction. If he had sons and they died, he has not fulfilled the command of reproduction. However if they died and left behind children, since the son had a son or daughter or the daughter had a son or daughter, reproduction has been fulfilled. But if one of them died without children and the second has a son or daughter, he has not fulfilled it. If he had children while he was a Gentile and he and his children converted, then he has fulfilled [the mitzvah of] reproduction but a slave who had sons, and he and they were freed, has not fulfilled reproduction. And even one who has fulfilled his obligation of reproduction is forbidden from remaining without a wife, as Rabbi Nachman said: Even if a man has several children, he is forbidden from remaining without a wife, as it is said, "It is not good for man to be alone." Rabbi Yehoshua said: If he married in his youth, he shall marry in his old age. If he had children in his youth, he shall have children in his old age. As it is said, "Sow your seed in the morning, and don't hold back your hand in the evening." There is no difference between one who has children and one who does not except with regard to the matter of selling a Torah scroll for one must always marry a child-bearing woman if he is able to [afford it] even if he has many children and if it is not within his grasp [to afford] to marry a child-bearing woman without selling a Sefer Torah then if he does not have children he should sell a Sefer Torah so that he can marry a child-bearing woman but if he already has children then he should not sell a Sefer Torah but marry a non child-bearing woman rather than remain without a wife. Some say that even if he has children he should sell a Sefer Torah so that he can marry a child-bearing woman and that there is no difference between a child-bearing and n0n-child-bearing woman except for a case where he married her and stayed ten years without her giving birth , so that if he has stayed with her for ten years he's obligated to divorce her in order to fulfill procreation but if he has children then he's not obligated to divorce her for R. Yehoshua only said that ideally he should marry a child-bearing wife [also] in his older years but he's not obligated to divorce her if she's not child-bearing  and this too is the opinion of my father my master the Rosh. A man can marry a number of wives for Rava said a man can marry many wives and this is as long as he is able to provide for them nevertheless our Sages gave good advice not to marry more than four wives so that each one can spend "time" [together with her husband] once / month. In a place where there is an edict not to marry more than one wife we follow that custom. A woman is not obligated in procreation therefore if she asks for a divorce on the grounds that she's unable to build a family with him, we don't listen to her as will be explained late on regarding those we force to divorce in the Laws of Divorce.

Siman 2

A man should not marry a woman unless she is fitting for him, meaning, she has no disqualification for anyone who married a woman who is not fitting for him, when the Holy One blessed be He testifies about the tribes He will not testify for him and it will be as if he has ploughed the whole world and planted it with destruction [salt in other texts] meaning he brings barrenness to the world and he will have children who are unfit and God does not rest His Divine Presence except on families with lineage, meaning they have no trace of disqualification and what is a sign of this? One who hears his shamefulness and keeps quiet for as Rav explained the lineage of Babylonia is their silence nevertheless a family where a possible disqualification got mixed into it there is no need to distance them for all are pure in the future - this refers to an Israelite but a Kohen should not marry them as we say later on. And all lands remain with an assumed fit status and when a man or woman who comes to marry [there] one does not need to check their status at all but Rashi explained that a man who comes to marry a woman, one needs to check his status before he marries her and so too wrote the RaMa and explained that when it says all the families are considered to be fit, this means that one who had a fit status, one need not check after him but one who does not have a fit status, for example his family is not known needs proof about their lineage and a single witness is not believed  even though fit females were were not warned against marrying unfit males, this was referring to met unfit for the priesthood but men unfit to be counted among the Jewish Community, if one comes to marry a Jewish woman we do not permit it until a proof is brought for maybe he is a slave these are his words. To me it seems that the expression "all the families are considered to be fit" does not sound like his words for it is referring to a case where a person does have a presumption of fitness and Rabbeinu Tam explained that we only check [for marriage into] the priesthood and that which we learned that if someone marries a woman he needs to check her four mothers that means  that his son would not be fit to serve [as a kohen] at the altar and his daughter would not be fit to marry a kohen unless he married a woman who was checked out and even for the priesthood only a man checks the woman but a woman of the priestly lineage need not check after a man for fit women were not wanted against marrying disqualified men but when it comes to lineage where there is no priestly angle there is no need to check and these are his [Rabbenu Tam's] words. It sounds from his words that for the priestly lineage one must check and so to wrote the Rambam this is his language [Laws of Forbidden Intercourse 20:1] "1) All the priests in our day are assumed to be priests and they only partake in holy food that can be consumed within the borders [of eretz yisrael], meaning rabbinic Teruma however of Torah ordained Teruma and of Torah ordained Hallah only a priest with definite lineage may partake. Who is a priest with definite lineage? Anyone about whom two witnesses testified that he is a priest and the son of john doe priest the son of john doe priest until we arrive at a man [whose priesthood] does not need to to be checked and he is a priest who served at the altar for had the Sanhedrin not checked after his status they would not have permitted him to serve." These are his [Rambam's] words and it seems that even for priestly lineage one need not check for on that Mishna [Kiddushin 76a] of "a priest who marries a woman must investigate four mothers" we conclude [Kiddush 76b] "Rav Yehuda says that Rav says: This mishna is the view of Rabbi Meir, but the Rabbis say: All families retain a presumptive status of fitness. Rav Ḥama bar Gurya say that Rav says [our mishna is referring only to a case] when an objection was registered" then one needs to check. Therefore we see that we probably need no checking nonetheless it is possible that although according to the Sages one does not need to check, the law follows an anonymous Mishna and a priest marrying needs to check his wife [the daughter of a priest]. Maimonides wrote that although all the families are presumed to be fit and one is allowed to marry into them, ideally two families that are always quarreling with each other or a family that is always contentious and combative or a man who is always looking for an argument with everyone and is very brazen we are worried about their status and it is appropriate to stay away from them for these are symptoms of disqualification. Similarly, someone who always disqaulifies others, for example he offers disqualifying innuendo about families or individuals and says about them that they are Mamzerim we are concerned that he himself may be a Mamzer and if he says about them that they are slaves we are concerned that maybe he is a slave for all who disqualify are themselves disqualified with the same disqualification. Similarly, someone who is is arrogant and cruel and hates people and does not act kindly we are concerned that he may be a Gibeonite for the signs of an Israelite, the holy nation is that they are shy, merciful and doers of kindness

Siman 3



Siman 4

These [people] it is not appropriate to marry [them] either because of a disqualification in their lineage or because of something physical or because of [something] illicit. A male Israelite is forbidden to marry a Mamzer, or a Netin who is from the Gibeonites that Joshua decreed against marrying them. There is a prohibition against marrying an Ammonite, Moabite and, Egyptian. [Marrying a] Mamzer or Netin, is an eternal prohibition for all generations and it makes no difference whether they're male or female. Male Ammonites and Moabites are eternally prohibited but the females are immediately permitted. Egyptians and Edomites, males and females, are prohibited for the first two generations, after an [Egyptian father] converts, he and his son are prohibited but the [Egyptian father's] grandson is permitted. A pregnant Egyptian woman who converts, her son is a second generation Egyptian. A male Israelite who copulates with one of these [mentioned above], the child is like her [ s/he has the mother's lineage], however one of those [mentioned above], except for a Mamzer, who copulates with an Israelite woman, the child may marry in to the community although it is disqualified for the priestly lineage. If a female of one of these [mentioned above] converted and married an Israelite or a male of one these [mentioned above] converted an Israelite woman, the child take the lineage of the [more] disqualified one therefore a converted second generation Ammonite or Egyptian convert who married an Israelite woman their daughter is accepted for no matter which one of them [i.e. her parents] we follow she is acceptable even for [marriage into] the priesthood even though her copulation was a transgression. A second-generation male Egyptian who marries a first-generation Egyptian woman, his son is a second-generation [Egyptian]; a first-generation Egyptian man who marries a second-generation Egyptian woman, his sone is a third-generation [Egyptian] for it all follows the mother. An Ammonite male who married an Egyptian female their child is an Ammonite, an Egyptian male who married an Ammonite female their child is an Egyptian for among the nations [in matters of lineage] we follow the males. If they converted then the child follows the more deficient of the two of them. For example an Amonite male convert who follows an Egyptian female convert or an Egyptian male convert who married an Ammonite femal convert and they gave birth to a son his status becomes an Ammonite who is eternally prohibited, if they gave birth to a daughter her status is Egyptian who is prohibited for two generations. Regarding all other nationalities, immediately after converting they have the status of an Israelite immediately. Rambam wrote that in our time both an Egyptain and an Ammonite are permitted [to marry an Israelite] immediately [after conversion] for Sennacherib arose and intermixed all of the nations and anything removed [from a mixture is viewed as if it was] removed from the majority [of the mixture] and we estimate the [individual convert] descends from the majority of nations who are permitted. My master and father the Rosh wrote that Ammonites, Moabites and Edomites are immediately permitted but also now Egyptians are prohibited [after conversion] until the third generation. A male slave who was immersed [by his Jewish master] for the purpose of becoming a [Canaanite] slave is prohibited form marrying an Israelite woman, and an Israelite man is prohibited from marrying a female slave who was immersed [by her Jewish master] for the purpose of becoming a [Canaanite] female slave, regardless of whether she was his slave or another's [slave]. However, after his master frees him, or abandons him, or lays phylacteries on him, or if his master was a prayer leader and called him to go up to the Torah [ for an aliyah] behold he comes like an Israelite in all matters but if he lay phylacteries in the presence of his master or called him or read the Torah in his presence [during an aliyah] he does not go out to freedom. If his master married him off to an Israelite woman or even if he married an Israelite woman in the presence of his master, the betrothal takes effect for certainly he [his master] has released him since he permitted him to marry an Israelite woman and certainly if it is he [the master] who is marrying his own female slave that betrothal with her takes effect. Who is a Mamzer? It is [the offspring] of a man who copulates with one of the illicit [unions] where the punishment is death administered by the [earthly] Beth Din or Kritut [death / childlessness by the Heavens] with the exclusion of one who copulated with a Niddah who is not a rabbinic Mamzer.  Rambam wrote that if her husband was overseas and she gave birth then the child is is presumed to have the status of a Mamzer for a fetus does not stay in its mother's womb for more than twelve months but the Behag wrote that the child is not presumed to have the status of a Mamzer for we attribute it to the possibility that maybe her husband arrived [home] discreetly and copulated [with her]. A married woman who gained a reputation of copulating promiscuously while under [marriage] to her husband and everyone is chattering about her, we need not worry about her children that maybe they are Mamzerim for we excuse it and say that the majority of instances of intercourse takes place with the husband but as for her we suspect her of being a promiscuous woman [zonah] and if she is exceedingly promiscuous then we are even concerned about [the Mamzer status] of her children.

Choshen Mishpat

