Ohr Penimi on Talmud Eser HaSefirot
אור פנימי על תלמוד עשר הספירות
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Ohr Penimi on Talmud Eser HaSefirot

Introduction

It should be remembered that the wisdom of kabbalah is based on spiritual themes, and not  on [physical] space or time, in that loss or change do not apply to it, and all the changes mentions in this wisdom, does not mean that the previous state is gone, and there now exists [only] a new state, but the new state is an addition to the previous state, and the old state still exists. For loss and change are associated with material matters. This idea is difficult for beginners, for they grasp these [kabbalistic] concepts within materialistic expressions, that the authors used only as manifestations of their spiritual roots. Therefore, I will attempt to translate every word and word in its kabbalistic nuance, separated from time and space and change. And it is imperative on those that delve [into this topic] to engrave into their memory the meaning of these words, for it is not possible to constantly repeat them. 





Section 1



Chapter 1

1.Time in spirituality will be thoroughly explained in later chapters. At the end of "Histaklut Penimit" with the words "in addition".  
2. [Simple light] is the light that spreads from His essence. You should know that all the names and terms that are used in the wisdom of kabbalah, are not heaven forbid related to the Creator's essence, but only to the light that spreads from His essence, however, concerning His essence there are no words or comprehension. For the this is the rule: Whatever, we do not comprehend we do not name. Remember this and do not stumble.
3. (Before the worlds were created His light filled all reality). This statement at first glance is confusing, for we are speaking of a situation before creation, in that case what reality is there that the light has to fill. The idea is, that all the worlds and all the souls that are present and will be in the future, with all their events until their final "tikun" are all present in [the situation termed] "Ein-Sof, may His Name be Blessed", it all their beauty and completeness. In that, we have to differentiate two stages in our reality. Reality a: In Ein-Sof with all its completeness and beauty. Reality b: How it evolves and renews itself after the first Tzimtzum [ known as Tzimtzum-Alef] through the five worlds (levels) termed Adam Kadmon, Atzilut, Beriah, Yetzerah and Asiyah, as will be explained later. And what the Rav (the ARI) says that the light that spread from His essence, fills all of reality, this is in Ein-Sof, the first reality, as they are arranged and established in Ein-Sof may His name be Blessed, before the Tzimtzum. To inform us that the light filled it (Malchut) completely with no place of a void, a place that is complete, where an addition of light is not possible.
4. Explanation: Before the worlds were created, [the situation of] Ein-Sof was present, where there was no "empty space" in other words no area of lack that needed fulfillment and repair. For the "upper" light filled all of space, without leaving a place for the lower beings to limit [the light] and to [then] add to its completeness.  But only because of Tzimtzum, as will be explained later, a void was established that created a place void of light, which can then be repaired. But you should not err that this book is speaking about physical space.
5. The intent is not physical air, heaven forbid, but a spiritual light termed "air". For there are two types of light in every "Partzuf" (spiritual entity). They are known as "Ohr D'Chochmah" the light of Wisdom, and "Ohr D'Chasadim" the light of Loving-Kindness. The light of Wisdom is the essence of the spiritual entity, the life force within it. The light of Loving-Kindness is but a light that enclothes the light of Wisdom, for the light of Wisdom cannot enter a spiritual entity, before it acquires the light of Loving-Kindness.  However, at times when the spiritual entity is in its infancy, they only have the light of Loving-Kindness. This light is termed אויר-air or רוח-wind, and since there is no light of Wisdom, it is called "empty-air", since it is devoid of the light of Wisdom, but it hopes that the light of Wisdom will spread within it and fill it [at a later time]. And the Rav (ARI) informs us that before the [different] worlds (levels) were created, in other words in Ein-Sof, there was not a reality known as "empty-air" for there is no emptiness there (for emptiness connotes no light of Wisdom, but in Ein-Sof the light of Wisdom filled all of reality). 
6. To explain this word, you must first understand the essence of a spiritual vessel. Since the created being receives their life force from the Creator, it is of necessity that they have a desire and need to receive this abundance from Him. You should know that this desire and need is the [spiritual] matter of the created being. In that everything else that is included within the created being, that is not associated with this substance, is not the created being, but the abundance that is received from the Creator. This substance (desire) is what measures the greatness of every created being, every Partzuf and every Sefira. For the spread of the light from the Creator is without limits, for only the created being places limits on the abundance (light) according to the amount of their desire, for they receive no more and no less, it is all dependent on the amount of their desire. This is the true measure [of the amount received] in spirituality, for there is no coercion there, everything depends on desire. Therefore, we term the "desire to receive" the desire of the created being, as their essence. This separated the created being from the Creator, to become its own entity, for its essence is not present within the Creator, heaven forbid, for He has no desire to receive [for He has everything] and from whom would he receive, understand this. Later we will explain that in this essence there are four stages, from [spiritual] infancy to adulthood [in the matter of] receiving, in that the fourth level that is the most receiving, is complete only in Ein-Sof, before the [spiritual]worlds (levels) were created, only on the last level (the fourth level) was there Tzimtzum. It will be later explained that the vessel became void of all the abundance (light) that it had in Ein-Sof, and it remained an "empty space". This was what the Rav (the ARI) meant when he said "before the worlds were created", that is in Ein-Sof, [in that state] there was no "empty space" (since all spiritual desires were completely filled with light).