Hakdamah Lesefer HaZohar
הקדמה לספר הזוהר
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Hakdamah_Lesefer_HaZohar
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Hakdamah Lesefer HaZohar

In this introduction [to the Zohar] I would like to clarify certain ideas that many have touched upon, much has been written on, but still its depths has not been perceived. My questions are: a) What is our essence? b) What is our role in this reality, that each of us is a small link? c) When we look around us, we see that humanity has many faults, but when we think about the One who created us, we should be superior and perfect; then why would a high caliber manufacturer (Creator), create a faulty product? d) Why would a loving Creator, create beings, many of whom suffer throughout their lives. Shouldn't a compassionate Creator create goodness, and especially not create pain? e) How is it possible that from an eternal Creator, beings are created, that end and are gone.   
In order to completely clarify all this, we must initially make some inquires (about the Creator) not in areas that we are forbidden to discuss, in other words about the Creator's essence, which we have no knowledge whatsoever, but in an area where such knowledge is a Mitzvah, that is in His actions. As the Torah commands: "Know the God of your forefathers, and worship Him". And it is also written, in the "Shir HaYichud": "You [God] are known through your actions". The first inquiry is: How is it possible for God to create something from nothing, "ex nihilo", for everyone knows that raw materials are needed to create any product. Furthermore, since God is the creator, creation did not come from "nothing", it came from God. Second inquiry: Even if we acknowledge, that God has the power to create "something from nothing", in other words something completely new, not found in God Himself; what exactly is that "something" that God created from "nothing". Third inquiry: What the Kabbalists say that the Soul of man, is a "part of God Himself" in that there is no difference between the Soul  and God, just that God is the "whole" and the Soul is a "part" [of God]. And they compared this to a stone separated from a mountain, that there is no difference between the stone and the mountain, just that the mountain is "all", and the stone is a "part". However, the stone is quarried from the mountain by a tool used for that purpose. But what is the "tool" that separates the Soul from God Himself. In other words, at what point is it called "Soul" and not God Himself.
Fourth Inquiry: Since evil (the "other side", and the "shells") are distanced from God's holiness an infinite distance, how is it possible that evil emanates from God Himself, and not only that, but that God also sustains it. Fifth Inquiry: The matter of resurrection of the dead. Since the body is finite and from the moment of birth, the end result will be death and burial; and furthermore, the Zohar states, that the body must completely rot before the Soul can enter Eden, why the need for the resurrection of the dead. Couldn't God just delight the Soul, without the body? Even more perplexing, concerning the resurrection of the dead, it is written, that God will resurrect each body with the defect that it had before death, so that no one should say, "this is not the same person that died", and only later will God heal that person from their prior defect. Why should God take into account  what other people say, to the point that He has to resurrect the dead with all their defects, and only later heal them. Sixth Inquiry: It is stated in the Zohar (Tazriah 40), and also in Tractate Sanhedrin (37a) that all the spiritual worlds, and our physical world with all that it contains, were created for even just one person, since each person is the center of the universe. It is difficult to understand, how a person whose worth appears to be so small as compared to all of reality, how can he be the center of the universe? And especially when we compare man to the spiritual worlds, whose boundaries and pinnacles have no limit. Why would God create all these worlds just for man? What benefit is there to man, from all this?
In order to find answers to these questions and inquiries, our strategy must be to look at the end result! In other words, to the goal of creation. For it is not possible to understand anything, if we only observe the manufacturing process without seeing the final product.  It is obvious that a manufacturer strives towards a certain goal. For only a deranged person works with no goal in mind. I know, however, that there are philosophers, those who do not follow the torah and mitzvoth, who say that it is true that God created the world, but he has removed Himself from it, due to the lowly nature of people, since it is not befitting God to associate Himself with such frivolous and loathsome behavior. However, they have not thought this through. Because had we created ourselves, we can say that we have bad traits, and we are lowly creatures. Once we decide though, that the Creator who is complete, He created us, the good within us, and also our faults; we must then realize that we were created by a high level manufacturer (God) who produces only quality products (people), and that every product produced, reflects the caliber of the manufacturer. It is not the fault of an inferior suit, if it was produced by an incompetent  tailor, why should the suit be blamed. This is similar to the story (Tractate Taanit 20b) about Rabbi Elazar who happened to come across an exceedingly ugly person, when told by Rabbi Elazar that he is very ugly, answered back: "go and tell the craftsman that made me, how ugly is the vessel that you made". Imagine if you came across a person, who would create people who suffer all their lives, and not only that, would forsake them, and not try to help them even a slight amount, how much scorn would you pour on such a person! Is it possible to even imagine this about God, who is the positive force of the universe!  
Therefore, a clear thinking individual must come to the realization, opposite to what appears on the surface, and conclude, that we are creatures of the highest order, worthy of representing the One who created us. For every fault that we may have, after exhausting all excuses, the only one to blame is God Himself, for He created us with all our bad traits; we did not create ourselves. Also, He can foresee all the outcomes that these bad traits wrought, those traits that He imparted in us. But as we had said, we must look at the final result, only then can we have an understanding. As people say: "Don't show a fool an item before it is completed". 
Our Rabbis have taught, that the reason for God creating the world is to benefit and give enjoyment to His creatures. This should be our focus, because this is God's thought and purpose in creating the world. We should also realize, that the enjoyment that one receives is in direct proportion, to the person's desire for that enjoyment. The greater the desire, the greater the enjoyment. (Receiving a penny, brings no enjoyment, because there is no desire for a penny. Receiving $5,000 brings with it much enjoyment, because of the great desire). As part of God's plan in creating the world, He had to create a great desire within the soul, within the person. If there is no desire, there is no enjoyment.
Now that we know this (that desire and pleasure go hand-in-hand). We can answer our second inquiry, which was, what is the "something from nothing" that God created. That God created something, not found in God Himself (from nothing).  We now also know, that the purpose of creation was to benefit and give enjoyment to those that were created. It must be then, what God created, something completely new, not found in God Himself, this "something" is the desire to receive God's goodness. For as we had said, desire and enjoyment go hand-in-hand. This desire to receive is not found in God Himself, because from whom should He receive (He is complete, and has no need to receive anything). The desire to receive, is the "something" that was created from "nothing", since the desire to receive is not found in God Himself. It is now  understood, that the desire to receive was all that God needed to create, in order to fulfill his goal, which is to benefit and give enjoyment to us.  The enjoyment though, did not have to be created anew, it was always within Him. We can now conclude for certainty, that all of creation from beginning to end, all that God needed to create, in order to fulfill His purpose, was to create the "desire to receive".
Now we can understand what the Kabbalists say, when they compare the Soul to a stone quarried from a mountain. Just as a stone was once part of the mountain, so too the Soul was a part of God. And we wondered ( in our third inquiry), the stone is separated from a mountain with a special tool, but what "tool" separated the Soul from God, that now it is called Soul and not the Creator Himself. You must realize that in the physical world there are tools that separate the stone from the mountain, however, in the spiritual worlds there are no objects, there is no space, there are only desires. What separates, or combines two spiritual beings is their desires. If their desires have "similarity of form" i.e. the same desires, they connect, if they have opposite desires they separate. We see this also in our physical world. Two friends who have the same interests, same desires, are close, no matter the distance between them. However, two people who have different interests, different desires, are "far apart" no matter how physically close they are to each other.    
You now know that in spirituality the "difference of form", differences in desires, acts like an ax that splits an item into two. And also, that distance in spirituality, is measured according to the "difference of form", difference of desires, between spiritual entities. The desire to receive that God implanted in the Soul, to receive all the goodness that He wanted to give; this desire to receive, separated the Soul from God who has an opposite desire, a desire only to give.  However, concerning God's goodness, the light that the creations receive, in that aspect, there is no difference between them and the Creator. The difference occurs when the light is shaped in the desire to receive, the vessel that accepts this light. The light that was received , because it is in the vessel of the "desire to receive", has now separated from the original light, and is now only a "part" of the  original light, and is no longer the "whole". One becomes the "part", while the other is the "whole", as a stone quarried from a mountain. Contemplate this carefully, because it is not possible to explain these lofty matters at length.  
We now have an opening to understand the fourth inquiry: How it is possible that evil emanated from God's holiness, since evil and holiness are complete opposites. Also, how is it possible that He sustains evil. But we need to understand the source of evil, that evil comes from the strong desire to receive which is the essence of all the Souls that were created, because only through the desire to receive, can the Souls receive all the fulfillment that God had in store for them. However, the desire to receive for oneself cannot remain in this state. For if it did, the Souls would be in permanent separation from their creator. For they are opposites, one a desire to receive, the other a desire to give, they can never bond. In order to fix this separation, God created two systems, as it is written "this one, versus that one, did God establish". One system, the four worlds (levels within oneself) of holiness, the other, the four worlds of impurity. These worlds (levels) are known by the acronym ABYA, they are: Azilut, Beriya, Yetzirah and Asiya. He implanted the desire to give, in the system of ABYA of holiness, and the desire to receive for oneself, in the ABYA of impurity. The desire to receive is now separated from the Creator, and from all the worlds (levels) of holiness. For this reason, the "shells"(evil) are called "dead" as it is written "sacrifices of the dead".  The wicked are also called "dead", as it is written "the wicked in their lifetime are called dead". This is because the evil within them, the "opposite of form" (opposite of desires), separates them from the life force of the universe (God), and they are distanced from Him an infinite distance. For He has no desire to receive, but only to give, and the "shells" (evil) have no desire to give, but only to receive for themselves, and there is no greater opposite of desires than that. And you already know, distance in spirituality is measured according to the difference in "form" (desires), and these opposite desires cause the maximum distance between God and those that He created.
And the spiritual worlds evolved to the reality of our physical world, where a person is born with a [spiritual] body (the desire to receive) and a soul (the desire to give), a time of decay and a time of rebuilding (tikun).  The [spiritual] body, the  desire to receive for oneself, which has its roots in the thought of creation, travels through the system of impurity, as it is written "man is born a wild  donkey", and remains subservient to this system until the age of thirteen. This is the time of [spiritual] decay (because the person is mostly thinking of himself). And through his involvement in mitzvoth beginning at thirteen, for the purpose of causing pleasure to His creator (by becoming a giver), he slowly switches from the desire that was ingrained within him, the desire to  receive, and turns it into a desire to give. That person has now entered into the system of holiness, and is acquiring a soul (the desire to give), whose roots are also in the thought of creation. This is the time of rebuilding (tikun). The person adds and attains levels of holiness, (by becoming more of a giver), and thus fulfilling the purpose of creation which is [known by the term] "Ein-Sof".  These levels of holiness help change a person's desires for himself, and help make him a "receiver in order to give" where giving and receiving become one.  At that point he achieves "similarity of form" with his Creator.  Because receiving in order to give is considered complete giving. As is mentioned in Tractate Kiddushin 7a: A groom, if he is someone of stature, the bride can put the ring on his finger, and when the groom says: "you are hereby married to me with this ring", they are married. (Usually it is the groom who puts the ring on the bride, however, in the above scenario, the groom who usually doesn't accept gifts, because he is an important person, by accepting her ring, he gives her pleasure, and with this pleasure she is married to him). We see then, that by receiving (the ring) the groom is actually giving [pleasure to the bride]. Because his act of receiving in order to give [his bride pleasure] is considered pure giving. Such a person when it comes to his relationship with God, who accepts from God, in order to give Him pleasure, acquires "similarity of form" with God, (they are now both givers, although in actuality the person received and God gave) and that person can now receive all the goodness that was in God's thought when He created the world.
It is now well understood that the desire to receive must undergo a transformation (tikun) and become a  desire to give.  Both the desire to receive and the change needed, were in God's thought when he created the world. For the Creator created two systems, "this one as well as that one", and the Soul goes through both systems, and is endowed with a [spiritual] body and a soul. And through Torah and Mitzvoth the person transforms his desire to receive into a desire to give, and  becomes a "receiver in order to give".  That person can now receive all the goodness from God, and at the same time have a strong connection with Him, because through Torah and Mitzvoth he has acquired "similarity of form"  to his Creator. This stage is called " the last state of tikun", or " the thought of creation". Now there is no longer a need for the impure "other side". When this occurs, "death will be no more". Being diligent in Torah and Mitzvoth during these "6000 years" and in a person's lifetime, is for them to attain this final stage. It is now understood that evil, the "shells" and impurity, which have their roots in the [spiritual] body (the desire to receive), had to be created, in order to transform the desire to receive, into a desire to give, for one cannot change what they don't possess. 
We must still understand, since the desire to receive for oneself is so defective and corrupt, how is it possible that this desire was bonded completely with the Creator in the state called Ein-Sof.  This bond was so strong, that there are no words to describe this oneness. But the idea is, that when God decided to create the Soul, in God's "mind"  the desire to receive has already undergone transformation into "receiving in order to give", for He does not need any actions to fulfill His thoughts, and  instantly all the stages that the Soul would experience had already occurred. The Soul was then able to receive all the goodness that God had in store for it, because "receiving in order to give" is considered pure giving, and the Soul is now in "similarity of form" with the Creator.  In God's eternality, the past present and future are all occurring simultaneously, all in the present. God is above time. The corrupt desire to receive was never in Ein-Sof to effectuate a separation from God. Just the opposite, the future situation, the  "similarity of form", the last stage of tikun, (receiving in order to give) appeared instantly. This is the deeper meaning of " before the world was created, He and His name were one".  Separation never occurred in the "thought of creation" in Ein-Sof.  The Soul was always completely bonded with the Creator because of "similarity of form". This is the meaning behind "He and His name are one". (In Hebrew "desire" and "His Name" have the same numerical value 346).
The Soul experiences three different situations. 1. In the "thought of creation" in Ein-Sof, where the future state, the last state of tikun, already exists. 2. In the state of "6000 years" where the Soul is divided into a [spiritual] body and soul. And through efforts in Torah and Mitzvoth the person transforms himself from a desire to receive into a desire to give pleasure to his Creator, with no desires for himself (except what is necessary for his existence).  In this stage, there is no transformation/tikun of the [spiritual] body, (the desire to receive), the transformation/tikun is only on the soul, the desire to give, (to transform it into giving just for the sake of giving, but not for any reward). In other words, to destroy (not to use), the [spiritual] body, the desire to receive (except for what is necessary), and to remain only with the desire to give, known as the soul.  At this stage even the righteous who pass away, cannot enjoy Eden only after their [spiritual] body has completely disintegrated in the earth. 3. The last state of tikun, which is after resurrection of the dead. At this time even the [spiritual] body will undergo transformation/tikun, and the desire to receive will only be used as a vehicle for the desire to give. Two goals will be accomplished, the desire to receive  will receive all the pleasure, that is in the "thought of creation", and the desire to receive will be completely bonded to the Creator due to their both having "similarity of form". They will receive not for their own pleasure, but only to give pleasure to their Creator, since He has pleasure when we receive from Him. For the sake of brevity, I will no longer explain these three stages, but will only refer to them as situation 1, situation 2 and situation 3.   
When you contemplate these three situations, you realize that they are all linked. If there was no third situation, where the desire to receive is transformed into the desire to give, the first situation in Ein-Sof could not be realized. Because the first situation only appeared due to the future third situation. This future third situation already appeared in God's eternality, as the present situation. And all the completeness that manifested itself in that [first] situation is but a copy from the future into the present. However, if it were possible to cancel the future [situation], there would be no actuality to the present [first situation]. We see then, that the third situation is the cause of the first situation. Of course, if the second situation is not realized,  which is the toil and effort needed to bring into fruition the third situation, meaning the toil in the decay and transformation [of the desire to receive], and the attaining of different spiritual levels, then it is obvious that there would be no third situation. Also, the first situation in Ein-Sof obligates the second and third situation. The first situation creates a necessity for the two systems "this one as well as that one" in the second situation. In this [second]situation there is the corrupt impure[spiritual] body, that will undergo transformation/tikun. If there would be no impurity, there would be no desire to receive [what God wants to give], and no possibility of transformation/tikun into the third situation. The question that was asked,  how is it possible that impurity comes from Ein-Sof is now mute, for just the opposite, the first situation (the desire to receive)  brings into reality the second situation. 
One cannot ask, if the above is correct, then there is no free will, due to the fact that we are required to reach the third situation, because the third situation is already present in the first situation. But the matter is thus: There are two paths that God established in order to bring about the third situation. The first, through the fulfillment of Torah and Mitzvoth. The second, through pain, that afflicts the [spiritual] body, and forces the desire to receive to become the desire to give, and to bond with God. As is mentioned (Sanhedrin 97b) " If you repent, good; and if not, I will set upon you a king whose decrees are as difficult as Haman, whose decrees will force you to repent". This is also the meaning of the verse " in its time I will hasten it". If they are worthy, I will hasten it, and if they aren't worthy, in its time." That is, if we merit through the first path, through Torah and Mitzvoth to transform ourselves, we hasten our transformation/tikun and we don't need the prolonged harsh and bitter pain that will eventually cause us to repent. However, if we don't take the first path, then, "in its time". That is, the prolonged pain will bring about our transformation/tikun even against our will. Part of this pain is also the punishment of the Souls in Gehenna. But either way, the third situation, the last state of transformation/tikun, must be realized, because the first situation obligates it to occur. Our choices are either the path of pain, or the path of Torah and Mitzvoth. 
We now have an answer to our third question. we asked: When we look around us, we see that humanity has many faults, which condemn us to a wretched existence. However, when we think about the Creator that created us, humanity should be on the highest level, being that we come from an extremely praiseworthy source.  A quality manufacturer should only produce quality products. But as was originally stated, the [spiritual] body with all that it has acquired, is not our true [spiritual] body. Our true [spiritual]  body, our eternal body, our complete body, is already flourishing in Ein-Sof in the first situation. Because it has received its final form, from the future third situation, where receiving has become giving, and is now in "similarity of form" with Ein-Sof. And although, the first situation forces the second situation, the situation that is deficient and corrupt, of receiving only for ourselves, that causes a separation from Ein-Sof,  this second situation is only for the purpose of transforming ourselves,  enabling us to acquire an eternal [spiritual] body-the third situation. We should not resent this process, for there is no other way. Our work is with the [spiritual] body, whose transformation will cause it to end and disappear. For "a person cannot fix what he doesn't have". The truth is, we already are in a complete state that is worthy of the One who created us, even in the second state. The [spiritual] body, the desire to receive only for oneself, does not detract from our lofty state since it is slated to die and be voided. It is only temporary, until we are able to transform it to its eternal state.
We can now answer our fifth question, we asked: How is it possible that from an eternal entity, emerge beings that are transient and gone? But from our previous explanation it is understood. The truth is that we are eternal, we are complete, just as He is eternal and complete. Our eternality definitely requires that the "shell" the [spiritual] body, that was given to us only to work [on its transformation] be culminated and gone. Had it remained indefinitely, we would be forever separated from the source of life. We had already said in paragraph 13, that the [spiritual] body, the desire to receive only for oneself, is not found in the "thought of creation", [in Ein-Sof]. For in Ein-Sof we are already in the third situation. However, we are obligated to go through the second situation, in order to transform it into the third situation. We shouldn't ask regarding other creatures that were created, only about humans. For people are the center of creation. The rest of creation was only created to help humanity on its spiritual quest, to achieve completeness. As a consequence of this, Nature and animals, become more passive or aggressive depending on the actions of people.
With the above understanding, the fourth question is now explained. We asked: Since good produces goodness, how is it possible that God created creatures that suffer throughout their lifetimes? But as we said, all the sufferings are obligated from the first situation, the situation that came into reality from the future third situation, that forces either in the way of Torah, or the way of suffering (both are possible in the second situation) in order to achieve our eternality in the third situation. The suffering is only upon the shell, the [spiritual] body, that was destined for death and burial. This teaches us, that the desire to receive only for oneself, was created in order to erase it, and transform it into a desire to give. The pain that we experience are only revelations that divulge the worthlessness and damage that spread from the desire to receive. If all of mankind would agree to destroy the desire for themselves, and their  desire would be only for others, all the worries and hazards would be eliminated. Everyone would be assured a healthy and complete life, for each of us would have an abundance of people who would take care and make sure that all our needs are meet. However, all the worries, suffering, wars and corruption, that we have no refuge from, occur because we only think about ourselves. These weaken our  bodies with diseases and pain. You now realize, that all the suffering  that we experience in our world,  those that are featured before our eyes, appear, in order to push us into cancelling the evil "shell" that is the [spiritual] body, and to accept upon us the desire to give. As we had said, pain has the ability to bring us to the desired state. [There are two types of Mitzvoth, those that are between man and God, and those between man and his fellow man]. But know this, the Mitzvoth between man and his fellow man take precedence over the Mitzvoth between man and God, because giving to others, leads one to give to God! (The goal is between man and God, but the vehicle to that goal is through the Mitzvoth of man-to-man. See Tractate Shabbos 31a, the story of Hillel and the convert). 
After all these explanations, our first question is now resolved. We had asked, what is our essence? Answer: Our essence is the same as all the different details of nature, which is, no more and no less than the desire to receive. However, not as it is appears in our current second situation, receiving only for yourself, but as it stands in the first situation in Ein-Sof, meaning in its eternal form,  receiving [from God] in order to give Him pleasure. And although in actuality, we haven't reached the  third situation yet, that does not diminish in any way our true essence. It is only a matter of time. The third situation must occur, because it is linked to the first situation. Therefore "whatever is certain to be collected, is considered as already collected". The fact that something hasn't happened yet, is a drawback, only if there is doubt that it will occur.  Where there is no doubt, it is considered as if we have arrived at the third situation. And our current awful [spiritual] body that which we now possess, this [spiritual]body does not diminish our [eternal] essence, since it, and all that it acquired, are destined to be completely voided together with the impure system that is its source. And "all that is destined to be burned, is already considered burned", and viewed as if it never occurred. However, the soul, whose essence is also a desire, the desire to give, that desire which flows from the four worlds (levels) of ABYA of holiness, is eternal. For the desire to give is in similarity of form with the Eternal, and is not subject to any substitution. 
You should not be persuaded by philosophers who say that the essence of the Soul is knowledge, that the Soul exists and flourishes through this knowledge. That the eternality of the Soul is depended on the knowledge that it acquired; to the degree if there is no knowledge there is nothing for the Soul to attach itself to. This is not the Torah's view! Also, this view makes no sense. For anyone who has tried to acquire knowledge, knows and feels, that knowledge is acquired [from an outside source] and is not the essence of the acquirer. But as was explained, the underlying core of creation, the spiritual roots  and the physical roots are no more and no less than the desire to receive. And although we said that the Soul is a desire to give, this is only after we transform it through the power of the "returning light"(the capability to change from a receiver into a giver). The ability to use this "returning light" comes to us from the upper worlds (levels), however, the essence of the Soul is the desire to receive. What makes one entity different from another, is their separate desires. Because the desire in every entity, begets thoughts and ideas, on how to realize those wants. And just as different people have different desires, so too they have different wants, thoughts and ideas. For example, those whose desires are limited to animal desires (such as food, etc.) their needs, thoughts and ideas are focused on fulfilling those animal desires. And although they use the mind and knowledge of a human, still, their mind is enslaved to the animal desires within them. And those who desire honor and power over others, desires that are not encountered in the animal kingdom  but are human desires, (in animals, power over other animals is only for the purpose of procreation) all their thoughts and ideas are concentrated on how to bring to fruition and completeness those needs. And those whose desires are mainly to receive knowledge, all their thoughts are focused on how to procure that need. 
These three desires (animal desires, people desires, and desire for knowledge), all three are usually found in each individual, however, in different mixtures. Different individuals have more of one, and less of the other. This is what produces  differences between one person and the next. And from these  physical attributes, one can construct an analogy to the spiritual, from the lowest spiritual level to the highest. 
In that, a spiritual person, who through the strength of the "returning light" (the ability to become a giver) that ability which they receive from the higher worlds, breeds in them a desire to only cause happiness to their Creator. This desire is the essence of the [spiritual] soul. When it becomes an integral part of the person, it forges thoughts and deliberations on how to accomplish this desire of giving to the Creator, whose amount is reflected by the depths of that individual's yearnings.  
And since the core and essence of the [spiritual] body is only the desire to receive for oneself, and all of its acquisitions are the fulfillment of this corrupt desire, that was only created for the purpose of enabling one to attain the third complete situation (receiving in order to give) which will manifest itself at the end of the Tikun process (and the desire to receive just for oneself has no significance); for this reason the desire for oneself is destined for death and desolation, it and all of its possessions, as a fleeting shadow which leaves no trace. On the other hand, the core and essence of the soul is only the desire to give to others, and all its realizations are the fulfillment of this desire, which is already manifest in the first eternal situation (in Ein-Sof), and also in the future third situation (at the end of the Tikun process), it and all that was acquired, are everlasting and eternal, it is not affected by the death of the corrupt [spiritual] body, just the opposite, the loss of the [spiritual] body enhances it, and gives it the ability to achieve great heights in [the state that is called] the Garden of Eden!  It is well explained that the permanence of the Soul is not predicated on acquired knowledge, as the philosophers believe, but its eternality is its essence, i.e. the desire to give. Whereas the knowledge that was attained is the Soul's reward and not its essence.
We now have a thorough  solution to our fifth inquiry. We asked: Since the [spiritual] body is so corrupt that the Soul can only achieve its complete purity when the [spiritual] body rots in the ground. Why the need for resurrection of this body? And also, what our sages said " in the future the dead will rise with all their defects, so that no one will say this is a different person (Zohar Emor 17). This can be understood when you grasp the thought of creation, the first situation. We had said that the purpose of creation was to give pleasure to those that He created. This necessitated the creation of an immense desire to receive all this pleasure, inasmuch as desire and pleasure go hand in hand. This desire to receive was all that God needed to create in order to fulfill His goal. For a perfect manufacturer, only produces what is necessary, and nothing extra. We had also mentioned that this massive desire to receive [for oneself] was removed from the system of holiness and placed into the system of impurity, this is the source of the physical beings, their economy and all their possessions. However, beginning at the age of thirteen (but usually at a later age) by virtue of the person's occupation in Torah, begins to acquire a soul of holiness whose sustenance is from the worlds of holiness, the degree of which depends on the amount of godliness that the person achieved. We had also mentioned above, that in the "six thousand year" period that was given for us to labor in Torah and Mitzvoth there is no transformation/tikun on the [spiritual]body, the desire to receive, but all the Tikun is only on the soul, by which an individual moves from one level to the next, that is to say, to increase our desire to give, that [this desire]is culled from the soul. For this reason the body (spiritual and physical) is destined to burial and decay, because it had not achieved Tikun. However, it cannot remain in this [decayed] state, for if it did, there would be no fulfillment of God's will, the thought of creation, to give immense pleasure to those that were created. Because pleasure and desire go hand-in-hand. The less the desire the less the pleasure. 
We had already mentioned that the first situation (in Ein-Sof) obligates the third situation (end of Tikun)  to reveal itself in all its potency