Onkelos Genesis
תרגום אונקלוס על בראשית
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Onkelos Genesis



Chapter 1

In the beginning, God created the heavens and the earth.
And the earth was desolate and empty, and darkness came off the face of the water, and a wind from God blew over the face of the water.
And God said, "Let light be", and light was.
And God saw the light, that it was good, and separated the light from the darkness.
 And God called the light "day" and the darkness he called "night".  It was evening and it was morning; day one.
And God said, "Let there be an expanse in the midst of the water, separating between water and water".
 And God made the expanse, and separated the water below the expanse from the water above the expanse; and it was so.
 And God called the expanse "the heavens".  And it was evening and it was morning; day two.
 And God said, "Let water gather under the skies to one place, exposing land, and it was so.
 And God called the land "earth", and to the gathering of the water he called "seas", and God saw that it was good.

Chapter 2

...And they were finished, the heavens, the earth, and all their hosts.
...And God ended on the seventh day his work that he did, and he rested on the seventh day from all the work that he did.
...And God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it because on it he rested from all of his work that God created to do.



And the Lord God created man, dirt from the ground, and He blew into his nostrils a living soul, and it was for a speaking spirit in man.

Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12

And God said to Abraham, leave your land, your childhood, and your father's house for the land that I will show you.

Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29



Chapter 30



Chapter 31



Chapter 32



Chapter 33

And Yaakov lifted his eyes and saw and behold Esav was coming and with him was 400 men and he [Yaakov] divided up the children with Leah and with Rachel and with the 2 maidservants.

Chapter 34



Chapter 35



Chapter 36



Chapter 37


























And Judah said what [monetary] benefit do we receive from covering up his [Joseph's] blood

Chapter 38


There Yehudah saw the daughter of a merchant named Shua; he married her and had intercourse with her.

Chapter 39



Chapter 40



Chapter 41



Chapter 42



Chapter 43
































They served to him by himself, and to them by themselves, and to the Egyptians eating with them by themselves because Egyptians cannot eat bread with Hebrews  for the domesticated animals that the Egyptians worship, the Hebrews eat