Onkelos Genesis
תרגום אונקלוס על בראשית
Translated by Yani Alapini
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1BAcRw0OjdesSjh97XJQjIYrv6nxzzBj5gh8ygZseFzw/edit?usp=sharing

Onkelos Genesis



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12

And the Lord said to Abram, “Go for yourself from your land, from your birthplace, and from your father’s house to the land that <b>I will reveal to you.</b>"
And I will make you into a great people, and I will bless you, and I will make your name great, <b>and you shall be blessed</b>.
And I will bless those who bless you, and I will curse those who curse you, and they will be blessed <b>because of you</b>. All the descendants of the land will be blessed.
And Abram went as it was said to him by the Lord, and Lot went with him. And Abram was seventy-five years old when he departed from Haran.
And Abram’s word (was) with Sarai, his wife, and with Lot, the son of his brother, and with all his possessions that he had acquired, and with the souls <b>whom they had made subject to the Law</b> (who made God's Law theirs) in Haran. They went out to go to the land of Canaan and came to the land of Canaan.
And Abram passed through the land, until the place of Shechem, to the oak of Moreh, and the Canaanite was then in the land.
And the Lord revealed to Abram and said, "To your son, I will give this land, and there you will build an altar <b>before the Lord who revealed it to him.</b>"
And he departed from there to the mountain, from the east to Bethel, and pitched his tent there, Bethel on the west and Ai on the south. He built an altar there before the Lord and <b>prayed in the name of the Lord</b>.
And Abram went and took to the south.
And there was a famine in the land, and Abram went down to Egypt to sojourn there because the famine was strong in the land.
And when it was near to going up to Egypt, Abram said to Sarai, "You are very beautiful, as you know, because you are of <b>such</b> great beauty."
And it will be that when the Egyptians see your beauty, they will say, "This is his wife," and they will kill me, but you they will let live.
Say, "You are my sister," so that it will be well with me because of you, and my soul will live <b>by your words</b>.
And it was when Abram went to Egypt, and the Egyptians saw him with his wife, that she was very beautiful.
And the officers of Pharaoh saw her and praised her to Pharaoh, and they spoke to her in Pharaoh's house.
And to Abram, Pharaoh gave for her (Sarai) cattle, sheep, donkeys, male servants, female servants, camels, and additional camels.
And the LORD brought upon Pharaoh many great plagues, and upon the people of his house, because of the affair of Sarai, the wife of Abram.
And Pharaoh called Abram and said, "What is this that you have done to me? Why did you not reveal to me that she is your wife?"
Why did you say that she is my sister? And her word was for me to be with her. But now, here she is with you—let her go.
And Pharaoh appointed men and officials over him, and his men, and with her, and all his possessions.

Chapter 13

And Abram went up from Egypt, he and his wife and all his possessions, and Lot with him, to the south.
And Abram strengthened for one (his position) in the city with silver and with gold.
And he went from the south to Bethel, to the region of the plains there, his dwelling (was) to the east, between Bethel and Ai.
Abram made an altar there to the east, and he prayed there in the name of the Lord.
And also Lot, who went with Abram, was there, with flocks and herds.
And it was not fitting for them to dwell in the land as one, because their possessions were abundant, and they were not able to dwell together as one.
And there was strife between the herders of Abram's city and the herders of Lot's city, and [this was in Canaan] Canaanites and Perizzites, and thus he settled in the land.
And Abram said to Lot, 'There will not be strife between me and you, and between my shepherds and your shepherds, because we are brothers.'
Is it not all the land before you? If you go to the north, I will go to the south, and if you go to the south, I will go to the north.
Is it not all the land before you? If you go to the north, I will go to the south; and if you go to the south, I will go to the north. Thus my possession is divided before you.
And Lot chose for himself all the plain of the Jordan, and Lot took from the east, and they separated, a man from the possession of his brother (one another).
Abram settled in the land of Canaan, and Lot settled near the plains, and the field until Sodom.
And the men of Sodom were wicked in their wealth, and guilty in their bodies before the Lord to be destroyed.
And the Lord said to Abram, 'After Lot has separated from you, lift up your eyes, and look from the place where you are, northward, southward, eastward, and westward.'
For all the land that you see, I will give it to you and to your descendants forever.
And I will make your son many, like the dust of the earth, so that it will not be possible for a man to count the dust of the earth; even your descendants will not be counted.
Arise, walk through the land, to its length and to its breadth, for I will give it to you.
And Abram came and sat in the plains of Mamre, which are in Hebron, and there he built an altar before the LORD.

Chapter 14

And it was in the days of Amraphel, king of Babel, Arioch, king of Elasar, Kedorlaomer, king of Elam, and Tidal, king of the nations.
They arranged (they served) for battle with Bera, king of Sodom, and with Birsha, king of Gomorrah, and with Shinav, king of Admah, and with Shem-‘ever, king of Zoar, and the king of Bela, which is Zoar.
All these gathered to the place of the fields; it is a place by the sea of battle.
For two ten years (two decades) they served Chedorlaomer, and for three ten years they rebelled.
And in four ten years (four decades), Chedorlaomer came, and the kings that were with him, and his army of the mighty ones of Ashtaroth of the horns, and the strong ones of the cattle, and the terror of those who were near the cities.
And of the deserts of their mountains, of Seir to the straight of Paran, which is adjacent to the wilderness.
And they will come and go to the straight division of the judgment, which is a mixture, and it is close to all the field of Amalek. And also to the dwelling which is seated at the spring of Gedi.
And the king of Sodom, and the king of Gomorrah, and the king of Admah, and the king of Zeboim, and the king of Bela, which is Zoar, went out, and they arranged with them a battle in the plain of the fields.
With Kedorla'omer, king of Elam, and Tidal, king of the nations, and Amraphel, king of Babel, and Arioch, king of Ellasar, four kings gathered against five.
And from the plain of the fields, the wells were dug, and with clay, they fled. The king of Sodom and Gomorrah fell there and they became lost, fleeing to the mountain.
And the return of all the possessions of Sodom and Gomorrah, and of all their food, and they went away.
And the return of Lot and of his possessions was outside the brotherhood of Abram, and they went away, and he sat in Sodom.
And he came to the place of the oak, and a man from the family of Abram, the Hebrew, was prince in the area of Mamre, of the Amorite, the brother of Eshkol and the brother of Aner, and they were men of Abram’s standing.
And Abram heard that his brother had been captured, and he was quick to gather his people, those born to him in his house, three hundred and eighty and ten, and he pursued them as far as Dan.
And he divided his forces against them by night, he and his servants and his troops, and they pursued them as far as Hobah, which is to the north of Damascus.
And he brought all his property, and also Lot, the son of his brother, with his property, and also the wives and the people.
And the king of Sodom went out to meet him after he had smitten the kings of Kedorlaomer and the kings that were with him, to bring them into righteousness from the place to the place of the house of the king.
And Melchizedek, the king of Jerusalem, brought forth bread and wine, and he ministered before God Most High.
And blessed him, and said, 'Blessed is Abram to God Most High, whose possessions are the heavens and the earth.'
And blessed is God Most High, who gave your enemies into your hand, and He gave him one from ten of all.
And the king of Sodom said to Abram, 'Give to me my life and my possessions, the thing that is mine, to you.'
And Abram said to the king of Sodom, 'I raise my hands in his shadow, before the Lord, before God, the Most High, whose possessions are the heavens and the earth.'
If from a thread and to the shoelace of a sandal, and if Esav takes anything from all that belongs to you, and you will not say, 'I have enriched Abram.'
Except that they ate the banquet and a portion of the men who went with me, Anar, Eshkol, and Mamre, they will receive their portion.