Megillat Ta'anit
מגילת תענית
Rabbi Mike Feuer, Jerusalem Anthology
https://www.sefaria.org

Megillat Ta'anit

Nisan



Iyar





<b>On the twenty-third of Iyar the residents of the Chakra</b> <small>(the fortress built by the Greeks in the time of Antiochus to dominate the Temple Mount)</small> <b>went out from Jerusalem.</b>
This is what is written “And David conquered the stronghold of Zion which is the city of David.” (Shmuel I 5:7) this is the place of the karaites (?) right now. Since they were troubling the people of Jerusalem and they were unable to go out or in except at night, they declared the day they were driven out as a holiday.

Sivan



Tammuz



Av



Elul



Tishrei



Cheshvan



Kislev







<b>On the twenty fifth of the month is Channuka, eight days on which one does not eulogize</b> 
because when the Greeks entered the Temple they defiled all the oil there. When the hand of the Hasmoneans was made strong and they defeat the Greeks, they checked (in the Temple) and only found one jar of oil sealed with the mark of the High Priest which remained undefiled. Though there was only enough in it to light for one day, a miracle occurred through it and they lit the Temple lamps from it for eight days. The following year they decreed these to be eight days of celebration. And what justification did they see for making Channuka eight days? Wasn’t the dedication (channuka) which Moshe did in the wilderness only seven days? As it says “And you shall not leave the entrance of the Tent of Meeting for seven days…” (Vayikra 8:33) And it says “The one who brought his offering on the first day was…” (Bamidbar 7:12) and on the seventh day Ephraim made his offering. So too we find at the dedication which Shlomo made that it only lasted seven days, as it says “…for the inauguration of the altar they made seven days, and the feast seven days.” (Divre HaYamim II 7:9) So what reason did they see to make this dedication eight days? In the days of the kingdom of Greece the Hasmoneans entered the Temple, built the altar, plastered it with plaster and for seven days they were preparing the vessels for service. The re-dedication done by the Hasmoneans it to be marked for all generations. And why is it a practice for all generations? They fixed it when they came out from a narrow place into broad spaces, and they said praises and thanksgiving, lighting lamps in purity. Since the Greeks had gone into the Temple and defiled all the vessels, there was nothing with which to light. When the Hasmoneans were victorious, they brought seven skewers of iron, covered them with tin and began to light. 

Tevet



Shevat



Adar





<b>On the thirteenth of that month is the Day of Nikanor.</b>
Nikanor, general of the Greek kings, when passing through to Alexandria daily would wave his hand against Jerusalem and the Holy Temple blaspheming, insulting and disparaging them, saying ‘when will she fall into my hands that I may destroy her?’ When the hand of the Hasmoneans became strong they went down amongst his soldiers and killed until they came to those closest to him. They cut off their heads and chopped off their thumbs and big toes, and then cut off his head, chopped off his limbs and hung them across from the Holy Temple. They said ‘the mouth that spoke arrogantly and the hand which waved against Yehudah, Jerusalem and the Holy Temple – let this revenge be done to them. They made the day that they did this a day of celebration.