Tosefta Avodah Zarah
תוספתא עבודה זרה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Tosefta Avodah Zarah



Chapter 1

Nachum the Midianite says, "One day in the Diaspora before their [the idolaters] festivals, it is forbidden [for the Jews to do business with them]." What do these words refer to? These refer to their festivals that have fixed dates. But if they are not fixed, it is only forbidden [to do business] on that day. Although they [the anonymous rabbis] said, "Three days it is forbidden to sell or to buy with them." What do these words refer to? To a matter [of business] that is finished, but to a matter that is not yet fulfilled, it is permitted [to do business]. Even a matter that is finished regarding buying or selling is permitted. R. Yehoshua ben Qarchah says, "Every lender with a document [guaranteeing a loan] may not be repaid by them [the idolaters on a festival day], and the one without a document may be repaid by them because it is like a protector from their hand." 
2. Let him not not buy or sell with an idolater on the day of his festival. Let him not "lighten his head" with him [through drink?]. Let him not greet him in a place that is thought to have idolatry[?], for greeting someone is tantamount to honoring him. Let them greet idolaters on their festival days for the sake of peace. Jewish artisans who work besides an idolater in a Jewish home, it is permitted [to greet them], but in an idolater's home it is forbidden. R. Shimon b. Elazar says, "If he was a hired worker for the day, whether he worked in the home of a Jew or an idolater, it is forbidden [to greet an idolater]. If he was a hired worker under a Jewish home, it is permitted, but in an idolater's  home, it is forbidden. If he is working in a fixed place[?], whether it is in the home of a Jew or an idolater, it is forbidden. In another city, either way it is permitted [to greet]. And although he finished making an idolater's tool before the idolater's festival day, he may not bring it to him because his home would rejoice." One city does [idolatry?] and another city does not, one nation does and another does not, one family does and another does not. The ones who do are forbidden and the one who do not are permitted. Calends. Though everyone does [idolatry?], only the worshipers are forbidden. Saturnalia. The day in which he seized control, Krateisis. The Day of Genusia [Birthday] of the kings of the idolaters is the day of each king and the day in which he like the rabble. An individual, even the day of his banquet and the day in which in which he took control. R. Meir says, "Even the day in which he was sick, it is forbidden [to do business]."
One may not go to a [idolatrous] market-place that is in a village or in any of the surrounding cities because it looks like he is going to the market-places in those cities. These are the words of R. Meir. The sages say, "Only that village is forbidden. A market-place that is inside of a village is forbidden. If it is outside of the village, it is permitted. As for the nobility [?] of a village, it is forbidden to deal with them outside the village, but it is permitted inside the village. The shops that are crowned at each place are forbidden. If a man is in a caravan going from place to place and enters a village in which there is a market-place, let him not worry because it looks like he goes into an market-place. A market-place that was given by the kingdom, the state, or by the elite of the state are permitted. Only the market-place of idolaters is forbidden.  One may go to an idolatrous marketplace and receive medical treatment so long as the treatment is for money(?) and not for life(?). One may not take from them houses, fields, vineyards, animals, slaves, or maidservants because it is as though one is rescuing from his hand. And he writes and deposits [a deed] in an archive. A priest contracts impurity to give testimony outside Eretz Yisrael. Just as he contracts impurity from outside Eretz Yisrael, so too he contracts uncleanness in a graveyard. And he contracts uncleanness [in order] to study Torah or to marry a woman. Rabbi Yehuda says, If he has someone with whom to study, he should not contract uncleanness, but if not, he should. Rabbi Yosei says, even if he has someone with whom to study, he should contract uncleanness for it is not from any man that a person should merit to learn, but with the person who can give that merit to him. They said about Yosef haKohein that he should contract impurity and go out [to study with[ Rabbi Yosei in Tzidon. A priest should not go ab road even to marry a woman unless they assured him. Merchants who moved up the time of a yarid or pushed it back, it is permitted. It is only forbidden at the time of the yarid alone. Four [instances of the word] “dust” are [used] figuratively [meaning “something akin to” or “a shade of”]: “the dust of usury,” “the dust of the seventh year,” “the dust of idolatry,” and “the dust of lashon hara.” The dust of usury: a man should not do business in a loan of his fellow. The dust of the seventh year: A man should not do business with an idolator in (idolatrous) fruit because of the shade of [that is, it is akin to, produce of] the seventh year. The dust of idolatry: One should not do business with an idol worshipper on the day of his festival because of the dust [or because it is akin to] of idolatry. The dust of lashon hara: One should not do business in as a favor to his fellow because of the shade of [it is akin to] lashon hara. Jews who are going to a yarid are permitted to do business with them, and on their return it is prohibited because they engaged in idolatry, but as for an idolator, it is permitted whether he is going or coming back. Idolators who are going to their debauchery, it is prohibited to do business with them but on their return it is permitted, because it is like idolatry and they have abandoned its worship. A Jew, whether going or coming, is prohibited. A Jew should not travel in a caravan to a debauchery even to go out and even to to before it and even to be there when it gets dark and even though one is fearful because of idolators or brigands or evil spirits, as it says, “you shall not go after other gods” (Deut 6:14).  Rabbi Eliezer the son of Rabbi Yosei haGalili says, if you see a righteous person who is going out on a journey and you are planning on making the same journey, you should move your trip three days earlier or later to travel with him, as he is accompanied by ministering angels, as it says, “For he will command his angels to keep you in all your ways” (Ps 91:11). And if you see an evil person going out on a journey and you want to make the same journey, you should move your trip even three days earlier or later so as not to accompany him, because adversary angels accompany him, as it says, “Appoint a wicked man against him, let an accuser stand at his right hand” (Ps 106:6). Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says, if young people say to you “build the temple!” do not listen to them. And if old people tell you, “destroy the temple!” listen to them, for the building of youths is destruction and the destruction of the old is building. Proof of the matter is Rehoboam the son of Shlomo. They asked Rabbi Yehoshua, what [is the law] of a man teaching his son a book in Greek? He said to them, Let him teach [it] at an hour which is not day or night, as it says, “And you will meditate in it day and night” (Josh 1:8). 
From all of them that would sell to them a bundle. And how much is a bundle? Rabbi Yehuda ben B’teirah says, of frankincense not less than three by number. He sells to a traveling merchant or to a homeowner. If the merchant is suspected, it is prohibited to sell to him. If he sells to him pigs and he is not suspected lest he offer it to idolatry. He sells to him wine and he is not suspected lest he pour it out for idolatry. And if he specifies [that is it for idolatry], even water or salt, it is forbidden to sell to him. He sells to him a white chicken among a flock of chickens, Rabbi Yehuda says, this refers to a time when he said to him, Sell me any chicken, but if he specified because he was sick or for his son’s banquet, this is permitted.


Chapter 2

Take from them an animal to test and return it the whole entire day. And just as one may take from them an animal to test and return it the whole entire day, so too one may take from them slaves or maidservants to test and return them the whole entire day. All the time that you are bound to return to a Jew, you are bound to return to idolators. If you are not bound to return to a Jew, you are not bound to return to idolators. If an Israelite sells his animal to an idolator on the condition that he slaughter it with the Israelite standing next to him, the idolator may slaughter it. One may buy from them an animal for a sacrifice and not worry on account that it might be unfit due to having copulated with a person or being an object of bestiality or due to it having been set aside [for idol worship] or due to it having been worshipped. Just as one may not sell to them fattened cattle, so too one may not sell to them a fattened wild animal. And even in a place where they sell to them small cattle, one may not sell to them a small wild animal. Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says, one may sell them dogs, squirrel moles, cats, and apes, things that clean the home. As one does not sell to them, thus one should not barter with them, not bad for good or good for bad, not lame for healthy or healthy for lame. Rabbi Yehuda permits lame because it isn’t possible to heal them. They said to him, he put it out to impregnate [a female] and she gives birth. Rabbi Yosei ben B’teira permitted a horse that doesn’t do labor on shabbat for which they are liable for a sin offering, but the Sages prohibit because of two things: because of war implements and because of large cattle. One may not sell to them implements of war nor weapons and they may not whet their weapons for them. And one may not sell them stocks or foot chains or neck chains or iron chains.
The rule is the same for idolators and for Samaritans. One may entrust to them shorn fields, harvested grain, and cut trees. Rabbi Yehuda says, low growth for shearing on the condition that he will shear it, grain to harvest on condition that he will harvest it, trees for cutting on the condition of cutting them. He who visits gentile camps (s’rat’ya’ot), it is prohibited, because of idolatry according to Rabbi Meir, but the Sages say, in a time when they are [actually] making offerings to idols it is prohibited because of idolatry but if they are not making offerings to idols it is prohibited because of “a session of scorners” (Ps 1:1). The one who goes theater and sees the snakes and the members of the muleteers in the saeculares, the saeculare is prohibited because of “a session of scorners” as it says, “And in a session of scorners he did not sit” (Ps 1:1), you learn that these bring a man to neglect studying Torah. The one who visits the theater of the idolators, if he cries out because someone is in need, he is permitted, but if he does it in alliance [with the Romans] it is prohibited. The one who sits in the theater, this is one who sheds blood. Rabbi Natan permits because of two things: because of crying and saving a life and testifying for a woman that would remarry. One may go to the theater in order to cry out and save the life or a camp of besiegers because of the welfare of the town, but if he is counted among them, it is forbidden.
One may not lease to them houses or fields or vineyards and one may not give them a tenancy (arisut) or a contracted animal—and it is the same for idolators and for Samaritans. Under what circumstances? In Eretz Yisrael. But in Surya, one may rent to them houses but not fields. In both places, a man should not lease his field to an idolator according to Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yosei says, even in Eretz Yisrael one can rent to them houses and in Surya one may sell them houses and rent fields, and outside of Eretz Yisrael one may sell either. In both places a Jew may not rent his home to an idolator but he may rent to him a shed or a warehouse or an inn, even though he knows idolatry will come in. A Jew may rent his house to a Samaritan and not worry that idolatry will enter it. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says, in any case a Jew may not rent a bathhouse to an idolator it is called by the name of the Jew and they will bathe there on shabbat. Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says, in any case a Jew may not rent his field to an idolator because it is called by the name of the Jew and they will work there on a holiday.


Chapter 3

They put up animals in inns of Samaritans, even males in the places of females and females in the places of males, and it is unnecessary to say males in the places of males and females in the places of males. They give possession of an animal to their shepherd, and they give over their child to teach him book(s) and to teach him art and to be alone with him. A daughter of Israel (may) act as a midwife or a wet-nurse for a Samaritan woman and a Samaritan (woman may) act as a midwife or a wet-nurse for an Israelite woman. They do not put up an animal in inns of idol worshipers, not even males in the places of males or females in the places of females, as a male will have sexual relations with a male and a female will have sexual relations with a female, and it is unnecessary to say males in the places of females and females in the places of males. And they do not give possession of an animal to their shepherd, nor a child to teach him book(s) or to teach him art or to be alone with him. A daughter of Israel may not be a wet-nurse for the an idol worshiper because she raise him for idol worship; but an idol worshiper may act as a wet-nurse for an Israelite woman in her domain. A daughter of Israel may not act as a midwife for an idol worshiper because she delivers (the child) for idol worship. An idol worshiper may not act as a midwife for a daughter of Israel, because they suspect (idol worshipers) of (taking) lives, (these are) the words of Rabbi Meir. But the Sages say that an idol worshiper may act as a midwife for a daughter of Israel in a time when others stand over her, but when they are alone together, it is prohibited, because they suspect (idol worshipers) of (taking) lives. One may be treated by them (provided that it is) monetary treatment, but not personal treatment. An idol worshiper should not cut the embryo from the female organs of an Israelite woman, and she should not drink a cup of infertility potion, because they suspect (idol worshipers) of (taking) lives. An Israelite should not be alone with an idol worshiper, whether to bathe or in a bathhouse. An Israelite who encounters an idol worshiper on the road should (put the idol worshiper) to his right and not to his left. R. Yishmael ben R. Yohanan ben Beroqa says, (if the idol worshiper has) a sword, to his right. (If the idol worshiper has) a stick, to his left. (If) the two of them go up an incline or down a decline, the Israelite should stay above and the idol worshiper below. And he should not bend down before him, lest the idol worshiper break his skull. He should extend the journey (if an idol worshiper) asks him where he is going and divert him from the path, as it says Jacob did to Esau (Genesis 33): "until I come upon my lord at Seir," but he went to Sukkot. An Israelite may get a haircut from an idol worshiper (if) he can see in a mirror. (If) from a Samaritan, he does not need to look in a mirror. The house of Rabban Gamaliel permitted one to look in the mirror because they are in contact with the government. An Israelite who cuts the hair of idol worshiper, when he reaches the forelock, he should remove his hand.
One may buy from idolators scrolls and tefillin and mezuzot but only if one writes on them to fix them. A ma’aseh about a certain idolator that would write scrolls in Zidon and the matter came before ethe Sages and they said it was permitted to buy from him. One may sell scrolls and tefillin and mezuzot to an am ha-aretz but one may only buy tefillin from an expert. If one buys from someone that is not an expert and finds in his hand two bundles of tefillin, he checks one of the one of the shel yad or of the shel rosh of the first set and of the second and third and fourth.
They purchase from an am ha-aretz slaves and maidservants, whether adults or minors. They sell to an am ha-aretz slaves and maidservants whether minors or adults. They buy from them minor girls but not adults according to Rabbi Meir. But the Sages say, adults—and she accepts upon herself. They do not give them girls whether minors or adults, according to Rabbi, but the Sages say, they give them adults and one agrees with him on the condition that she does not make [foods requiring] purity while under his control. A ma’aseh of Rabban Gamliel haZaqein who married his daughter to Shimon ben Netanel haKohein, and agreed with him on the condition that she should not prepare pure [foods] under his supervision. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says, this is not necessary, for they do not force a fellow to prepare pure [food] under the supervision of an am ha-aretz. And who is considered an am ha-aretz? Anyone who does not eat his unconsecrated foods in a state of purity, according to Rabbi Meir, but the Sages say, anyone who does not separate tithes. 
The one who buys uncircumcised slaves from idolators and circumcises them and does not immerse then and thus also for the sons of maidservants who do not immerse whether circumcised or uncircumcised, they are idolators and the objects upon which they tread are impure and the wine of their adults is prohibited but of their children is permitted. And who is an adult? All who are mentioned and recognize idols and their accessories. And who is a minor? All who do not recognize idols and their accessories. Rabbi Yosei says, there is a presumption that a Jewish slave, even one who is uncircumcised, is a Canaanite, until one finds out from them that they are sons of maidservants that did not immerse. There is a presumption that the circumcised slaves of Samaritans are Samaritans; uncircumcised, that they are idolators, until one knows that they are the children of Canaanite maidservants. There is a presumption that the slaves of idolators, even if they are circumcised, are idolators.
Always they circumcise idolators in the name of [becoming] a ger, but idolators do not circumcise Jews because they are suspected of taking lives, according to Rabbi Meir. But the Sages say, an idolator may circumcise a Jew in a time when others are standing over him, but if they are alone, it is forbidden because they are suspected of taking lives. A Jew may circumcise a Samaritan, but a Samaritan may not circumcise a Jew because they circumcise in the name of Mt. Gerizim, according to Rabbi Yehuda. Rabbi Yosei said to him, Where do we find circumcision in the Torah that it is not in the name of the covenant? Rather, let him circumcise in the name of Mt. Gerizim until he dies! One may buy from them and give them an undeserved gift. Of what does this speak? In a time when he is not selling it to him or if he was going from place to place. But if he was his neighbor or his field, this is permitted, because it is like selling to him. The scripture says, “grant them no terms (brit) and give them no quarter (t’chaneim)” (Deut 7:2). If to teach about the covenant, look it speaks of the brit, but why is it said, “give them no quarter (lo t’chaneim)”? To teach that you do not give them unearned gifts. 

Chapter 4

The one who sells his slave to an idolator, the slave goes out free and he requires a document of manumission from his first master. Rabbi Shimon ben Gamliel says, under what circumstances? When he did not write out a transfer document, but if he wrote a transfer document, that is his document of emancipation. Whether he sold him or gave him as a gift, he has gone free, lest he has gone out to a domain that is not a domain. If the idolator did what the law required, [the slave] goes free, and if not, he does not go free. If he took him as fulfillment for a debt or fell to him as confiscated property (siqariqon), he has gone free. If one inherited slaves from idolators, until they come into his domain, he is permitted to sell them to an idolator, but from the time that they come into his domain, he is prohibited from selling them. And so you say [in the case] of libation wine: until it comes into his domain its money [that is, the money from its sale] its permitted, but from the time it comes into his domain, its money is prohibited. A Jew and an idolator that make a purchase in a partnership and returned and made another purchase in a partnership, he cannot say to him, You take the things that are in such-and-such a place as the first purchase and I the things which are in such-and-such a place as the second purchase. But he says to him, You take the things in such-and-such a place and I’ll take the things in such-and-such a place. In lieu of the first purchase, you take the things that are in such-and-such a place, and I shall take the things that are in such-and-such a place in lieu of the second purchase.
The one who sells his slave outside Eretz Yisrael, [the slave] goes free and requires a document of manumission from his second owner. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says, sometimes he goes free and sometimes he does not go free. Howso? He said to him, “I am so-and-so son of so-and-so. I sold my slave so-and-so to so-and-so of Antioch,” then [the slave] goes free. “To so-and-so of Antioch who resides in Lod,” he does not go free. If one inherited slaves outside of Eretz Yisrael, until they come into Eretz Yisrael he is permitted to sell them outside of Eretz Yisrael, but once they come into Eretz Yisrael, it is prohibited to sell them outside of Eretz Yisrael. A slave that fled outside of Eretz Yisrael, his master does not have the right to sell him. If a slave went with his master to Surya, in that case if he sold him there, he is sold. A slave who went with his master on the condition of returning, they force him to return; on the condition that he would not return, they force him not to return. If he came from outside Eretz Yisrael on the condition that he would return, we do not force him to return; that he wouldn’t we turn, we force him not to return. 
The one who sells his slave to an idolators fair, his money [that is, the money resulting from his sale] is prohibited and he must take it to the salt sea. They force his master to redeem him even for a hundred times the amount [for which the master had sold him], and then he sets him free. You find to say: the one who does business at an idolators fair: regarding a beast, it is hamstrung; clothing and vessels, they are left to rot; money and metal tools, one takes the benefit to the salt sea. Produce that is usually poured out is poured out, [that is usually] burnt is burnt, [that is usually] buried is buried. Rabbi Yosei says, one breaks idols and throws them into the wind or casts it into the sea. They said to him, it may even be made into manure, as it says, “Let nothing that has been doomed stick to your hand” (Deut 13:18). Rabbi Yosei said to them, it says, “As for that sinful thing you made . . . [I broke it to bits and ground it thoroughly until it was fine as dust, and I threw its dust into the brook that comes down from the mountain]” (Deut 9:21). They said to him, is that proof? [It has also been said,] “[He took the calf that they had made and burned it, he ground it to powder] and strewed it upon the water and made the Israelites drink it” (Exodus 32:20), teaching that he tested them the same way they test the suspected adulteress. Rabbi Yosei said to them, but it says, “They abandoned their idols there” (II Sam 5:21) and “He also deposed his mother Maakhah from the position of queen mother because had made an abominable thing [for Asherah].” (I Kings 15:13). They said to him: Is there any proof from there? “Asa cut down her abominable thing [and burnt it in Wadi Qidron]” (II Kings 15:13). Rabbi Yosei said to them, but it says, “He broke into pieces the bronze serpent” (II Kings 18:4). They said to him, was this an idol? Didn’t Moses make it? This teaches that Israel went astray after it until Chizqiyah and his son came. 

Chapter 5

They do not store in Eretz Yisrael things upon which life depends, like oil, wine, fine flower, and produce. But things upon which life does not depend, for example cumin and spices, these are permitted. They put things in storage for three years: the year before the shevi’it, the shevi’it, and the year after the shevi’it. Under what circumstances? If one purchases from the market. But if he puts it in his house, even for ten years it is permitted immediately. And in a year of famine, even carob he should not put into storage because he brings a curse on the [cost] calculation. They do not profit from grain. But they profit from wine and oil and beans. They said about Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya that he would profit from wine and oil all of his days. They do not export from Surya things on which life depends, like wine, oil, and fine flour. Rabbi says, I say that they can export wine to Surya, because it reduces frivolity. Just as they do not export to Surya, they do not export to [another] province (hiparkhyah). Rabbi Yehuda permits [exports] from one province to another.
2.	It is proper for a person to live in Eretz Yisrael even in a city where most [of the inhabitants] are idolators and not outside Eretz Yisrael even in a city where everyone is Jewish. This teaches that living in Eretz Yisrael is equal to all the mitzvot in the Torah. And the one buried in Eretz Yisrael, it is as if he is buried under the altar [in the Temple]. A person should not go outside of Eretz Yisrael unless wheat is two se’ahs for a sela. Rabbi Shimon said, under what circumstances? In a time when can find [wheat] to purchase even a se’ah for a sela, he does not go out. And so Rabbi Shimon said, Elimelekh was among the great ones of his generation and among the ones who sustained the public. And because he went outside Eretz Yisrael, he and his sons died in a famine. But all of Israel was able to survive on their land as it says, “The whole city buzzed over them” (Ruth 1:19). This teaches that all the city survives when he and his sons died in famine. Indeed it says, “And I return in peace to my father’s house” (Gen 28:21), and the scripture does not say, “Then the Lord will be my God” (Gen 28:21). And it says, “[I am the Lord your God who brought you out of the land of Egypt] to give to you the land of Canaan and to be to you God” (Lev 25:38). For all the time you are in the land of Canaan, indeed I am your god. If you are not in the land of Canaan, I am not your god. And thus it says, “About forty thousand shock troops [went across at the instance of the Lord, to the steppes of Jericho for battle]” (Josh 4:13). And it says, “[See, the Lord your God is with you, and He will give you rest on every side,] for He delivered the inhabitants of the land into my hand [so that the land lies conquered before the Lord and His people” (I Chron 22:18). Would it come up in your mind that Israel would subdue the land before ha-maqom? Rather: all the time that they are on it, it is [as if it is] subdued. If they are not on it, it is [as if it is] not subdued. And thus David said, “For they have driven me out today so that I cannot have a share in the Lord’s possession” (I Sam 26:19). Would it come up in your mind that David the king worshipped idols? Rather David interpreted and said, whoever leaves Eretz Yisrael behind in a time of peace and goes out it is as if he worshipped idols, as it says, “I will plant them faithfully in this land” (Jer 32:41). If they are not upon it, they are not planted before me in faith “with all my heart and all my soul” (Jer 32:41). Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says, A Jew that is outside the land is an idol worshipper in purity. Howso? An idolator who made a banquet for his son and invited all the Jews in his town, even though they eat their own [food] and drink their own [drinks] and their server stands over them, even still they worship idolatry as it says, “And invite you and you will eat of their sacrifices” (Ex 34:15).
These are the “hides pierced at the heart” [which are mentioned in m. Avodah Zarah 2:3]: All that are perforated at its heart and made like a kind of aperture [in the roof looking to the ground floor]. But if it is straight, it is permitted. Preserved and boiled produce of idolators, into which it is customary to put wine and vineyard and Hadrianic earthenware, [they are subject to] a prohibition on benefit according to Rabbi Meir but the Sages say they are not subject to a prohibition on benefit. Pressed olives that are sold at the entrances to bathhouses are prohibited for eating and permitted for benefit. Rabbi Yosei prohibits them even for benefit because they pour vinegar on them in order to remove their pits.
The <i>drorin</i> and the <i>qravot</i> of idolators with Jewish wine in them are prohibited for drinking but permitted for benefit. Shimon ben Godya testified before the son of Rabban Gamliel in the name of Rabban Gamliel the elder that it is permitted for drinking but he did not agree with him. The leather of idolators, Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Qafosai, one may not make a mat for cattle. The scraped leather or the new [leather] of idolators is permitted, but the tarred [leather] is prohibited. If idolators pitched [them] and a Jew oversaw him, one may put wine into it without concern. Wine vessels belonging to idolators: new ones are permitted but old ones are prohibited. Those in which idolator collected water is permitted, a Jew can put water into it. If an idolator collected wine in it, a Jew fills it with water for three days, the full time, and then he can put wine in it without worry. And one in which an idolator collected Jewish wine or brine or pickle, it is permitted for a Jew thereafter to fill it with wine.
They purchase from idolators grains, beans, dry figs, garlic, and onions under any circumstances and they do not worry about impurity. The sumac berry, in every case is clean. Rice in every case is clean. A hunter is believed to say, “that bird is unclean, ”and “that bird is clean.” An am ha-aretz is believed to say, “these preserved vegetables are unclean and these pickled vegetables are clean and I did not sprinkle on them a liquid [that might impart uncleanness]. But he isn’t believed to say, “these fish I trapped in a state of purity and I did not shake over them the net. Their caper-berries, and mutalya and hot water are permitted. Their roasted egg is prohibited. Rabbi Yehuda and his court permitted the oil of idolators by a vote. Bread that an idolator baked when no Jew supervised him, this is prohibited. Bread that a Jew baked, even though an idolator kneaded it and cheese that a Jew curdled even though an idolator worked it, this is permitted. A Jew may sit at the edge of his animal pen and an idolator may milk [the cows] and bring him the milk and he should not be concerned.
What is tarbit that has not been minced? Any in which the spinal column and the head are recognizable. What is brine with fish? All that are one or two kilbit are floating in it. A piece of meat on which there is a sign, whether on the whole of it or on part of it, even on only one of a hundred, this is permitted. A ma’aseh: They brought jugs of pieces of meat from a single species in Acco, and they only found a mark on one of them, and the matter came before the Sages and they permitted all of them. Brines of a professional, these are permitted. Rabbi Shimon ben Gamliel says, even a heleq-brine of a professional is permitted. Boiled wine and bathing wine are prohibited because they began as wine. Bathing wine as it was made is permitted. Apple wine from a store-room or from storage or a boat, these are permitted. If it was sold at the counter, it is permitted. Apple wine from the marketplace is prohibited because they [might have] adulterated it. Locusts and meat from the storeroom, from storage, or from a boat, these are permitted. The one who buys from the shopkeeper’s basket before the shop, this is prohibited because they sprinkle them with wine in order to improve their appearance. Black salqonit salt is permitted, but the white is prohibited according to Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehuda says, the black is prohibited, but the white is permitted. Rabbi Yehuda ben Gamliel says in the name of Rabbi Hanina ben Gamliel, both of them are prohibited.
One does not buy cheese of beit hiniaqi except from an expert. But seethed [cheese] may be bought in any case. One does not buy drops of asafoetida except from an expert. But a leaf is purchased from any source. One does not buy wine from Surya except from an expert or brine except from an expert or pieces of meat without a sign except from an expert or salqoniti salt except from an expert or cheese of beit hiniaqi except from an expert or drops of asafoetida except from an expert. But any of these can be eaten in the home of someone who is not an expert without worry.

Chapter 6

And the Sages say, the only one that is prohibited is the one that has in its hand a staff, a bird, or a globe, sword, crown, ring, image, or snake. And those things on objects of honor like silk, noserings, necklaces, or rings, these are prohibited. On common [items] like kettles of hot water, mats, pots, bowls, signs, or coins, these are permitted. If one found a ring and on it was the image of the sun or the image of the moon or the image of a dragon, he brings it to the salt sea. Rabbi Yehuda says, even the likeness of [a nursing woman, Isis] or Serapis. A ring that has an idol  upon it, if it projects out, it is prohibited for benefit. If it does not project out, it is permitted. In either case it is prohibited to make a seal with it. If it does not have an idol on it, it is permitted for benefit and to make a seal with it. A ring that has a seal on it can be used to make a seal with it. Rabbi Yehuda says, if it was stamped down [into the ring], it is prohibited to seal with it because it will make a projected [image when used as a stamp in wax], but it is permitted to put it on one’s hand. The one whose seal projects is permitted to seal with it and prohibited to put it on one’s hand. A ring that has on it a face is permitted to seal with it. Rabbi Hanina ben Gamliel says, those of [my] father’s house would [use a] seal with faces. Rabbi Elazar bar Tzadoq says, all figures were in Jerusalem aside from the image of a man. The one made in the shape of a dragon is prohibited and on which a dragon is hanging—if he takes it and throws it away the rest is permitted. Which is the sort that has the image of a dragon on it that is prohibited? Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says, all whose fringes [emerge] from its neck but if it is smooth, it is permitted.
The one who purchases scrap metal from an idolator and finds in it idols, he takes it and throws it away and the rest is permitted. An idol until it has come into [the Jew’s] domain, he asks an idolator to nullify it, as an idolator can nullify idols whether his own or belonging to others, whether worshipped or not worshipped, whether unwitting or purposeful, whether under duress or willingly. A Jew who makes an idol, it is prohibited even though it has not been worshipped. Therefore he has no power to nullify it. An idolator who made an idol, it is permitted until it has been worshipped. Therefore he has the power to nullify. Rabbi says in the name of Rabbi Yaaqov, if a Jew made it from the beginning, he cannot nullify it. An idolator who sold an idol for [people] to worship it, it is prohibited, but if not for them to worship it, it is permitted. One may lend on it. If debris fell on it or a river swept it away or brigands took it or its owner left it behind, like in the war of Yehoshua, if the owners are going to return for it, it is prohibited. If not, it is permitted. The pedestals which the idolators set up during the persecution, even if the persecution has passed, these are prohibited. And can any idol that an idolator nullified be prohibited? Scripture says, “You shall consign the images of their gods to burn in the fire” (Deut 7:25)—what he treats as if it were a god is prohibited but what he treats as it if were not a god is permitted. And of a Jew, whether he treats it like a god or whether he doesn’t, it is prohibited. How does one nullify it? Rabbi Meir says, unless one strikes it with a hammer and damages it. Rabbi Shimon says, even if he saw it, struck it and it fell, it is nullified. And the Sages say, an idolator nullifies his idol and that of a Jew, but a Jew cannot nullify the idol of an idolator. Rabbi Shimon ben Menasiya says, an idol of a Jew is never nullified. A pedestal, the majority of which was damaged, it is permitted. An altar, the majority of which was damaged, is prohibited until one tears it down.
That which he sets aside is prohibited and that of his fellow is permitted. Before it is sanctified, it is prohibited. After it is sanctified, it is permitted. At what point is it called “set aside”? Once he has done something to it. What is that which has been worshipped? Anything that people worship, whether unwittingly or purposefully. What is that which is set aside? It was set aside for idolatry. But if someone says, this bull is for idolatry, he says nothing because there is no such thing as consecration when it comes to idolatry. 

Chapter 7

The cow that is fattened on idolatrous lentils or went down into a garden fertilized with idolatrous manure, it should be left fallow. A garden that one plowed with pieces of an asherah, it must be left fallow. Q’la ilan wool which has been stamped with pieces of an asherah should be burnt. Others say, it is subject to a legal stringency until it returns to its original appearance. Fifes that belong to idolatry, it is prohibited to lament with them. If he rented them for money from the state, even though they were made for the use of idolatry, it is permitted to lament with them. Shops belonging to idolatry, it is permitted to rent from them. Idolatrous charity collectors, it is forbidden to give to them. If they were hired for money, even if they were used for the benefit of idolatry, it is permitted to give to them. One who designates his house for idolatry, the whole of it imparts impurity upon entry, and the one who passes within it is like one who passes within a house of idolatry. If a public thoroughfare cut through it, it confers impurity on that path alone.
The one who adjoins his house to a house of idolatry, the whole of it confers impurity upon entry. If they [built a house of idolatry] adjoining his [house], the whole of it does not confer impurity upon entry. That wall [near the idol] is deemed to be divided half and half [between the two owners]. [If the house] fell down, it is prohibited to rebuild it. If one rebuilt it, he has made it like it was in the beginning. If [someone else] rebuilt it for him, the whole of it does not confer impurity upon entry, but only the wall, which is divided half and half. The one who sells his house to idolatry, its money is prohibited and he should bring them to the salt sea. But an idolator who forced someone and took his house and set it up for idolatry, its money is permitted and one may write [a document to that effect] and deposit it in the archives. The one who enters his head and most of his body into a house of idolatry, he is impure. An earthenware vessel that has been entered into a house of idolatry is unclean. Benches and backed chairs most of which are entered into a house of idolatry, they are unclean.
All places that are referred to positively as a place of idolatry should be called by a negative epithet. If it is called “the Spring of the Cup,” one should call it, “the Spring of the Thorn.” “The place of fortune,” call it “the place of undress.” One who scatters his money before an idol, he shouldn’t bend down in front of it to gather [the money] because it will appear that he is bowing to an idol. But if he turns his back to it and from that positive it does not appear [that he is bowing to it], it is permitted. A spring of water that comes out from a house of idolatry, he should not bend over to drink from it because it appears that he is bowing to an idol. But if he turns his back to it and drinks and is in a place where it does not appear [that he is bowing to the idol], it is permitted. Human faces that spray water in cities, one may not put his mouth on the mouth of the face because it looks like he is kissing an idol, but he can collect [water] in his hands and drink. In addition to that, they say he should not put his mouth on the pipe and drink because of danger to his life. Philosophers asked the elders in Rome, if it is not [God’s] will [that people should engage in] idolatry, why do does he not eliminate it? They said to them, if they were worshipping [only] objects upon which the world does not depend, he would eliminate it. But they worship the sun and the moon and the stars and the constellations. Should He destroy the world on account of fools? Rather he leaves the world to follow its course and the fools who sinned will in the future be given to judgment. The one who steals seeds for planting, [the seeds’] end should not be to sprout. The one who had sex with another man’s wife, his end should not be to beget a child. But [God] leaves the world to follow its course and the fools who sinned will come to be subject to justice.
Idolators who worship the mountains and the hills, even though [the mountains and hills] are permitted, their worshippers should be stoned. A person who is worshipped, even though he is permitted [to live], his worshippers are stoned. Which is the asherah? All which idolators worship and guard them and do not taste of their fruits. Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says, There are three asherahs in Eretz Yisrael: a carob in Kfar Patam, and [a carob] in Kfar Pigshah, [and] a sycamore in Rani and in Karmel. They plant vegetables under an asherah in the rainy season but not in the dry season. Lettuce, neither in the dry nor in the wet season. Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says, not even seeds or vegetables in the rainy season, because the leaves fall and become manure [for the plants].
The one who enters under [the asherah] is like one who entered a house of idolatry. If a public thoroughfare cuts through it, it is permitted. A Jew who trims an asherah: if for [the tree’s] benefit, it is prohibited; if for [the Jew’s] benefit, it is permitted; if for the benefit of both, it is prohibited. A person shouldn’t go up to the top of a pedestal even to disfigure it or to soil it because, as it says, “Let nothing that has been doomed stick to your hand” (Deut 13:18). A person should not say to his fellow, “Wait for me next to so-and-so’s idol” or “I will wait for you next to so-and-so’s idol,” as it says, “Make no mention of the names of other gods[, they shall not be heard on your lips” (Ex 23:13).
An idol and everything that is on it is prohibited. If one found on it wine or oil or fine flour or anything of the like that is offered on the altar, it is prohibited. Utensils used for them or their bodies are prohibited. If not used for their body, they are permitted. Utensils used on them or their bodies if idolatrous priests stole them and sold them, they are permitted. One scripture says, “You shall not covet the silver and gold on them” (Deut 7:25). How can one uphold both verses? Whether its body is clothed in them or not, they are prohibited. “With them”—the ones with which the body [of the idol] is clothed are forbidden, the ones with which the body is not clothed are permitted. Even utensils with which the body is clothed which idolatrous priests solve and sold, they are permitted. A marqolis and everything on it is prohibited. If one found on it wine or oil or fine flour or anything of the like that is offered on the altar, it is prohibited. Money or utensils, these are permitted. Others say, money and utensils that are on the top stone are forbidden. Stones that are dropped from the marqolis, if they seem to be associated with it, they are forbidden, and if not, they are permitted. Rabbi Yishmael says, within three tofasot of it are forbidden but outside are permitted. A Jew who brought stones from a marqolis, these are prohibited because they have been forbidden by the idol. An idolator that brings stones from a marqolis, these are permitted because they are like an idol whose worshippers have abandoned it. A marqolis which was pulled up from its place is permitted for benefit. A person who throws a stone on a marqolis, what does it say of him? “Like a pebble in a sling, so is paying honor to a dullard” (Prov 26:8). Honor [given] by way of throwing a stone to a marqolis but the honor it does not recognize, so too all who give honor to an evil person  who does not know the honor given it. Another thing: Like the one who puts a stone, just as one who tosses a stone to a marqolis practices idolatry thus all who honor a wicked person are like those who practice idolatry. Another thing: Like the one who puts a stone, the one who throws a stone to a marqolis becomes liable for his life, thus the one who gives over to his impuse becomes liable for his life. Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says, the one who teaches to a wicked student, what does it say? “Like one who puts a stone,” as the one who throws a stone to a marqolis practices idolatry, thus the one who teaches to a wicked student is like one who practices idolatry. 

Chapter 8

At first they said, do not cut grapes with an idolator. And do not tread grapes with a Jew who makes [the wine] in a state of ritual impurity. But one may tread grapes with an idolator. They went back and said that one may not tread grapes with an idolator and may not cut grapes with a Jew who makes [his wine] in a state of ritual impurity. But one may cut grapes with an idolator. And they may carry new jugs with him, but not old ones, according to Rabbi Meir, but the Sages say, it is the same for new and old, they accompany him until he until he disappears from sight. Once he disappears from sight, he may make it into libation wine [and the Jew is not liable for that fact]. At first they said that one may not help the professional baker who makes [bread] in a state of ritual impurity and one may not carry twisted loaves with him to the oven. They went back and said, one may help the professional baker who makes [bread] in a state of ritual impurity and one may carry twisted loaves with him to the oven. And in Surya, one may help the professional baker who makes [bread] in a state of ritual impurity and carry with him twisted loaves to the oven.
A Jew who works with an idolator at the wine-press, this one brings up the bread to the apple and brings down the bread from the apple. Even though the wine flows on his hands, it is permitted, because it isn’t usual for them to make a libation thus. The idolator who works with a Jew in the wine-press, this one brings the bread up to the apple and brings down the bread from the apple, even though wine flowers over his hands, and it is permitted, because making libations thus is not the usual. The one who weighs grapes on a scale, even though the wine flows over his hands, it is permitted, because making a libation thus is not usual. The one who presses wine into a jug, even though the wine flows over his hands, it is permitted, because making libations thus is not usual. The one who falls into the pit and a drop of any size touched him, it is forbidden. If he went down to draw grape-shells and grapestones from the pit, this was a ma’aseh and they came and asked the Sages. And they said, one may sell it all to an idolator. An idolator that was bringing up grapes in baskets and barrels at the wine-press, even though he beat them in the wine-press and the wine has squirted onto the grapes, it is permitted, because it isn’t their way to make a libation thus. The one who bought a vessel of grapes from an idolator and found under them holes, it is permitted. [If he found] on the side of it holes, it is prohibited. A person who stretched his hand into the jug as if it were an oil [jug] and found that it was wine, there was a case like this and they came and asked the Sages, and they said, it may all be sold to idolators. An inspector who tasted from a cup and returned it to the jug, it is prohibited or bored [into the jug] and sucked [with a siphon] and even one drop fell back [into the wine] from it, it is forbidden, because the drop of wine is prohibited and it prohibits any amount.      
A Jew who puts his wine into the domain of an idolator, if there is a lock or a seal on it, it is permitted, and if not, it is forbidden. If one borrowed from an idolator [against the wine], even though it has a lock or a seal, it is prohibited unless one makes sure it is guarded. A Jew who made wine for an idolator in a state of ritual purity and gave it to him in his domain, even if it has a lock or a seal on it, it is forbidden. If the storehouse was open to the public, it is permitted. In a city where everyone is an idolator, it is prohibited unless he makes sure it is guarded. The one who makes wine for an idolator in a state of ritual purity and gives it to him in his domain and this one wrote him, “I have received from you money,” it is permitted. But if he does not want the Jew to leave it until he paid its price, this was a ma’aseh in Beit Shean and they said, this is just prudence. A Jew who prepared wine for an idolator in a state of ritual purity and gave it into the domain of the idolator, one case like this arose and they asked Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar and he said, the domain of an idolator is [subject to] one [law]. A Jew who prepared wine for an idolator in a state of ritual purity and put it in two courtyards or two cities, even though he comes out and enters from this courtyard to this courtyard or from this city to this city, it is permitted, because it is under the presumption of being guarded. If it was presumed that he was in a single place, it is prohibited. A market to which a Jew and an idolator bring wine, even if the jugs are open and the idolator is sitting and watching them, it is permitted, because they are under the presumption of being guarded.
The one who hires a worker to work half the day with prohibited [wine] and half the day with permitted [wine] and he put all of it into a single town, all of it is prohibited. If these [are kept] by themselves and these are kept by themselves, the first ones are forbidden but the second ones are permitted. The one who hires a worker to work with him around the time of evening, and he said to him, “Bring for me this bottle to such-and-such a place,” even though the Jew is not permitted to do so, his wage is permitted. The one who hires an ass to ride upon and says to him, “Carry for me this bottle upon [the ass],” even though a Jew is not permitted to do so, his wage is permitted. If a person said to his fellow and his worker, “Go and eat with this dinar” [or] “Go and drink with this dinar,” he does not worry on account of tithes, shevi’it, or liabation wine. But if he aid, “Go and eat a loaf and I will give you its worth,” [or] “Go and drink a revi’it and I will give you its worth,” he does need to be careful on account of tithes and shevi’it and liabation wine. The one who gives wool to an idolatrous dyer to dye it for him, he does not worry lest he dyes it in vinegar of libation wine. If he came to the house of reckoning, it is prohibited.
The one who put his wine in an inn and entered the city, even if he tarried there for a long time, it is permitted. If he made them aware or secured the door of the inn, it is prohibited. The one who put his wine in a boat and entered the city, even if he tarried for a long time, it is permitted. If he made them aware or the boat went out to sea, it is prohibited. Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says, if there was there a full bottle and it was tied to the leg of the bed and the idolator did not know of it, it is permitted. Rabbi Yehuda said to him, won’t its seal be recognizable whether above or below? Rather, [if he was gone for time] sufficient to uncork it, recork it, and dry [the new seal]. The one who sends a jug of wine with his daughter, or brine or vinegar or muries or oil or honey in the and of an idolator, if he knows the seal and put it there, is permitted. If not, it is prohibited. His wine in the house of an idolator that is sealed is forbidden because of [the laws pertaining to] liabation wine. But brine, muries, and honey, if he saw him use them as a libation, they are prohibited, and if not, they are permitted. A Jew who is suspected they drink from his cellar but they do not drink from his bottle. If he was suspected of drinking, even the cellar is prohibited. 
An idolator who was liable [to pay] money to a Jew, even if he sold libation wine and brought him [the money] or an idol and brought him [the money] it is permitted. But if he said to him, Wait until I sell libation wine and I will bring you [the proceeds], or, [Wait until I sell] an idol and I will bring you [the proceeds], it is forbidden. The one who sells his wine to an idolator and agreed with him [on a price], even though he is going to wipe out the siphon and the measures, it is permitted. And a storekeeper, either this way or that way, is prohibited because one after the other there is an obligation on him. The idolator who sends a bottle to the home of a Jew and part of it has wine in it, he fills the bottle and takes it seals it and takes from it the value of the whole of it and does not worry.

Chapter 9

The one who pours from one vessel to another, [if he puts] the spout against the mouth of the jar or below, it is prohibited. The wine-press, the ladle, and the funnel of idolators, Rabbi permits and the Sages prohibit. And Rabbi agrees that jars are prohibited. And why are these prohibited and these are permitted? These were made to [have something] put into them and these were not. Ones made of wood or stone, one must dry them. If they were tarred, he must scrape them.  
The one who purchases utensils from an idolator: things that have not been used, he immerses them and they are ritually pure. Things that have been used, like cups or flasks, he rinses them in cold [water]. Like pitchers, kettles, pans, or [another kind of] kettles, he rinses them in boiling [water]. Like knives, spits, or grills, he heats them to white-hot and they are ritually pure. And all that have been used, if he had scalded [in boiling water] or immersed or heated [to white-hot], they are permitted. 
The one whose wine-presses and olive-presses were unclean and he wanted to make them clean, the boards and the posts [supporting the beams] and the troughs that he dries are clean. The work of wicker and of hemp he must dry. Shavings and reed-grass, he must let them be. And how long should they be left? Twelve months. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says, from one wine pressing to the next or from one olive pressing to the next. Rabbi Yosei says, the one who wants to clean them should mix them immediately with hot water or scald them in olive water. Rabbi Shimon ben Gamliel says in the name of Rabbi Yosei, he puts them in a river whose water flow the whole spring or a spout from which water pours. Just as he dries them for cleanness, thus does he dry [on account of] libation wine. 
The sons of Noach were given seven commandments: courts, idolatry, [blasphemy,] forbidden sexual relations, bloodshed, theft, and [consuming] the limb of a living animal. Justice, how so? Just as Jews are commanded to set up courts in their cities, so too are the sons of Noach commanded to set up courts in their cities. Idolatry and blasphemy, how so? The sons of Noach are executed only with the sword. Forbidden sexual relations, how so? Any prohibited sexual relation that a Jewish court would inflict capital punishment, the sons of Noach are forbidden [from doing so]. And every prohibited sexual relation that a Jewish court would prohibit, the sons of Noach are put to death on their account according to Rabbi Meir. But the Sages say, there are many forbidden sexual relations on account of which a court would not inflict capital punishment and about which the sons of Noach are not warned. For engaging in a forbidden sexual relationship, a Jew is judged according to the Jewish law and idolators are judged by the law of idolators. I have only the prohibition on a young woman alone. Bloodshed, how so? An idolator [who kills] an idolator or an idolator who kills a Jew are liable. A Jew [who kills] an idolator is exempt. Theft, how so? One who stole or robbed or [took] a female war captive and so on, an idolator [who did so to] an idolator or an idolator [who did so] to a Jew, it is prohibited. A Jew [who did so] to an idolator, it is permitted. [Eating] from the limb of a living animal, how so? A limb loosely connected to an animal and it is not brought up [enough] for healing is prohibited for a son of Noach and one needn’t even mention a Jew. And if it is brought up enough for healing, it is permitted to a Jew, and one needn’t even mention a son of Noach. If one took a bird which is not an olive’s-bulk and ate it, Rabbi would exempt him and Rabbi Elazar son of Rabbi Shimon would obligate him. And if the limb of it makes someone liable, shouldn’t the whole of it make someone liable? If one strangled it and ate it, he is exempt. Rabbi Hananya ben Gamliel said, on account of blood from a living animal. Rabbi Hidqa says, on account of castration. Rabbi Shimon says, on account of sorcery. Rabbi Yosei says, all that is said in the parsha of the sons of Noach they are warned, as it says, “Let no one be found among you who consigns a son or daughter to the fire . . . one who casts spells . . . for anyone who does so is abhorrent to God” (Deut 18:10-12). Is it possible that scripture has subjected [one to punishment] without forewarning? Rather it warns and after that subjects [one to punishment]. This teaches that it warns first and after that subjects [one to punishment]. Rabbi Elazar says, all kilayim are permitted to the sons of Noach to sow or to wear kilayim. It is prohibited to breed [mixed animals] or graft trees.