Avot D'Rabbi Natan
אבות דרבי נתן
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Avot_D'Rabbi_Natan
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Avot D'Rabbi Natan



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6


"Become dirty in the dust of their feet". How so? At the time when a scholar enters the city, you shall not say, "I do not need him". Rather, go to his place and do not sit with him, not on the bed nor on a chair, and not on a bench. Rather, sit before him upon the ground. And receive with awe, fear, shaking and dread everything which comes from his mouth, in the same way that our ancestors received from Sinai with awe, fear, shaking, and dread. Another explanation, "become dirty in the dust of their feet", this is Rabbi Eliezer, "and drink their word thirstily", this is Rabbi Akiva. What were the beginnings of Rabbi Akiva? They said that he was 40 years old and still had not study anything. One time, he was standing next to the well and asked, "Who engraved this stone?" They told him, "Is it not the water which is constant (in falling) upon it every day?" They said (to him), "Akiva, do you not read, 'the waters wear the stones'?" Immediately Rabbi Akiva applied the logic of an a-fortiori argument to himself. "Just as the soft engraves the hard, words of Torah which are hard like iron, how much more-so shall they engrave my heart which is flesh and blood!" Immediately he returned to learn Torah. He and his son went and sat in the place where children are taught. He said to him, "My master, teach me Torah!" Rabbi Akiva grabbed a top of the board and his son (grabbed) a top of the board, and he wrote for him alef, bet, and learned it. (Alef, tav and he learned it, the Torah of Kohanim and he learned it). He was learning and continuing until he learned all of the Torah. He went and sat before Rabbi Eliezer and before Rabbi Yehoshua and said to them, "My masters, open for me a reasoning of Mishnah."

Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12

