Be'er Mayim Chaim
באר מים חיים
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Be'er_Mayim_Chaim
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Be'er Mayim Chaim

Genesis



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Paragraph 1


















And this is as the Scripture states <b>"beyond the river dwelt your ancestors from olden times; Terach, the father of Avraham" (Yehoshua 24:2). That is to say, Terach the father of Avraham, his dwelling and his level was in the attribute of "beyond the river", which is, the second side of the river, to perform evil deeds [<i>chasadim hara'im</i>] in the world. "But I took your father Avraham from beyond the river" (Yehoshua 24:3) - from that level itself of "beyond the river" I took Avraham, to the other, opposite side: to do and to increase good deeds in the world [<i>chasadim tovim</i>]. And this is a great and wondrous level, the attribute of one who is forgiving [lit. "passes over their traits"], who the Sages of blessed memory praised (Ta'anit 25b:5). Since They took evil attributes and reversed their attributes to be made into good attributes, regarding this the Scripture says (Yirmiyahu 15:19) "If you produce what is noble out of the worthless, you shall be like My mouth". And our Sages of blessed memory said (Bava Metzia 85a) that even if the Holy Blessed One decrees a decree, They will nullify it for the sake of such a one. And behold, our sages of blessed memory said, blood is spoiled up and made into milk (Niddah 9a), as it is said "Who will make pure from impure?" (Iyov 14:4). And they explained it, that the impure blood alone, it itself is spoiled and made into pure milk. Regarding this it says "Who will make pure from impure?" -- like Avraham from Terach, from the impurity of Terach, Terach himself who was accustomed to do evil deeds in the world and to make known matters of idolatry, how to serve every different idol: from this impurity itself Avraham reversed and made it pure, and taught the people the ways of God and converted the converts, as it is said!</b>

Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Paragraph 1



Paragraph 2



Paragraph 3



Paragraph 4



Paragraph 5



Paragraph 6



Paragraph 7



Paragraph 8



Paragraph 9



Paragraph 10



Paragraph 11



Paragraph 12



Paragraph 13



Paragraph 14



Paragraph 15



Paragraph 16

Lot could see that the angels didn't want to do anything until he left the city.  He thought that since the decree of destruction did not fall upon him, he would be able to withhold the destruction from entering the city (of Sodom) by not leaving it. 
He, therefore, delayed a bit because he thought that the people of Sodom would repent and not be destroyed.
The angels knew that it was the opposite- the punishment wouldn't be delayed because of Lot, and that he would also be consumed by the sins of the city held him and took him out.  The reason for his salvation is because G-d took pity on him - he wasn't able to prevent the destruction, and it was enough for Lot to save himself once he left the city.

Exodus



Leviticus



Numbers



Deuteronomy

