Shulchan Arukh, Introduction
שולחן ערוך, הקדמה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Shulchan Arukh, Introduction

... These are the words of young Yosef Karo.
... Son of Rabbi Ephraim son of Rabbi Yosef Karo.
... I will thank God very much in my mouth and in the midst of our many praises and our beloved songs:
What shall I do before the Lord, I will enjoin upon the Most High God, who appeared from his holy abode in the heavens with the abundance of his mercy and grace, and influenced with his goodness the lowliness of people like me, to compose a book that gives Amri Shafer, the great treatise I composed on the four Torim, which I read in Beit Yosef, in which I included all the laws found in all  The arbitrators, both new and old, with their places of residence in their courts and castles, in the Babylonian Talmud and the Jerusalem Talmud and the Tosefta, in the Sefra and Sipari, in the Michilta and the words of the commentators and the arbitrators and those who have answers, new and old.  And all judgments will be explained there, and judgments will be well-known, a bee will speak on its wheels, and a palace will sit on its judgment, hanging on it all the signs of the heroes, the men of God who have ever existed.
I saw in my heart, that it is good to gather the roses of his words in a short way and a clean and comprehensive language, beautiful and pleasant, so that the Torah of God may be innocent that lives in the mouth of every man of Israel.  Because when a scholar is asked a matter of Halacha, he will not stutter in it, but will say to the scholar, My sister, you, just as it is clear to him that his sister is forbidden to him, so any law that he asks about Halacha will be clear to him in practice, since he has in his mouth this book that is built into talphiots, a mound where everything is addressed, divided into parts  thirty, to learn a portion of it every day, and it was found that every month he returns to his Talmud, and he said of him, "Blessed is he who comes here with his Talmud in his hand:
What's more, the little students will always learn and memorize their language by heart, and there will be a well-ordered Dinkuta version in their mouths from their childhood in practice, and also because their elders will not deviate from it.   And the learned will be warned like the radiance of the sky, when it leaves them sad and touching their palm, they will amuse their souls by thinking about this book, which is all sweet and precious, a settled law, with no sayings and no words.
And I read there this book that is arranged, because in it the thinker will find all kinds of reasons, arranged in all and preserved, orderly and clear.  And I am assured of supreme grace, because through this book the earth will be filled with the knowledge of God, the small with the great, the student with the understanding, the wise with the deaf and the wise with the secret.  Well, I will retire according to the Lord, may he help me in the word of the honor of his name, to be one of the righteous of the many, and may my beginning and end be orderly in his way, corrected and acceptable and good and beautiful.  And I'm starting to do what I want and God will help me: