Targum Jonathan on Genesis
תרגום יונתן על בראשית
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Targum Jonathan on Genesis



Chapter 1



Chapter 2




















And Adam called names for all the animals, for all the birds of the sky, and for all the beasts of the wild, but for Adam, there was not found until now a support corresponding to him.
And the Lord God cast a deep sleep upon Adam, and he slept. He took one of his ribs, the thirteenth rib from the right side, and closed it over with flesh.
The Lord God built the rib which he had taken from Adam into a woman, and brought her to Adam.

Chapter 3



Chapter 4








And Cain said to Abel his brother, "Come and let us both go outside." When they both went outside, Cain turned and said to Abel, "I see that the world was created in compassion, but it (the world) is not conducted based on the fruits (i.e. offerings) of good servants [of God], and that there is favor exercised in [God's] judgement. For why was your offering accepted and my offering from me was not accepted [by God] with pleasure?" Abel answered Cain and said, "The world was created in compassion, and it is conducted based on the fruits (i.e. offerings) of good servants [of God], and there is no favor exercised in [God's] judgement. And because the fruits of my labor were better than yours, and [that my offering] preceded yours, my offering was accepted [by God] with pleasure." Cain answered and said to Abel, "There is no judgement, and there is no judge, there is no next world, and good rewards will not be given to the righteous, and punishment will not be exacted on the wicked." Abel answered and said to Cain, "There is judgement, and there is a judge, and there is a next world, and good rewards will be given to the righteous, and punishment will be exacted from the wicked." And in dealing with these matters they argued on the face of the field, and Cain arose onto Abel his brother and sank a stone into his forehead and killed him.

Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12


















 And Pharoh called Abram, and said, What is this that thou hast done to me?  Why didst thou not show me that she is thy wife?

Chapter 13



Chapter 14





















And the king of Sedom said to Abram, "Give to me the souls of the men of my people, who you returned, and take the possessions for yourself.

Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19


























And his wife looked after the angel, to know what would be in the end of her father's house, for she was of the daughters of the Sedomaee; and because she sinned by salt by the revealing of the poor, she was manifestly punished; behold, she was made a statue of salt. 

Chapter 20















And to Sarah he said; Behold I have given you a thousand sela'im of silver to your brother. Behold they are to you a desire of eyes in exchange that I have covered you from your husband one night and have seen you. Because if I were to give you all that is to me it would not be enough. And the matter was proven, and Avraham knew that Avimelech did not come close to Sarah, his wife. 

Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29



Chapter 30



Chapter 31



Chapter 32



Chapter 33



Chapter 34

and Dina daughter of Leah and who Jacob had given birth to, went out to see the customs of the daughters of the land. 

Chapter 35



Chapter 36



Chapter 37



Chapter 38



Chapter 39



Chapter 40



Chapter 41











































and made him ride in the second chariot of Pharoh; and they chanted before him, This is the Father of the king; Great in wisdom, few in years. And he appointed him prince over all the land of Mizraim.