Pri Haaretz
פרי הארץ
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Pri_Haaretz
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Pri Haaretz

Title Page



Bereshit



Noach



Lech Lecha



Vayera



Chayei Sara



Toldot



Vayetzei



Vayeshev



Vayigash



Shemot



Vaera



Bo



Yitro



Mishpatim



Tetzaveh



Ki Tisa



Vayakhel Pekudei



Vayikra



Shabbat Pesach



Tazria



Achrei Mot



Behar



Nasso

1 The statement is asked "He who calculates his ways in this world will be worthy to behold the salvation of the Holy One, blessed be He; as it is said: To him that ordereth his way will I show the salvation of God"
2 This is expounded in the words of Rashi z'l "What has the matter of the Sabbatical year to do with Mount Sinai that Scripture fell compelled to expressly state where it was commanded? Were not all commandments given on Sinai? Etc..."
3 And our Sages of blessed memory said "With ten utterances was the world created, but behold with one utterance wasn't it able to be created?...But to bring goodly reward...Ten generations from Adam...Ten generations from Noah to Abraham...He received the reward of them all."
4 It is a puzzle that the "world is upon ten utterances and could have been on one.." and does God 'deal imperiously with his creations'? Insofar as he was able to create with a single utterance why did he create with ten utterances - in order to interpose punishment in the ten utterances? But in truth the concept of the ten utterances are ten instances of "And he said" as are written in the order of creation, in which each "And he said" was a different specific creation. As is known to us through the concept and knowledge revealed to us. For the concealed things are to God our Lord, but it is explained in the book of the Torah "And he said let there be light", "and there was a firmament", and so all the creation of the heavens and earth and pooled waters and animals and birds, and after them all "and He created man" who encompasses the upper and lower worlds, as Rashi z'l explains.
And our Sages of blessed memory said "the end of an action begins in thought", that all were only created for the sake of Man. And our Sages of blessed memory said "The whole world was not created except for this [Man]". And so the entire world behaves in accordance with Man as its says "And have dominion over the fish of the sea...", And has King David peace be upon him said "You made him have dominion over the works of his hand all which you put under his feet". And as the concept is in the lower worlds, so to it is in the upper worlds which were created with Man over them all. As our Sages of blessed memory said "There is not a blade of grass below which does not have an Angel above...which tells it to grow", And once Man existed to rule over everything below, also he rules over the angels and their superiors and the upper worlds which were created for him, for he is King over all. 'With this the world(s) ascend and with this they descend'. And via the spirit of Man which ascends ever high in order to cling to Him who is blessed or the spirit of Man and Animal which descends very low God forbid, and all the worlds and creations follow him inasmuch as they are all included with him, as is known that the animal soul in Man is the soul of desire, and all the creations accordingly. And if Man pursues his animal soul (desires), he becomes an animal in the form/appearance of man, and in the thing which he spoiled he must rectify, as its explained in relation to the sacrifice of the Sotah - where she acted as an animal, her offering feeds an animal. And this is the conception of all sacrifices/offerings "from an animal...from cattle...from sheep". Apart from the hidden things which are the God our Lord, the idea is to rectify his animal action and return to God as the priests will instruct him when he brings his sacrifice. And through this all the lowest creatures are elevated up high and those which 

Beha'alotcha

The passuk reads " The riffraff in their midst felt a gluttonous craving...they cried for their families"
Rashi comments z'l "on account of the family affairs..." And the notion that [Moshe] spoke strongly "Why have You dealt ill with Your servant... If You would deal thus with me, kill me rather, I beg You, and let me see no more of my wretchedness!”
This idea is in accordance with the saying of the Sages z'l in Ethics of our Fathers, "Each day a heavenly voice emerges from mount Horeb and declares..." For it is known that there are six hundred thousand souls in Israel, accordingly the same [number of] letters in the Torah; as is known the the Torah, The Holy One, and Israel are all one, and Israel is the body of/for the Torah, and it is known that through the Torah The Holy One created the world which is letters. And there can be nothing in the world without the letters which bring life to it for they are the speech of The Holy One and if the letters disappeared and weren't perceptible, the speaker prior to his speaking what can be said of his speech(?) - that the letters are in potential and not perceptible - it is a general principle is that the life force of each thing are the letters within it. And if a man sins God Forbid, the letters which are the life-force enter Evil and give power to Evil, and also it doesn't appear in the eyes of the flesh that the truth is known. And thus he gives a confession of [these] things in saying 'I sinned' with bitterness of heart on account of his Awe of God combined with Love of God. And through this the letters which were providing life-force to Evil leave and the Evil is left without the life-force and is consequently nullified. 
And so a person [must] remember [this] and take care during his learning the Torah how he speaks the letters of the Torah, for with them was the world created, and by himself attach the letters to their root letters in the Torah, which was given like this to the world through 'thunder and lightening' in order that 'the fear of God should be upon you and you will be without sin', as explained. In any case, if 'awe' and 'fear' befall a person in 'thunder and lightening', its seems apparent that he would not sing, God forbid. For how could there be the possibility of sin with all that. And this is the idea of the 'heavenly voice which goes forth', they are the letter of the Torah inside every person who recalls and declares them daily. And he who doesn't not hear the heavenly voice [and for whom] it is as if he did not declare, 'woe unto him...for insulting the Torah' which is inside of him. And this is the meaning of 'for anyone who does not involve himself in the Torah' meaning - who is not inscribed in the Torah, "he is called "rebuked"'; for this is the idea of rebuke for a person which changes his 'face to redness'
Our Rabbis of holy memory said that all the souls of Israel until Moshiach stood at Sinai and received the Torah, which are the letters of their roots whose 'remembrancers take no rest'. IT is known that Moshe is the Knowledge of all of Israel who are the six hundred thousand souls. And the Manna was on account of Moshe's merit in order to enliven Israel with bread from Heaven which since it was spiritually flavored, any desired taste, which is the life-force itself without any rain because Moshe was separated from his wife which is the aspect of physicality, so thus Israel was provided sustenance - and this is 'the Torah wasn't given except to those who ate Manna'

Sh'lach



Korach



Balak



Pinchas



Matot Masei



Devarim



Vaetchanan



Shabbat Nahamu



Eikev



Re'eh



Shoftim



Ki Teitzei



Ki Tavo



Letters

