Bartenura on Mishnah Oktzin
ברטנורא על משנה עוקצים
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Bartenura_on_Mishnah_Oktzin
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Bartenura on Mishnah, trans. by Rabbi Robert Alpert, 2022
-sefaria.org

Bartenura on Mishnah Oktzin



Chapter 1



Mishnah 1

כל שהוא יד (whatever -part of the fruit- serves as a handle -of the stem) – the wood that is attached to the fruit, and a person holds it at the time that he eats the fruit, as, for example, the peduncle/point of the apples, grapes and pears, are called ידות/handles. And similarly, a bone that has at its head/top meat/flesh, and a person holds the bone in order to eat the meat at its head/top, the bone is a handle to the meat/flesh.
ולא שומר (and not as a protector – as the shell of a nut) – to exclude the portion of the peduncle/point that touches the fruit and is attached to the globule/the stone or kernel of a stone fruit, that this part is a protector to the fruit (see also Tractate Taharot, Chapter 10, Mishnah 5 – describing the "חותם"/the oblate side of a berry to which the stalk is attached).
מיטמא – the handle is defiled, and even though it is not appropriate for consumption, if the defilement touched the food, the handle is considered as a connector/junction to the the food, and it is as if it is one body.
ומטמא – if the defilement touched the handle, the food is defiled, even though the defilement did not touch the food. And our Rabbis learned this from the Scripture, as it is written (Leviticus 11:37-38): “If such a carcass falls upon seed grain that is to be sewn, [it is pure; but if water is put on the seed and any part of the carcass falls upon it,] it shall be impure for you,” for everything that is in your needs, meaning to say, every thing that requires food is susceptible to receive ritual defilement like it, and it is impure and defiles with it.
ולא מצטרף – if the food was less than the bulk of an egg, for there is no defilement of food with less than an egg’s bulk, for this handle of the food does not combine with it to complete the requisite measurement.
שומר אע"פ שאינו יד – as, for example, the shell of a fruit that protects it that it not be suffer loss/become damaged.
מיטמא ומטמא ומצטרף – as it is written (Leviticus 11:37): “upon seed grain that is to be sown,” and what is “that is to be sown” – in the manner that people bring them out for sowing, wheat in their shells, and barley in their shells, that is with their protectors. For what purpose is the Biblical verse? If it is defiled and defiles, now the handle of the fruit is defiled and defiles as we derive from [the word]: "לכם"/for you – for all that are your needs, a protector is necessary, but the Biblical verse does not come other than to join with it, for a handle does not combine with it, while a protector combines with it.
וכל שאינו יד ולא שומר – like the hair that is on the fruit.
לא מיטמא ולא מטמא – and there is no need to say that it doesn’t combine/join.

Mishnah 2

והקפלוטות (leeks with a head, torret) – leeks, a חציר /leek (Numbers 11:5) in the language of Scripture, KORAHT in Arabic, and the foreign language PORUSH.
והפטמא שלהן (and their protuberance on the blossom-end of fruits – having the appearance of a pestle seated in a mortar – the upper portion of the fruit/top-piece) – like a kind of top-piece of a pomegranate that is at their top. And it is a protector and it combines.
והעמוד שהוא מכוון כנגד האוכל (the scape/central stalk as far as it is surrounded by the edible part, the scape within the bulb) – which is the heart that is in the onion, that the seed is born at its end.
שרשי החזרים – the root of lettuce, which is חסא in the language of the Gemara and also in Arabic, and LETUGA in the foreign language.
והנפוס (a kind of radish, resembling the carrot as to foliage, and the radish as to taste, or a turnip) – It is a kind of radish, but its leaves are similar to the leaves of the turnip.
והסיב שלו (and the fibrous root of the radish) – Maimonides explained that on the side of the top of the radish are born thin sinews like threads, and the sellers sever/cut them by hand at the time that they sell them, and what remains of them are called סיב/fibrous roots of the radish.
והמיתנא (and the mint) – such is its name in the foreign tongue MUNTA, and NANA in Arabic.
והפיגום (rue) – RUDA in the foreign tongue, and in Arabicv SARAV.
שעקרן (which were uprooted)- in order to plant them in another place.
והשדרה של שבולת (and the spine of an ear of corn) – the middle thread, that the threads are attached to it.
והלבוש שלה (the husk of the wheat grain) – and the skin/membrane that is upon the seed of the wheat, and all of these are protections for the fruit.
הסיג של רצפות (the cobweb-like covering of fruits) – dust that is attached on the heads of vegetables and joined closely on them like the spider’s web. ASnd it also is considered a protection to the fruit. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer.

Mishnah 3

מיטמאים ומטמאים ולא מצטרפים – because they are handles only, and do not protect the food.
ויד הפרכיל (the handle, stem of a vine) – when the grapes are cut with the vine-shoot/rod, they are called פרכיל/handle, stem of a vine. The language of (see Tractate Betzah 30b and Tractate Sukkah 10a) twigs with grapes.
טפח מכאן וטפח מכאן – the vine-shoot that is cut and the clusters [of grapes] are suspended/hang on it, a handbreadth from the vine-shoot from the right of the cluster and a handbreadth from the left, is considered a handle, but not more.
יד האשכול – the peduncle/point of the cluster [of grapes] is suspended/hanging from the vine-shoot/rod, which is the handle of the cluster.
כל שהוא – even if it is very long.
זנב האשכול – the end of the cluster [of grapes]
שריקנו (the skeleton of a cluster of grapes which one has stripped – of its grapes) – that were loosened from it the globules/stone, kernel of a stone fruit, even that it is the handle to the grapes at its head/top, that we hold it by its ail. And even its measurement is whatever the amount, and even very long.
והמכבד של תמרה (the fan-shaped twig of the palm tree/the broom of the palm tree) – the fan-shaped twigs of the palm trees and upon them are palms, the measurement is the length of their handle to include the defilement of four handbreadths, but not more.
ומלעין של שבלים (the outer husk of grains/glume) – upper beard of the ear of corn that extended on its head, like a kind of hair of a beard.

Mishnah 4

אלו לא מטמאין – that they are not considered either a protection or a handle.
קולסי כרוב (cabbage-heads/stalks) – Maimonides explained, the heads of the cabbage where sinews that surround them extend out from them (one needs to say, entangled), and it the manner of cabbage sellers that they cut them and cast them off.
וחליפות התרדים (and the young shoots of beets) – the roots of the beets that remain in the ground when they cut the beats in order to exchange and others will rise up in their place.
את שדרכן ליגזז – the things where the practice is to cut them not to uproot them with their roots, if to uproot them, the roots do not defile, because they are not either a handle nor a protection.
ר' יוסי מטמא בכולן – for all of them are considered a handle for food except for the cabbage-heads/stalks and the turnip, for those sinews that surround (that are entangled) are not considered either a handle or a protector. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 5

שבססן (tread, stamped/packed in the barn/threshing floor) – that he threshed them with the feet of the animal or with sticks/staffs with the grain. And [the word] "ובססן" is the language of (Isaiah 63:18): “Which Your holy people possessed but a little while.”
ורבי יוסי מטמא – because/since they are fit/worthy to be turned over/up with a shovel with the grain. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.
פסיגה של אשכול – a sprig of a vine [when stripped of its grapes] – it is the manner of a vine/cluster of grapes to depart from its stem like small vines/clusters and those vines are called פסיגי ענבים/sprig of grapes.
שריקנה (when stripped/emptied of its grapes) – that were stripped/emptied from the springs that are on it, meaning to say that they removed from it the small sprigs and they remained empty.
שייר בה גרגיר אחד טמאה – all of it became a handle to that berry.
שרביט של תמרה שריקנו (a twig of a date tree that was stripped of its dates) – that he removed the dates and there remains the empty twig.
ור' אלעזר בן עזריה מטמא בשל פול – became they are large beans and they don’t require a twig, for even if they combine with chips/refuse , it is pleasant to pick at them.
ומטמא של קטניות - for it is a protection, because they are thin and one is not able to pick at them when they are combined with chips/refuse, and it is appropriate for it that they would be on the same twig in order to be able to handle them and to carry them on that twig. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eleazar ben Azariah.

Mishnah 6

והכלוסין – a species of pulse/beans.
ומצטרפים – for sometimes they are consumed with the fruit.
ר' יוסי אומר אף עוקץ הדלעת (Rabbi Yossi says: even the peduncle of gourds/pumpkins) – because it is boiled with it. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.
אגסים- in Arabic AGAS and in the foreign tongue PEARS.
קרוסטמלין (Crustumenian pear – red on one side) – small apples that are similar to gall-nuts. They are called MILIN.
פרישין (quince)- in Arabic SPARGIL and in the foreign language KODONAISH.
עוזרדין (sorb-apples, medlars, crab-apples) – in Arabic ZAROD and in the foreign language SORBASH.
טפח - it refers to the peduncle/stalk of the Greek gourd, but not to the others that are taught in the Mishnah as they peduncles are small.
קונדס (artichokes) – bitter vegetables, and we sweeten them through the hot flame. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eleazar b’Rabbi Tzadok.
לא מיטמאין ולא מטמאין – and it is not necessary to state that they don’t combine.

Chapter 2



Mishnah 1

זיתים שכבשן – in wine or vinegar or in other liquids.
בטרפיהן – with their leaves. The leaf of an olive, we translate in Aramaic as טרף זיתא/the leaf of an olive.
טהורים – if a creeping reptile/insect touched/came in contact with the leaves, the olives and the leaves are ritually pure, for the leaves are not considered neither a handle nor a protector.
לפי שלא כבשן- with their leaves.
אלא למראה – in order that they would look nicer when their leaves are with them, for they appear as if they were newly detached/plucked.
כשות של קישות (fine hairs/fibers of cucumbers) - when the cucumbers are small, they have a kind of small hair, and it is called כשות/fine hairs/fibers.
והנץ שלה (its blossom, sprout/flower) – in the mouth of the cucumbers there is like a bit of a long blossom/flower.
טהורים – for they are not considered neither a handle nor a protector.
לפני התגר טמאה (before the vendor/travelling merchant) – for it is satisfactory to the vendor with hair and with a blossom, and because of this the cucumbers appear beautiful and it is as if they were newly plucked/detached, and since he wants their preservation, they are considered as a protector for the fruit. Alternatively, because the cucumbers are soft and everyone’s hand touches them to buy them, they are ruined/spoiled if not because that hair protects them from all dirt and filth.

Mishnah 2

הגלעינים (the stones/kernel of a stone fruit, globule/pits) – like גרעינים/globules, the stone or kernel of a stone fruit.
ולא מצטרפות – [and do not join together] with the food to complete it to be like an egg’s bulk, for it is considered a handle, but not a protector.
גלעינה של רוטב (stones of moist olives) – a stone of a moist olive and it is appropriate to suck.
אע"פ יוצאה (even though it is detached) – meaning to say, even though it is detached from the food, it joins with the food, because it is consumed, that one sucks it on account of its moistness.
לפיכך חותל של יבישה (the membranous enclosure separating the stone of a date from its flesh, pericarp – as far as not eatable) – a berry of grapes or figs has a membranous enclosure, that seals the incision of the fruit, and that at the top of the membranous enclosure/pericarp is a peduncle, such is what my Rabbis have explained. And their explanation has difficulties, of what therefore. And I found in the Mishnayot accuracy, therefore, the membranous enclosure separating the stone of the date from its flesh/pericarp, and such is the reading of Maimonides (i.e., חותל של יבישה ) and he explains the reason – that the kernel of a green date, that is of a moist date, combines/joins together, because it is a protector to the fruit, for without the globule/stone or kernel of a stone fruit, the fruit would be lost. But that of pericarp does not combine/join together, for again, the globule/stone or kernel of a stone fruit is not a protector of the fruit, for the moisture that is in the date has already ceased and the globule does not protect it so that it doesn’t become lost. Therefore, the membranous enclosure separating the stone of the date from its flesh/pericarp, and it is the membrane/skin that is wrapped and attached on the globule of the date, combines/joins with the date when it is dry, because the membrane/skin is a protector and not the globule/kernel of a stone fruit.
ושל רוטב – that is, the moist date, the membrane does not join/combine. For the globule/stone or kernel of a stone fruit is the protector and not the membrane. And that membrane is called a חותל/membranous enclosure separating the stone of date from its flesh/pericarp. Because it is wrapped and attached to the globule/stone or kernel of a stone fruit. It is the language of (Ezekiel 16:4): “[As for your birth, when you were born your navel cord was not cut, and you were not bathed in water to smooth you; you were not rubbed with salt] nor were you swaddled.”
גלעינה שמקצתה יוצאה (a pit, part of which was detached) – as for example the globule of the moist date, half of which is consumed and half of it remains with the globule.
מה שכנגד האוכל (that which is near the edible part) – is considered a protector and combines/joins together, but not the other part. And similarly, a bone that has upon it an olive’s bulk of flesh.
היה עליו – there was flesh on the bone on one side that does not surround the bone, Rabbi Shimon states that we see if there is meat the measurement that it is able to surround its thickness like the thread of woof like a ring around the bone that joins/combines. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.
כגון הסיאה והאזוב והקורנית (as for example, a plant classified with hyssop/Satureia Thymbra/savory, and the hyssop/marjoram and the thyme) – for also with these, such is their law. What is near the edible part joins together, what is not near the edible part does not join together. And סיאה and קורנית are a species of hyssop. סיאה is TALIAZ in the foreign language and קורנית is SHADRIAH in the foreign language.

Mishnah 3

שנימוק מקצתו אין מצטרף (that was partially rotted, does not combine)- for what has rotted is not considered food/edible, since it became in a state of dissolution and it is not worthy of consumption.
הפטמא של רימון (the protuberance on the blossom-end of pomegranates) – like a kind of nipple that extends at the top of the pomegranate and it is called פטמא/protuberance, and around the protuberance is like a kind of green flower that has thin threads. And they are called נץ/blossom, sprouting . And around those threads are a something similar to a cup and its head is made in turrets/fortress. And it is called a מסרק/the crown of a pomegranate, because it has teeth like a comb/indented attachment to a plant.
אף המסרק טהור – that if it severs/cuts from the fruit, the globule/stone or kernel of the stone fruit is not revealed through this, therefore, it is not a protector. Even the protuberance, if one severed it until its root, it would reveal the globules/stones and destroy the fruit. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer.

Mishnah 4

כל הקליפין (all the husks/skins) – as for example, the shells of nuts and almonds and pomegranates and shells of eggs, are considered as a protector to the food, and combines/joins with the food to complete to make up the measurement to be susceptible to receive ritual defilement. But however, a moist upper shell that is upon nuts at the time of their harvest, does not combine, for it is not considered a protector, for there is no protector on top of a protector.
קדורה (perforated) – perforated, it is the language of מקדרים בהרים/estimating the level distance between two places separated by mountains that is taught in the Mishnah in [Tractate] Eruvin (Chapter 5, Mishnah 4 – Talmud Eruvin 58a – measuring Sabbath elevations are considered as cut through). But something cut through/perforated does not combine, because it doesn’t protect when it is perforated and severed/cut.
והחיצונה – it is the thin shell that falls on its own, when we handle the onion. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 5

המחתך לבשל – as for example, cuts gourds or onions or meat in order to cook it in a pot.
שלא מירק (did not finish it off) -that he did not complete the cutting, like he completed it after slaughtering by his hand in Tractate Yoma [31b].
אינו חיבור – even though the pieces are still partly intertwined/interwoven.
לכבוש – that he pickles in wine or in vinegar in order to preserve it.
ולשלוק (or to seethe) – seething is more than cooking, and in these it is satisfactory for it in their combining/joining, therefore whenever he didn’t finish it off, it is combining/joining. But to cook is not combining/joining, for if he knows that the cooking will separate them and divide them one from the other.
התחיל לפרק (when he has begun to strip vegetables) – and to separate completely one from them, we do not say that since he revealed his intention with one that he wants separate them, all of them also are as if they are separated one from another and it is not combining/joining, but if he eats and only strips, it is not combining/joining, and what he didn’t strip is combined/joined.
האגוזים שאמנן (nuts which one arrayed/arranged in lines) – that he grew them and combined them one with the other. It is the language of (Esther 2:7): “He was foster father to Hadassah [that is Esther, his uncle’s daughter, for she had neither father nor mother].”
שחמרן ([and the onions] which one has piled up) – It is the language of (Exodus 8:10): “And they piled them up (i.e., the dead frogs) in heaps, [till the land stank].” From the manner of those who wish to store up nuts or onions, they cut them and tie them up with rope or with cord/flax rope and combine them one with the other and suspend them in order that they will endure.
לפקל (to strip, peel) – like to peel/לקלף. And it is example we taught in [Tractate] Maaserot, Chapter 1, Mishnah 6, “the onions [are subject to tithes] when one begins to strip them (for storage)” (note that there is a mistake in the printed editions which mention chapter 2 and/or chapter 4).
האגוזים והשדקים – now we are speaking of cracking open nuts and almonds. For the shell of nuts and almonds are considered a protection, and even though he cracked them open, all the while that it is attached to the food/edible part, it is considered a protection.
עד שירסס (until he crushes them) – It is the language of (Amos 6:11): “[For the LORD will command,] And the great house shall be smashed to bits [And the little house to splinters],” meaning to say until the shell will be crushed and opened into thin pieces.

Mishnah 6

ביצה מגולגלת (a roasted egg) – roasted slightly, until it is mixed and appropriate to sip/quaff.
עד שיגוז (until it is chipped) – the shell is considered a protector and combines [to make it susceptible to ritual uncleanness] until he cuts off from it a little bit, and then it is not considered a protector any more, for the egg comes down slowly through the path of that fracture and cut.
ושלוקה – but if the egg was boiled, that it is hard and stands within the shell, and een that which is broken, the shell is always considered a protector, until it is crushed.
וכן עצם שיש בו מוח (and similarly a bone that has marrow in it) – the bone is considered a protector for the marrow, and even though the bone is broken, it [protects] until it is crushed.
הרמון שפירדו (a pomegranate which one has cut into two – leaving the seeds in their sheaves) - that he cut the pomegranate into two and still the seeds/kernel of the stone fruit are attached in the shell, this shell is a connection/attachment, until he knocks it with a reed and will shake the seeds/kernel of the stone fruit that is within it.
שלל הכובסים (washers’ materials loosely stitched together) – it is the manner of washers to stitch the clothes of a child with those of an adult in order that they don’t become lost, and eventually to separate them.
והבגד שהוא תפור בכלאים – two pieces of woolen cloth which was sewn with threads of flax, for certainly, they will be separated one from the other, because of the prohibition of the mixture of wool and linen in the same web.
חיבור לטומאה -if one is defiled, its neighbor is defiled, until he begins to loosen it/take it apart, and even though he did not finish loosening it/taking it apart, for the deed/act [of loosening/taking it apart] removes it from the act [mixing wool and linen together].

Mishnah 7

ירוקים מצטרפין – they are fit/appropriate for consumption.
לבנים אין מצטרפין – that furthermore they are not appropriate/fit.
ובחזרת – with lettuce, even though they are white, they are not appropriate for consumption, nevertheless, they are a protector. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eleazar bar Tzadok.

Mishnah 8

בני בצלים ( central sprouts of onions) – the middle pillar which is like the heart (green) and from it, they grow the onions, to this they call בני בצלים/central sprouts of onions.
אם יש בהן ריר (if there is juice/sap in them) – that they are filled with moisture, and there is no empty space/cavity in them.
משתערין כמו שהן (they are measured as they are) – when we come to measure if there is within them edible parts of an egg’s bulk, the measurement of receptibility to defilement, we measure them with the juice/sap and we don’t crush/press down on their empty space/cavity. But if there is in them a cavity, we press down on their empty space and afterwards measure for an egg’s bulk.
ספוגנית (spongy [bread]) – it is made soft like a kind of sponge, but it is not tread upon nor stamped upon.
משתערה כמות שהיא – without being crushed.
בשר העגל שנתפח (meat of a calf that is swollen) – it is the manner of calf meat that is swollen that it increases when it is cooking, whereas the meat of an old bull diminishes.
בכמות שהן – if it is the meat of cooked bull that diminished and stood on less than that of an egg’s bulk, we don’t say that when it was living there was in it an egg’s bulk [of meat] or more, and it would become defiled even though that now it lacks according to the measurement. And similarly, if it was the calf meat that had become swollen and increased, and there is within it in order to defile, we don’t say for since when it was alive there wasn’t in it sufficient to defile, even now it doesn’t defile.

Mishnah 9

קישות שנטעה בעציץ (a cucumber which was planted in a pot) – which is not perforated, and became susceptible there to receive ritual impurity and it became defiled, that is considered like it is detached.
והגדילה ויצאה חוץ לעציץ – and it is considered as attached, because it sucks/is nurtured from the ground that is outside of the pot.
טהורה – that defilement flew off from it when it left outside the pot
מה טיבה ליטהר (what is its character that it should be insusceptible to uncleanness) – that when it received defilement it was like it was detached, therefore, whatever is within the pot remains in its defilement and what it added afterwards and left outside of the pot is pure. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.

Mishnah 10

כלי גללים – a vessel made from the dung of cattle.
שהשרשים יכולים לצאת בהן – even though they are not perforated, the root goes out on its own and perforates the dung and the ground of that vessel. And for this reason, it (i.e., the Mishnah) did not take the language of "כלי אבנים"/stone utensils, because they are hard and the root does not penetrate/perforate them.
עציץ נקוב אינו מכשיר את הזרעים – that are within it. And they don’t receive susceptibility [to receive defilement] because they are considered as attached, and the seeds are not susceptible to receive ritual defilement other than when water comes upon them after they have become detached, and even detached fruit are not made susceptible [to receive ritual defilement] with the water that is within, because the water does not make them susceptible [to receive ritual defilement] when they are attached/connected, for we require that the water is detached and these waters that are placed on a perforated pot, it is like placing it on the ground.
ושאינו נקוב מכשיר את הזרעים – for whether the water is within it or between the seeds, both of them are considered as detached.
מלאהו – to a pot that is not perforated.
עפר עד שפתו (dirt until its rim) – since it sees the atmosphere from four directions, it is like a perforated pot, and it is considered as attached/connected, between the water and between the seeds that are in it.
כטבלא שאין לה לזביז (like a tray lacking a vertical rim/ledge – by which a flat vessel is made into a vessel-like receptacle) – that it lacks a rim from this side and that but is rather flat and smooth, that the water that is in it does not make the seeds susceptible [to receive ritual defilement] and it is considered as attached, since it sees the atmosphere from four directions.

Chapter 3



Mishnah 1

צריכים הכשר (that require preparation) – water, as it is written (Leviticus 11:38): “But if water is put on the seed [and any part of a carcass falls upon it, it shall be unclean for you].” (see also Tractate Makhshirin, Chapter 6, Mishnah 4 for the listing of the seven liquids).
ואין צריכין מחשבה – to consider them as food, and all of our Mishnah is explained further on (see Mishnah 2 of this chapter).

Mishnah 2

החותך מן האדם מן הבהמה מן החיה ומן העופות – all of them are speaking about cutting off flesh from the living creatures, and even though that they were separated from the living, they do not defile, for only a limb a living creature defiles but not the flesh that was separated from a living being, therefore we require intention that he should have in mind upon them for consumption, and if not, they don’t defile.
החלב בכפרים (from fat in the villages) – for the people of villages do not consume fat. Therefore, they require intention. Bu tin the marketplaces, where most of the people come to the market, there are many that eat fats, and they don’t require intention.
ושאר כל ירקות שדה – that are not sown in gardens, are not special/specific for human consumption and require intention.
חוץ משמרקעים (except for truffles/a species of very acrid onions) – a species of pungent onions.
ופטריות (truffles/fungus, morils) – a species of plant that doesn’t have a root. FUNGI in the foreign language.
חוץ מכרישי שדה (except for wild leeks/field leeks) – PUROSH in the foreign language and PORAT in Arabic. That these, even though we don’t plant them in gardens , do not require intention.
והרגילה (purslane) – such is its name in Arabic. And in the foreign language, PORKAKLAH.
נץ חלב (Ornithogalum, star of Bethlehem, a bulbous plant) – white flowers like milk. And there are those who say, grass when they cut it that milk comes out from it.
עכביות (a species of edible thistles, cardoon) – grass filled with thorns, and it is the דרדר/thistle in the language of Scripture, and in the foreign language KARDOSH.
כלוסין (a species of figs) – Maimonides states that we call it in Arabic ANAV ALDIB. But Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Shimon and Rabbi Yossi hold that these do not require intention because they are specific for human consumption. But the Halakha is not like any of them, but rather all of them require intention, and if not, they do not defile.

Mishnah 3

נבלת בהמה טמאה בכל מקום – whether in the villages or whether in the marketplaces.
צריכין מחשבה – for undefined they are not for consumption.
ואינן צריכין הכשר (and they don’t require preparation) – neither preparation of water nor preparation of a creeping animal/insect [for susceptibility to ritual defilement], for there is no need to have something impure to touch them to defile them, for ultimately they will be impure on their own a grave defilement. And if you should say, it is all right that the carron of a pure/clean fowl and it doesn’t defile other than in the esophagus, it is satisfactory that it requires intention to defile a light defilement. But the carrion of a beast that defiles through contact and through lifting, why do I need intention, for a light defilement, it is an impure body. This manner is answered in the Gemara in the chapter דם שחיטה/The Blood of Slaughter (Chapter 5, Tractate Keritot, folio 21a), as for example, that there is less than an olive’s bulk of carrion, and he attached it to less than an egg’s bulk of food, for whether this one or that one’s an egg’s bulk, and for this reason it requires intention. But nevertheless, it is considered ultimately to defile a grave defilement and doesn’t require preparation, for since it was possible to combine it to be an olive’s bulk.
בשווקים – that there is a majority of the people that come to the marketplace, there are many that eat the carrion of a clean fowl, and consume fats.
אינן צריכין לא מחשבה – for they standing for eating.
ולא הכשר – for the carrion of clean fowl ultimately will defile a grave defilement, that will defile clothing in the esophagus, and regarding fat we are speaking of impure fat, that fat defiles like meat, as we learn further on in our chapter (see Mishnah 9), therefore we don’t require preparation.
רבי שמעון אומר אף הגמל וכו' – they (i.e., the carrion of a camel, a rabbit, a hare and a pig) – do not require intention in the marketplaces, for there are many people who consume them, and this is not like the first Tanna/teacher who stated that the carrion of an unclean beast in every place and didn’t exclude these. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.

Mishnah 4

השבת (dill stalk) – a species of vegetable/green, and such is name in Arabic. And in the foreign language ANITO.
משנתן טעמו בקדירה (having given its taste to a dish) – if it was dill of heave-offering, once it gave its taste/flavor to a dish and he removed it from there, a “foreigner” (i.e., non-Kohen) who eats it is not liable, for it is a mere piece of wood.
ואינו מטמא טומאת אוכלים (and does not receive uncleanness as food) – for since it was cooked, its strength and taste have departed and what remains is like a mere piece of wood, and furthermore it is not considered food.
לולבי זרדים (young sprouts of the service-tree – the interior of which is eaten as a relish) – soft branches that come out at the time when the trees blossom. And they pickle them in wine or in vinegar or in water and salt, and consume them.
והעדל (garden-cress, summer-savory) – a species of vegetable similar to the radish.
ועלי לוף (and leaves of wild LOF/a plant similar to Colocasia with edible leaves and root, and bearing beans – classified with onions and garlic) – from the species of onions. And there are of if a species that we call it the לוף שוטה/the wild LOF, LOF trained for the leaves.
עד שימתוקו – for they are not considered edible food other than until after that they pick them and their bitterness leaves them.
פקועות (Bitter-Apple, a gourd) – similar to small watermelons, and they are bitter. But my Rabbis explained, a desert gourd. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.

Mishnah 5

הקושט (name of a fragrant root or shrub, putchuck) – such is its name in the foreign language and in Arabic. And it is numbered among the spices of frankincense.
והחמס (amomum, an Indian spice/חמם )- there are those who explained it as an Arabic spice plant/ginger and there are those who explain it as cinnamon.
וראשי בשמים (and the principal spices) – as for example Moscato nut, Nard (aromatic herb, Valerian) and things similar to them, that provide a pleasant smell.
התיאה (root of crawfoot -used as a spice, but poisonous for beasts) – a species of assas foetida (an umbelliferous plant used, as a resin or in leaves, for a spice and for medicinal purposes).
וחלתית (assa foetida) – this is its name in Arabic. But even though its aroma is bad, they regularly put from it in foods.
חלות חריע (lozenges made of bastard saffron) – forest crocus/saffron (one of the ingredients of frankincense). And we call it ALKARTOM in Arabic.
אף הן לא ילקחו בכסף מעשר – For the All-Merciful stated (Deuteronomy 14:26): “and you shall spend the money [on anything you want -cattle, sheep, wine, or other intoxicant, or anything that you may desire.] And you shall feast there [in the presence of the LORD your God and rejoice with your household],” a thing that is consumed as it is you purchase with the money of [Second] Tithe, that which is not consumed as it is, you do not purchase with the money of [Second] Tithe. And this is the Halakha, that if it does not receive defilement as food, they are not purchased with the monies of [Second] Tithe.

Mishnah 6

הפגין (hard/unripe figs)- figs that are not ripe, as it is written (Song of Songs 2:13): “The green figs form on the fig tree.” And all the rest of the produce/fruits also which are not ripe are called פגין.
והבוסר (half-ripe fruit, esp. grapes) – grapes that did not ripen. And when they arrived to become like a white bean, they are called בוסר. And פגין are worse than בוסר.
משיבואו לעונות המעשרות – each and every fruit according to the established time for it to be obligated in tithing, as is taught in the Mishnah in the first chapter of [Tractate] Maaserot (see Mishnah 32). But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri
פריצי זיתים וענבים (the proud among the olives and grapes) – that became hard prior to their ripening, and they are not peeled in the olive press. It is the language of (Daniel 11:14): “and the lawless sons of your people [will assert themselves to confirm the vision, but they will fail],” hard and wicked people. Such are these olives and grapes, hard and they are not peeled nor trodden/pressed.
בית שמאין מטמאין – for they are considered edible/food.
ובית הלל מטהרין – for they are not considered edible/food.
הקצח (black cumin) – NEEL in the foreign language. And it is a black seed, and it is customary to put it on bread, for those who are accustomed to it do not come to have heart pain.
וכן למעשרות – just as they disagreed regarding defilement, so too they argued with regard to tithing, for those who declare them as susceptible to uncleanness as food obligated it for tithing.

Mishnah 7

קור (white heart or terminal bud of a palm – cabbage tree – used as food) – it is soft wood that is added at the top of a palm. And people consume it, and in the rainy season it becomes bard.
כעץ לכל דבר – and is not susceptible to uncleanness as food.
נלקח בכסף מעשר (and it is purchased through Second Tithe monies)- of the fruit [from fruit] and it grows in the ground.
כפניות (date-berries in their early stage/inflorescence of palms) – palms that did not ripen all the way.
כאוכלים – and they are susceptible to uncleanness as food.

Mishnah 8

דגים מאימתי מקבלים טומאה – and whenever they are living they are not susceptible to receive defilement.
משיצודו (from when they are caught) – they are considered as dead.
אם יכולים לחיות – that if he would return them to the water they would live, they don’t defile. But if they are not able to live when they return them to the water, even though they still had not died, they are susceptible to receive ritual defilement. And the Halakha is according to the School of Hillel.
יחור של תאנה שנפשח (a young shoot of a fig tree that was stripped/split) – a branch of the a fig tree and there are figs on it, that had been detached and separated from the place of their connection, but that there remained from its skin and it is attached with the husk/skin/bark of the tree alone.
ר' יהודה מטהר – those figs that are on the branch, if the defilement came in contact with them, they are considered as attached, since the branch is attached slightly, and even though it is not attached other than with a skin/husk.
וחכמים אומרים אם יכול לחיות – if they will tie and attach the branch with the tree, the branch will live and produce fruit, and it is considered as attached and pure. But if it will not live when they retie it with the tree, the figs that are on the branch are considered like they are detached and are susceptible to receive defilement. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 9

חלב בהמה טהורה – that became ritually forbidden by unskillful slaughtering,
is pure from the defilement of carrion, as it is written (Leviticus 7:24): “Fat from animals that died or were torn by beasts may be put to any use, [but you must not eat it],” which implies even Holy Service.
לפיכך הוא צריך הכשר – and since that it will not ultimately become a heavy defilement, for this, we hold in the first chapter of [Tractate] Taharot [Mishnah 3), for everything that ultimately doesn’t defile in a grave manner, that is to defile a person and vessels, requires preparation.
חלב בהמה טומאת נבלות – for the Torah did not purify other than the fat of a ritually pure animal that became forbidden by unskillful slaughtering, which excludes the fat of an unclean animal which lacks being torn apart [by a beast of prey], because its being torn and its slaughter are equivalent.
ואין צריך הכשר – for defilement of food if he combined less than an olive’s bulk with less than an egg’s bulk, as explained above (Mishnah 3), but intention is certainly required, for something regarding meat requires intention as is taught in the Mishnah above (Mishnah 3).
וצריך מחשבה בכפרים - but not in the marketplaces [for unclean fish and locusts]. But preparation is required in every place.

Mishnah 10

כוורת דברים וכו' – if it (i.e., the beehive) is attached with plaster, everyone admits/agrees that it is like land/real estate (i.e., the ground) for all things, but if it was placed on pegs, everyone admits that is like vessels. But they didn’t disagree other than when it is placed on the ground and is not attached with plaster.
ר' אליעזר אומר הרי היא כקרקע – and it is acquired by money, a document or a claim of undisturbed possession like land/real estate (i.e., the ground) .
וכותבין עליה פרוזבול – a document that the Jewish court writes to the lender/creditor that transferred to them every debt that he has [to collect’ – so that the Seventh Year would not cause a cancellation of the debt, and we don’t write a Prozbul (i.e., a declaration made in court, before the execution of a loan, to the effect that the law of limitation by the entrance to the Sabbatical Year shall not apply to the loan to be transacted) other than on land/real estate, meaning to say, that when the borrower has real estate/land and he has a beehive, it is similar to land/real estate, and we write upon it a Prozbul [document] to the creditor.
ואינה מקבלת טומאה במקומה – for it is like it would be attached and is not susceptible to receive ritual defilement.
והרודה – from the honeycombs that are within it on the Sabbath, he is liable for a sin-offering, like someone who detaches something from the place where it is attached, as it is written (I Samuel 14:27): “And he (I.e., Jonathan) dipped it into the beehive of honey [and brought his hand back to his mouth and his eyes lit up], but what connection has the forest with honey, but rather just as the forest, he who plucks/detaches from it on the Sabbath is liable for a sin-offering, even honey that one removes [from the beehive]] on the Sabbath is liable for a sin-offering. (This Bartenura to Tractate Shevi’it, Chapter 10, Mishnah 7 adds that the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer).

Mishnah 11

מאימתי ממיטמאות משום משקה – for that which is undefined exists for consumption, and from when does it become susceptible for ritual defilement for liquids to become first-degree of ritual defilement. (See also Tractate Makhshirin, Chapter 6, Mishnah 4 which defines the seven liquids that make foods susceptible for ritual impurity – and Tractate Bava Batra 9b where a Baraitha is brought indicating the honey in a beehive becomes susceptible for ritual impurity without intention – and that as long as the honey is in the beehive, it is considered as food and not liquid. There is a dispute between the Schools of Shammai and Hillel in this Mishnah about when the transition takes place.)
משיחרחר (he sets the twigs on fire for driving out the bees/smokes the bees out) – when he brings smoke and smokes it out to drive away the bees. It is the language of לחרחר ריב/to stir up strife. That it appears as if he wants to stir up strife with the bees. Another explanation of מישחרחר, that he heats them up in order to remove their honey, even though they honey has not yet left. It is the language of (Jeremiah 6:29): “The bellows puff.” And there are those who have the reading "מיהרהר"/from when he will conceive in his mind, meaning to say, that he will conceive an intention/thought in his heart to take the honey out of the beehive.
מירסק (from the time you break the honeycomb – to take it out of the hive) – when they want to take the honey out of the beehive, they cut it with a knife and remove the honeycombs and that is ריסוק/crushing.

Mishnah 12

עתיד הקב"ה להנחיל לכל צדיק וצדיק – he (i.e., Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi) joined this statement to here to inform/announce at the conclusion of the Mishnah of the reward for righteous people who study and fulfill all what is written in the Mishnah.
שלש מאות ועשרה עולמות שנאמר להנחיל אוהיב יש – there is in this Gematria/use of letters for their numerical value/homiletical interpretation based upon the numerical value the following (for the word יש) which is 310, meaning to say that the benefit and satisfaction/contentment that each and every righteous person will have in the World-to-Come will be three-hundred and ten times [greater] corresponding to This World, for this entire world is [at best] only a piece of the three-hundred and ten than what each righteous person will have as an inheritance in the World-to-Come.