Nefesh HaChaim
נפש החיים
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Nefesh_HaChaim
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Nefesh HaChaim



Gate 1



Chapter 1



Chapter 2

In order to understand what is meant by being created in the image of ELOKIM, and not another name (the following is required).  The definition of ELOKIM is that G-d is the source of all the energies in the universe, as it is written in the TUR...  When we say that G-d is the source of all energies its meaning is thus:  Man and G-d are very different.  When a man builds a building from wood for example, the builder doesn't create and manufacture the wood from his own essence. Rather he takes wood which has already been created and builds the building.  After he has organised them according to his will, if he forgets the building (and his focus is no longer on it) the building still exists.  However G-d himself when he created the world, he created ex nehilo (something from nothing) with non-physical strength,also from that moment every power which exists within them and organises them is dependent only on the fact that G-d focuses energy on them at every moment....if G-d would remove the strength of his influence from them for even one moment, they would all disappear into nothingness.  This is what the men of the great assembly intended when they said that G-d constantly renews creation - which literally means at every single second...

Gate 2



Gate 3



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



	In truth it (having belief &amp; faith in Hash-m) is a great matter &amp; an awesome ability (Segulah) to remove &amp; nullify from oneself all judgments &amp; wills of others – that they will have no power or influence upon you whatsoever. When a person fixes in his heart to say “Is not Hash-m the true G-d &amp; besides Him, may He be Blessed, there is no power whatsoever in the world &amp; in all the worlds at all &amp; all is filled only with His simple Oneness, may His Name be Blessed.” And [then] he shall nullify with a complete nullification &amp; he will not be concerned about any power or will in the world. And he will attach &amp; cling the purity of his thoughts – only to the One Master, Blessed be He. Thus the Blessed One will give in his hands – to automatically nullify by himself all of the forces &amp; desires in the world that absolutely nothing will be able to affect him.