Tosefta Shabbat
תוספתא שבת
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Tosefta Shabbat



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



...Rabbi Tarfon says, one may light only with olive oil. Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri stood on his feet, and said: And what shall the people of Babylonia, who have only sesame oil, do? And what shall the people of Medea, who have only nut oil, do? And what shall the people of Alexandria, who have only radish oil, do? And what shall the people of Cappadocia, who have neither this nor that but only naphtha, do?...  

Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9

















17 One who takes out [to the public domain] a domesticated animal, a wild animal or fowl, whether live or dead is liable. R. Natan says: For dead ones he is liable, for live ones he is exempt. 

Chapter 10














They do not nurse from clean animals on holidays [and one needn't mention on shabbat. Abba Shaul says: they used to nurse from clean animals on a holiday.] A woman should not release milk from her breasts or express milk into a cup or dish in order to nurse her child. They do not nurse from either a gentile or an unclean animal, but if it is a matter of danger (to life), it is permitted, in that there is nothing that should stand before saving a life except for idol worship, forbidden sexual relationships, and shedding blood.

Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16










One who reacts swiftly to a danger to a human life on the Sabbath, and one who is vigilant, behold he is praiseworthy, and one need not obtain permission from the Beit Din. <i>How so?</i> One fell into the sea and he is unable to lift himself up, [or] his ship sank at sea and he is unable to lift himself up -- they may descend and lift him up from there, and there is no need to obtain permission from the Beit Din. [If] one fell into a pit and cannot raise himself out, they may dig out a segment [of earth from the pit, presumably to widen it] and descend and lift him out of there, and there is no need to obtain permission from the Beit Din. An infant that entered a house and cannot get out -- they may break down the doors of the house, even if they were made of stone, and take him out of there, and there is no need to obtain permission from the Beit Din. They may extinguish or place a barrier before a fire on the Sabbath, and one who is vigilant [in doing so], behold, he is praiseworthy, and there is no need to obtain permission from the Beit Din.
One who was bitten by a snake [on the Sabbath] -- they call a doctor for him [to come] from one place to another place, and they slaughter a chicken for him, and they harvest leeks for him to eat, and there is no need to tithe, the words of Rebbi. And Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says, one does need to tithe.
They may heat water for a sick person on the Sabbath, whether for his peace of mind or for medical purposes, and they should not say, "Let us delay [heating it] for him lest he live." Rather, the uncertainty [of his survival] overrides the Sabbath, and not just the uncertainty on this Sabbath, but rather the uncertainty on [even] another Sabbath. And they should not say, "Let Gentiles or minors do these things"; rather, [they should be done] with adults among the Jewish people. They should not say, "These things should be done [in reliance] upon the word of a woman or upon the word a Gentile"; rather, their words combine together with the consent of a [male] Jew.
R. Yose said: Whence do we know that saving a life takes precedence over the Sabbath? As it is written. “…you shall observe my Sabbaths.” Is it possible that circumcision and the temple service and saving a life [do not take precedence over the Sabbath]? The Torah teaches “But” - a portion. There are times when you observe the Sabbath and times when you do not observe the Sabbath.  R. Elazar says: Circumcision takes precedence over the Sabbath because one is punished for it by karet (excision) after time. And the matter is a kal va’homer. If for one limb of him the Sabbath can be superseded, it is logical that the Sabbath should be superseded for all of him. They said to him: according to your reasoning just as in that case it is certain and not uncertain, so too here it must be certain and not uncertain.  R. Akiva said: And with respect to which was the Torah more stringent? With the temple service or with the Sabbath? [The Torah was more stringent] with the temple service than with the Sabbath, for the temple service takes precedence over the Sabbath and the Sabbath does not take precedence over the temple service. And the matter is a kal va’homer - if the temple service takes precedence over the Sabbath and a risk to life takes precedence over it, with regard to the Sabbath, which the temple takes precedence over - is it not logical that a risk to human life should supersede it? Behold, you have learned that a risk to life takes precedence over the Sabbath.  
R. Aha said in the name of R. Akiva. Behold, it says: “If a thief is found tunneling in…” Is the house’s owner certain or uncertain? You must say he is uncertain. If they kill a person to save a life in a case of uncertainty, it is logical that they should push off the Sabbath, in order to save a life in a case of uncertainty.  Behold, the commandments were only given to Israel that they might live by them, as it is written “Which a man shall perform and live by them” - he shall live by them, and not die by them.  Nothing takes precedence over saving a life, save idolatry, sexual sins, and murder. In which circumstances are these things said? When it is not a time of persecution. But, when it is a time of persecution, even when it comes to the smallest of small commandments, a person should die for it, as it is written: “Do not profane my holy name” (Leviticus 22) and “the Lord made everything for his own sake” (Proverbs 16).

Chapter 17









One may tear the covering that is on a [barrel] of wine or muryas [on Shabbos], as long as he does not intend to pour [from it]. One may not open sealed jugs [on Shabbos]; R' Shimon ben Gamliel permits [it].

Chapter 18
















One who bundles seeds to protect them from birds or melons to protect them from animals may bundle normally on shabbat as long as s/he does not clap, dance, or slap [thighs] as is done on a week day.