Kli Yakar on Exodus
כלי יקר על שמות
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Kli Yakar on Exodus



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Verse 1



Verse 2

This month shall mark for you the beginning of the months; it shall be the first month of the year for you: Since The Holy One, Blessed be God, showed Moses with His finger the moon in its newness saying "like this you see and shall bless" thus He said this is the beginning of the month. That is to say this newness (of the moon) will be for you the beginning of the months, that every time that you see the newness of the moon in this picture you will have a new month for every month of the year. And after God gave this sign - it was known about all the days of every month of the year to make them new for  every month of the year

Chapter 13



Verse 1



Verse 2



Verse 3



Verse 4



Verse 5



Verse 6



Verse 7



Verse 8



Verse 9



Verse 10



Verse 11



Verse 12



Verse 13



Verse 14



Verse 15



Verse 16

Our sages  (מנחות לז) explain that you place the Tefilin on the weaker hand, to teach us that Tefilin should be placed on the left hand.  the reason for this is that the intellect and our physicality are problematic for on another; when the one rises, the other falls.  When the physicality of an individual is afflicted, the strength of the intellect waxes.  The reason for the affliction in Egypt is to bring the physicality of the Jewish people into the iron crucible (as mentioned in Deut.) and through that the intellect of the Jew would overcome it.  Both young and old men will attest to this - when a man is young and immature, his physicality is in the ascendancy over his intellect, and when he gets older his intellect has the ascendency over his physicality.  It is for this reason that Solomon (In Ecclesiastes) says "Don't say that your earlier days were better than your later ones because it is not out of wisdom that you ask it" - because at the age of 60 comes wisdom, length of days and understanding.
So it is with the two hands of man, because the left hand is weaker. and it is weak because of its proximity to the heart, which is the source of intellect. (This is therefore the primary example of the intellect controlling the physical forces in man). However, the right hand is next to the liver which is the source of desire.  The liver does not oppose the physical force in any way, because that is the source of its strength.  The place in which the intellect dwells (the heart) makes the hand weak.  Therefore when the verse says: והיה לאות על ידכה it is as if it is says that it should be a sign on your heart, because the heart is the reason that his hand is weak.  Indeed, this is the reason of the Tefilin should be put on the arm, (to remember that the whole purpose of the exodus from Egypt is to teach this concept), and the Shel Rosh should be between the eyes, because the heart and the eyes are the two agents of sin (as seen in the Yerushalmi).  Therefore these two places need something to remind them about the existence of G-d and his capacity, and through that will return from sin.
Another explanation is as follows:  It mentions the weaker hand to teach us that man will not overcome (anything), but that G-d is the one who battles in any war. (Wearing Tefilin on the left weaker hand illustrates that) a man's hand is weak and he is unable to do anything with it unless G-d will help and strengthen his hand.  This is the meaning of the verse in Psalms (תהלים טז ח) I place G-d opposite me always, He will never move from my right hand).  At first, King David was upset that the heart should be on the left hand side, and the liver on the right hand side of a human being.  This would indicate that G-d created man in such a way that his desires should be the main force, and his intellect subservient to his desires.  Afterwards, David states: G-d is opposite me - his right hand supports my left hand.  It is through that I am confident that I will never be moved - that the strength of his desires will never move him from the straight path.  this is because the hand of G-d provides power and energy to the heart (intellect) which is opposite him as he stands in front of G-d.  It is for this reason that he states afterwards: "Therefore my heart rejoices" to see that G-d is supporting my left hand. David ends the psalm stating: the pleasantness of your right hand is eternity" - not in my right hand, because the intellect is supported by the right hand of G-d which is opposite my left hand.  Therefore, G-d commanded us to put on Tefilin, where the name of G-d is engraved on them on the weaker hand, to teach us that the strength of G-d's right hand gives our left hand strength.  This is the meaning of the verse:כי בחוזק יד הוציאנו ה' ממצרים.  G-d's right hand opposite man's left hand took us out of Egypt.  This in turn teaches that no deed is dependent upon man's action, rather with the help of G-d.
