Kli Yakar on Exodus
כלי יקר על שמות
YU Torah miTzion Beit Midrash
http://www.torontotorah.com

Kli Yakar on Exodus



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Verse 1

“Speak to the Children of Israel and have them take for Me an offering; from every person whose heart inspires him to generosity, you shall take My offering. And this is the offering that you shall take from them...” “Three offerings are mentioned here, etc.”  [Megilah 29b, Psikta Rabti] There are a few questions on this subject. For why did He attribute the first two offerings to G-d, as in the first He said ‘Have them take for Me’ –for My Name, and in the second one He said ‘You shall take My offering’, but in the third neither was mentioned; on the contrary, it is said regarding it ‘From them’, associating it with the donors...




[Answer:] For wherever there is the concept of humility and submission among those below, there is hidden the might of G-d, who dwells among the contrive and humble of  spirit. However, wherever there is a tinge of haughtiness, G-d does not wish to associate His Name. Therefore, the first two gifts-where the hand of every man was equal, for the rich did not  add  and the poor did not subtract, and no one can brag over his fellow and say ‘My donation is greater than yours’ – were associated with G-d ...
In the same way, the objects made from these two donations were similar to the donation itself. For just as everyone was equal with no condescension of one over the other, so too, from one donation the sockets [for the Mishkan’s wall boards] were made – for all the sockets were equal to each other, and they were underneath the building as a threshold that is trodden upon, and they served as the foundations to the whole building. They were like their makers ... These sockets teach humility, since humility is the foundation upon which the entire house of Israel stands ... 
From the second offering they brought the communal sacrifices which were also the same every day, one lamb in the morning and one in the afternoon. It states, “G-d’s [accepted] sacrifices are a broken spirit”, meaning to say that the purpose of sacrificing is to bring man to a state of a broken spirit. Therefore, this offering was also associated with G-d ... However, the third offering was not equal from all; some gave less, and some gave more. The rich who gave more had room to boast over the poor and say to him, “I have a greater share in the house of our G-d, as I gave a larger donation.”... There-fore it was not attributed to G-d.