Prayer of Manasseh
תְּפִלַּת מְנַשֶׁה
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Prayer_of_Manasseh
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Prayer of Manasseh



Chapter 1

Adonai of hosts, God Almighty, God of our ancestors Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and God of their righteous seed
Who made the heavens and the earth and their multitudes
Who limited the sea with Your word, and closed and sealed the depths, in Your awesome and glorious name.
And all wonder and quake before Your power.
And one cannot stand before Your majestic glory, or bear Your furious anger against the wicked.
Yet without measure or bound is the mercy You have bestowed.
For You, Adonai Most High, slow to anger and abounding in mercy, and forgiving the evils of men; You, Adonai, in Your great goodness, have bestowed forgiveness to sinners dwelling in transgressions, and in Your great compassion have placed a path of repentance for the wicked so that they may be saved.
You, Adonai, God of the righteous, did not grant forgiveness to the righteous Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, as they had not sinned to you; but for me, I, a sinner, You have granted forgiveness, for I have sinned.
My iniquities are beyond number, and I should not see, or raise my eyes, or look towards on high, from the greatness of my transgressions; and now, Adonai, rightfully have You afflicted me, and have repaid me according to my hands’ work with captivity.
I am bent down with iron bands, I cannot even raise my head from my soul’s sins, as I moved Your spirit and was evil in your eyes – I did not do Your will and did not guard Your commandments, and I set up disgusting idols and I increased abominations.
And now I bend the knee of my heart, for I desire Your goodness.
I have sinned, Adonai, I have sinned, and of my transgressions I am well aware.
And thus I will plead unto you, Adonai, forgive – please! – forgive me, and do not let me die in sin, and do not forever guard and keep iniquities, and do not cast me away from You and place me in the depths of the earth, for You are Adonai, God of the repentant are You!
Show me – please! – Your goodness even to me and save me in Your great compassion, though I am not worthy to see it.
And I shall praise You always, all the days of my life, for to You praise all the host of heaven, and to You, Adonai, is the honor, for ever and ever, amen.