Peri HaAretz
פרי הארץ
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Peri_HaAretz
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Peri HaAretz

Title Page



Bereshit



Noach



Lech Lecha



Vayera



Chayei Sara

"And HaShem blessed Avraham with everything." In the Midrash "Because of the Tithes, and it says 'and he gave him tithes from everything'."
And the matter is in accordance with the words of the Zohar on "And Avraham was old, advanced of days" (see there). In order to explain the matter lucidly, as the Rabbis told in regards to Barzelai the Geladite who was eighty years old and said "Can I tell the difference between good and bad? Can your servant taste what he eats and drinks?" And the Rabbis said "He removes the speech of men of trust and takes away the understanding of the aged"
Behold, in truth in regards to all the inclinations of the world it may be said that 'the way of the adulterer is to try and "satisfy his hunger".'
And so the Sages said "Man does not die with half his inclination still in his hand" and therefore they 'age' the understanding of Man so that his understanding is never calm and constantly lusting. And as the text says the "craving of a lazy man kills him", and the statement "hope deferred sickens the heart..."
And in accordingly with we may find in the service of God that "the word of the Lord is rare" and its impossible to settle for anything else. For all who are greater than his friend perceive a great depth which is concealed from his friend, and his friends perceptions are as nothing in his view, and as it says "wisdom, from nothing is found", for the Blessed one is without end and so all his perceptions are without end. But the core of service is connecting to Him in each and every attribute and in every way which Man is overcome, for the Inclination of Man overcomes him daily. And if yesterday Man knocked him (the Inclination) down and overcame him, and then the spirit of God rested on him in order to connect to him through that attribute, nevertheless the inclination will attack him tomorrow in a different and more harsh manner. And even if he is successful everyday 'in the shade of God' and 'the cover of the Supernal', nevertheless the Inclination will forever strengthen itself against him in order to make him fall into his trap, unless the Man strengthens himself greatly to the point that he liberates and  frees that attribute from the the any selfish use whatsoever - and he shall not derive any pleasure from its use except if used in the service of his blessed Creator. As King David of blessed memory said "and my heart is void within me" and thus the Inclination withdraws from him, for what would be captured if the Man receives no pleasure at all from using the attribute for his own selfish purpose, and on the contrary, the Man would feel sorrow! As our Rabbis said "The good of the Evil Doers is evil to the Righteous"
In this manner we refer to this as "Redemption" and "The Building of the Holy Temple in his Days", for "days" are the "attributes" as is known, and presently we redeem this attribute from the harsh servitude of the Inclination. And so long as there is no redemption, his Inclination will continue to attack him, and it will make no difference whether one, two or a hundred such instances. And if, God forbid, his sins trap him even one in ten or in one hundred of the instances, in any case the "previous period shall be void". Meaning that all which he overcame against the Inclination with the 'Hidden Mind' and 'Holy Spirit' up until that instance, all of it enters the Kelipah upon that instance, and he does not remain fortified by the original thought and effort with which prior he [successfully] stood against the Inclination with that very perseverance and divine guidance. For now, after knowing its greatness and ingenuity, and bringing upon himself the governance of the Inclination and heeding it, those (divine guidance and effort) holy sparks now also enters the Kelipah; for how could a rejuvenating remedy be extracted out of that very same guidance itself. As the Sage of blessed memory say "every generation for whom the Temple is not built in their days, its as if it is destroyed in their days", and the meaning of the unbuilt Temple is as explained above, for since it was not built (fully) and the Inclination toppled it, it is in any case destroyed - that the sparks of holiness have entered the Kelipah; meaning to say - in the Inclination's overcoming of the holy lifeforce which rested on him yesterday and the day before that in order to save them (the sparks) from it. 
And inasmuch as [the Inclination] overcame him at that time, he in any case needs to search for and strengthen himself through a different method, guidance and effort, for the battle. For the Inclination will not be suppressed by the divine guidance of yesterday or the day before it. The general rule is that Belief in what the eye cannot see, the ear cannot hear, and no mind can apprehend - 'the Lord alone shall be exalted'. And subsequently, the strengthening of Awe which in any case follows from the Belief, for the two are really one thing in simple unity. It is this which brings connection to Him, may he be blessed, through each and every attribute, since these things stand at the height of the world and break every lust and Kelipah. And when these (Belief and Awe) overtake him "all the evildoers are scattered"..."as wax melts before fire" and "to have self-control to conquer".
And this is "Avraham was old advanced in days". Meaning, through his attributes he came to 'age'; and the meaning of 'age' is the abrogation of childhood and futility which is the way of the material world. From the abundant use of his senses all his days, in his age he nullified them. And all use them more, the more age overtakes them. For this is the way of the divine. Once he takes over his attributes to use them in order to serve Him, may he be blessed, and for no selfish benefit whatsoever, he releases from the attributed and nullifies in constant connection with Him, may he be blessed, without and interruption at all.
...And this is "And the Lord blessed Avraham in everything", because the connection is called "everything", for it combined two into one, as it says "Everything that is in Heaven and on Earth", as is known; and the Midrash says "for the Tithes as it says 'he gave tithes from everything'. For it is known that Awe is called Tithe, which is the final 'Hey' and his the Tithe from Everything - meaning, Tithe from the connection as is known, and from the Awe and Belief he merit the connection, as per above. 

Toldot

"And these are the generations of Isaac the son of Abraham". Rashi of blessed memory explains "Jacob and Esav, those mentioned in the Section."
The matter is according the response Hillel have to the convert who came to be converted on the condition that [Hillel] teach him the entire Torah on one leg. He received him and taught him "that which is hateful to you do not do to another...". Rashi of blessed memory explains, this is the Commandment "Love your neighbor as yourself". See the Maharsha who objects [and wonders] why [Hillel] did not phrase this to him as the positive commandment which it is in the Torah, and further [he spoke in a] translated manner (Aramaic); unquestionably, [he should have stated his response in a] positive form [for example], 'have mercy on another'. But he said it in a negated form, as if a negative commandment - 'what is hateful to you do not do to another'.
However, the matter is as they stated, may their memory be for blessing: "With Ten Utterances was the world created and they are juxtaposed to the Ten Commandments, as out Sages of blessed memory stated, that He looked into the Torah and created the world. For the matter of the creation of the world is known to have begun from a state wherein He and His Name were in one simple unity without any perceptibility, comprehension or bounds whatsoever, for it is infinite. And when it arose in His simple will create, He constricted Himself, as is known. Now the matter of simple unity and infinity is the utterance "I am" and all the [corresponding] positive Commandments, the constriction (TzimTzum), which is limitation (Gevurah), and the [corresponding] utterance "You shall not have" along with all the details are the negative Commandments which [when taken together] is the entirety of the Torah through cause and effect to each and every detail. And all of the roots and branches in general and her details, which have their source above, manifest [into] fruits below in the form of the performance of the Commandments, which is our holy Torah with all of her Commandments, Decrees and Laws. 
And behold they of blessed memory stated "'Inasmuch as Abraham obeyed me and kept my charge..." to teach us that our father Abraham, peace be upon him, kept even [the mitzvah] of Joining the Cooked Foods" which on the surface is confusing for how could he have known to do so? And if we say that he perceived [himself] the actions of the Commandments and the Laws to which the [human] intellect can bind, nevertheless its difficult [to understand] how he could have perceived the Decrees which have no reasoning [behind them] to which the [human] intellect cannot bind, like the Red Hefer and other such Decrees. Our discussion will be understood according the the words of our blessed Sages who stated, "to you I will reveal the reason behind the Red Hefer and the others will be Decrees (without reason)" for all the Decrees do [in fact] have a reason and a source above in the order of the creation, for the creation occurred in accordance with the Torah, its just that 'no [human] mind can contain it' - and [this is the meaning of] "...the others will be Decrees". However, the Torah does not speak to 'great ones' such as Moshe or our father Abraham, peace be upon them, before whom nothing stood as a Decree [without reason]; rather all the Decrees to them were Commandments in their understanding and they perceived their reasoning and source. 
However, without his [first reaching a spiritual level at which] the Commandments are nullified and no longer need apply to him, it is impossible for [the great man] to upturn the Decrees into Commandments. For example, all the negative Commandments like do not murder, do not commit adultery, do not steal - warnings which are not applicable to [the great man] in relation to the breaking of his lustful pursuit of all the physical attributes [since] he'd never use them for his personal needs whatsoever, but [rather] only for God. All actions for his personal needs are abhorrent to him as mud and feces, from which we need not warn any man to distance himself as he would in any case do so out of disgust. In this vein, King David, peace be upon him, said "and my heart is void within me". For a person of this ilk, for whom the Commandments need not apply, to him is revealed the reasoning of the Decrees, and the Decrees thus become as though Commandments. And this is what they of blessed memory meant that in the days of the Messiah the Commandments will be nullified "for the Land will be filled with Understanding of God", and they will possess a different Torah from the Decrees which will become as Commandments. And when a person goes from strength to strength, higher and higher, until he reaches and stands before the root of the whole Torah and Commandments which is "I am HaShem your God...", simple unity and infinite, he then crimps the wings of all the Commandments and Decrees, and they are all nullified. And this is the nullification of the Evil Inclination and elevation of it [back] to prior to the beginning of creation. For from where [else] does the Evil Inclination come? In truth, in the beginning and prior to the creation is the positive [Commandment(s)] "I am HaShem your God..." and [only] afterward the negative [Commandments]. But in [human] perception of the Commandments [the order] must be reversed - in the beginning to 'abandon evil' (negative commandments) and then 'do good' (positive commandments). For a man in his beginning is [in the aspect of] "a wild ass is born a man" - his [spiritual] level is very low and he needs to add from the mundane onto his holiness, higher and higher, until [he reaches] "I am HaShem your God..." And this is [the meaning] of the convert who came to be converted and wanted to learn the whole Torah [standing] on one leg. Meaning, [the whole Torah] in one self-sustaining construct. And in truth his lesson [should have been] that indeed the source of all is "I am HaShem your God" (as above). But the convert could not have understood the apprehension of [the positive] "I am..." if not by way of the negation prior ("And you shall not have"), in order that it be on his level, which begins very low. And this is why he said "The rest is commentary. Go study"; for the [actual] Commandment is [the positive form] "Love thy neighbor..." and the negated [form] "that which is hateful to you, do not do to another" - they are the Commandments "I am..." and "You shall not...", [respectively]. And in accordance with Rashi's understanding, this is "And these are the generations of Isaac the son of Abraham" for it is the order of creation and the meaning is that Isaac, who is the constriction (TzimTzum) and the boundaries (Gevurot), is the son of Abraham who is loving-kindess (Chesed) and simple unity. And from these, they propagated to the entire world. And this is what Rashi of blessed memory explained in that 'the generations are Jacob and Esav who are spoken about in the Section'. For as Rashi explained about Esav "he was made and fully developed with hair" on the day he was born. And as the Zohar states on the verse "When an ox or a sheep or a goat is born", immediately upon the day it is born it is called an Ox, in contrast to a Man. Although in reality [only] a man's materialistic attributes are [in fact] fully developed on the day he's born, as is said 'Sin couches at the door...of the elderly king and the fool'. And so on the day of his birth he was called Esav. Afterward Jacob's hand held onto Esav's heel, the meaning of which is that 'his hand' is [Jacob's] perception which is Lower Wisdom [represented by the letter] YuD - and this is YaDo/Hand. And afterward, from [the Lower Wisdom] he reaches Upper Wisdom and the Commandment "I am..." which is the simple unity. He who is of understanding will understand. 

Vayetzei

It is written in the Midrash "Taking one of the stones of that place", in the beginning there were many stones and for Jacob they became one stone. And it is therefore said "[Jacob] took the stone" (see there).
The Rav of the Midrash opened "'And behold the ladder was set on the ground' which is Sinai 'and its top reached to the Heavens. And behold the Angels of the Lord' which are Moses and Aaron. 
Additionally [we will consider] the statement of our Sages of blessed memory that "There are three things a person must say in his home on Shabbat eve at nightfall", and that of King David peace be upon him who said "I am Your servant, the son of Your maidservant".
The Sages of blessed memory stated the general rule - "each and every person is obligated to say: The world was created for me", and all of the world's events truly [occur] specifically for him. For one righteous person would have been sufficient [to sustain] the entire world as is written "[the] Righteous [man, the] foundation of the world". And as Rabbi Shimon Bar Yochai stated "You and I are enough for the world" and as well, he stated, "I am a mnemonic (lit. symbol in/for the world)".
Now if the main point of creating the world was for one person, certainly the world's events following its creation, whether good or bad, [are also for him]. So every person must know in himself how he causes the world's events and changes, not [only] via belief and humility without any understanding - close to his mouth but far from his kidneys - but [rather] his heart must see his worldly interactions [as an] earthly man; and how he is far from God [as a result of] all his materialistic ways which treat the holy life-force superficially - [thus] from this world of action "the querulous one alienates his (/ALuF/) friend" (a wordplay equivalence is made here on the letter root /ALF/) which is 'a thousand (AeLeF) [of] Understanding, a thousand (AeLeF) [of] Wisdom' (totaling the two thousand years corresponding to Wisdom and Understanding which preceded creation). And [since] as it is written "with Wisdom did you make all", thus without Wisdom there is nothing with which to [even] sustain [the creation]. 
And this is reason for all the world's events: In order to castigate a person until he returns him to God with all his heart, and the land is filled with knowledge of God, each one according to his capacity; and there is no difference whether he is a great man and a servant or slave, each according to his actions superficializes the spiritual and [thereby] give degrading garments to the holy life-force.
And in [direct] accordance with the magnitude of the subtlety and integrity of the simple unity - in a person's separating the unity of the Holy One and Divine Presence via his superficializing himself, he 'cuts his plantings' God forbid (the small sprout is separated from its invisible deep roots) - small and/or large [alike], for in this he and all others are equal, whether [he is a] lenient or stringent [person]. For in all that the man is, [conversely] so are [the extent of] his evil ways. But no matter what everything ends up in one place - and causes the concealment of the Divine Presence and the world events which follow, God forbid, which castigate them in judgement and to 'teach the stray understanding' and to know God. 
From now on in all the events of the world every person needs to say 'for me' because this is the truth. It is in the hands of every person to rectify the event through the unification of the Holy One and the Divine Presence in himself. And according the words of the adage in the Zohar wherein the friends came to request [in regards to the] rain (/GSHM/ which is the same root as Material) of Rabbi Shimon Bar Yochai, and the content of his [response] was that the unity was not complete and face-to-face, and [then] he didn't move until he caused the complete unity by cleaving to His Torah. (See there the clarified language of the Zohar). 
And this is the matter of the unity of the Holy One [and the Divine Presence]: we understand what is written that prior to the sin of Adam "they Adam his wife were both naked and were not embarrassed of it", and [only] afterward "did they know of their nakedness. And God made for them garments of leather." The idea is as stated "And Adam became a living being", and Rashi of blessed memory explains "the [most] living of all of them (the creations)", meaning that the life-force in Adam was the life-force which was in all of the creation - from the very end of the act to the first thought - which is the entirety of the Torah and the unity of the Holy One and his Divine Presence. As our sages of blessed memory said, "He looked in the Torah and created...". If so, the bodies of Man are the bod(ies) of the Torah if all his ways are intentionally directed for God. And now there is no embarrassment over the naked body as it is the body of the Torah. If indeed as it is said "A thigh is ordinarily hidden" [then] so too the words of Torah are hidden - thus the body conceals the Torah in order that it exist inside of it and [the body] live through it, which is not the case after the sin when the body was separated [from the Torah] and they knew of their nakedness. And God made them leather garments which were [required] garments since for the entire Torah to exist it needed to become more material along with the body in the form of the physical Commandments. And it required further garments yet, as is said "the sheep you wear" - the Torah's existence required it to become concealed like a thigh. But bodies which are the bod(ies) of Torah "can sling [a stone] at a hair and not miss" which is [the idea] of the unity of the Holy One and the Divine Presence, and 'they do not feel shame' (an equivalence is made with the root /BSH/ in reference to the embarrassment of nakedness and garments which are both also derivative of the root /BSH/) and 'they cannot be made to blush'. 
And thus through all the variety of events in the world a man can know in his soul in what way(s) he opposes God, since the world itself is created for him and sustained and comports with his ways. [This is] like a servant who possesses all his master's goodly things [but] who [attempts to] flee (/BoReaCH/) from the dominion of his master. Yet with every step of his foot he [remains] in his master's dominion, and when they tell the [master] of his [servant's] flight, [his master] castigates him there and "there made for him a fixed rule and put them to the test" in order to know what is in his heart for perhaps he shall turn back.  However the servant who is the son of the servant of a master, wherein he was born in the master's house, would certainly not flee from [the master] and would serve forever, on account of the fact that his existence was service from the day he was born; his forefather's practices (legacy) is in his hands and his mother is the servant of his master. It is certain that a servant such as this would not flee and does not require any tests or judgement. And this is what King David of blessed memory meant "I am your servant, son of your maidservant", therefore [you may] "undo the cords that bind me", for the cords are only for [the purpose] of preventing his flight, [but] if he certainly will not flee, what need is there for the cords?
And so the body which certainly will not flee is the body of the Torah and the unity of the Holy One and the Divine Presence. And How [is this achieved]? Through Awe and Love, and Connection which is the constant cleaving. And this is what our sages [meant when they said] "There are three things a person must say in his home...", meaning 'in his body'. And their statement "... on Shabbat eve...", means preparation for Shabbat which is the unity of the Holy One and the Divine Presence. And their statement "...at nightfall" means when darkness of the intellect arises. And their statement "tithing" means Awe which is called Tithe, as is known. {And their statement "...the Eruv (conjoined)" means Love which conjoins two into one.} And their statement "lighting the candle(s)" means connection and cleaving as is the way of light which attaches to the wick via the oil, as it is said "your head shall never lack oil". And this is why they stated "one must say them calmly [so that the members of his household will accept them from him]" - meaning, that he must lure the body in order to bring it to these attributes (Awe, Love and Connection/Cleaving), which will create a body of Torah and the unity of the Holy One and the Divine Presence. 
Thus, the man that says that for him was the world created and it behaves that way - in accordance with the manner in which [the person] conducts himself before God and [in relation to] the various events of the world, he will perceive the deficiencies in himself and [therefore] see [how] to return to God, to return the unity face to face. He is called the 'righteous man, [the] foundation of the world'. For he is the one who interconnects all the worlds [since they] comport with him. And he is called "The center bar (/maBRiaCH/) halfway up the planks shall run from end to end", and is called 'Jacob' as it is said "You will give Truth to Jacob". For Truth is the 'Center Bar that runs' (/maBRiaCH/), as is known. And as for the statement[s] "Truth will sprout from the earth" and "Cast Truth to the ground" - for even in all earthliness (world of falsehood) the truth [is] stowed (maBRiaCH/) and connects to the root which is the attribute of Jacob.
And this the statement of the sages of blessed memory "'And behold the ladder was set on the ground...and its top reached...' this is Sinai" meaning the Torah. And the statement 'And behold the Angels of the Lord' which are Moses and Aaron' meaning, the righteous ones. For through the Torah which is the unification of the Holy One and the Divine Presence, the completely righteous ones' bodies become as the bod(ies) of the Torah and the ladder which runs (/maBRiaCH/) from the earth to the firmament. And this is "God was standing beside him" - absolutely God and not another - since for a person like him there is nothing else in this world but God himself the creator. And he is the solitary creation in the world, and the whole world was created for him. Thus the statement "I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac..." and, [am as well the God of] of this type of person. As King David said "I am your servant, son of your maidservant" as per above (for whom attempting to flee is inconsequential for he knows all the world is God's dominion as there is truly nothing in the world other than he and God). And as it is said " the ground on which you are lying I will assign to you" - [God] folded the whole earth beneath him; of course He did since the whole world comports in accordance with his behavior. 

Vayeshev

Our sages stated on the verse "And Joseph came home to do his work" - that is to fulfill his [sexual] needs [with her], but [instead] he saw the image of his father in the window. For at first blush the statement of the Sages of blessed memory is confusing that "Joseph obligates the wicked" {Yoma 35b} inasmuch as he did not sin. [But] did he not prevent himself from sin [only] on account of his seeing the bearded visage of his father - likely any evildoers who were to see such a thing would be prevented from sinning! However the matter is understood in the statement of the Sages of blessed memory: "The clothing which she wore in the morning, [and which] she did not wear in the evening]" in order to beautify herself for Joseph to find favor in his eyes. And this method of superficial adornment(s)/garbing is the way by which the Evil Inclination constantly tempts man while he wrestles him - and when [the Evil Inclination] sees that he is unable [to cause him to stumble] this way, then he garbs himself in a different idea. And if his traps do not entrap him also through that he will garb himself in another manner. Anything he can get his hands on to knock him down - through happiness or sadness, love or fear. And through this is the idea of a man's service of his Creator all the days of his life: For not all times are equal - [there is] "a time to love and a time to hate". Because man is (constantly) changes with every passing moment of life. As is known that he "strips of a form, he dons a form", for he cannot stand long on a single leg which is because "he is angry but a moment, when he wills it there is life" {Psalms 30} and so if he sinned and did not pray then his passed becomes malformed/distorted and he wont be able to contribute to being a man created to honor Him (the blessed one), and to beautify his creator in the name of the honor of His kingship, in a ways, at all times for good, in every aspect, and every place that he is standing. And if he missed a single prayer its impossible to make it up afterward by praying twice, for he will pray in a manner different (than he would have) given how he's changed. If so, it was accidental and "the merciful one exempts the unwitting culprit" for "this is the Lord's doing" these unwitting ones, and (similarly) it is his blessed will that there by a double prayer done in the same manner as now; but this is not the case with intentional culprits. And the idea of a person changing in his service of the blessed one is also called donning garments, for the dress of the morning is not the dress of the evening, but the idea of the garments of holiness or profanity, of spirituality or physicality, are all ideas of beauty/evanescence. For it is known that a permanent thing is not beautiful/evanescent, but for through change. And he "who does this in abundance it is laudable" and all the worlds will be in His blessed honor as it says "every one that is called by my name and whom I have created for My glory". And so from the day the Lord created Adam until the end of all generations, you wont find a single day the same as its fellow, and no moment equal to any other in the manner and state in which the worlds are operating from the highest places to the ends of the lowest worlds the hasnt been and will never be...from the six days of creation to the very end, any two moments that are the same, or two people the same, for if so what would be the point of the second person?! And the concept of change is what is referred to by [the idea of] "garment" as is explained. This is the "God is king, he is robed in grandeur" because the concept of kingship is the [connected to] the concept of the creation, for "there is no king without a nation", and a king robes in grandeur to make his greatness apparent via the garments. But the concept that change is what is referred to by the idea of "donning" [a garment] is because in truth all evanescence/beauty, of the physical world and unholiness, they dont have their own love or awe, only what comes from him, blessed be - "who illuminates from within them" and gives them life from his manner. And this is the idea of "his kingship is in everything" as is known for the "world was created with Lovingkindness", which is the idea of his spreading/projection. But there could not have been the possibility of any creation without the constriction of himself from being infinite and filling all. There had to be a constriction which is Strength. But through strength alone also the world could remain upheld, but through the sequence of concealment and expansion as it says - in the beginning it arose in his mind to create the world with the attribute of Strict Judgement but saw that the world would not be sustainable, so he paired it with the attribute of Mercy. For in regards to this pairing what is called Mercy, is called Lovingkindess which is the expansion without boundaries which lock the door from filling all the void. For if the void was to be filled then the entire creation would revert back to nullify to the simple and complete oneness. But the Mercy which pairs and arbitrates and blends, is the foundation of creation and its being, and it is called Beauty, per the above that the purpose of beauty is the abundance and change which is the concept of variety for through their abundance they beautify, not through single lone variety. And such is the concept that creation is via a partnership between Judgement and Mercy which is Beauty
"

Vayigash



Shemot



Vaera

...The questioner asked: Our rabbis commented on the verse “Your rod and Your staff — they comfort me” (Psalms 23:4). Your rod means afflictions and Your staff is Torah.
The rabbi began by citing the verse: “I appeared to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob as El Shaddai, but I did not make Myself known to them by My name Yud-Heh-Vav-Heh” (Exodus 6:3). Rashi observed that the verse does not say “I didn’t make known my name” since the Torah already says that “Yhvh appeared to Abraham.” Rather, this was not the name by which I was known to them.
And the Ramban raised a difficulty around Moshe’s statement that “I am slow of speech and slow of tongue” (Ex. 4:10). And if that is translated literally then the questions raised in the Talmud about the phrase “a lad crying” (Ex. 2:6) where it first says “a child.” Rather, his voice was that of a boy. If so, then God gave Moshe, our teacher, a speech impediment and Levites are disqualified from service if they have speech impediments, which complicates this [issue of his speech impediment] even more.
In the end, the Ramban says that it was God’s intent that Moshe have difficulty speaking [and that’s why God didn’t remove his speech impediment as further encouragement to accept the task]. For if Moshe spoke beautifully then he could have obscured the greatness of the Torah. 
Actually, the Torah is sweeter than honey, enlightening the eyes and restoring the soul, all of which was experienced at Sinai. However, if Moshe did not have a speech impediment, then the sweetness of Torah would have been tied to Moshe’s oratorical abilities. Thus, the the reverse had to be true and, despite Moshe’s speech difficulties, the sweetness and grace of Torah came through.
Now, in truth, the great ones did seek a way toward Divine service, but in fact Moshe was healed at the time the Torah was given, as it is written, “As Moses spoke, God answered him in thunder” (Ex. 19:19).
Indeed it is known that speech is important, for it is the essence of personhood and it is the advantage of that which speaks over the other living creatures. The Aramaic rendering of the verse “And Adam became a living being” is “a speaking spirit” which is the life force within the person (Gen. 2:7).
And so, in fact, because speech rules, commands, and oversees everything and it is the essential the vitality of the Divine. Speech is without understanding or image unless it is clothed in letters. But this is for its comprehension for the one who understands and hears, for without being clothed in the letters there is no way to understand what is being said.
And always, all the utterances of speech give the soul more pleasure, beauty, haste, and clarity in ways that a mouth speaking from a body cannot convey in many thousands of years, God’s spirit spoke within him/her and God’s words were on their tongue (II Samuel 23:2).
Each person who becomes accustomed in speech to be watchful and understand that it is not coming from within the person but rather from the good God who is really the speaker, creates a new heaven and earth as was at the beginning of creation, “the heavens were made by the word of God” (Psalms 33:6).
And what difference does make now whether a person attains, when speaking, how each utterance emerges from the Divine and descends so much until it can be heard from a person’s mouth. Therefore, anything spoken is a new creation, similar to what R. Akiva did whose learning caused a valley to be filled  with cucumbers and squash. And with others who purified themselves.
The greatness of speech is when it is in holiness; so is the opposite, God forbid, if the speech is for the speaker’s pleasure, God forbid, creating heavens which are empty, chaotic and give life to the k’lipot which then rule over the person. For it is this speaker who adds to their power as a result of the self-centred satisfaction which the person wants to receive and thus comes under their sway. Which is not the case when speaking God’s words with no desire for ego gratification at all. Rather, a person is tied by means of speech to the Blessed Creator of all, who therefore guides those words.
And so the Torah which is the creation of the worlds and their guidance from the origin of [God’s] desire and forever after, namely the ten commandments which are acquired through speech, as it is written: “And you shall speak of them” (Deut. 6:7). This is tying oneself to the Blessed God in a complete unity as mentioned. It is God who speaks and is heard by means of the vessel which is this person, without any image. However, this speech is beyond all categories (middot), which is different from speech which emerges from a particular category. It is already clothed in this category which itself is tied to all material matters since all of the lower creations emerge from these categories. Also, each category has a predictability, which prevents God’s word from being pure and clear, for the predictability leads to a forgetting. 
Even all the words of urging (mussar), no matter how refined and wonderfully logical and forceful the voices, cannot reawaken [the original clarity] because it is the predictability/the habitual itself which is the reason why God’s actions and wonders which the person has already seen or heard or knew several times, is forgotten. It is this speech which is without being clothed in a category at all except for faith in the words of the living God.
This is what is meant by the expression that one who is commanded and practices is greater that one who practices without being commanded (Bava Kama 38a) for whom the action isn’t a response to being spoken to. Rather, it is because of the category which compels, such as love or awe of the Blessed One. This is similar to the observance of Torah by Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob which was due to their categories / middot and not in response to a command since the Torah had not yet been given.
Now, speech which isn’t intrinsic to a specific attribute is like a flowing spring tied directly to the Ein Sof, the Blessed Infinite and from which it flows. All mouths tire themselves in the desire to speak God’s words and they are not enough to match the gushing forth of the Divine. This is not the case for speech which is clothed in an attribute, which functions in limbs, for it is the category/ middah which accustoms the limbs to speak in its vocabulary.
Therefore, Moses our teacher of blessed memory, who was beyond all the middot when he spoke, was called heavy of mouth, as in “And I appeared to Abraham, Isaac…,” who represent the middot, “as El Shaddai.” This is sufficient for Divinity as it is revealed to everyone. “But by my name, Yhvh, I was not known to them,” as in “it will be known (punished) through them,”1 also meaning a joining, that this speaking either rules everything or rules over itself, God forbid, if it is not as it should be. Which is not the case with speech which derives from the middot which has a relevance and closeness to all creatures, also via the middot.
This is what is in Sh’mot (5:22), that Moses complained – why did You make things worse for this people and why did You send me? He feared that maybe he had been mistaken with his words because they had failed to bring trust to them through his words as is explained elsewhere (above in Parashat Sh’mot). God replied, “Now you will see…that with a strong arm he will send them out…”
With a strong hand means the work of speech, that makes everything strong, which is the rod that rules all.
And so, every person who speaks words of Torah in this way is like him (Moses). And this is the meaning of “Your rod and staff,” which are the travails and the Torah in the way that he is heavy of mouth as mentioned above. Speech is a “searing wind” which either is in control or is controlled (i.e. selfishly used).1 These are the trials of Torah speech, and in this way they comfort me as the rabbis said (Kiddushin 30b), “I created the inclination for evil (separation); I created the Torah as an antidote.

Bo



Yitro



Mishpatim



Tetzaveh



Ki Tisa



Vayakhel Pekudei



Vayikra



Shabbat Pesach



Tazria



Achrei Mot



Behar



Nasso

1 The statement is asked "He who calculates his ways in this world will be worthy to behold the salvation of the Holy One, blessed be He; as it is said: To him that ordereth his way will I show the salvation of God"
2 This is expounded in the words of Rashi z'l "What has the matter of the Sabbatical year to do with Mount Sinai that Scripture fell compelled to expressly state where it was commanded? Were not all commandments given on Sinai? Etc..."
3 And our Sages of blessed memory said "With ten utterances was the world created, but behold with one utterance wasn't it able to be created?...But to bring goodly reward...Ten generations from Adam...Ten generations from Noah to Abraham...He received the reward of them all."
4 It is a puzzle that the "world is upon ten utterances and could have been on one.." and does God 'deal imperiously with his creations'? Insofar as he was able to create with a single utterance why did he create with ten utterances - in order to interpose punishment in the ten utterances? But in truth the concept of the ten utterances are ten instances of "And he said" as are written in the order of creation, in which each "And he said" was a different specific creation. As is known to us through the concept and knowledge revealed to us. For the concealed things are to God our Lord, but it is explained in the book of the Torah "And he said let there be light", "and there was a firmament", and so all the creation of the heavens and earth and pooled waters and animals and birds, and after them all "and He created man" who encompasses the upper and lower worlds, as Rashi z'l explains.
And our Sages of blessed memory said "the end of an action begins in thought", that all were only created for the sake of Man. And our Sages of blessed memory said "The whole world was not created except for this [Man]". And so the entire world behaves in accordance with Man as its says "And have dominion over the fish of the sea...", And has King David peace be upon him said "You made him have dominion over the works of his hand all which you put under his feet". And as the concept is in the lower worlds, so to it is in the upper worlds which were created with Man over them all. As our Sages of blessed memory said "There is not a blade of grass below which does not have an Angel above...which tells it to grow", And once Man existed to rule over everything below, also he rules over the angels and their superiors and the upper worlds which were created for him, for he is King over all. 'With this the world(s) ascend and with this they descend'. And via the spirit of Man which ascends ever high in order to cling to Him who is blessed or the spirit of Man and Animal which descends very low God forbid, and all the worlds and creations follow him inasmuch as they are all included with him, as is known that the animal soul in Man is the soul of desire, and all the creations accordingly. And if Man pursues his animal soul (desires), he becomes an animal in the form/appearance of man, and in the thing which he spoiled he must rectify, as its explained in relation to the sacrifice of the Sotah - where she acted as an animal, her offering feeds an animal. And this is the conception of all sacrifices/offerings "from an animal...from cattle...from sheep". Apart from the hidden things which are the God our Lord, the idea is to rectify his animal action and return to God as the priests will instruct him when he brings his sacrifice. And through this all the lowest creatures are elevated up high and those which 

Beha'alotcha

The passuk reads " The riffraff in their midst felt a gluttonous craving...they cried for their families"
Rashi comments z'l "on account of the family affairs..." And the notion that [Moshe] spoke strongly "Why have You dealt ill with Your servant... If You would deal thus with me, kill me rather, I beg You, and let me see no more of my wretchedness!”
This idea is in accordance with the saying of the Sages z'l in Ethics of our Fathers, "Each day a heavenly voice emerges from mount Horeb and declares..." For it is known that there are six hundred thousand souls in Israel, accordingly the same [number of] letters in the Torah; as is known the the Torah, The Holy One, and Israel are all one, and Israel is the body of/for the Torah, and it is known that through the Torah The Holy One created the world which is letters. And there can be nothing in the world without the letters which bring life to it for they are the speech of The Holy One and if the letters disappeared and weren't perceptible, the speaker prior to his speaking what can be said of his speech(?) - that the letters are in potential and not perceptible - it is a general principle is that the life force of each thing are the letters within it. And if a man sins God Forbid, the letters which are the life-force enter Evil and give power to Evil, and also it doesn't appear in the eyes of the flesh that the truth is known. And thus he gives a confession of [these] things in saying 'I sinned' with bitterness of heart on account of his Awe of God combined with Love of God. And through this the letters which were providing life-force to Evil leave and the Evil is left without the life-force and is consequently nullified. 
And so a person [must] remember [this] and take care during his learning the Torah how he speaks the letters of the Torah, for with them was the world created, and by himself attach the letters to their root letters in the Torah, which was given like this to the world through 'thunder and lightening' in order that 'the fear of God should be upon you and you will be without sin', as explained. In any case, if 'awe' and 'fear' befall a person in 'thunder and lightening', its seems apparent that he would not sing, God forbid. For how could there be the possibility of sin with all that. And this is the idea of the 'heavenly voice which goes forth', they are the letter of the Torah inside every person who recalls and declares them daily. And he who doesn't not hear the heavenly voice [and for whom] it is as if he did not declare, 'woe unto him...for insulting the Torah' which is inside of him. And this is the meaning of 'for anyone who does not involve himself in the Torah' meaning - who is not inscribed in the Torah, "he is called "rebuked"'; for this is the idea of rebuke for a person which changes his 'face to redness'
Our Rabbis of holy memory said that all the souls of Israel until Moshiach stood at Sinai and received the Torah, which are the letters of their roots whose 'remembrancers take no rest'. IT is known that Moshe is the Knowledge of all of Israel who are the six hundred thousand souls. And the Manna was on account of Moshe's merit in order to enliven Israel with bread from Heaven which since it was spiritually flavored, any desired taste, which is the life-force itself without any rain because Moshe was separated from his wife which is the aspect of physicality, so thus Israel was provided sustenance - and this is 'the Torah wasn't given except to those who ate Manna' for it is the life-force which are the letters which is not the case in regards to physical eating which is a "whisperer [which] separateth familiar friends". This is why we must be careful in regards to eating the heart of an animal on account of the soul which depends on it. And so upon Israel eating the Manna, the shed their [physical] filth and did not desire a single [animalistic] urge or love of physicality only for God himself. 
But the 'Rabble-rousers' who were not of Israel, but who also were refined upon eating the Manna and ought not have desired any physicality, nonetheless they had such urges. Meaning, that they desired to love of physicality [again], because they were not of Israel, and it was impossible for them to exist entirely with their life-force being Knowledge, and thus they asked to eat meat. 

Sh'lach

In the passuk of Sh'lach Lecha: Rashi z'l explains that The Holy One did not consent rather only did not protest against then, and said 'if you want, send'.
And the concept is related to the Sages z'l who said "Three goodly gifts did the Holy One give to Israel, and all were on account of suffering, Torah, the Land of Israel, and the World to Come", and they explained them all from what it written.
The concept it - it is known that our Sages z'l said "Through the Torah the Holy One cared the world", and these are the letters of the Torah as is known, and it is expounded in the Sefer Yetzirah and affixed in the mouth that the letters were affixed regularly in the mouth, and the illumination of the letters awaken all the worlds from the [supernal] attributes and downward, for they are the origin of the worlds and their revelation, in this aspect of 'I will build the world from loving-kindness', and there's nothing desirable which will be beyond the attributes rather [he merely need] call-out [to him]. This is recalled by the Zohar by 'a loud depth' which is upward - for it is the depth of the heart, which cannot be garbed in the letters.
 It is known that the truth and nature of the creations is to gravitate toward their root, 'the passage's purpose is to drag' - It is the way of the Inanimate to sprout and elevate from its place, and the way of the Animate things to grow in order to enter the life of the Speaking things. Though they know nothing [of it] they are imprinted [to be this way] naturally. And if so, it is appropriate to [therefore] refer [this to] the letters of the Torah which through them was the world created in order to gravitate toward its source. For the attributes precede the creation of the world by two thousand years, are the entire physical creation extended from [them] from its origin, for there is nothing without the attributes. And they are the [thing which] stands up the body from the lower and its life-force to the ever higher. So separating the life-force from the body until its nullification from emotion [to the point wherein] there would be no difficult suffering from it, as it known by those who investigate that all the sufferings of the body come from the the powers of the heart, and every suffering is a separation from cleaving [to the divine]. And this is the concept of all weakness, may God have mercy, as is known from the concept of the separation of the soul from the body which is from the seven judgments, as is known.
Indeed in this case there is no separation, for their remains an imprint from the perspective of the concealed spirituality. Nevertheless, it is understandable that sufferings increase until the body remains standing without any life-force, as is known from the Prophets and Writings of Daniel and his successors, who were truly sick from their nullification of their feelings.
Our Sages z'l bring forth the saying 'blessed is the man who God torments and learns from his Torah', and we can explain this in a few ways. 1 - It is known that [the divine name] YH is half of the name [HVYH], and all the defects of man are a result of separating the letters of God('s) [name] as is known.  There are people of unrefined bodies who do not suffer except by bring hit or trampled, for the fool will understand from the rebuke of these blows a hundred [times as much], for he is tortured by [these] things, which would not work without these torments for he is unrefined. This is not the case in regards to the freedom of one who has the Torah, inscribed on the tablets. And our Sages z'l explained freedom, as is known, as the 'world of freedom', that he understands and is wise, which is known that they are [the] two thousand years and are higher than the attributes, he suffers from things which are the letters gravitating toward their source which is the Torah.
And this is as the Sages z'l explained with the words " 'And teach him from your Torah' we learn from an a fortiori inference from the law of 'an eye and a tooth' through which the salve attains his freedom; suffering that cleanses a person's entire body all the more so...' And the abrasions refine the physicality and nullify the evil completely. For he had involved good and evil in all his attributes and could not return in the state he was, like 'tooth and eye' which cannot [ever] be returned. And in this this we can resolve the difficulty that the world is beset with suffering - and the body to its strength. And a person that "understands" is tormented by these things - attaining understanding of the separation of the letters which occurred by his hand God forbid. And this is "Happy is the man God {YH} torments"; meaning, the Wisdom and Understands which are Y and H. And this is "teach him from your Torah" which are the bodies of the Torah, accordingly he gifted the Land of Israel through suffering.
But this requires a bit of explanation. As is known in relation to the concept of the Manna that it was a bread from heaven, and was one a level above the Earth and as spiritual as is known. This is seemingly difficult for how is it possible to misuse something divine from God for [evil] urges, and for it to be spiritual food as it was divorced from evil?
But the concept is as is known from the statement of the Zohar "Even an angel that desires to be seen in this world needs to dress in garments of this world". And this is the way of all spiritual simplicity - that is conforms in its descent to the manner and way of the vessel in which is dresses, as is known from the analogy of water which conforms to the shape of the vessel whether circular or square. And thus even the simple spiritual in its descent into Man and its entry, changes in accordance with the man, if he is good or bad will come to fruition. For all will come to fruition according to what the Man is. In the scornful person the spiritual causes all the more evil, because much of the spiritual life-force is thin in the shell {k'lipa} and a scornful person resultantly becomes more and more [evil]. God's intention in giving the Land of Israel to Israel was to sustain them with the sustenance of the Land of Israel which is in the quality of the Manna, and "absorbs water from the rains of heaven", which is the Holy one himself and not via a ministering [angel], and as is explained in the sefer Chesed L'Avraham, which is therefore why the eating of Manna ceased upon going to the Land [of Israel], because they did not require it. This is per the first idea [above].
This is as we've already learned that everything is according the the way of the person, and God forbid is can further actualized as referenced [above], because everything depends on preparation and the how one invites [the process]. The rule is accordance with why he eats - if [he eats] in order to resist then he is more spiritual and thin, and [if he eats] in order to actualize physicality then he becomes that way. Ad its explained "the two that ate the Paschal offering" where our Sages z'l said of them "and the just walk in them and sinners stumble over them".
If it is a man's intention to polish [spiritually], his purpose and gaze is entirely on spiritual life-force, but this is not the case in regards to a person who's desires rule his purpose and gaze in accordance with 'the physical desire among you'. Therefore, God said 'I swear that I will give them now an opportunity to fall into error' - I gave them free will and anyone who desires to err it is open to him. In this way it is possible to explain the passuk "Indeed, of Zion it will be said    'This one and that one were born in her, and the Most High himself will establish her.” The one born in her and the one who awaits to see her, the Sages z'l said "the place in which the penitent stand, the completely righteous cannot stand' as explained by the Rambam z'l that the remorse of the penitent must be the same in this manner - that he regrets his existence in the world in general as chooses with truthful heart. For it is better not to be in the world and do evil, and this is utter self-sacrifice and higher than the attributes.
And this is "and Zion" who are the excellent {/mZuIONim/} righteous as is known. Each one 

Korach



Balak



Pinchas

We find in the Talmud “From where do we know that a priest with a physical defect is invalid.? As it says ‘Behold I give him my covenant of peace (/SHaLOM/)’, when is he whole/complete (/SHaLeM/) therefore and not lacking. This is problematic however for SHaloM is written, with a VaV (and therefore does not have the meaning of complete/whole). But the Vav is severed (and therefore it may be read as having the meaning complete/whole). Elsewhere the Talmud explains the verse from Psalms “Pinchas stood in reckoning (VaYiPaLeL). VaYiTPaLeL (prayer) is not written, rather VaYiPaLeL (entreaty), to teach that he made a ׳reckoning׳ )(PeLiLaH) with his Creator. 
The idea shall be explained per the section of the Zohar on the verse “Swear to me daughters of Jerusalem, that if you find my lover what will you tell him - that I am love sick!” There Zohar expounds that the Shechina makes all the Souls lowered to this world swear that they will relay to the Holy One of her love sickness for Him. In order to explain this idea, it is known that the Zohar states “He who has Awe of Heaven, lacks nothing at all, as it says ‘Nothing is lacking for those who fear them”. The idea is further explain through the statement in the Talmud that “Ben Zoma saw a myriad at the Temple Mount...and he said ‘Blessed is he who created these to serve me’”. And it is a great rebuke and fear which a person places upon his heart when he perceives that the entire world was created only for him, and that the Schechina therefore garbs herself in very many details (of the creation) and people without end or count - in many physical forms, so that perhaps he may exert himself to do what is right and good in the eyes of Hashem. And so all the more so, is she is forced to garb herself in punishment or the nations of the world God Forbid, in order to subjugate his heart and to come to fear Hashem and do the will of his Creator. It is the case that when a person prays to Hashem over something which is lacking him, the primary effort is to place upon his heart the lowliness of the Shechina; for it is fitting that she be complete in all the worlds, [meaning that] that the Jewish person have dominion over all things - all that’s created, formed and made as did King Shlomo or Moshe Rabeinu may peace me upon them. 
For such was the case at the beginning of creation as it says “[man is] sovereign over the fish of the sea” and nothing was lacking then; conversely when man experiences lack it certainly implies that the Shechina has been forced to garb herself in that lack on his account, so that his heart is moved with passion toward Hashem. Thus he shudders from the truest point of his heart, and won’t focus at all in his prayer on the fulfillment of his personal lack, rather only on the lack of the Shechina which isn’t receiving bounty from Hashem wholly while she’s forced to garb herself in lack. And it is known that every Jew is a limb of the Shechina and a messenger like her. And this is the meaning of “Swear to me daughters...”, that the Shechina causes all the Souls of Israel to swear that if they come upon Hashem may he be blessed, they will tell Him of her love sickness for Him, per above - that they will garb themselves in the grief of the Shechina and not be considering their own lack at all. This is the meaning of “he who has awe [of heaven]...”, for that is [he who is] cleaving to the Shechina “lacks nothing at all”. The meaning is that there is nothing at all lacking to his soul and he does not aim at [that personal lack] at all, for all of [what he personally lacks] is insignificant relative to the lack of a Shechina when he [makes] his passions her passion. And he entire world is like nothing to him compared to this grief and the magnitude of this passion which [becomes] his entire force [of being] and he cannot suffer it any longer. Then it seems to him a thousand thousand times better than he should perish from his life, for what does it mean to him to relinquish himself and sacrifice himself to sanctify His name which would bring Him profound pride and pleasure at the very source of love and joy. When a person exists with this force he is entirely detached from the source of judgement and is [in fact] beyond the very judgement/law of Torah [itself], and it’s impossible for him to [actively] consider going by the word of Torah, on account of this divine lovesickness. 
This was Pinchas in his passion for the passion of Hashem when he witnessed the lowliness of the Shechina. This is in accordance with the statement of the Baal Shem Tov that everything a person perceives in this world is [precisely] what he needs [to perceive] (and therefore, what he does not perceive, is not necessary for him to perceive) - so Pinchas [simply] acted and self-abnegated relative to the [strict] word of Torah.  For gas he asked a learned man whether or not he was obligated to a negate himself among 24,000 and kill Zimri, they would not be [even] have permitted it him to do so. But by his own life,  Pinchas was unable to stand for it, and the law of Torah didn’t [even] arise in his mind on account of the great lowliness of the Shechina. And this is what is written “vayiPaLeL”, that he made a ‘reckoning’ (PeLiLah) with his Creator (the meaning of PeLiLah is Judgment as in ‘PeLiLim’), and made a new judgement/law on account of the divine lovesickness. In this manner judgements are sweetened, and a person who prays in this way has his prayers answered for behold the judgements have been sweetened. And this is the meaning of “if his prayer is fluent (/SHaGURaH/) in his mouth”; ‘fluent’ indicates a ‘mission’ as in “I sent (/SHaGaRani/) to you”, for the prayer of his mouth is a messenger of the Shechina. Inasmuch as it he is a limb of the Shechina, he must garb himself in her and send her prayer to Hashem. And this is the indication which Rashi of blessed memory gives in relation to the words “his prayer is fluent” - that the prayer flows from his mouth and is spoken without any obstruction which would make it despised and rejected, as is explained in the holy Zohar (R”M Pinchas, 228.). And it is further explain in the Zohar (Part 1, 241:), on the verses Rahab the Prostitute - “provide me a symbol of Truth”. She requested the sign of Moshe who is [the letter] Vav which [represents] a complete or whole drawing forth, which has no break in it; this is the idea of Truth, as is known. And the messengers retorted that they cannot provide such a symbol for Moshe has died and it is now the reign of Joshua, who is the aspect of “the crimson cord you shall tied’; as is known from the red string [which turns] white (on the Day of Atonement), which is the sweetening of judgements. And this is as the known verse in Song of Songs “your lips are like a red cord’ - meaning, if my prayer is fluent in my mouth etc... and this is the explanation that a defective Priest is invalidated via the verse “behold I have given him my covenant of peace (with a lacking/broken Vav which spells ‘complete’), and to which they retorted that the word is however in fact written with a Vav - meaning, that a place (the Vav which is Truth which is connection to the Shechina) from which it is impossible to be lacking/broken. What is not the case where Pinchas was a messenger of the Shechina and from the severed red Vav of SHaLOM which is the small Vav. 

Matot Masei



Devarim



Vaetchanan



Shabbat Nahamu



Eikev

Our Sages of blessed memory nicknamed Fear (of heaven) with the name "External Keys" and it is the gate to God, the righteous shall may enter 
And those of blessed memory taught two such "openings. As said "Open for me as an eye of a needle" which is Fear of Heaven, a point in relation to Love, and without the Fear there 

Re'eh



Shoftim



Ki Teitzei



Ki Tavo



Letters

