Mishneh Torah, Transmission of the Oral Law
משנה תורה, מסירת תורה שבעל פה
Maimonides' Mishneh Torah, edited by Philip Birnbaum, New York, 1967
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH002108864

Mishneh Torah, Transmission of the Oral Law

All the precepts that were given to Moses at Sinai were given with their interpretation, as it is written: "I will give you the stone tablets with the teaching and the commandment" (Exodus 24:12). <i>Teaching</i> implies the written Torah, and <i>commandment</i>—its interpretation. He has commanded us to practise what the Torah teaches in accordance with the <i>Mitzvah</i>, which is referred to as the Oral Torah. Moses wrote the entire Torah himself before he died, and presented a copy to each tribe. He placed one copy in the Ark as a witness, as it is written: "Take this book of the Torah and place it beside the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord your God…" (Deuteronomy 31:26). He did not write down the <i>Mitzvah</i>, which is the interpretation of the Torah, but bequeathed it to the elders, to Joshua, and to all the people of Israel, as it is written: "Be careful to observe everything that I am commanding you…" (13:1). For this reason, it is called Oral Torah. Although the Oral Torah was not committed to writing, Moses taught the whole of it to the seventy elders who were included in his court. Elazar, Phineas and Joshua, the three of them, received it from Moses. He handed down the Oral Torah to Joshua, the disciple of our teacher Moses, and charged him concerning it. Joshua, too, taught it orally throughout his life. Many elders received the oral tradition from Joshua; Eli received it from the elders and from Phineas; Samuel received it from Eli and his court; and David received it from Samuel and his court.— —
Our saintly Rabbi Judah compiled the Mishnah. From the days of Moses to the time of our saintly Rabbi Judah they had composed no work to be taught in public on subjects of the Oral Torah; but in each generation, the head of the supreme court, or a prophet who lived in that period, would note down for himself a memorandum of the traditions which he apprehended from his teachers, transmitting them to the public orally. So too, everyone would note down for his own use as much as he could the traditional intrepretation of the Torah and the rules of conduct that were based on it, as he perceived them.— — This used to be the regular procedure until the appearance of our saintly Rabbi Judah. He compiled all the traditions, laws, comments, and interpretations, which had been transmitted by our teacher Moses and by the courts of the preceding generations, with regard to the entire Torah. He employed all this material, of which he composed the work of the Mishnah. Then he taught it diligently to the students in public, so that it became well known to all the people of Israel, who made copies of it and taught it everywhere, so that the Oral Torah might not be forgotten among the Jewish people.
Now, why did our saintly Rabbi Judah do what he did and did not leave things as they were? Because he realized that the number of students kept decreasing, while ever new troubles kept coming; a wicked government was spreading out in the world and rising in power; the Jewish people were wandering about, migrating to distant localities. So he composed a work, designed as a handbook for everybody, in order that they might study from it speedily and that it should not be forgotten. He spent all his life teaching the Mishnah in public together with his colleagues, members of his court.— —
Rav compiled the Sifra and the Sifré to explain and to impart the principles of the Mishnah. Rabbi Hiyya compiled the Tosefta to explain the subject matter of the Mishnah. Similarly, Rabbi Hoshaya and Bar Kappara compiled Baraithoth to interpret the wording of the Mishnah. Rabbi Yoḥanan compiled the Jerusalem Talmud, in Eretz Yisrael, about three centuries after the destruction of the Temple.— —
Ravina and Rav Ashi were the last sages of the Talmud. Rav Ashi compiled the Babylonian Talmud, in Babylonia, about one century after Rabbi Yoḥanan's compilation of the Jerusalem Talmud.— — It follows therefore that Ravina and Rav Ashi, together with their colleagues, were the last great sages who transmitted the Oral Torah.— —
The scholars who rose shortly after the compilation of the Talmud and studied it deeply became famous for their wisdom. They are called Geonim. The Geonim who rose in Eretz Yisrael and Babylonia, Spain and France, studied the method of the Talmud, elucidated its obscure passages, and explained its subject matter; for indeed, the way of the Talmud is exceedingly deep.— — The inhabitants of every town addressed many questions to each contemporary Gaon and asked for explanations of difficult passages in the Talmud. The Geonim would answer the questions to the best of their knowledge. Those who posed the questions compiled the responsa into books for purposes of study.
The Geonim of successive generations also wrote commentaries on the Talmud. Some of them intrepreted specific laws, while others explained particular chapters that were found difficult in their time. Still others expounded complete tractates and entire orders of the Talmud. They also made compilations of established rules concerning what is forbidden or permissible, what is or is not punishable, in matters of immediate concern, so as to make them intelligible to anyone who cannot penetrate the depths of the Talmud. All the Geonim of Israel were engaged in this work of the Lord ever since the Talmud was compiled until this date, which is the eighth year of the eleventh century after the destruction of the Temple, corresponding to the year four thousand nine hundred thirty-seven since the creation of the world (1177 common era).
At the present time, when severe disasters keep following one another and the needs of the moment brush aside all things, our wise men lose their wits, and the understanding of our clever people is hidden. Hence, the commentaries, the codes of law and the responsa, which were written by the Geonim who regarded them as easily intelligible, have presented difficulties in our days, so that a mere few are capable of understanding their subject matter properly. Needless to say that this applies particularly to the Talmud itself, the Babylonian as well as the Palestinian, the Sifra, the Sifré, and the Tosefta, works that require wide knowledge, a learned mind, and ample time.— —
I bestirred myself therefore, I, Moshe ben Maimun the Sefardi, and relied upon the Creator, blessed be he, and made a thorough study of all these books, and decided to put down in writing the results obtained from all these works as to what is prohibited or permitted, unclean or clean, and the other laws of the Torah— — all in plain language and concisely, so that the entire Oral Torah might become familiar to all systematically, without arguments and counterarguments, one man saying so and another something else; but rather clear, convincing statements, governed by the logic derived from all these compilations and commentaries that have appeared since the time of Moses until now, so that all the laws be open to old and young alike, whether they belong to the precepts of the written Torah or to the enactments and ordinances introduced by sages and prophets. In brief, in order that no one should be in need of any other work dealing with the laws of Israel, this work is to include the entire oral Torah along with the ordinances, customs and decrees instituted from the time of Moses till the compilation of the Talmud, and in accord with what the Geonim explained to us in all their works composed after the Talmud.
I have named this work <i>Mishneh Torah</i> because the person who first reads the Written Torah and then this <i>Mishneh Torah</i> will know from it the entire Oral Torah without having to read any other book between them.— —
The number of precepts of the Torah that are observed through all generations is six hundred thirteen. Two hundred forty-eight of these, corresponding to the number of bones in the human body, are affirmative; three hundred sixty-five precepts, corresponding to the number of days in the solar year, are negative.