Mishneh Torah, Transmission of the Oral Law
משנה תורה, מסירת תורה שבעל פה
merged
http://www.sefaria.org/Mishneh_Torah,_Transmission_of_the_Oral_Law
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-http://www.sefaria.org



Mishneh Torah, Transmission of the Oral LawAll the mitzvot that were given to Moshe on Sinai - they were given with their explanation, as it is written: "and I will give thee the tables of stone, and the law and the commandment." (Exodus 24:12) "The Law" - this refers to the written Torah; "the commandment" - this refers to the explanation. And He [HaShem] commanded to do [i.e., perform] the Law according to the commandment. And this commandment - this is called the Torah sheb'al Peh [Oral Law].
The whole Torah was written by our teacher Moses before he died, in his hand. And he gave a book [of the Torah] to each and every one of the tribes. And one scroll he placed in the ark for a witness, as it is written: "Take this book of the law, and put it by the side of the ark of the covenant of the LORD your God, that it may be there for a witness against thee." (Deuteronomy 31:26).
The commandment, which is the explanation of the law, he did not write. But [instead] he commanded to the Elders [of Israel], to Joshua and to the rest of all of Israel, as it is written: "All this word which I command you, that shall ye observe to do." (Deuteronomy 13:1) And because of this it is called the Oral Law.
Even though the Oral Law was not written, Moshe our Teacher taught all of it [the law] in his Bet Din to the seventy elders. And Elazar, Pinchas and Yehoshua - [these] three received [the Law] from Moshe. And Yehoshua who was a student of Moshe our Teacher, he [Moshe] transmitted the Oral Law to him and instructed him in it. And likewise Yehoshua taught it all the days of his life.
And many elders received [the Law] from Yehoshua. And Eli received it from the elders and from Pinchas. And Shmuel received it from Eli and his court, and David received it from Shmuel and his court. And Achiya the Shilonite had left Egypt, and he was a Levi, and he heard [the Law] from Moshe, but he was a young lad in the days of Moshe. And so he received it from David and his court.
And Eliyahu received it from Achiya the Shilonite and his court, and Elisha received it from Eliyahu and his court, and Yehoyada the Priest received it from Elisha and his court, and Zekharya received it from Yehoyada and his court, and Hoshea received it from Zekharya and his court; Amos received it from from Hoshea and his court, and Yeshaya received it from Amos and his court, and Mikha received it from Yeshaya and his court, and Yoel received it from Mikha and his court; Nachum received it from Yoel and his court, and Chabakuk received it from Nachum and his court; Tzephania received it from Chabakuk and his court, Yirmiyahu received it from Tzephania and his court; Baruch ben Neryah received it from Yirmiyahu and his court. Ezra and his court received it from Baruch ben Neryah and his court.
Ezra's court was called "men of the great assembly" and comprised: Hagai, Zecharia, Malachi, Daniel, Chananiah, Mishael, Azaria, Nechemiah son of Chachliah, Mordechai, Zerubavel and a great many wise men with them to total 120 elders. The last of them was Shimon the righteous, and he was one of the 120, and received the Oral Torah from all of them. He became the High Priest after Ezra.
Antigonos of Sokho and his court received it from Shimon the righteous and his court; and Yosef ben Yoezer of Tsereda and Yosef ben Yochanan of Jerusalem and their court received it from Antigonos of Sokho and his court; and Yehoshua ben Prachia and Nittai the Arbelli and their court received it from Yosef and Yosef and their court; and Yehuda ben Tavai and Shimon ben Shetach and their court received it from Yehoshua and Nittai and their court. Shemaya and Avtalyon - the righteous converts - and their court received it from Yehuda and Shimon and their court; and Hillel and Shammai and their court received it from Shemaya and Avtalyon and their court; And Rabban Yochanan ben Zakai and Rabban Shimon the son of Hillel received it from Hillel and his court.   
Rabban Yochanan ben Zakai had five students and they were the greatest of sages, and these are them: Rabbi Eliezer the Great, Rabbi Yehoshua, Rabbi Yose the Priest, Rabbi Shimon ben Netanel and Rabbi Elazar ben Arakh. And Rabbi Akiva ben Yosef received it from Rabbi Eliezer the Great - and his father, Yosef, was a righteous convert. And Rabbi Yishmael and Rabbi Meir - son of the righteous convert - received it from Rabbi Akiva; and Rabbi Meir and his colleagues also received it from Rabbi Yishmael. 
And the colleagues of Rabbi Meir - they were Rabbi Yehuda, Rabbi Nechemia, Rabbi Elazar ben Shamua, Rabbi Yechonan the cobbler, Shimon ben Azzai and Rabbi Chananya ben Teradyon. And so [too] did the colleagues of Rabbi Akiva receive it from Rabbi Eliezer the Great. And the colleagues of Rabbi Akiva - they were Rabbi Tarfon the teacher of Rabbi Yose Hagelili, Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar and Rabbi Yochanan ben  Nuri.
Rabban Gamliel the Elder received if from Rabban Shimon his father, the son of Hillel; and Rabban Shimon his son received it from him and Rabban Gamliel his son received it from him and Rabban Shimon his son received it from him. And Rabbi Yehuda the son of Rabban Shimon - he is the one that is called Our Holy Rabbi - he, received if from his father and from Rabbi Elazar ben Shamua and from Rabbi Shimon his colleague.
Rabbeinu Hakadosh composed the Mishnah. From the days of Moshe until Rabbenu Hakadosh they did not compose a composition from which to teach the Oral Law in public. But in each generation the head of the Beth Din, or the prophet that lived in that generation, would write for himself reminders of that which he had heard from his teachers, and then he would teach those orally in public.
And so, each and every one wrote down for himself according to his ability, of clarifications of the Torah and its laws as he heard, and the innovations of each generation, about laws that weren't derived from tradition, but rather from the properties of the 13 principles, and which were decided upon by the Great Court. So it always was, until Rabbenu Hakadosh.
He collected all the teachings, all the laws, and all the explanations and commentaries that were heard from Moses, our teacher, and which were taught by the courts in each generation concerning the entire Torah. From all these, he composed the text of the Mishnah. He taught it to the Sages in public and revealed it to the Jewish people, who all wrote it down. They spread it in all places so that the Oral Law would not be forgotten by the Jewish people.
Why did Rabbenu Hakadosh make [such an innovation] instead of perpetuating the status quo? Because he saw the students becoming fewer, new difficulties constantly arising, the Roman Empire18 spreading itself throughout the world and becoming more powerful, and the Jewish people wandering and becoming dispersed to the far ends of the world. [Therefore,] he composed a single text that would be available to everyone, so that it could be studied quickly and would not be forgotten. Throughout his entire life, he and his court taught the Mishnah to the masses.
These are the great Sages who were part of the court of Rabbenu Hakadosh and who received the tradition from him: His sons, Shimon and Gamliel, Rabbi Effess, Rabbi Chanina ben Chama, Rabbi Chiyya, Rav, Rabbi Yannai, bar Kafra, Shemuel, Rabbi Yochanan, Rabbi Hoshaia. Thousands and myriads of other sages received the tradition from [Rabbenu Hakadosh] together with these great sages.
Even though all of the eleven sages mentioned above received the tradition from Rabbenu Hakadosh and attended his study sessions, [there are differences between them. At that time,] Rabbi Yochanan was of lesser stature. Afterwards, he became a disciple of Rabbi Yannai and received instruction from him. Similarly, Rav received the tradition from Rabbi Yannai, and Shemuel received the tradition from Rabbi Chanina ben Chama
Rav composed the Sifra and the Sifre to explain and make known the principles of the Mishnah, and Ribbi Hiyya authored the Tosefta to explain the contents of the Mishnah. Ribbi Hoshaya and bar Kappara also authored external Mishnayot to highlight the words of the Mishnah. And Ribbi Yohanan authored the Jerusalem Talmud in Eretz Israel approximately 300 years after the destruction of the (II) Temple...



All these rabbis are the leaders of their generations - some of them were heads of Yeshivah, some the leaders of the Exile and some of the Great Bet Din (Sanhedri), and with them in each generations there were tens of thousands of disciples, learning from them and with them.
Ravina and rav Ashe are the last of the sages of the Talmud. rav Ashe authored the Babylonian Talmud on the land of Shinar, approximately one hundred years after Ribbi Yohanan authored the Jerusalem Talmud.
The essence of both Talmuds is an explanation of the words of the Mishnah and illumination of its depths, as well as matters which were innovated by each rabbinical court from the time of Rabbi Judah the Holy up to the completion of the Talmud. The two Talmuds, the Tosefta, the Sifra and Sifre, and the Toseftas -  [are the sources from which ] will be clarified the concepts of forbidden and permissible, the impure and the pure, the punishable and the exempt, the qualified and the disqualified, as they have transmitted, person from person, all the way to Moshe at Sinai.
They will also clarify the concepts decreed by the sages and the prophets of each generation, to create a fence for te Torah, as they have explicitly heard from Moshe "guard my guard" (Lev. 18:30) meaning: "make a guard for my guard."...
They will also clarify the customs and regulations created in each generation, as was deemed necessary by the rabbinic court of the time, since one is not allowed to veer from them, as it is written "you shall not veer from their word to the right or to the left" (Deut. 17:11).
...Also, laws and legislations which are פלאיים [unique/distinct/without precedent] which they have not received from Moshe, and the Great rabbinical court of that generation analyzed using the methods of the interpretation of the Torah, and the elders reached a decision on what the law should be - all was included by rav Ashe in the Talmud - from the time of Moshe until Rav Ashe's time.
The sages of the Mishnah wrote other books to explain the words of the Torah. Ribbi Hoshaya, a disciple of Ribbi Judah the Holy, wrote a commentary on Genesis, and Ribbi Yishmael commented on the Torah from Exodus to the end, a book called Mekhilta, Ribbi Akiva as well authored a Mekhilta. Other rabbis after them authored books of Midrash, and all this was written before the Babylonian Talmud.
To conclude: Ravina, Rav Ashe, and their colleagues are the last sages of Israel who transmitted the Oral Law, and who decreed decrees, made regulations and created customs which became accepted by all Israelites wherever they live.
After the court of rav Ashe, who authored and canonized the Talmud during his son's lifetime, the Israelites were dispersed all over the land in extreme measure, and have reached the end of the world and the far islands. There were also great wars and the roads were blocked by armies, and the level of Torah learning has diminished, and the Israelites did not gather in their Yeshivot to study by the tens of thousands as it was done before.  
Rather some individuals, the remnants named by God (see Joel 3:5), would gather in each town and country and study Torah, and master the works of all the sages, and from them they learned the way of the law.
Each court which was established after the Talmud in any country, and made decrees, regulations, or customs, to its country or other countries, its decision have not spread through the whole people - because of the dispersion and the difficulty of traveling. Also, that court was considered an individual since the great court, of seventy members, has been annulled many years prior to the canonization of the Talmud. Th..
Therefore we cannot force the residents of one country to follow the custom of another country, and we do not tell a court to make a decree similar to the one made by a different court [even] in the same country. Also, if one of the Geonim taught the way of the law in one manner, and a later court understood that it differs from the way of the law as written in the Talmud, we do not follow the earlier, but rather to the one whose argument is more convincing, regardless if he an earlier or later sage.
These rules apply to the laws, decrees, regulations, and customs, introduced after eh canonization of the Talmud. However, all matters mentioned on the Babylonian Talmud are binding to all Israelites. We force all cities and all countries to follow all customs followed by the Talmudic sages, and to uphold their decrees and their regulations. 
[That is] because all these matters in the Talmud were agreed upon by all Israel, and the sages who regulated or decreed or made a custom or judged and taught that the law is such and such, are all the sages of israel or their majority, and they are the ones who received the whole transmission, person from person, all the way to Moshe at Sinai.
All the sages who lived after the canonization of the Talmud and analyzed it, and made a name for themselves through their wisdom - are called geonim. And all these Geonim who lived in Israel, Shinar [Babylonia], Spain and France taught the way of the Talmud, revealed its mysteries and explained its matters, since its path is very deep [hard to comprehend]. Also, it is written in Aramaic with a mixture of other languages, since that language was the lingua franca of Shinar at the time of the canonization of the Talmud, but in other places and even in Shinar at the time of the Geonim, one would not know this language unless it was taught to him.
The people of each city would ask many question of their contemporary Gaon, requesting explanation for the difficult matters of the Talmud, and the [Geonim] answered in accordance with their wisdom. The addressees would then gather the responses into books they would use for studying.
The Geonim of each generation also wrote books to explain the Talmud, some explained single units, some explained specific chapters which present problems to his contemporary students, and some explained whole tractates and orders.
They also wrote clear-cut laws, on timely matters of the forbidden and the permissible, the punishable and the exempt, so those who cannot fathom the Talmud will be closer to understanding [the laws]. This is the holy work in which all Israelite Geonim were engaged in, from the canonization of the Talmud until today, 1108 years after the destruction (1178 CE).
And now the calamities are many and frequent, and the harsh times destroyed everything. The wisdom of our sages has been lost, and the intelligence of our scholars has been hidden [or: has collapsed]. Therefore, those explanations, responses, and laws written by the Geonim have become hard to decipher, and there are only few who can fully comprehend their contents. Needless to say, [fewer comprehend] the Talmud itself: the Babylonian, the Jerusalem Talmud, the Sifra, Sifre and the Toseftas - which all require breadth of mind, a wise soul, and lengthy time before one can conclude from them what is the correct way in the matters of the forbidden and the permissible and the rest of the laws of the Torah.
Because of all that I, Moshe son of Ribbi Maimon of Sepharad, have decided to take action. I have relied on the Creator and analyzed all these writings. I found it necessary to write the conclusions which are derived from all these works; in matters of the forbidden and the permissible, the pure and the impure, with the rest of the laws of the Torah. All will be written in lucid language and few words, so that all people will be well versed in the totality of the Oral Law - with no questions and answers, with no "this one says so and that one says so" but rather clear, accessible, correct concepts, following the law distilled from all the books and commentaries created from the time of Ribbi Judah the Holy until today.
In that manner all the laws will be revealed to children and adults alike [or the lesser and the greater], regarding the laws of each Mitzvah, and the laws of all matters established by the sages and the prophets. In summa [the purpose of my book is] that one will not need any other book regarding the Laws of Israel, but rather this book will gather the whole oral Law, with the regulations, customs, and decrees made from the time of Moshe until the canonization of the Talmud, as the Geonim have explained in all their works which they wrote after he canonization of the Talmud. That is why I named my book Mishne Torah [Second to the Torah] - because one reads first the Written Law and then reads this [book], and from it he knows the whole oral Law, and he does not need to read any other book between them.