Metzudat David on Joshua
מצודת דוד על יהושע
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Metzudat David on Joshua



Chapter 1



Verse 1

The Vov comes to add, and to connect, to what was completed in the Torah, with the story of Moshes death, and after this, Hashem said to Yehoshua etc.

Verse 2

This means to say, had he still been alive, you would not have been able to cross the Jordan River because it was on him that it was decreed not to cross.
Now that he has died, get up and cross over etc.

Verse 3

This is a  reference to the beginning of the Story.

Verse 4

This is in the wind from the way the sun has arisen.

Verse 5



Verse 6



Verse 7



Verse 8

This. That was said in the text that preceded (verse 7) that Moses commanded you.
So That You Shall Keep. Because through use from your mouth, lest you forget what.
Because then. When you keep doing, etc., then you will succeed.

Verse 9

I have commanded you to be strong in war opposite the enemy and to not be afraid.
It does not say "That I will be with you", even Hashem was saying this, an example of this is in Shmuel, "And he sent, and Shmuel" and the one who was speaking was Shmuel.

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Verse 1



Verse 2



Verse 3



Verse 4



Verse 5



Verse 6



Verse 7



Verse 8



Verse 9

Now I am lifting from on you what the mitzrim shamed you with saying: aren't they uncircumcised like us. And it will be considered a disgrace to the jews like it says: Because she is an embarrassment to us.

Verse 10



Verse 11

The day after day one of Pesach that this is the time of Korban Omer and the food will be perfect (able to be eaten)

Verse 12



Verse 13



Verse 14

He replied "No": meaning, I have not come to help the enemies of Israel, because I am a Minister of Israel that are called Army of the Lord, and that you have not seen me until now is because now I have come, and not earlier:
What does my lord speak: meaning "speak your word and I am here to fulfil it as a servant who fulfils the word of the master."

Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Verse 1


2. Before the Arin, that they brought to Shchem to cut (or establish) a treaty before him (Hashem) like it says at the end of the matter:

Verse 2



Verse 3

1. With my kindness I turned his heart away from that of his father's and brother's, and I took him from within this, so he want be drawn to their false ideology.
2. 
3. It means to say, even though I multiplied his seed from Yishmael, like it says "And also the son of the maidservant, etc." Because he is you child and he only asked for him (one son) like it says "Yishmaels will live before you" Still, I also gave you Yitzchak, like I promised you.

Verse 4

Jacob and Esau. The good would be considered Yaakov who was with Esav in one stomach, because he drew all the poison, and Jacob came out clean;