Derekh Hashem
דרך ה'
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Derekh Hashem

Introduction

[When one approaches a subject] the most effective way to apprehend it is to break down all its details, categorize them, and discern there interrelationships.

Part One

On the Creator

The Existence of G-d: Every Jew needs to believe and know that a First Being exists. [This Being] is without beginning or end. He brought into existence and [constantly] creates everything that is present in existence. This [Being] is G-d.
 Additionally [every Jew] needs to know that the essential reality of this Being, G-d, cannot be [adequately] grasped by any [created being] at all. The only thing known about Him is that He is totally Perfect, having no deficiencies at all. This information, however, is only known through a tradition received from our ancestors and the prophets [we couldn't conclude it on our own].

On the Purpose of Creation



On Mankind

As we have discussed, humanity is the creature created for the purpose of drawing close to God. They are placed between perfection and deficiency, and it is in their hands to earn perfection. Humanity must earn this perfection, however, through their own desire and choice because if they were forced to choose perfection then they would not actually be its master, and God's purpose would not be fulfilled. It as therefore necessary to create humanity with free will. One's inclinations are therefore balanced between good and evil and they are not compelled toward either. They have the power of choice, able to choose either side knowingly and willingly, as well as to possess whichever one they wish. Humanity was therefore created with both a good urge and an evil urge. They have the power to incline in whichever direction they choose.

On Human Responsibility



On the Spiritual Realm



Part Two

On Divine Providence in General



On Mankind in This World



On Personal Providence



On Israel and the Nations



On How Providence Works



On the System of Providence



On the Influence of the Stars

Behold, I have already explained in section one that all physical items have their root in transcendent powers. In truth all these items are rooted there in every necessary fashion, and only afterwards are drawn down and translated into physicality in the manner required of them. The heavenly spheres with all their stars were prepared for this purpose. Through their rotation all that is rooted and prepared above in the spiritual world is drawn down and translated into our physical world here below, set in its proper place. The number of the stars, their various levels and divisions, are set according to the highest wisdom in order to achieve this translation. The power of existence flows from the stars to every physical item below, they are the means to transform everything from its transcendent form above to its manifest form below.
There is another matter which the Holy One engraved into the stars. All the events of the physical world are prepared above and only then drawn down by the stars in they way in which they are meant to occur. For example - matters of life, wealth, wisdom, children and the like are all prepared above in the roots and made manifest below through the stars in their proper manner. Each of these happen though well-known divisions, particular groupings and known orbits assigned to them. Among all these are divided everything which occurs in the physical world.  All physical matters are under their control, functioning according to the influences of their orders and connections to each and every individual. 

On Specific Modes of Providence



Part Three

On the Soul and Its Activities



On Divine Names and Witchcraft



On Divine Inspiration and Prophecy



On the Prophetic Experience



On Moshe's Unique Status



Part Four

On Divine Service



On Torah Study

Behold that Torah study is an obligatory matter. As without it, it is impossible to arrive at [proper] action. For if one does not know what he is commanded to do, how will he do it? However besides all this, there is in study a great function towards the perfection of man. And we already mentioned the matter briefly in Part I, Chapter 4. Yet now we will write about it at greater length.
Among the influences that are brought from Him, may He be blessed, for the needs of His creatures, it is the most precious and sublime of all that can be found in existence. That means that it is the goal of all that it is the greatest entity of that which can be found that is similar to His true existence, may He be blessed, and the preciousness and sublimity similar to His true sublimity, may He be blessed. And it is that which the Master, blessed be His name, of His glory and preciousness, shares with his servants. However, the Creator, may His name be blessed, bound this influence to something that which was created by Him, may He be blessed, for this purpose. And that is the Torah. And this matter is accomplished in two ways – by reading and by understanding. 

On Love and Fear of God

Behold, we have already clarified in the first part, fourth chapter,  concepts of love and awe/fear, that these are what draw one close and cause one to cleave to one's Blessed Creator. This is said about true love and awe/fear, that is, love of the Blessed Name and not the love of reward, and awe of His greatness, and not fear of punishment. And behold this awe/fear purifies the person from darkness of the physical body, and causes the presence of the Divine Shechina to rest upon one; and in accordance with the amount of awe/fear, so is the amount of the taharah/purity and the envelopment [of the Divine Shechina], and one who achieves this awe/fear on a constant basis will [merit] the envelopment consistently. And this phenomenon was found with perfection in Moshe/Moses our teacher, peace be upon him. About him is was stated, "Awe/fear for Moshe/Moses was a small matter" (Brachot 32), and so he merited constant Divine envelopment. It is very difficult for people to achieve true awe/fear as is appropriate, but in accordance with their accomplishment, so is the power of taharah/purity and holiness for them, as we mentioned, especially while engaged in a mitzvah or in learning. It is [in fact] the necessary condition for completing the learning or the mitzvah, as we mentioned.

On the Sh'ma and Its Blessings



On Prayer



On the Daily Order of Prayer



On Divine Service and the Calendar



On Seasonal Commandments



On Blessings

