Teshuvot HaGeonim
תשובות הגאונים
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Teshuvot_HaGeonim
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Teshuvot HaGeonim



Teshuva 1

And you asked three people who went to buy goods with him for a business owner and he didn't sell them anything, and they left there and gave each other property. Everyone from Dzabin Zbuna had this. Everything is in partnership. But yes, Tev Had Menhon Luthia and bought from him a business. The authority in his hand. If he wanted to share with them, he would share, and if he didn't want to, he owes nothing. And the property between them is nothing, it is worth things and property is not enjoyable. (Shc Shh Mha C. Yod in the name of the late Mr. Rabbi Yodai Gaon).

Teshuva 2

Reuben said to Shimon: Give me my deposit that I gave you to look after. Shimon said to him: I did not receive the deposit from you and I don't need to הא ביתא קמך. And he said the direction that you brought the deposit. I said to him: Rather, the things that I do not need הא ביתא קמך, if Shimon has witnesses בהא ביתא קמך and Reuben receives or thanks (?) him 

Teshuva 3

Reuben and Shimon cooperated. The king kidnapped Shimon and took everything that was with him. The king said, he fled from before me and ate from me. Give me what you lost. The king raped him and he has nothing against him, Reuben has nothing against him, neither law nor things, but if Reuben wanted to put to death and confiscate everything that a certain king had on him or a debt or a loan and ran away from him and lost to me from me in them, he is entitled to that.

Teshuva 4



Teshuva 5



Teshuva 6



Teshuva 7



Teshuva 8



Teshuva 9



Teshuva 10



Teshuva 11



Teshuva 12



Teshuva 13



Teshuva 14



Teshuva 15



Teshuva 16



Teshuva 17



Teshuva 18



Teshuva 19



Teshuva 20



Teshuva 21



Teshuva 22



Teshuva 23



Teshuva 24



Teshuva 25



Teshuva 26



Teshuva 27



Teshuva 28



Teshuva 29



Teshuva 30



Teshuva 31



Teshuva 32

Regarding your question about someone who constantly takes oaths and is accustomed to swearing for everything, and a legal case arises where an oath is administered to him in court, and he violates the oath, thus exempting him from the consequences of the oath - once he has transgressed the oath, he becomes distant from the obligation of oath-taking and says, "I will not swear at all." However, now he is fearful of the oath. What is the ruling in such a case? Since he was accustomed to taking oaths before this incident, and when obligated by the court, he says, "I will not swear," they administer the oath to him.