Seder Tisha B'Av (Edot HaMizrach)
סדר תשעה באב
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Seder Tisha B'Av (Edot HaMizrach)

Tisha B'Av Night

Al Naharot Bavel



On the rivers of Babylon, the beauty of our lights darkened
The noise of our cries, shut down the voice of our trumpets
The daughters of Babylon are happy. The find our bitterness tasty.
And we are by the poplars. There we hang our lyres.
By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat, sat and wept, as we thought of Zion. There on the poplars we hung up our lyres, for our captors asked us there for songs, our tormentors, for amusement, “Sing us one of the songs of Zion.” How can we sing a song of the LORD on alien soil? If I forget you, O Jerusalem, let my right hand wither; let my tongue stick to my palate if I cease to think of you, if I do not keep Jerusalem in memory even at my happiest hour. Remember, O LORD, against the Edomites the day of Jerusalem’s fall; how they cried, “Strip her, strip her to her very foundations!” Fair Babylon, you predator, a blessing on him who repays you in kind what you have inflicted on us; a blessing on him who seizes your babies and dashes them against the rocks!

Oy Ki Yarad Esh


Alas for fire came from the sky. To Jerusalem. My eye, my eye is full of water.
Holy castle, how did it become wilderness? Oh heaven dweller, why? The daughter of the king is a slave. The harlot is in the eyes. To Jerusalem. My eye, my eye is full of water.
The month of Av darkened the sun. It's the one when Aharon died. And the splendid city was destroyed twice. To Jerusalem. My eye, my eye is full of water.
The night is bitter. It's a night of crying. He destroyed us, God who took us from Egypt. To Jerusalem. My eye, my eye is full of water.
(May my light, God, shine like dawn. He'll throw his anger on the wicked. And choose His people. He who chose Jerusalem). <br>Note: I could not preserve the rhyming scheme. In most stanzas it is three identical syllables, followed by a verse that ends with -aim, and then the -aim twice again in the refrain. In the first stanza it is just three -aim, and in the last stanza the refrain does not appear.

Ha'azinu HaShamayim



Arvit



L'mi Evkeh


To whom I cry and raise my hands and in my crying express bitterness and my innards are stirred up. The mikdash, aron, and cherubim that the ravens and kipod bird nest there. And the duchan that was prepared eternally for the Levites to sing to God with joy. They were from heaven - The leaves [of parchment in] the urim and tumim The kohanim on watch [in the mikdash]. And on the death of the wise ones, [who are] the house of God Magicians and sorcerers came [in their place]. Alas! The light of halacha dimmed. And the Talmud sits solitary. Who remains to study it? And the secrets of Torah - who will bring them to light? And what great men of the generation will be distressed over this? Disgraced ones fell, children and babies. There's nobody to raise them up, nobody to have pity and mercy on them. On this I wail, every day and every night, in mourning over the enormous pain of all this. With bitterness, I wail, and as a fellow sufferer, I call to the kipod bird with tears. Please have mercy on the dust of Zion. I cease the sound of my joyous singing, and I lament "Alas! She sits in solitude."

Megillat Eichah







Chapter 1

Then because of our sins, the Beit HaMikdash was destroyed, and in our sins the heichal was burned. In the city that was unified, eulogies were tied together, and the host of the heavens raised their voices in lamentation. Also, the tribes of Yaakov cried on high, the constellations shed tears. The flags of Yeshurun covered their heads [the constellations] Kimah and Orion darkened their faces. Our fathers pleaded, but it was like God didn't hear. The children cried out, but their Father didn't answer. And the voice of the turtledove cried out in bitterness, but the faithful shepherd didn't incline an ear. Holy seed wrapped themselves in sackcloth, and the host of the heavens donned sackcloth. The sun and the moon darkened, and the stars gathered in their light.

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7

Tonight my children cry and wail. The night my house was destroyed and my palace burned. And all of the house of Israel groans in grief. They cry over the fire that Hashem burned.
Tonight, five harsh things were brought upon me: It was decreed on our ancestors and they were punished. That they would not enter into the holy land. And the temple was destroyed and also plowed over -- the first temple and the second, the old one and the new one. And the city of Beitar was trapped -- it became the object of the snare and stumbling block. Tonight, because of it came from Hashem, they cry over the fire that Hashem burned.
Tonight, wailing, bitterness, poverty, and isolation. Today she is forsaken from the house of her father, and the time of her crying is lengthened. She wails dirges because her house was destroyed in a consuming fire, and coals were a flame were sent by Hashem. They cry over the fire that Hashem burned.
Tonight I was exiled, and my house was destroyed. On the 9th of the month [of Av] at the time of Ma'ariv. I was on my watch, the watch of Yehoyariv, and the enemy entered and offered his sacrifices, and he came into the Mikdash, which Hashem had commanded that he may not do. They cry over the fire that Hashem burned.

Chapter 8


Each year on this night, I arrange my lamentations, becuase the faithful city has become like a widow.
On it I cry and moan, and on it I become angry. We raise up our mourning from ancient days.
Tonight of all nights, we assemble to sing dirges. An on it we drank the cup of poison -- the way of Zion is mourning.
The night the Rock [Hashem] commanded his anger and sent a destroying fire, he put an end in our ruins, and he dimmed tonight's lofty stars.
I am an unfortunate man to see this woe and suffering. Tonight my wickedness was repaid -- Hashem destroyed without mercy.
Tonight this befell the watchtower int he darkness, and the respected ones in the nations sit in humiliation, taking the darkness.

Chapter 9

For this our heart was faint, for these things our eyes dimmed.
On the desolation of our holy city Tonight we feel our sorrow an our joy is overturned.
On the wondrous city that was made desolate, to the Torah and its commandments which we shut out from our ears.
Our heichal was disheveled so we raise our ears in bitterness on the day our desecration multiplied. Oy! what has come upon us.
And the alter and ark perished when [Hashem's] anger grew stronger. I picked up a strange voice in my throat in the house of our lord.
Our strength weakened and we stumbled from the force of our oppressor we fell. We have become a cautionary tale and a mockery to our neighbors.
We have been forgotten from the heart like a dead man. Our oppressor has sheared and mauled us. We scream from the provocation of our enemy to God who doesn't answer us.
Our distress came suddenly and our hands were weakened and the hands of our oppressors strengthened and in His flaring wrath, He sold us.


Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12

Remember, Hashem, Yehuda and Efraim, whose blood was spilled like water.
Surrounding, surrounding Jerusalem
Remember, Hashem, the one you called your anointed whose body you made like a sieve there wasn't a remaining arrow they didn't shoot into him to break the softness of his hands. Surrounding, surrounding Jerusalem.
Remember, Hashem, the eighty thousand kohanim who fled and went to the Ishmaelites. When they saw them, they set up tents for them with food, and stuff their carcasses and they quenched their thirst without water. Surrounding, surrounding Jerusalem.
Remember, Hashem, the fathers and their children, who the evil head butcher [Nebuzaradan] killed. With the blood of the kohen who offered sacrifices and trapped them like birds in a snare. From this destruction, spare their ears. Surrounding, surrounding Jerusalem.
Remember, Hashem, the modest widow whose seven sons were killed by the children of injustice - the evil kingdom of Greece. She, herself, fell and declined. On this, all my innards stirred. Surrounding, surrounding Jerusalem.
Remember, Hashem, the ten martyrs who fell by the hands of harsh kings to the sword and to the flame. They were skinned like lambs and goats to sanctify the name of the one who dwells on high. Surrounding, surrounding Jerusalem.


Chapter 13

To you, holy nation, I ask of you questions:
Why is this night different from all other nights?
On Pesach night we eat matzah on marror. Why, now, on this night, are we satiated on scorn and bitterness? On the death of kosher ones and the seed of the upright. Therefore with tears of bitterness, I raise my voice like sick people do.
Why is this night different from all other nights?
On Pesach night, the table is set with joy. Why now, in our sins, on this night, is there the voice of sighing? Because now we have not found rest for the soles of our feet. Oy! Because misfortune has come, I will forget forgiveness. Why is this night different from all other nights?
On Pesach night, we drink cups [of wine] for a blessing. Why now, on this night do we read megillat Eichah [the book of Lamentations]? Why do I sit in this exile, having come from my land in embarrassment. Thus on this I raise my voice in wailing. Why is this night different from all other nights?
On Pesach night, we always read the Haggadah. Why now, on this night do we cry short and bitter cries? Oy! Because during my life the time came that we were ordered [to leave] Oy! On the desirable city and on the houses of prayer. Why is this night different from all other nights?
On Pesach night, we always finish Hallel. Why now, on this night do we eulogize and wail. Because, in our sins, we can't pray because the Beit HaMikdash has been desecrated and the Heichal destroyed. Why is this night different from all other nights?
On Pesach night we say "pour out [your wrath upon the nations]" in song. Why now, on this night, do we drink wormwood, hemlock, and bitterness? Oy! Because joy is absent, and the way of Zion is mourning.
Why is this night different from all other nights?

Aleinu



Al Heichali



Tisha B'Av Day



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3

I have heard the daughter of Zion, her embittered words I wail because I drank from the cup and found its dregs. I gnaw over the grace of the Shechinah, that its light has been darkened like a young woman who girds herself with sackcloth over her husband of her youth. You wail, oh forest of Lebanon, your cedars have been consumed by fire. The gate of Zion mourns, because God brought this end. The courtyard wallows [in despair], because the elevation offering has ceased. The chamber [of hewn stone] sings dirges because there is no Sanhedrin.
I gnaw over the grace of the Shechinah, that its light has been darkened like a young woman who girds herself with sackcloth over her husband of her youth.
The chamber called "Birah" weeps, "Oy!" over the children of Aharon. The house of the holy of holies: "Oy!" over the hiding of the ark. The parochet screams out "there is no advantage to my [being here]" because savages have seen it and revealed its secrets.
I gnaw over the grace of the Shechinah, that its light has been darkened like a young woman who girds herself with sackcloth over her husband of her youth.
And the incense pan sings dirges "Where are the fragrant incense?" Aharon's heart is torn over the Urim and Tumim. The altar is angry about the Elevation offerings and Peace offerings, "Why don't you prepare the order [of these offerings] in their time?"
I gnaw over the grace of the Shechinah, that its light has been darkened like a young woman who girds herself with sackcloth over her husband of her youth.
The lyre of the levi'im wails "who will rouse my melodies?" The pure menorah asks "who will kindle my lamps?" The tent complains "nobody establishes my walls." The Torah thunders because they have ceased to support it.
I gnaw over the grace of the Shechinah, that its light has been darkened like a young woman who girds herself with sackcloth over her husband of her youth.
The shulchan's anticipation is desecrated "Nobody is setting out [my showbreads]." The kohanim pronounce "Alas! The service has ceased." On this the daughter of my people cries -- because of her oppressors, her leaders have been captured.

Chapter 4

The seraphim stopped their song, and the chayot and ofanim stopped their watch on the day the decree was finalized and sealed the angels of peace began weeping bitter tears. And the stars darkened at their leaving and the host of the heavens donned sackcloth and the chayot wailed and cried with the ofanim opposite them. The day the strangers' hand grew strong in the mikdash and you burned a fire in the inner sanctuary two wings of the chayot were removed and in the straits I converge dirges. (My beloved, when will you return to the refuge (of the beit Hamikdash) and return the hearts of fathers to their children? When will the faithful praise and revere you, and the chayot and ofanim sanctify you? The serafim in words and the ofanim with song the angels of peace cry bitterly and scream with an embittered heart and call to each other and say [Kedushah].)

Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13

I ask of you a question, oh faithful nation
Why is today different from the rest of the year?
On Pesach day, we pray in a pleasant voice. Why now, in our sins, does our voice wail like a raven. Because the holy city is destroyed, by spears and the sword. Why has she become like a prostitute, the faithful city? Why is today different from the rest of the year?
On Pesach day, all of Israel is joyous. Why now, in our sins, are we groaning in mourning? Because the faithful are like leaves [which have been eaten by] the worm, killed by the head of the butchers. The day had been bitter like wormwood to the faithful nation. Why is today different from the rest of the year?
In times of old, the tribes of Israel were princes. Why now, in our sins, are we abandoned to the hands of strangers, and to the children of Moav and Hagar to be destroyed and plundered? We are refuted by him every year, the nation of little faith. Why is today different from the rest of the year?
In times of old, we were the head of nations. Why now, in our sins, are we beneath all of the nations -- Exiled and distressed in the hands of men of blood? Until when and where will this great nation be like a widow? Why is today different from the rest of the year?

Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16

The daughter of my people wails in her sorrow, about Chanah and her seven sons, because all seven were slaughtered before her eyes, and she fell and died on her sons.
And she fell and died on her sons.
They were pressured to forsake God and serve Bel, and to testify against the one who created the world. "How could you forsake the inheritance of Hevel over the cruel?" And the tears of a mother fall on her face.
And she fell and died on her sons.
To the first, the cruel slaughterer asked "If you desire this foreign god and bow to it, I will honor you and crown you as king." [And the first son answered] "How can I forsake God, whose strength is universal?" With the sword, he was decapitated, and his mother's tranquility shattered. And she fell and died on her sons.
To the second they tried to appeal to the strength of his spirit. "Worship my idol because of the strength of its right hand." [The second son answered] "I will serve none other than the One who dwells alone on high, who redeems his treasure from their oppressor."
And she fell and died on her sons.
To the youngest, the king offered "bow down and pick up my ring from in front of this idol." Don't disparage and disgrace my law, and don't let my assistance thing you violated my word, and that I swore a false oath." He answered him "with my tongue I will answer."
(A voice is heard screaming in the heavens, "Praiseworthy are you, seven sons of Chanah. Your inheritance in Gan Eden is prepared because you served your God with faith. Your joyous mother is in Gan Eden with her sons.")

Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29


On my heichal, I will cry day and night. And on the glory of Jerusalem, the praised city.
My soul cries over the double destruction, the lovely land, the lovely Jerusalem and on her nation which went into exileץ And on the glory of Jerusalem, the praised city.
The house of my glory the enemy put to desolation they returned to my hand Nevayot and desolation. on this I cry constantly with the sound of wailing. And on the glory of Jerusalem, the praised city.
I mourn you, Torah, because your glory has been desecrated. Your crown has fallen since the day your house was destroyed. And I raise up dirges about Aholivah and Aholah. And on the glory of Jerusalem, the praised city.
(Be strong, my nation -- I will quickly rebuild your [inner] sanctuary I will wear vengeance, and I will restore your captivity Within the heichal, I will rest as in times of old Then Torah and prayer will come forth from Zion.)

Chapter 30

I mourn and praise the Torah of Yekutiel and I don sackcloth and rope on the exile of Ariel Who are steeped in troubles between Edom and Yishmael I cry on the death of the holy nation, the nation of God. Because the sword has eaten the remnant of Israel
I mourn and praise the holy Torah To the land of Israel, the head of all lands And the many sins for which she was conquered I cry over the holy mountain, the desolation of Harel.
Because the sword has eaten the remnant of Israel
I mourn and praise the perfect Torah on the Beit HaMikdash that aliens entered It was dispatched with fire -- with anger and rage. I cry on this with tears and (?).
Because the sword has eaten the remnant of Israel

Chapter 31

Arise and mourn, oh Torah! and I make dirges of remembrance on the 9th of Av, day of trouble and tumult, the day of anger -- the day anger flared up against me and the [inner] sanctuary and courtyard were destroyed.
A loud and bitter scream -- this is the decree of the Torah
I ask, please, in my great sorrow. Where is the camp of the Shechinah, and the house of the Levi'im and their platform, and were are the men of faith? Where is your face? Where is the the glory of the faithful city? How could she become a prostitute? Most holy, for this your heart cries out in bitterness, like the heart of a woman in distress. A loud and bitter scream -- this is the decree of the Torah
Where are the heads of the yeshivot, and where is your Sanhedrin? And where are those who walk the roads for the glory of your rays to shine? And where are the paths of return for those who ask of your secrets and for the thousands of myriads who explain your orders? They are all arrested in exile, they have gone into the hand of men of trouble. A loud and bitter scream -- this is the decree of the Torah
Where are those who offered sacrifices and where are those who made oils and where are those who arranged the pieces and those who knew the secret of the showbreads? The head of the butchers came, and killed fathers and sons and we morn openings that the assistants arranged because God called out his destruction, and shot the arrow of his anger.
A loud and bitter scream -- this is the decree of the Torah