Tractate Kutim
מסכת כותים
James Montogmery (1907)
The Samaritans; the earliest Jewish sect: their history, theology, and literature

Tractate Kutim



Chapter 1



Chapter 2

We do not buy meat from a Samaritan except that of which he himself eats, nor strings of birds unless he first puts them into his mouth. We do not buy offhand what he would give to Israelites, for they have been suspected of giving Israelites flesh of ritually unclean carcasses. 
The Samaritan is on the same footing with the Israelite in respect to all damages laid down in the law. The Israelite who slays a Samaritan, or a Samaritan who slays an Israelite, if unintentionally, is to go into exile [i. e., to a city of refuge] ; if intentionally, he is to be slain. If the ox of an Israelite gore the ox of a Samaritan it goes free. But in the case of an ox of a Samaritan, if it is its first offence, it is to pay half the damage. If a subsequent offence, the full damage. Rabbi Meir says: "The ox of a Samaritan which gores the ox of an Israelite, whether it be the first offence or the second, is to pay the full damage and at the highest appraisement". 
Their cheeses are allowed. R. Simon b. Eleazar says: "To wit, the cheeses of householders, but those of dealers are forbidden". Their pots and presses in which they are accustomed to make wine and vinegar are forbidden. 
The priests of Israel may share the priestly dues with the Samaritan priests in the territory of the latter, because they are thus, as it were, rescuing the Samaritans from their priests; but not on Israelite territory, lest they should have a presumption on our priesthood. If a Samaritan priest, when he is unclean, eats and gives of his food to an Israelite, it is permitted; if he is clean, the Israelite is forbidden to eat of his food. 
We do not buy bread from a Samaritan baker after Passover until after three bakings, nor from householders until after three Sabbaths, nor from villagers until after three makings. When does this apply? When they have not celebrated the Feast of Unleavened Bread at the same time with Israel, or have anticipated it by a day; but if they celebrate the feast with Israel, or are a day later, their leaven is permitted. R. Simon forbids it [in general], because they do not know how to observe the feast like Israel. 
Formerly they said ; The wine of Kador is forbidden because of [the proximity of] Kephar Pansha. This they changed to the effect that wherever the people are suspected of mingling with the Gentiles, wine that is open is forbidden; that which is sealed is allowed. R. Meir said: "All their wine is allowed except that which is open, if it is in the market". But the Sages said: "That which is open in any place is prohibited, that which is sealed is allowed; that which is bored into and then sealed is as though sealed". Their jars if new are permitted, if old are prohibited. 
Why are the Samaritans forbidden to marry into Israel ? Because they are mingled with the priests of the high places. R. Ishmael said: "They were genuine converts at first. Wherefore were they forbidden? because of their bastards, and because they do not marry the brother's widow". 
When shall we take them back? When they renounce Mount Gerizim and confess Jerusalem and the resurrection of the dead. From this time forth he that robs a Samaritan shall be as he who robs an Israelite. 