Tractate Kutim
מסכת כותים
James Montgomery (1907)
The Samaritans; the earliest Jewish sect: their history, theology, and literature

Tractate Kutim



Chapter 1

The usages of the Samaritans are in part like those of the Gentiles, in part like those of Israel, but mostly like Israel. 
We do not accept from them the bird-offerings of men or women having issues, nor the bird-offerings of women after child-birth, nor sin-offerings or guilt-offerings. but we accept from them " vows and freewill-offerings." 
We do not give them possession of immovable property, we do not sell them sheep for shearing, or crops that are to be harvested, or standing timber; but we may sell them cattle for slaughter. 
We do not sell them large cattle, even if they are maimed, nor ass-foals, nor calves; but we may sell them that which is maimed so it cannot be healed. 
We do not sell them weapons, nor anything that can do damage to people. 
We do not give them wives, nor do we take wives from them.  But we do lend or borrow on usury with them.
We give them the gleanings and the forgotten sheaf and the corner of the field ; and they have the custom of the forgotten sheaf and the corner, and so may be relied upon concerning the gleanings and the forgotten sheaf and the corner in the proper time, and also concerning the tithe for the poor in its year. But their produce is forbidden as untithed, as in the case of the Gentiles. They invalidate the <i>eruv</i> even as the Gentiles. 
A Jewess may not deliver a Samaritaness, nor suckle her son; but a Samaritaness may deliver a Jewess and suckle her son in her [the Jewish woman's] quarters. 
An Israelite may circumcise a Samaritan, and a Samaritan an Israelite. Rabbi Judah says: "A Samaritan is not to circumcise an Israelite because he circumcises him in nothing else than the name of Mount Gerizim."
We may lodge a beast in a Samaritan inn, or hire a Samaritan to go behind our cattle, or entrust our cattle to a Samaritan herdsman. We commit a boy to a Samaritan to teach him a trade. We associate and converse with them anywhere, which is not the case with the Gentiles. 
A Samaritan suffers the <i>halitzah</i> from his sister-in-law, and gives a divorce-writ to his wife. He may be relied upon to bring a divorce-writ from a foreign city to an Israelite. 
These are the things we may not sell them: carcasses not ritually slaughtered, or animals with organic disease; unclean animals and reptiles; the abortion of an animal; oil into which a mouse has fallen; an animal that is mortally ill, or a foetus, although Israelites eat them both, lest the sale lead them into error. And as we do not sell these things to them, so we do not buy them from them, as it is written: "For thou shalt be a holy people to the Lord thy God. As thou art holy, thou shalt not make another people holier than thyself (Deuteronomy 14:21)". 
A Samaritan may be relied upon to say whether or not there is a tomb [in a field], or whether an animal has had its firstborn or not. The Samaritan is to be relied upon concerning a tree whether it is four years old or is still unclean, and concerning gravestones, but not with regard to the cleanliness of overhanging boughs or protruding boughs; nor concerning the land of Gentiles, nor concerning the <i>bet peras</i> because they are open to suspicion in all these things. This is the principle: they are not to be believed in any matter in which they are open to suspicion. 