Deuteronomy
דברים
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Deuteronomy



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5

 And Moses called unto all Israel, and said unto them: Hear, O Israel, the statutes and the ordinances which I speak in your ears this day, that ye may learn them, and observe to do them.

Chapter 6

Obey, O Israel, willingly and faithfully, that it may go well with you and that you may increase greatly [in] a land flowing with milk and honey, as the LORD, the God of your fathers, spoke to you.

Chapter 7



Chapter 8








A land of wheat and barley; and grape and fig and pomegranate; a land of oil-olive and honey.

Chapter 9



Chapter 10

10:12	And now, Israel, what does God want of you? Only that you remain in awe of God your Lord, so that you will follow all His paths and love Him, serving God your Lord with all your heart and with all your soul.
10:13	You must keep God's commandments and decrees that I am prescribing for you today, so that good will be yours.
10:14	The heaven, the heaven of heaven, the earth and everything in it, all belong to God!
10:15	Still, it was only with your ancestors that God developed a closeness. He loved them and therefore chose you, their descendants, from among all nations, just as the situation is today.
10:16	Remove the barriers from your heart and do not remain so stubborn any more!
10:17	God your Lord is the ultimate Supreme Being and the highest possible Authority. He is the great, mighty and awesome God, who does not give special consideration or take bribes.
10:18	He brings justice to the orphan and widow, and loves the foreigner, granting him food and clothing.
10:19	You must also show love toward the foreigner, since you were foreigners in the land of Egypt.

Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15
















..
.

Chapter 16



Chapter 17

Do not offer to Hashem, your G-d, an ox, or a sheep, which has a blemish, or anything that is bad, because it will be an abomination to Hashem, your G-d.
If you find in your midst, in one of your city gates, which Hashem, your G-d, has given to you, a man or a woman who does evil in the eyes of Hashem, your G-d, by violating his covenant. 
And he goes and serves other gods, and he bows to them, to the sun or to the moon, or to any of the hosts of the heavens, which I have commanded to not do.
When you are told, and you understand, you are to investigate thoroughly; If the accusation is in fact true and accurate, it will be an abomination within Yisrael.   
And you should take out that man or that woman that did this evil thing, to your city, the man or the woman, and you are to stone them with stones, and they will die. 
By the testimony of two or three witnesses, we put the guilty to death, [but] by the testimony of one [witness], we do not kill [the guilty]. 
The hand of the witnesses should be the ones to kill him first, and the hands of the people [should be] the second [to stone him], and you will eradicate the evil from your midst.
If a matter of law is beyond your understanding, (for example) between [impure] blood to [pure] blood, between [an innocent] verdict and [a guilty] verdict, between [contaminated] leprosy and [uncontaminated] leprosy, [in essence] matters under dispute in your city, you should rise up and ascend to the place that Hashem, your G-d has chosen for you. 
And you should come to the Kohanim, to the Leviim, and to the [head] judge that will be in your days and you should inquire [about the matter], and they will tell you the ruling.

Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29













No hago este pacto y juramento solo con ustedes,
pero con los que están parados aquí hoy en la presencia de nuestro Dios Adonai, y con los que aún no están aquí.
Ya que ustedes saben como vivimos en la tierra de Egipto, y como pasamos por las naciones donde pasaron.
Donde vieron sus abominaciones y sus ídolos de palo y piedra, y los de plata y oro, cuales ellos poseían.
Puede ser que hubiera un hombre o una mujer, o una tribu o familia entre ustedes cual su corazón se aleje hoy de nuestro Dios Adonai, para ir a servir a los dioses de esas naciones. No sea que haya entre ustedes una raíz que produzca hierba amarga y hiel.

Chapter 30



Chapter 31



Chapter 32

Give ear, O heavens, let me speak; Let the earth hear the words I utter!
...May my discourse come down as the rain, My speech distill as the dew, Like showers on young growth, Like droplets on the grass.
...For the name of the Eternal I proclaim; Give glory to our God!
...The Rock! - whoes deeds are perfect, Yea, all God's way are just;
...Unworthy children -that crooked, perverse generation - Their baseness has played God false.
...Do you thus requite Eternal, O dull and witless people? Is not this the Father who created you  -Fashioned you and made you endure!
...Remember the days of old, consider the years of ages passed; Ask your parent, who will inform you, Your elders, who will tell you:
...When the Most High gave nations their homes and set the divisions of humanity, [God] fixed the boundaries of peoples In relation to Israel's numbers.
...For the Eternal's portion is this people; Jacob, God's own allotment.
...[God] found them in a desert region, in an empty housing waste. [God] engirded them, watched over them, Guarded them as the pupil of God's eye
...Like an eagle who rouses it's nestlings, Gliding down to is young, So did [God] spread wings and take them, Bear along on pinions;
The Eternal alone did guide them, No alien god alongside.