Rif Avodah Zarah
רי"ף עבודה זרה
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Rif_Avodah_Zarah
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Rif Avodah Zarah



Daf 1a



Daf 1b



Daf 2a



Daf 2b



Daf 3a



Daf 3b



Daf 4a



Daf 4b



Daf 5a



Daf 5b



Daf 6a



Daf 6b



Daf 7a



Daf 7b



Daf 8a



Daf 8b



Daf 9a



Daf 9b



Daf 10a



Daf 10b



Daf 11a



Daf 11b



Daf 12a



Daf 12b



Daf 13a



Daf 13b



Daf 14a



Daf 14b



Daf 15a



Daf 15b



Daf 16a



Daf 16b



Daf 17a



Daf 17b



Daf 18a



Daf 18b




In the Mishnah there (Avodah Zarah 43b), we learned:  Rabban Gamliel had images of the moon in various phases (different shapes) in his attic, on a tablet and on the wall. He would show these images to ordinary people and ask them, "Did you see a moon like this or like that?"  But is it even permitted to make such images? After all, it is written (Exodus 20:20), "You shall not make with Me," This prohibition includes making images of the heavenly bodies that serve before God, such as the sun, moon, stars, and constellations. The Gemara (Avodah Zarah 43b) responds: Learning and teaching is different, as it is written (Deuteronomy 18:9), "You shall not learn to do [as the nations do]," but you may learn in order to understand and to teach.  A different Baraita teaches: “You shall not make with Me” (Exodus 20:20) also prohibits making images of the beings that serve God in heaven, such as the chayot, the ofanim, the seraphim, the holy living creatures (chayot hakodesh), and the ministering angels (mal’achei hasharet).  In another Baraita (Avodah Zarah 43b), it is taught that all representations (images of faces or forms) are permitted, except for the image of a human being. Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, said in the name of his teacher Abaye: I heard that the verse “You shall not make with Me” should be read as “You shall not make Me,” meaning an image of a human form. The Sages taught in a Baraita (Avodah Zarah 43a): A person should not make their house in the form of the Temple, their portico in the form of the Temple's hall, or their courtyard in the form of the Temple's courtyard. Similarly, one should not make a table in the form of the Temple's table, or a candelabra in the form of the Temple’s menorah. However, one may make a candelabra with five branches, six branches, or eight branches, but a candelabra with seven branches (like the menorah in the Temple) should not be made.