Beit Elohim
בית אלהים
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Beit Elohim

Introduction





Table of Contents



Shaar HaTefilah



Shaar HaTeshuvah



Shaar HaYesodot



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4

















And that is why [Hannah] said, "Lord of the Hosts, of all of the hosts and hosts that You created, is it difficult in Your eyes to grant me one son" (Berakhot 31b:7): Since I am naturally fit to give birth, for I am not barren, as behold I am included in all of Your hosts that You created, such that it should not be difficult in Your eyes to give me the portion that is fitting for me amongst the hosts that You created. 

Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29



Chapter 30



Chapter 31



Chapter 32















And concerning these matters it is said that in everything that Moses our teacher was commanded to say to the children of Israel regarding matters that are practiced for generations, he did not mention explicitly that these words were spoken by Moses to the children of Israel. Because when there was no immediate need, it was not necessary to inform them that what was spoken to Moses by the Lord was communicated to them. It is known that what was spoken to them, but in matters of commandments or instructions relevant to a specific moment, it is found that it is written that Moses spoke and communicated to them the words of the Lord and they fulfilled them, such as the work of the Tabernacle and its vessels, as seen in the seven days of inauguration and on the eighth day, and similar occasions. You will not find from the giving of the Torah until the Book of Leviticus that Moses spoke to the children of Israel what the Lord spoke to him, except in matters that were necessary at the time, such as the construction of the Tabernacle and its vessels. Similarly, in the Book of Leviticus, you will not find that Moses spoke to the children of Israel what he was commanded regarding matters practiced for generations, except in relation to the appointed times, as in the portion of Emor where it says, "And Moses declared to the appointed times of the Lord," and in the portion of Ish Mizeh ("This is the law of") for their generations, where it is written afterward, "And Moses spoke to Aaron and his sons." And these have reasons, as our sages have said and as the Ramban, may his memory be blessed, has written. In the book Bamidbar Sinai, at the end of the portion of the appointed times, in the concluding part of the portion of Pinchas, it says, "And Moses spoke to the children of Israel," and the Ramban, may his memory be blessed, has also given an explanation for this.
And it seems that due to the Torah being an inheritance of the congregation of Jacob, it is not mentioned that every commandment of Moses was spoken to the generation in the wilderness, for it was not given only to them but to generations and generations. And what was relevant for a specific moment was spoken to them. At the beginning of the portion of the heads of the tribes, it is written, "And Moses spoke to the heads of the tribes," and it is not mentioned that God spoke to him in this portion except for what is written at the end of the portion, "These are the statutes that the Lord commanded Moses." Similarly, when Eleazar the priest spoke to the men of the army, it is stated, "This is the statute of the Torah that the Lord commanded Moses, only the gold, etc.," and it is not mentioned in the Torah that God commanded him this specific instruction. And all the renewed commandments that Moses spoke in the book of Deuteronomy, it is not mentioned in the heavenly books that they were spoken to him, for it is known that they were said to him earlier, either at Sinai or in the Tent of Meeting or in the plains of Moab.
And it appears that from the time the Ten Commandments were given on Mount Sinai with voices, lightning, and clouds, no commandment was spoken to Moses except there on Sinai. Those are all the commandments that were mentioned after the Ten Commandments until the end of the portion of Mishpatim. And when he ascended the mountain, it is written, "And Moses went into the midst of the cloud and went up to the mountain... And the Lord spoke... Take for Me a contribution..." until its completion. And he remained on the mountain for another forty days until Yom Kippur, and it was then that the work of the Tabernacle began, and its construction was completed on the first day of the first month in the second year. From then on, every book of the Priestly Torah was spoken to him, from beginning to end, in every month of Nissan. And the book of Numbers was also spoken in the Tent of Meeting, from the first of Iyar until the fortieth year. For everything that was said in the plains of Moab was also in the Tent of Meeting. Thus, all the commandments were given in Sinai and in the Tent of Meeting in the cloud. And the commandments that were spoken to him in Egypt, such as the portion of Bo, and the laws that were commanded at Marah, were all repeated and reviewed in Sinai and the Tent of Meeting.