Ikar Tosafot Yom Tov on Mishnah Sotah
עיקר תוספות יום טוב על משנה סוטה
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.org

Ikar Tosafot Yom Tov on Mishnah Sotah



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Mishna 1



Mishna 2



Mishna 3



Mishna 4



Mishna 5



Mishna 6



Mishna 7



Mishna 8



Mishna 9



Mishna 10



Mishna 11

The explanation of the halachic codes in the name of Rav Hai Gaon, of blessed memory, is that the singing mentioned herein refers to love songs written in praise of mortal beauty.  However, the recital of songs (hymns) of praise an exaltation, and those that record the benevolent acts of the Almighty accompanied by music and merriment, at weddings and banquet halls is an accepted custom among all Jews.
[The declaration over] the heifer whose neck is to be broken must be in the holy tongue; as it is said, “If a corpse is found slain on the land . then your elders and judges shall go out” (Deuteronomy 21:1-2)--three used to go out from the high court in Jerusalem.  Rabbi Yehudah says: five, as it is said, “Your elders”—two, “and your judges”—two, and there cannot be a court of an even number, so they add one more. 
If [the corpse] was found buried underneath a heap of stones, or hanging on a tree, or floating on the surface of the water, they would not break [the heifer’s neck], as it says: “In the earth” — and not buried underneath a heap of stones, "fallen" not hanging on a tree; “In a field” —and not floating on the surface of the water.  If it was found near the border, or a city whose majority of inhabitants were non-Jews, or a city in which there is no court, they would not break [the heifer's neck].  They measure the distance only from a city in which there is a court. If [the corpse] was found exactly between two cities, both of them would bring two heifers [between them], the words of Rabbi Eliezer;  And Jerusalem does not bring a heifer whose neck is to be broken. 
If the head was found in one place and the body in another place, they bring the head to the body, the words of Rabbi Eliezer.    Rabbi Akiva says: [they bring] the body to the head. 
From what part do they measure?  Rabbi Eliezer says: from the navel. Rabbi Akiva says: from the nose.  Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov says: from the place where he was made a slain person, from the neck. 
The elders of Jerusalem departed and went away.  The elders of that city bring “a heifer which has never been worked, which has never been yoked” (Deuteronomy 21:3). And a blemish does not disqualify it.  They bring it down to a hard (eitan) wadi— “<i>eitan</i>” is understood in its literal sense of “hard”. Even if it is not “hard”, it is valid.  They break its neck with a hatchet from behind.    And its place may never be sown or tilled, but it is permitted to comb flax there and chisel rocks there. 
The elders of that city wash their hands with water in the place where the heifer's neck was broken and they say, “Our hands have not shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen it” (Deuteronomy 21:7).    But did we really think that the elders of the court are shedders of blood!  Rather, he did not come to us and we dismissed him without supplying him with food and we did not see him and let him go without escort.   Then the priests exclaim, “Absolve, O Lord, Your people Israel, whom You redeemed, and do not let guilt for the blood of the innocent remain among your people Israel” (vs. 8).   They did not need to say, “And they will be absolved of bloodguilt” (ibid), rather the Holy Spirit announces to them, “When you act in this way, the blood is forgiven you.” 
If the murderer was discovered before the heifer’s neck was broken, it goes free and grazes with the herd;  But if after the heifer’s neck was broken, it is buried in that place because it came there from the outset in connection with a matter of doubt, and atoned for the doubt which is now gone.  If the heifer’s neck was broken and afterwards the murderer is discovered, behold he is executed.  
One witness says “I saw the murderer” and one witness says “You did not see him”; or a woman says “I saw him” and another woman says “You did not see him”, they break its neck.  If one witness says “I saw him” and two say “You did not see him”, they break its neck.  If two say “We saw him” and one says to them “You did not see him”, they do not break its neck.   
When murderers multiplied, the [ceremony of] breaking a heifer’s neck ceased.  From the time that Eliezer ben Dinai came, and he was also called Tehinah ben Perisha and he was afterwards renamed “son of the murderer”. When adulterers multiplied, the ceremony of the bitter waters ceased and it was Rabban Yohanan ben Zakkai who discontinued it, as it is said, “I will not punish their daughters for fornicating, nor their daughters-in-law for committing adultery, for they themselves [turn aside with whores and sacrifice with prostitutes]” (Hosea 4:14).    When Yose ben Yoezer of Zeredah and Yose ben Yohanan of Jerusalem died, the grape-clusters ceased, as it is said, “There is not a cluster [of grapes] to eat; not a ripe fig I could desire [The pious are vanished from the land, none upright are left among men]” (Micah 7:1-2).   
Yohanan the high priest brought to an end the confession made over the tithe. He also discontinued the wakers and the knockers. Up to his days the hammer used to strike in Jerusalem, and in his days there was no need to inquire about doubtfully tithed produce.  
When the <i>Sanhedrin</i> [highest court, charged with deciding cases and appeals that had national significance. It was comprised of 71 scholars who had received the full traditional rabbinical ordination, and its decisions fixed Jewish practice for subsequent generations.] ceased, song ceased from the places of feasting, as it is said, “They drink their wine without song” (Isaiah 24:9).
When the former prophets died, the Urim and Thummim ceased.  When Temple was destroyed, the shamir and nopheth zufim ceased.   And people of faith ceased, as it says, “Help, O Lord, for the faithful are no more” (Psalms 12:2).    Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel said in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua:  from the day the Temple was destroyed, there is no day without a curse, the dew has not descended for a blessing, and the flavor has departed from produce.  Rabbi Yose says: the fatness was also removed from produce. 
Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says: [the cessation of observation of the] purity laws has removed taste and fragrance, [the cessation of observation of] the tithes has removed the fatness of grain. But the Sages say: licentiousness and sorcery destroyed everything. 
During the war with Vespasian they decreed against crowns worn by bridegrooms and against the bell.    During the war with Quietus they decreed against crowns worn by brides and that nobody should teach their child Greek.  During the final war they decreed that a bride should not go out in a palanquin inside the city, but our rabbis decreed that a bride may go out in a palanquin inside the city.    
When Rabbi Meir died, the composers of fables ceased.  When Ben Azzai died, the diligent students [of Torah] ceased.  When Ben Zoma died, the expounders ceased.    When Rabbi Yehoshua died, goodness ceased from the world.   When Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel died, locusts came and troubles multiplied.  When Rabbi Elazar ben Azaryah died, the sages ceased to be wealthy. When Rabbi Akiba died, the glory of the Torah ceased.  When Rabbi Hanina ben Dosa died, men of wondrous deeds ceased.  When Rabbi Yose Katnuta died, the pious men (hasidim) ceased—and why was his name called Katnuta? Because he was the youngest of the pious men.    When Rabban Yohanan ben Zakkai died, the splendor of wisdom ceased.    When Rabban Gamaliel the elder died, the glory of the torah ceased, and purity and separateness perished.  When Rabbi Ishmael ben Fabi died, the splendor of the priesthood died.  When Rabbi died, humility and fear of sin ceased.    Rabbi Phineas ben Yair says: when Temple was destroyed, scholars and freemen were ashamed and covered their head, men of wondrous deeds were disregarded, and violent men and big talkers grew powerful.  And nobody expounds, nobody seeks, and nobody asks.   Upon whom shall we depend? Upon our father who is in heaven.  Rabbi Eliezer the Great says: from the day the Temple was destroyed, the sages began to be like scribes, scribes like synagogue-attendants, synagogue-attendants like common people, and the common people became more and more debased.  And nobody seeks. Upon whom shall we depend? Upon our father who is in heaven.  In the footsteps of the Messiah insolence will increase and the cost of living will go up greatly; the vine will yield its fruit, but wine will be expensive; the government will turn to heresy, and there will be no one to rebuke; the meeting-place [of scholars] will be used for licentiousness; the Galilee will be destroyed, the Gablan will be desolated, and the dwellers on the frontier will go about [begging] from place to place without anyone to take pity on them; the wisdom of the learned will rot, those who fear sin will be despised, and the truth will be lacking; youths will put old men to shame, the old will stand up in the presence of the young, “For son spurns father, daughter rises up against mother, daughter-in-law against mother-in-law—a man’s own household are his enemies” (Micah 7:6). The face of the generation will be like the face of a dog, a son will not feel ashamed before his father. Upon whom shall we depend? Upon our father who is in heaven. R. Pinchas ben Yair says:  Quickness leads to cleanliness, cleanliness leads to purity, purity leads to separation, separation leads to sanctity, sanctity leads to humility, humility leads to fear of sin, fear of sin leads to piety, piety leads to the Holy Spirit. And the Holy Spirit leads to the resuscitation of the dead, and the resuscitation of the dead leads to the coming of Elijah, may he be remembered for good, Amen.  