Tzav VeZeruz
צו וזרוז
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Tzav VeZeruz



Chapter 1



Chapter 2

If you desire to serve the Divine and raise yourself to a higher consciousness, don't stand at your seventieth birthday the same person you were at your Bar Mitzvah. Rather, do this. Every year, set yourself a goal. Imagine yourself: if your name is Reuben, for example, imagine what kind of Reuben you will be next year, what will his achievements, his engagement and his qualities be? This imaginary Reuben will be a way to measure yourself, always checking how far you are from reaching him. Are your daily worship and your self-development at a pace that will allow you to become that Reuben next year? And if the next year arrives, and you measure yourself and have not reached even to the level of Reuben's shoes, let it be in your eyes as if you have (G-d forbid G-d forbid!) not achieved a long life. Because only last year's Reuben, or the one of ten years ago, is alive, and not this year's Reuben. This is the meaning of the verse "And Abraham was old, full of days" (Genesis 24:1) - Today's Abraham was there today, and not yesterday's.

Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18

If you have not yet tasted prayer when it is free of asking for your needs. If you have not yet wept praises of God into your book, and not been so enthused until you feel your words are from God and to God; a revelation of Divinity, which you can’t reach and know, pushing to emerge through your heart and mind. Then your tears which you shed when praying only for your own needs appear to Heaven as childish, like crying for  toys and nuts. Then do this: take an hour or two off from the world and its clock, the sly nature of its wisdom and desire which is within you, and be alone. And if you can go to the forest, and you see yourself as a simple creature among the creatures of God. Unify yourself with the sun and moon, the birds and all the trees of the forest, to sing before God. You have come to reveal and to fill the whole world with the blessed majesty.
For example, begin to declare to them and to the whole world Adon Olam and Y’did Nefesh. See if that doesn’t cause your soul to spread her beauty out to meet her sovereign and creator, who will come close to you as it were to listen to the sound of your singing. A fire from above will take hold inside you from which only your tears can save and calm you.
Then you will understand the plea of Moses our teacher of blessed memory who prayed close to his death to become like a bird in the sky, to recount and sing the song of God, yearning before God.