Mishnah Tevul Yom
משנה טבול יום
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.org

Chapter 1

One who prepares breads in order to separate them (for the priest's tithe), and bites them--the House of Shammai says: he has exacted usury concerning the priestly food of the day; the House of Hillel says: he has not exacted usury.  If two pieces of dough stick together, or if two loaves stick together, or if one bakes one batter-cake on top of another before the loaf developed a slight crust  in the oven, or froth, or the boiling of beans, or the boiling of "new" wine (of the produce lawfully not yet fit for use), and Rabbi Judah says: even that of using "new" cedar wood--the House of Shammai says: he has exacted usury concerning the priestly food of the day; the House of Hillel says: he has not exacted usury. But they (the Houses of Hillel and Shammai) agree (stringently) in the remainder of the questions of the impurities, whether light or severe.
One who prepares breads without intention to separate them (for the priest's tithe), or if one bakes one batter-cake on top of another after the loaf crusted slightly in the oven, or a drop of water, or the boiling of beans of the second batch (not dedicated for priests), or the boiling of "old" wine (of the produce lawfully fit for use), and of any oil, and of lentils, and Rabbi Judah says: even if fermenting--they are unfit for the priestly portion of the day, and need not be considered among the impurities.
A knob that is behind a loaf, a small salt morsel, or a burnt crust less than a finger's breadth, Rabbi Yose says: Whatever is eaten with it is rendered impure by a Tevul Yom, and needless to say [the same applies] to any other impurity.
A pebble in a loaf, a big salt morsel, or a lupine, or a burnt crust more than a finger's breadth, Rabbi Yose says: Whatever is not eaten with it is ritually pure of an Av Hatum'ah, and needless to say of a Tevul Yom.
Barley and spelt which are not peeled, Crowfoot root, Asafoetida and Silphium -- Rabbi Yehuda says: Also Black Beans -- are ritually pure of an Av Hatum'a, and needless to say of a Tevul Yom. So says Rabbi Meir. The Sages say: They are pure of a Tevul Yom but impure of any other impurity. Barley and spelt which are peeled, and wheat regardless of whether it is peeled or not, Black cumin, Sesame or Pepper -- Rabbi Yehuda says: Also White Beans -- are ritually impure of a Tevul Yom, and needless to say of any other impurities.

Chapter 2

Liquids that come out of one who immersed that day (tevul yom) are like those which he has touched: neither of them defile   With regard to all others that are impure, be they of minor  or major  [degree], the liquids that come out of them are like those they touch; both have first degree impurity.   Except for liquid that is a "father of impurity."  
A pot which was full of liquid and one who immersed that day (tevul yom) touched it:
If it is terumah, the liquid is disqualified, but the pot is pure.  
But if the liquid is non-sacred [hullin] then all remains clean.  
If his hands were defiled [and he touched the liquids in the pot], it is all impure.   
This is a case where defiled hands are treated more stringently than one who immersed that day (tevul yom).
But there is a greater stringency for one who immersed that day (tevul yom) than fore defiled hands, since a doubtful tevul yom disqualifies terumah, but doubts with regard to defiled hands are pure.

Porridge made of terumah and the garlic or oil [it contained] was of non-sacred stuff, and one who immersed that day (a tevul yom) touched part of them, he has disqualified the whole thing;   
But if the porridge was of non-sacred stuff and the garlic or oil it contained was of terumah, and a tevul yom touched part of them, he disqualifies only the part he has touched.   
If the greater part was garlic then they go after the majority.   
Rabbi Judah said: When is this so? When it formed one cohesive mass in the pot, but if it was scattered in the mortar, then it is pure, since he wishes that it should be scattered.   
[Similarly] with all other mashed foods which were mashed with liquids. 
But those which are usually mashed with liquids and yet were mashed without liquids, though they formed one lump in the pot, they are regarded as a cake of preserved figs.

The porridge and batter-cake were of non-sacred stuff and oil of terumah was floating above them, and one who immersed that day (a tevul yom) touched the oil, he disqualifies only the oil. 
If he stirred it together, all the places where the oil goes are disqualified.

Sanctified meat over which the porridge crusted, and one who immersed that day (a tevul yom) touched the crust, the slices [of meat] are permitted.
If he touched a slice, that slice and all [the crust] that comes up with it form a connective one with the other. 
Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri says: the two of them serve as connectives to each other.   
Similarly, with [cooked] beans that have formed a layer over pieces of bread.   
Beans cooked in a pot: when they are still separate, do not serve as connectives; but when they become a lump, they do act as connectives. 
If they formed several lumps, they are to be counted.   
Oil which floats on wine and a tevul yom touched the oil, he disqualifies only the oil.
Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri says: each serves as a connective with the other.

A jug which sunk into a cistern containing wine, and one who immersed that day (a tevul yom) touched it:
If from the rim and inwards, it serves as a connective;   
If from the rim and outwards, it does not serve as a connective. 
Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri says: even if [the level of wine] is the height of a man and he touched it directly against the mouth of the jar, it serves as a connective.
A jug which had a hole either at its mouth, its bottom or its sides, and one who immersed that day (a tevul yom) touched it,  it is impure.   
Rabbi Judah says: if the hole is at its mouth or bottom it is impure; but if on its sides, on this side or on that, it is pure.   
One who pours [liquid] from vessel to vessel, and a tevul yom touched the stream, if there was something in [the vessel], then it is neutralized in a hundred and one.

A bubble on a jug which was pierced both on the inside and on the outside, whether above or below:
Opposite one another, it is impure [if touched] by a "father of uncleanness" and it is impure if it is in a tent in which there is a corpse.   
If the inner hole is below and the outer above, it is impure [if touched] by a "father of uncleanness," but it is pure in a tent in which there is a corpse.
If the inner hole is above and the outer below, it is pure if touched by a "father of uncleanness," but it is impure in a tent in which there is a corpse.


Chapter 3

All handles to food, which count as connectives when touched by a "father of uncleanness," also count as connectives when touched by one who immersed that day (a tevul yom). 
A food which was divided yet a small part was still attached:
Rabbi Meir says: if one holds the larger part and the smaller part comes up with it, it is like it.  
Rabbi Judah says: if one holds the smaller part and the greater comes up with it,  it is like it. 
Rabbi Nehemiah says: [this refers to one who holds]  pure part.
But the sages say: the impure part.  
In the case of all other foods, those usually held by the leaf he should hold it by the leaf, and those usually held by the stalk he should hold it by the stalk.   

A vegetable of terumah with a beaten egg on top of it and one who immersed that day (a tevul yom) touched the egg, he disqualifies only that stalk [of the vegetables] that is opposite the part [of the egg] he touched.  
Rabbi Yose says: [he has disqualified] the entire upper layer.
But if it was like a cap  it is not a connective.  

The string of an egg that had become congealed on the sides of a pan and one who had immersed that day (a tevul yom) touched it:
If within the rim [of the pan] and inwards it serves as a connective;   
But if outside the rim and outwards, it does not serve as a connective. 
Rabbi Yose says: the string and any part that is peeled away with it [serves as a connective].   
Similarly, with regard to beans that had congealed on the rim of the pot.

Dough that had been mixed [with dough of terumah] or that had been leavened with yeast of terumah, is not disqualified by one who had immersed that day (a tevul yom).
Rabbi Yose and Rabbi Shimon disqualify it.  
Dough that had become susceptible to uncleanness by a liquid, and was kneaded with fruit juice, and later a tevul yom touched it:
Rabbi Elazar ben Judah of Barthotha says in the name of Rabbi Joshua: he has disqualified all of it.
Rabbi Akiva says in his name: he has disqualified only the part that he touched.

 Non-sacred vegetables which were cooked with oil of terumah and one who immersed that day (a tevul yom) touched it: 
Rabbi Elazar ben Judah of Bartota says in the name of Rabbi Joshua: he has disqualified the whole thing.   
Rabbi Akiva says in his name: he has disqualified only the part that he touched.

A clean person who chewed food and it fell on his clothes and on a loaf of terumah, it [the loaf] is clean (insusceptible).   
If he was eating crushed olives or moist dates, as long as it was his intention to suck out the pit, and it fell on his clothes and on a loaf of terumah, it is unclean (susceptible). 
If he was eating dried olives, or dried dates as long as it was not his intention to suck out the pit, and they fell on his clothes and on a loaf of terumah, it is not unclean (susceptible).   
Whether it was a clean person or one who immersed that day (a tevul yom). 
Rabbi Meir says: in either case it is unclean (susceptible to uncleanness) in the case of a tevul yom, since liquids coming out from an unclean persons make things susceptible whether it was to his liking or not. 
But the sages say: a tevul yom is not an unclean person. 


Chapter 4

Tithe food that was rendered susceptible to impurity by a liquid, and one who had immersed that day (a tevul yom) or one with defiled hands touched it, they may separate terumah of tithe from it in purity, since it only has third degree uncleanness, and third degree uncleanness counts as clean in non-sacred food.
A woman who immersed that day (a tevulat yom) may knead dough, cut off the hallah, and set it apart, and she should arrange it on an Egyptian basket,  or on a tray, and then bring it near  and call it by its name. For it [the dough] has third degree uncleanness and third degree uncleanness is clean in non-sacred food. 
A trough which immersed that day (a tevulat yom), one may knead dough in it and cut off the portion for hallah and bring it near and call it by name; for it [the trough] has third degree uncleanness and third degree uncleanness is clean in non-sacred produce.  
A flagon which was immersed that day (a tevul yom) and they filled it from a jug containing tithes from which terumah had not yet been removed: 
If one said, let this be terumah of tithe after nightfall, it becomes terumah of tithe. 
But if he said: let this be the food for the eruv, he has said nothing.   
If the jug was broken, the contents of the flagon is untithed.
If the flagon was broken, then what is in the cask is untithed. 

At first they used to say: one may redeem [second tithe] for the produce of an ignoramus (an am haaretz).   
Later they went back and said: also for his coins.   
At first they used to say that if a man was being led out to execution and said, “Write a get for my wife”, they may write a get and give [it to her].   
Later they went back and said, even if he was setting sail or going out on a caravan . 
Rabbi Shimon Shezuri says: even if he was dangerously ill.

Ashkelon grappling-irons which were broken but their hooks are still there, they remain susceptible to impurity. 
A pitch-fork, winnowing-fork, or rake, and also  a hair-comb, that had one  of its teeth removed and it was replaced by one of metal, it is susceptible to impurity. 
And concerning all these Rabbi Joshua said: the scribes have have innovated a new thing, and I have nothing to say back. 

One who takes terumah from a cistern and said: "Let this be terumah provided it comes up safely," [it means] safely from breakage or spillage but not from impurity.  
Rabbi Shimon says: also from impurity.   
If it broke, it does not render [the contents of the cistern] to be a mixture containing terumah. 
How far away can it be broken and still not make [the contents of the cistern] a mixture containing terumah? As far back so that if it rolls , it can reach the cistern.   
Rabbi Yose says: even if one had the intention of making such a stipulation, but did not do so, and it broke, it does not make the [contents of the cistern] a mixture containing terumah, for this is a stipulation laid down by the court.
