Bartenura on Mishnah Parah
ברטנורא על משנה פרה
Bartenura on Mishnah, trans. by Rabbi Robert Alpert, 2020
http://sefaria.org

Bartenura on Mishnah Parah



Chapter 1



Mishnah 1

רבי אליעזר אומר עגלה בת שנתה – a heifer whose neck was broken needs to be one year old and no more/older.
ופרה – red [heifer].
ופרה בת שתי שתים – that the language of פרה/heifer implies that it is older than a עלגה/heifer (i.e., calf)
וחכמים אומרים עלגה ערופה כשרה אפילו בת שתים – and all the more so, when it is one year old, but even if it is two years old, it is a עגלה /calf, and even though that we hold that every place where it states עגל, it is one year old, the Rabbis hold that the heifer whose neck is broken is different, as it is written regarding it (Deuteronomy 21:3): “[The elders of the town nearest to the corpse] shall then take a heifer/עגלת בקר, [which has never been worked, which has never pulled in a yoke],” but it is not written a mere/plain עגלה/heifer.
שמא תשחיר שלא תפסל (lest a hair turn black and it should [not] otherwise become unfit) – for if two black hairs would grow in it, it would be unfit, as it written (Numbers 19:2): “[Instruct the Israelite people to bring you] a red [cow] without blemish, that its being without blemish/its purity, is in its reddishness and it went away, for a red cow which is three years old or four [years old] and old is fit/proper, but we don’t wait for it, lest a hair turn black and it should [not] otherwise become unfit.
לא שמעתי אלא שלשית (I heard only “Shelasheet”) – I heard that a red cow is not kosher/fit other than one which is “Shelasheet” (i.e., in its third year).
כך שמעתי סתם (such I heard plain) – and I have nothing to explain.
שלישית – implies, third to the others in sequence, that two other cows were born before her and this is the third to them.
שלשית- implies that she is three years old.
רביעי לאחרים – when there are four vineyards, it belongs to say about the last that it is the fourth to the others, but [the term] רבעי/that which is in the fourth year implies a vineyard that is four years old.
האוכל בבית המנוגע פרס – he who tarries in a leprous house in order to eat a piece of bread, defiles that clothing that is upon him. [The word] פרס is half of a loaf, from three loaves to a KAB.
אמרו לו אמור משמונה עשר לסאה – meaning to say, you should have said from eighteen to a Seah, that the Seah is six KABIM, and three loaves to a KAB are eighteen to a Seah.
כך שמעתי – from my Rabbis/teachers, and it is not in my hands to explain why they didn’t say from eighteen to a Seah.
אני אפרש – what the practical difference is between this and that [and why they didn’t say eighteen to a Seah].
משלש לקב אין בו חלה – for five fourths flour and more, are liable for separating Hallah, and a person who kneads only one KAB separates Hallah from it. Therefore, when you say, from three loaves to a KAB, it implies that Hallah had not been separated from them, but when you say “from eighteen to a Seah,” it is found that each loaf is less that what we reduced for Hallah and a person who kneads a Seah must separate Hallah from it.

Mishnah 2

ופר שני בן בקר תקח לחטאת- regarding the purification of the Levities, it I s written in the Torah portion of B’haalotekha (Numbers 8:8), and this "שני"/second is extraneous, for since it is written after it (Numbers 8:12): “One shall be offered to the LORD as a purification offering (i.e., sin-offering) and the other as a burnt offering, automatically one knows that there are two [bulls], but rather, it is written [the word]"שני" to teach that it is two years old, for just as for something three years old, we call שלשית, here also for something two years old it is called "שני".
וחכמים אומרים כו' – and the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 3

מיום ליום – if it was born on the first of Elul, it didn’t complete a full year until the first of Elul of the second year. For we follow after the its year, but not after the years of the counting of the world. But if the year were intercalated, it was intercalated for it. And similarly, with rams that are two years old.
אינו כשר לא לאיל – for it is not considered a ram until it enters thirty days from the second year for it.
פלגס (a sheep beyond the age of a כבש and below that of an איל ; a youth in the intermediate stage between boyhood and maturity) – It is the language of פלג/part, middle, meaning to say average between this and that, it has exited from the category of כבש but has not entered the category of איל (i.e., a כבש is a sheep at least one year of age; the איל is at least two years old).
נוקד (shepherd) – it is the language of (Amos 1:1): "[דברי עמוס] אשר-היה בנקדים מתקוע"/[The words of Amos] a sheep breeder from Tekoa,” whose explanation is the owners of sheet. (Also, possibly the word נוקד (NUKAD) – a stamped, distinct coin).
פרכדיגמא (false coin, counterfeit) -to a coin that is invalid that they call it PARCHADIGMA in the Greek language. Even this is invalid from the designation/definition of an איל or of a כבש.
מביא עליו נכסי אלי – one-third of a Hin. And we derive it from the fact that it is written (Numbers 7:6-7): “the case of a ram, [you shall present as a grain offering: two-thirds of a measure of choice flour with a third of a Hin of oil mixed in] and a third of a Hin of wine as a libation – [as an offering of pleasing odor to the LORD],” to include the פלגס/sheep beyond the age of a כבש and below that of an איל.

Mishnah 4

חטאות הצבור (see Leviticus 4:14) – as for example the goats of the New Moons and the Festivals and their burnt offerings (see Numbers 28:3 and following) , all of them are a year old.
חטאת היחיד (see Leviticus 4:28, 32 and 5:6) – a female sheep or a female goat.
ואם הקריבום שיום השמיני כשרים – as it is written (Leviticus 22:27): “and from the eighth day on it shall be acceptable [as a gift to the LORD},” and it is stated regarding a firstborn (Exodus 22:29): “[You shall do the same with your cattle and your flocks: seven days it shall remain with its mother;] on the eighth day you shall give it to Me,” just as the firstborn that he made the eighth day like the eighth [day] and beyond, so also with the rest of the sacrifices he made the eighth day like the eighth [day] and beyond. However, with a matter that is an obligation of the most preferable way of performing a Mitzvah is to bring it from the thirtieth day onward.
והפסח – even though it is an obligation, the Sages were not quiet/silent, because they take it according to the number of souls, so that they don’t come to a case of left over (i.e., part of the offering left over after time permitted for it to be eat. One who eats the leftover portions of an offering is punishable by extirpation – see Tractate Zevahim, Chapter 5, Mishnah 8 which states that the Passover offering an only be consumed until midnight) since it is not eaten [other] than for one fellowship.

Chapter 2



Mishnah 1

רבי אליעזר אומר פרה מעוברת כשרה – Rabbi Eliezer and the Rabbis of here established according to the approach of Rabbi Yehuda who mentions further on in our chapter (Mishnah 4) that if a bull brought it up upon the cow, it is not invalid unless it went up with the knowledge of the owner of the heifer, but they dispute here regarding a pregnant cow that a male went up on her on his own without the knowledge of the owners, for Rabbi Eliezer who declares it fit holds that fetus is the thigh/haunch of its mother and it is like the body of he cow, but the Rabbis who invalidate I hold that the fetus is not the thigh/haunch of it smother and it is disqualified from the work, that she carries the fetus. And the Halakha is that is invalid from the time when a male came up upon her, even without the knowledge of the owners, and even if she is not pregnant, and not according to Rabbi Yehuda.
אינה נלקחת מן הנכרים – who are suspected the copulation (i.e., carnal connection with beasts/buggery (see Tractate Avodah Zarah, Chapter 2, Mishnah 1), for lest it was copulated at their hands.
וחכמים מכשירין – [to purchase a red heifer from non-Jews] because the cow was made barren/impotent when it copulated with it, for the heathen has compassion on his cattle that it should not become barren/impotent.
ולא זו בלבד – not only regarding the Red Heifer that Rabbi Eliezer and the Rabbis disputed, but regarding all of the community sacrifices and those of an individual, Rabbi Eliezer invalidates [them] if they were purchased from the heathens, for he is concerned for copulation/carnal connection with beasts, but the Sages declare them fit. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer.
באין מארץ ומחוצה לארץ – (see Tractate Menahot, Chapter 8, Mishnah 1) – all of the sacrifices come whether from the Land [of Israel] or from outside the Land [of Israel], whether from the new [grain] or whether form the old [grain – i.e., from before Passover].
חוץ מן העומר ושתי הלחם - as Scripture states (Leviticus 23:10): [Speak to the Israelite people and say to them:] When you enter the land [that I am giving to you] and you reap its harvest, you shall bring the first sheaf of your harvest [to the priest],” and with the two bread loaves, it is written (Leviticus 23:17): “You shall bring from your settlements two loaves of bead as an elevation offering.” They do not come other from that which is new (and grown in the Land of Israel), as it is written (Leviticus 23:16): “an offering of new grain to the LORD.”

Mishnah 2

יגוד (chop off) – he should cut off/sever. Like (Daniel 4:11): “hew down the tree”/גודו אילנא.
והננסת (dwarf) – the smallest, for that is a blemish in a human but is not a blemish in an animal.
יבלת (wart on the skin – VAVROAH in the foreign language.
ור' יהודה פוסל – and the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 3

יוצא דופן (Caesarian section) – like the rest of Holy Things. As it is written (Leviticus 22:27): “[When an ox or a sheep or a goat] is born,” excluding that by Caesarean section. But even though a heifer/cow is not the Holy Things of the altar but rather the Holy Things of offerings for Temple repair, nevertheless, an animal born by caesarean section is invalid, for the All-Merciful called it a sin-offering.
ר' אליעזר מכשיר – especially the fee for a whore and the fee for a dog. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer.
כל המומין הפוסלים במוקדשים – In [Tractate] Bekhorot in the [sixth] chapter, “On account of these blemishes”/על אלה מומין (Mishnayot 1-12), the blemishes that invalidate the Holy Things are explained.
פוסלים כפרה – as it is written (Numbers 19:2): “in which there is no defect”/"אשר אין-בה מום".
עבר בה את הנהר אחז בזנבה – assisted/accompanied it when he crossed the river.
קיפל עליה בת המוסרה (if he threw the reins over her back) – the rope that he ties her with they doubled and placed them on her body (i.e., back).
מתן טליתו עליה פסולה – it states in [the portion of the] of the [Red] Heifer (Numbers 19:2): “and on which no yoke has been laid”/אשר לא-עלה עליה על", and it states regarding the heifer whose neck is broken (Deuteronomy 21:3): “a heifer which has never been worked, which has never pulled in a yoke”/"עגלת בקר אשר לא-עבד בה אשר לא-משכה בעל". Just as the yoke that is stated with the heifer (in Deuteronomy 21:3 and following) it did all of the rest of invalid work while yoked, even the yoke that is mentioned with the [Red] Heifer, it is the rest of the invalid work while yoked.
בשביל שלא תחליק – so that her feet should not slip and she would fall.
לצורך אחר פסולה – and even for his needs and for her needs it is invalid.

Mishnah 4

עלה עליה זכר פסולה – even though it is not what it prefers, because its costs are expensive and [the owner) loses a lot, and regarding the work it is not what he prefers it does not invalidate it, as it written regarding the heifer whose neck is broken (Deuteronomy 21;3); “a heifer which has never been worked, it is written as עבד – but it is read as עובד. Just as עבד is preferable to him, even עובד is preferable to him, and we derive the sin-offering of the heifer from it. Nevertheless, since that with the rest of the cows it was preferable to him (i.e., the owner), we consider that regarding the sin-offering of the heifer is also preferable to him (i.e., the owner). And further, if you came to validate it, if so, it is also preferable to him (i.e., the owner), and because of this it is invalidated.
העלהו פסולה – Not exactly “brought it up” [upon the cow], but rather, if it went up upon her (i.e. the cow) with the knowledge of the owners, even if it went up on its own, it is invalid. But if it went up [on the cow] without the knowledge of the owners, it is fit/appropriate. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 5

היו בה שתי שערות שחורות פסולה – as it is written (Numbers 19:2): “[This is the ritual that the LORD has commanded: Instruct the Israelite people to bring you] a red cow,” if there are blemish, it is already stated [in that Biblical verse]: “in which thee is no defect,” but rather that it will be pure in its redness.
רבי יהודה אומר בתוך כוס אחד – we have this reading. But we don’t have the reading: "ואפילו"/and even, and in place that the first Tanna would teach "גומא"/follicle, Rabbi Yehuda would teach a "כוס" /follicle (i.e., cavity). [The words]"גומא" and "כוס" are one [and the same], and it is obligatory for a person to state them in the language of his Rabbi/teacher (see Tractate Eduyot, Chapter 1, Mishnah 3 for an enunciation of this rule), that the Rabbi/teacher of Rabbi Yehuda would call a "גומא" a "כוס" , this is proven in the Tosefta (see Tractate Parah, Chapter 2, Halakha 7).
מוכיחות – corresponding and adjacent, this one (i.e., hair follicle) on the side of that one (i.e., hair follicle).
ר' אליעזר אומר אפילו חמשים – meaning to say, even more and they are scattered, one should uproot them (and the heifer would be fit/appropriate). But the Halakha is according to the first Tanna/teacher.
אחר הנראה – that is after the heads of the hairs.
אחר העיקר – but if their roots grow red and their heads grow black, and there are in the roots that grows red in order that it can be removed with scissors , he should cut their heads that grow black and it is fit/appropriate/kosher. But if there aren’t in the root that grows red a measurement that they would be able to be removed with scissors, it is invalid even according to the words of the Sages. For the measurement of two hairs that is stated in every place, is in order that they could be removed with scissors. And this is the Halakha.

Chapter 3



Mishnah 1

שבעת ימים כו' מפרישין כהן השורף את הפרה – as it is written in the portion of investment/inauguration [of the Kohanim] (Leviticus 8:34): "כאשר עשה ביום הזה צוה ה' לעשת לכפר עליכם"/”Everything done today, the LORD has commanded to be done [seven days], to make expiation for you,” and our Rabbis/teachers expounded (see Talmud Tractate Yoma 2a): "לעשת" /to be done – this is the act of the [Red] Heifer, "לכפר עליכם"/to make expiation for you – this is the act of Yom Kippur. That the Kohen who burns the heifer and the High Priest/Kohen Gadol who serves on the Day of Atonement requires separation for seven days] like Aaron and his sons would require in the seven days of investment/inauguration, as is written (Leviticus 8:33): “You shall not go outside the entrance of the Tent of Meeting for seven days,” And they would separate him from his wife, lest he come upon his wife and she would be found to be a menstruant woman and someone who has sexual relations with a menstruant woman is impure for seven days and is not able to burn the cow/heifer.
הבירה – there are those that say that this place was on the Temple Mount and “Birah” was its name. But there are those who say that the entire Temple is called “Birah,” as it states (I Chronicles 29:19: “[As to my son, Solomon, give him a whole heart to observe Your commandments, Your admonitions, and Your laws, and to fulfill them all,] and to build this temple for which I have made provision.”
צפונה מזרחה – the reason that they separate the Kohen who burns the Heifer/cow to a chamber that is in the northeast, since it is a sin offering [being offered] and the sin-offering requires the north (see Numbers 19:9), the Rabbis established for him in the northeast just that there will be for him recognition.
ובית אבן היתה נקראת – because all of its acts were with vessels of untrimmed stone, vessels of stone and vessels of earth that are not susceptible to receive defilement, and in them alone he would use all seven of the days of separation, because someone who is a person who immersed himself that day/טבול יום is fit/kosher [to offer up] the heifer, and they would defile the Kohen that burns the heifer and would immerse him immediately to remove (the false opinion) out of the heart of the Sadducees (i.e., to demonstrate, by practice, the rejection of their opinion) who state that it was done at sunset, the Rabbis established for it extra preference so that they would not disregard/despise it.
כל שבעת הימים – of the days of separation.
מכל חטאות שהיו שם – all the heifers that were made from the days of Moses our Teacher/Rabbi and until that time. For each and every Red Heifer that they would give a bit for protection, and on the first day they would sprinkle upon him from the ashes of one heifer and on the second day from another and the third day from another.
בשלישי ובשביעי – [on the third and seventh days] of his separation. And between the first Tanna/teacher and Rabbi Yossi, both of them hold that immersion at its appropriate time is a Mitzvah, but they differ with regard to sprinkling if they make an analogy to immersion or not, the first Tanna/teacher makes an analogy between sprinkling and ritual immersion and sprinkling at its appropriate time is a Mitzvah, and each day from the first seven days there is doubt lest today is their third day of his defilement, and the three concluding days – each day we have doubt that perhaps it is the seventh [day]. But on the fourth [day], it does not require sprinkling, for it is not on the third [day], one can doubt, but one cannot doubt on the seventh [day], for the sprinkling on the seventh [day] does not count because sprinkling on the seventh [day] until he actually sprinkled on the third [day] that is prior to it. And all of the seven [days] are not exclusively, for perforce we hold that sprinkling is שבות /a rabbinic degree to enhance the character of the Shabbat as a day of rest, and does not supersede the Sabbath. But Rabbi Yossi does not make an analogy between sprinkling and ritual immersion, and sprinkling at the appropriate time is not a Mitzvah, therefore, he doesn’t require sprinkling other than on the third and on the seventh [days] alone. But Rabbi Hanina the Prefect of the Kohanim also holds like Rabbi Meir, that sprinkling at its appropriate time is not a Mitzvah, and the Kohen who burns the Heifer is a mere preference, just as they would not disregard/despise it because it is done with a person who is immersed himself that day/טבול יום.

Mishnah 2

בנויות על גבי הסלע – The flinty rock that was known that was there from the beginning of the Creation of the world. But nevertheless, they were stringent to make a cavity underneath it, because of the grave in the depth, lest there is underneath it a grave and there no tent for the corpse that is a handbreadth hollow, and the defilement that is pressed ritual impurity (i.e., a corpse or part of a corpse located beneath a roof or a covering imparts ritual impurity only to objects beneath that covering – if there is a handbreadth of space between the corpse and the roof or covering) and it burst forth and rises, therefore, they would build it on top of arches, for even if there is a grave underneath them, the cavity interrupts it. And all the language of defilement of the depths that is in the Gemara, is the language of doubt and covered, like this depth that is not revealed.
ומביאים נשים מעוברות ויולדות שם - all of these are additional preferences that they made, just as so that they would not disregard/despise it, because hey would do it with a person who immersed himself that day.
ומגדלות שם את בניהן – until they would be eight [years] old, but not more so that they don’t see a nocturnal emission.
ומביאים שוורים – whose stomachs are wide in order that the feet of the young children who sit upon them overshadow over the land because of the grave of the depths.

וכוסות של אבן בידם – for all of the act of the “heifer” are in vessels of untrimmed stone and vessels of stone and vessels of earth that are not susceptible to receive defilement.

ומלאו – [and they filled] from it water to sanctify the waters of the sin offering that they sprinkle on the [Kohen] who burns the heifer all seven [days]. But within the river there is no [reason] to doubt about the grave of the depths, for they don’t make graves in the rivers.
רבי יוסי אומר – from on top of the oxen they would lover a rope and fill up [the cups] with water, but they would not descend into [the waters of] the Siloam. And the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 3

באו להר הבית – the young children that are upon the bulls with the cups filled with water.
בפתח העזרה – of the Women’s Court, that is near the Hel (a place within the fortification of the Temple; see Tractate Middot, Chapter 1, Mishnah 5).
היה מתוקן קלל של חטאת (and there set up a flask/pitcher containing the ashes of the red cow) – a vessel that was placed in it the ashes of the sin-offering from each cow that they would burn, as it is written (Numbers 19:9): “[A man who is clean shall gather up the ashes of the cow and deposit them outside the camp in a clean place,] to be kept for water of lustration for the Israelite community.”
קלל – a small pitcher. It is the [Aramaic] translation of (Genesis 24:15): “[He had scarcely finished speaking, when Rebekah, who was born to Bethuel, the son of Milcah, the wife of Abraham’s brother Nahor], came out with her jar on her shoulder,” – and her jar/small pitcher on her shoulder.
וזורקו תוך הקלל – and through this, the male sheep is startled and moves backward and the stick/staff goes out from the small pitcher/jar and absorbs/retains from the ashes with it and it spills on top of the bulls and the child takes it and doesn’t need to remove his hand outward. But in the Tosefta (Tractate Parah, Chapter 3, Halakha 5) it implies that they didn’t need to do this, but rather, when they came up [back to the Land of Israel] from the Diaspora (i.e., Babylonia) when all of them were ritually impure, and they were not able to touch it, for if they would touch the ashes of the heifer, they would defile it. And that they would throw the stick/staff into the small pitcher and not through placing it in there, so that they would not defile the ashes through movement/היסט because of doubt of a woman with flux [with them] (i.e., a manner in which ritual impurity may be imparted – that whenever a person with gonorrhea or a menstruating woman or a woman with a lux or a woman after childbirth – causes the object to move from its place, even though he/she does not actually come into contact with it – e.g., by means of a lever – the object becomes ritually impure).
אל תתנו במקום לצדוקים לרדות – to rule over us with their wors of laughter and derision. For Rabbi Yossi holds that when the people from the Diaspora (i.e., Babylonia) came up [to the Land of Israel], there were among them that were ritual pure that they had purified with the ashes of the heifer/cow that they brought down with them to Babylonia and carried up with them, and they were not defiled because of the Land of the Nations (i.e., any place outside of the Land of Israel), they did not decree defilement on the Lands of he Nations until after they ascended from the Diaspora. Therefore, it was possible that a pure person would take the ashes of the heifer, and they would not have a need for a male sheep, and the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 4

לא היו עושים חטאת על גבי חטאת – if they had purified themselves with the one sin-offering of a cow and it became invalid, they should not do another on top of this one. But rather, it requires guarding as at the outset.
ולא תינוק על גבי תינוק – for if there were two young children, one is protected for the heifer of a sin-offering and the other is merely protected on account of this child, but not for the need of a heifer sin-offering, he one does not adapt oneself with this one on account of that one.
צריכים היו תינוקות להזות – and even though all of these being guarded were protected, we are concerned that perhaps a raven would bring an olive’s bulk from a corpse and cast it upon them, and all of these are greater gradations/preferences.
לא היו צריכים להזות – for we are not concerned about defilement through contact with a corpse, but ritual immersion would be required for everyone, lest hey were defiled by an unclean reptile or moving creature/שרץ. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Akiba.

Mishnah 5

לא מצאו משבע – because as we stated that from all the sin-offerings that they sprinkle upon him, because of this it is stated, that if they did not find [the residue of ash] from seven [cows of purification], they sprinkle even from one [cow of purification].
וחמש מעזרא ואילך – Rabbi Meir did not count the four that were made by Shimon HaTzaddik/The Righeous and Yohanan the High Priest but rather for two, because he holds that as a result of invalidation that occurred at first, the second was made.
וחכ"א שבע מעזרא ואילך – for they hold that all of them were fit/appropriate.

Mishnah 6

וכיפה כנגד האוטם (and an arch corresponding to the foundation/substructure -filled with earth) – the feet of the arch that the arch is supported on them is called an אוטם/foundation. But the legs of the upper arch do not correspond with the legs of the lower [arch] but rather correspond to the arch itself, that opposite the upper foundation stands the lower cavity.
מפני קבר התהום – so that there would not be there pressed ritual impurity which bursts forth and rises.
ופרה וכל מסעדיה – those who support and aid it. It is the language of (Psalms 41:4): “The LORD will sustain him on his sickbed.” But even though the heifer is not susceptible to receive defilement while alive, they made a greater preference with it.

Mishnah 7

ולא אדומה – they would not remove another red cow/heifer with her on the ramp/causeway.
שלא יאמרו שתים שחטו – for the All-Merciful said (Numbers 19:3): “[You shall give] it (i.e., one cow) [to Eleazar the priest. It shall be taken outside the camp [and slaughtered in his presence],” but not her and her fellow [cow].
ובית טבילה היה שם – and that same house for immersion also was hollow on top of arches because of the grave in the depth (i.e., a covered-up uncleanness discovered). But even the place of its pile of wood on the altar of the Temple and its pit that are taught further on (see Mishnayot 9 and 10 of this chapter), all of them were on top of arches.
ומטמאים היו את הכהן – in that they would place their hands upon him, as it is taught in the Mishnah further on (see Mishnah 8 of this chapter), through this he would become defiled, for the clothes of those who consume Holy Things are unclean through treading/leaning against to the heifer of a sin-offering. But Maimonides explained that they would defile him with a creeping thing or with other defiling things that defile with ritual impurity until the evening.
במעורבי שמש היתה נעשית – that they (i.e., the Sadducees) would expound (Numbers 19:9): “A man who is pure shall gather up [the ashes of the cow and deposit them outside the camp in a pure place, to be kept for water of lustration for the Israelite community],” there isn’t someone pure other than someone whose sun has set, and similarly it states (Leviticus 22:7): “As soon as the sun sets, he shall be pure, [and afterward he may eat of the sacred donations , for they are his food].” But the Sages received the teaching that [the word] “pure” that is stated in the portion of the sin-offering (I.e., Numbers 19:9, see above) it is stated is pure for tithes, which is a טבול יום/one who immersed himself that day.

Mishnah 8

אישי כהן גדול- because that sometimes it is done through the High Priest, but any Kohen is fit/appropriate for it, whether with the Kohen Gadol whether with a Deputy High Priest or whether with a common Kohen.
ונסתפק (dried himself off) – and wiped himself off.
עצים – to make from them a pile of wood on the altar in the Temple for burning. They were set up/laid out there.
וארנים (pines, cedar) – it is the language of “Or plants firs, and the rain makes them grow” that is stated in Isaiah (44:14), and it is a species of cedar, and also cypress. And all of these trees are considered preferable from the rest of the trees for the needs of their burning.
כמין מגדל – wide from the bottom and narrow from the top.
פותחין בהן חלונות – to bring in through them the fire to kindle the wood.
וחזיתה מערבה – the face of the pile of wood on the altar in the Temple and its appearance, and it is the place that ignites the fire with kindling wood, he would face to the western side, that is, towards the Temple, as the Temple was to west of the Mount of Olives.

Mishnah 9

בחבל של מגג (rope made of a species of reed) – rope made from a species of reed-grass. In order that all of it actions in the matter will be that it is not susceptible to receive defilement.
ופניה למערב – to the side of the Temple.
ר' יהודה אומר בימינו היה מקבל – like the rest of the reception of the blood of Holy Things that if he received it in his left [hand], it is invalid. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda, for since its blood is not sprinkled on the Altar it is not like the other Holy Things in this matter.
ונזה בימינו – as it is written (Numbers 19:4): “Eleazar the priest shall take some of its blood with his finger [and sprinkle it seven times toward the front of the Tent of Meeting],” the usual that is of fingers, meaning to say, the finger of the right hand that a person handles with it always.
כנגד בית קודש הקדשים – as it is written (Numbers 19:4): “and sprinkle It [seven times] towards the front of the Tent of Meeting.”
על כל הזייה טבילה – on each sprinkling that he would make, he would immerse his finger in the blood, that the remainder of the blood that is on his finger is invalid for sprinkling.
גמר מלהזות קינח ידו בגופה של פרה – in order that he would burn the blood with It, as it is written (Numbers 19:5): “The cow shall be burned in his sight – its hide, flesh, and blood shall be burned,” and between sprinkling to sprinkling, he would wipe his finger in the rim of the bowl out of which the sprinkling is done, but not in the body of the cow, because of cords/string that were attached on his finger that it is a disgrace to do sprinkling with them.
אליתות (wood of the fig-tree) - small pieces of wood that they kindle the pile of wood on the altar. [The word] אליתות is the language of fat-tail. Like (Isaiah 7:4): “[Do not be afraid and do not lose heart on account of those two] smoking stubs of firebrands.”
בחריות (dried branches, twigs used for fuel) – vine-shoots of palm-trees. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Akiba.

Mishnah 10

נבקעת – the cow/heifer [burst open] on account of the fire. But if it didn’t burst open, he doesn’t [take the cedar wood, hyssop and scarlet wool], as it is written (Numbers 19:6): “into the fire consuming the cow,” but not prior to the fire is attached to most of it, but not after it becomes ash. And the same law applies if he tore it with a knife after the fire became attached to most of it.
ועמד – the Kohen.
חוץ מגיתה – a hole that was in the ground like a vat/marked off space for the burning of the cow/heifer, and when he would cast the cedar woo, hyssop and scarlet wool, he needs to stand outside that particular hole.
עץ ערז – a bundle that there is in it cedar wood and hyssop tied up with scarlet wool.
עץ ערז זה - because there are man species that are similar to cedar and are not kosher/fit, therefore, one must announce that this what the Torah commanded about. And similarly with the hyssop. And similarly with the scarlet wool. And hyssop is what they call in Arabic ZATAR. And scarlet wool is wool that is dyed with color that is called in Aramac KARMAZ and in the foreign language KARMAZI.

Mishnah 11

כרכן – to the cedar wood and hyssop with remnants of the strip of wool that was dyed in the scarlet wool which was long, and with what remained from it on the cedar wood and the hyssop, he would bind all three of them together, in order that they would have weight and would fall into burning of the cow, but not flame would not retain the strip. But if he didn’t bind them and he (i.e., the Kohen) cast each of one of them separately, it is fit/kosher.
בכברות של אבן (stone sieves) – stones that are perforated with thin holes like a sieve. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yishmael.
שחור שיש בו אפר – charcoal that if they pounded/crushed it, it would make ash.
כותשין אותו- but if it doesn’t return like ash, we leave it.
בין כך ובין כך – whether it comes back as ash or whether it doesn’t come back as ash.
חולקין אותו לשלשה חלקים – after they have sifted all of the ash, whether it is ash of the cow/heifer, whether it is the ash of the wood that was burned with it, we divide the ash into three parts.
אחד ניתן בחיל – for preventative measures, as it is written (Numbers 19:9): “[A man who is pure shall gather up the ashes of the cow and deposit them outside the camp in a pure place,] to be kept for water of lustration for the Israelite community.” (see Mishnah Middot 2:3 for the purpose of the חיל )
ואחד ניתן בהר המשחה – and there the Kohanim would sanctify.
ואחד היה מתחלק לכל המשמרות – and from it, they would sprinkle all of Israel.

Chapter 4



Mishnah 1

פרת חטאת שלא לשמה פסולה (the cow for purification) – as Scripture states (Numbers 19:9): "חטאת היא"/It is for purification. And since the All-Merciful calls it “a purification,” we learned that it requires slaughter for its own sake like a sin-offering (see also Tractate Zevahim, Chapter 1, Mishnayot 1 and 4) – that a sin offering that was slaughtered not for its own sake or any of the other actions concerning it were performed not for its own sake, it is invalid).
ורבי אליעזר מכשיר- since it is slaughtered outside the Sanctuary. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer.
ושלא רחוץ ידים ורגלים פסולה – for since it is called a "חטאת"/for purification (Numbers 19:9) by the All-Merciful, and for this it (i.e., the Mishnah) takes the term "רחוץ ידים ורגלים"/whose hand and feet were washed, and it (i.e., the Mishnah) does not teach "קידש"/sanctified, for it does not teach sanctified, inside or outside, whether with vessels dedicated to the Temple service or non-sacred vessels, he fulfills his religious obligation.
ור' אליעזר מכשיר – for it is written (Exodus 30:20-21): that “when they enter the Tent Meeting [they shall wash with water, [that they may not die;] or when they approach the altar to serve…they shall wash their hands and feet, [that they may not die]. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer.
שלא בכהן גדול פסולה – as it is written (Numbers 19:3): “You shall give it to Elzezar the priest,” it (the cow/heifer) to Eleazar, but the rest of the cows/heifers are not used, other than by the Kohen Gadol/High Priest.
ור' אליעזר מכשיר- and the rest of all the cows, wither by the High Priest or whether by a common priest. But the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehuda.
ובבגדי לבן הוא נעשית- that it is written regarding the cow/heifer (Numbers 19:10): “This shall be a permanent law for the Israelites and the strangers who reside among you,” and regarding Yom Kippur it is written (Leviticus 16:34): “This shall be to you a law for all time,” just as the Divine Service of Yom Kippur is with white clothes, so also is the action of the Cow/Heifer with white clothes.

Mishnah 2

חוץ מגיתה – the place that they make for its burning, like a species of a marked off place (i.e., selected for this purpose) which is corresponding to the opening of the hall containing the Golden Altar, but if he slaughtered it where it was not corresponding to the opening of the hall containing the Golden Altar, it is invalid.
או בשתי גיתות – as for example, that he divided it into two and burned half of it in this marked off place and half of it in that marked off place.
או ששרף שתים בגת אחת – even though he removed each one on its own/separately we invalidate them because of the labor, that this one invalidates the other one. But with that one after this one, it is fit/kosher.
ולא כיון כנגד הפתח פסולה (and he did not aim at the door – of the Holy of Holies – it is invalid) – for it is written (Numbers 19:4): “[Eleazar the priest shall take some of its blood with his finger] and sprinkle it [seven times] toward the front of the Tent of Meeting.”
מששית שביעית – for seven times (Numbers 19:4) is written in their natural order, but he counted the seventh prior to the sixth, and went back and sprinkled for the seventh [time], it is invalid, for we require that he would call for the sixth, “the sixth,” and for the seventh, “the seventh.” But from the seventh for the eighth, it is fit/kosher, for there isn’t an eighth [time] in sprinklings of [the blood] of the cow/heifer, and this one erred in mere speech.
וחזר והזה שמינית – not exactly, for in each matter it is fit/kosher, whether he went back and sprinkled or whether he didn’t go back and sprinkle. But on account of/subsidiary to the first clause [of the Mishnah), it (i.e., the Mishnah) took it. Alternatively, it surely teaches us that even though he added in the sprinklings, he did not invalidate it, for when he completed the seven sprinklings, its Mitzvah was completed, and furthermore we don’t concern ourselves to what he adds.

Mishnah 3

שרפה שלא בעצים – that he kindled the fire with the body of the cow/heifer.
כשרה – that “wood” is not written in the Torah, but [only] "ושרף"/”and he shall burn [the cow in his sight]” (Numbers 19:5) plainly/merely.
או בכל עצים – that he didn’t burn it (i.e., the cow) with cedar wood, pine and cypress and wood of fig trees that are taught [in the Mishnah] in the chapter above (see Tractate Parah, Chapter 3, Mishnah 8).
הפשיטה ונתחה כשרה (if he stripped/flayed it and dissected it) – it is written (Numbers 19:5): “[The cow shall be burned in its sight -] its hide, flesh [and blood shall be burned],” whether through flaying and dissecting it or whether attached.
על מנת לאכול מבשרה או לשתות מדמה כשרה – and specifically to eat and to drink that the first Tanna/teacher validates it, that with all of the sacrifices also in that manner it is kosher/fit, as it is taught in the Mishnah in the [Third] Chapter “All the Invalid”/כל הפסולים (Mishnah 3, [folio 35a], he thought about eating something that he generally doesn’t eat, it is kosher/fit, as for example, from the food of the Altar for a person, but if he thought on the condition to sprinkle from its blood on the morrow, the first Tanna/teacher invalidates, for the All-Merciful calls it a “sin-offering.” But Rabbi Eliezer holds that thought does not invalidate with regard to a cow at all, even with sprinklings. But he goes according to his reasoning that what is done not for its own sake he validates at the beginning of our chapter (see Chapter 4, Mishnah 1), which has no law from the laws of Holy Things, since it was performed outside [the Temple walls]. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer.

Mishnah 4

כל העסוקין בפרה – the red [cow] in one of its acts of Divine Service, whether at the beginning, whether at the middle whether at the end.
מטמאין בגדים – as it is written (Numbers 19:6): “[And the priest shall take cedar wood, hyssop and crimson stuff, [and throw them into the fire consuming the cow,” and near/adjacent to it (Numbers 19:7): “The priest shall wash his garments,” but in its burning, it is written (Numbers 19:8): “He who performed the burning shall also wash his garments,” but the person who person who throws the hyssop defiles clothing, doesn’t the person who does all the more so [defiles his clothing]? But rather, the verse comes and teaches us on all who engage with the cow/heifer from the beginning to the end require the washing of clothing.
ופוסלין אותה במלאכה – as it is written (Numbers 19:3): “[It shall be taken outside the camp] and slaughtered [in his presence,” but not that another labor should be done with it at the time of is slaughtered. And similarly with regard to its slaughter it is written (Numbers 19:5): “[The cow shall be burned – in his sight], but not that another labor should be done with its burning, we learned that the labor invalidates it from the time of its slaughter until it becomes ashes.
אירע בה פסול בשחיטתה – not that it became ritually forbidden by unskillful slaughtering, for if so, it defiles clothing because of being an animal not slaughtered according to the ritual rules, but rather it is invalid on account of the labor, similar that if an invalidation occurred to it through its sprinkling.
אינה מטמאה בגדים – for since that its slaughter was with an invalidation, if so, nothing was yet done to it for the sake of the heifer’s fitness, but if an invalidation happened to it while sprinkling, the slaughtered had already taken place in fitness/being kosher.
לעולם מועלין בה – a person who benefits from it whether prior to its burning whether after its burning, is liable for the sacrifice of unlawful use of sacred property, until the ashes are made, but after the ashes are made, there is nothing in the ashes coming as a result of unlawful use of sacred property, as it is written (Numbers 19:9): “it is for purification”/"חטאת היא".
ומרבין לה עצים- also especially until the ashes are made.
ומעשיה ביום – In the Tosefta (Tractate Parah, Chapter 4, Halakha 11) it explains, except for the gathering of its ashes and drawing [of water] and the mixing [of the ashes and the water], that they are able to gather the ashes of the cow/heifer at night, and to draw the water from the well and this is called the drawing of water/מילוי, and the putting into the ashes and this is called קידוש/mixing of the ashes in the waters of lustration, and all of this is permitted to be done at night. And all the actions concerning the cow/heifer are with a Kohen [only], except for the gathering of the ashes, and the drawing of the water and the mixing of the ashes in the waters of lustration and the sprinkling, which are appropriate for a non-Kohen/foreigner. The gathering of the ashes, as it is written (Numbers 19:9): “A man who is pure [shall gather up the ashes of the cow],” teaches that the gathering of the ashes is appropriate for any man. And [regarding] sprinkling, it states (Numbers 19:19): “The pure person shall sprinkle it upon the impure person [on the third day and on the seventh day],” whether he is a Kohen or whether he is not a Kohen.
והמלאכה פוסלת במים – as it is written (Numbers 19:9): “to be kept for water of lustration for the Israelite community. [It is for purification],” just as the sin-offering is invalidated with work [done by those involved in the ritual], as we have written above, so also the waters are invalidated through work [done by those involved in the ritual] from the time of the drawing of the water.
עד שיטילו את האפר – that they cast in the water from the ashes of the cow/heifer according to the measure that the ashes will be seen in the water and from them he sprinkles upon the impure individual, but if after they cast the ashes into the water he performed another task at the time of the sprinkling, he did not invalidate it.

Chapter 5



Mishnah 1

המביא כלי חרס לחטאת – that he goes near the potter to buy from him an earthenware vessel to place in it the ashes of the sin-offering or the water of the sin-offering/lustration.
טובל ולן על הכבשן – he begins to guard them in purity so that someone who doesn’t observe certain religious customs regarding tithes and Levitical cleanness (i.e., עם הארץ) wouldn’t touch them prior to their smelting them in a kiln/furnace, which is the conclusion of their labor to be susceptible to receive defilement.
ר' יהודה אומר אף מן הבית הוא מביא וכשר – we believe an person who doesn’t observe certain religious customs regarding tithes and Levitical cleanness if he says that he guarded it on the purity of a sin-offering, as we stated in the Chapter “A More Stringent Rule Applies to Holy Things”/"חומר בקודש" (Tractate Hagigah 22a), that people who don’t observe certain religious customs regarding tithes and Levitical uncleanness (עמי הארץ) are believed on the ritual purity of wine for libations and oil for meal-offerings, so that each and every person would not build a platform for himself and burn the Red Cow/Heifer for himself. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehuda.
ובתרומה – if he brings an earthenware vessel to place heave-offering in it.
פותח את הכבשן וטוטל – even though the its smelting was completed but not their guarding, that since [the oven] was not yet opened and is filled with dust on top of it, we are not concerned that perhaps a person who doesn’t observe certain religious customs regarding tithes and Levitical uncleanness touched it, for they were not stringent regarding heave-offering. 
Rabbi Shimon states: “From the second row”/מן הסדר השני. If a person who doesn’t observe certain religious customs regarding tithes and Levitical uncleanness/עם הארץ open the kiln and took vessels from it, he doesn’t take from the first row, for the hand of all handles them, but from the second row which is underneath the first row, he is permitted. But Rabbi Yossi is stringent and forbade even from the second row. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon nor according to Rabbi Yossi, but even though he found the kiln/furnace open, everything is in the presumption of ritual purity, and he can take even from the first row.

Mishnah 2

המטביל כלי לחטאת (a person who immerses a vessel for a purification rite) – a vessel which requires only rinsing in order to be restored to Levitical cleanness that he immersed it in order to fill it with water and to mix them with ashes, if he filled it with water that is not appropriate for mixing, as for example, the water of a Mikveh that are not potable, running spring water.
צריך לנגב – [he needs to wipe off] the vessel, for perhaps that which was appropriate would be mixed with that which is inappropriate. But if he immersed it in potable, running spring water waters, they are appropriate for mixing, one doesn’t need to dry it off.
ואם לאסוף לתוכו מים מקודשים – but if he immersed it in order to bring into water that he had already placed in it the ashes, even if he had immersed it in potable, running spring water, he needs to dry it, so that water that is not mixed becomes combined with water that is mixed, and it is taught in the Mishnah further on (Chapter 9, Mishnah 1 of Tractate Negaim) a flask of lustration that invalid water fell into it.

Mishnah 3

קרויה (pumpkin-shell used as a drawing vessel, cooler) – a dry, hollow gourd/pumpkin that absorbs water.
שהטבילוה – a mere preference for lustration, but not because of defilement, for we are speaking of something new that was never defiled.
במים שאין ראויין לקדש מקדשים בה – after it was wiped off. But we don’t concern ourselves that perhaps it absorbed water that are not appropriate for mixing, and it will return and emit them.
נטמאה אין מקדשים בה – but even though he returned and immersed it, for we are concerned that perhaps it would emit impure liquids that had been absorbed in it. For the Rabbis hold that we should be stricter with impure waters more than with waters that are not appropriate for mixing. The Rabbi Yehoshua harmonized his measures. But if you are concerned, here and there you should be concerned. But if you are not concerned, here and there you should not be concerned. But rather, whether one way or the other, whether at the beginning he immersed it in water that was not appropriate for mixing and dried it off, or whether at the end when it had become defiled and he immersed it even with appropriate [waters] for mixing and dried it off, he should not add into it mixed waters, for we are concerned that perhaps he will emit them. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 4

שפופרת (tube) – of reed.
שחתכה – he prepared it to place in it the waters of lustration or the ashes of lustration (i.e., of the sin-offering), even if a חבר/member of a group dedicated to the precise observance of the commandments who is not suspect regarding defilement.
ר' אליעזר אומר יטביל מיד – and there is recognition, that the [rituals surrounding] the cow/heifer are performed by someone who had immersed himself that day, because vessels that have been completed in ritual purity require ritual immersion for consecrated objects, lest there remain in the vessel the spittle that comes out from the mouth of a person who is not punctilious in his observance of the laws of tithing and ritual purity (i.e., a common, uneducated person/עם הארץ), and it is moist at the time at the time when he completes the vessel and he defiles it. But even though that this defilement does not require [waiting until] sunset but only ritual immersion, nevertheless, there is recognition, because regarding the cow/heifer of lustration (i.e., the sin offering), it makes him like someone who has been defiled by a corpse on his seventh day and he defiles people and vessels, and if there is of a heifer, he would require a sunset [to pass], and it (i.e., the tube of the reed) would also require it.
ר' יהושע אומר יטמא ויטביל – that in another matter there isn’t any recognition, since the vessels that are completed in ritual purity do not require [the passing of] a sunset to mix them. But the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehoshua.
הכל כשרים לקדש - all those who are poor are fit/appropriate to cast the ashes into the mater, and even women. As is it written concerning the collection of the ashes of the cow/heifer (Numbers 19:9): “A man/person who is pure shall gather up the ashes of the cow and deposit them outside the camp [in a pure place, to be kept for water of lustration of the Israelite community].,” and we expound [on the word] "איש"/a person or man, to permit the non-Kohen/”foreigner.” [The word] טהור/pure [means] even a woman; [the word] "והניח"/he shall deposit [implies] a person that has cognitive awareness/temperament to place it, excluding the deaf-mute, the imbecile and a minor who lack cognitive awareness. And after [the collection of its ashes], if is written that this Divine service of mixing – and there is no Divine Service that interrupts in the meanwhile. We learned that all who are fit/appropriate for the collection of its ashes are fit/appropriate for mixing.
ר' יהודה מכשיר בקטן ופוסל באשה – but if there is that everyone who is fit for the collection of [ashes] is fit for mixing, it (i.e., the Torah) should write, "ולקח"/and he takes, in the singular with regard to mixing, for just as (i.e., the Torah) wrote, "ואסף"/and he collected – in the singular for collecting [of the ashes], why does it write, "ולקחו"/and they shall take (see Numbers 19:17 – “Some of the ashes from the fire of purification shall be taken for he impure person,”/"ולקחו לטמא מעפר שרפת החטאת", that even those that are invalid there are fit/appropriate here, such as a minor. But not a woman, for it is written (Numbers 19:17): "ונתן עליו מים חיים אל-כלי"/and fresh water shall be added to them in a vessel), "ונתן"/and he shall give, and not "ונתנה"/and she gave.

Mishnah 5

בכל הכלים מקדשים – whether of wood, whether of bone, whether of glass, and even with vessels of dung, that are not considered a vessel in regard to defilement, not from the words of the Torah nor from the words of the Scribes, as I is written (Numbers 19:17): “And fresh water shall be added to them in a vessel,” but it is not written, “to the vessel.”
מחץ (ladle) – a large earthenware vessel that they call ALMAKHDIR in Arabic. And on one end of it is made in the form of a handle and it the sides of a broken ladle. Such is how Maimonides explained it.
ואין מזין אלא בכלי – meaning to say, that the water must be in the vessel at the time of the sprinkling.
אין מצילין – all what is inside it [is protected] from the defilement of the tent of corpse through a tightly fitting cover, except [whole] vessels.
שאין מצילין מאויר כלי חרס אלא כלים – that if a creeping reptile would fall into the airspace of an earthenware vessel, everything that is within it is impure even though it did not come in contact with them, except for utensils that are not defiled from the airspace of an earthenware vessels, as it is written (Leviticus 11:33-34): “[And if any of those falls into an earthen vessel,] everything inside it shall be impure…as to any food that may be eaten,” food and liquids become defiled from the airspace of earthenware vessels, but utensils/vessels are not defiled from the airspace of earthenware vessels.
שאין מצילין – like, and they do not protect/ואין מצילין , and an example of this is at the beginning of the first chapter of [Tractate] Betza [8a] that the ashes of a portable stove on feet with caves for two pots is prepared, and Rabbah stated in the Gemara (Tractate Betza 8a), that this is what he said, that the ashes of a portable stove on feet with caves for two pots is ready/prepared.

Mishnah 6

ביצת היוצרים – every vessel that the potter of earthenware begins to make, he first makes the material round like the form of an egg and makes for it a receptacle.
כשרה – to mix in it the waters of lustration/sin-offering.
ור' יוסי פוסל – for it is not considered a vessel to him. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.
ביצת התרנגולת – its outer shell.
וחכמים פוסלים – for it is not considered a vessel. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 7

השוקת שבסלע (the trough which [is hewn] in the rock) – A שוקת/trough is a hollowed rock that is on the rim of a spring and the water enters in it through a hole that is in its wall and waters the animals. But here we are speaking of a rock that is attached that was hollowed out, it is not considered a utensil since it didn’t have the designation of a vessel when it was detached. But even that it was detached [other than] that they attached it and at the end hollowed it out.
ואינה צריכה צמיד פתיל – if it was in the tent of a corpse it protects on what is within it with the covering alone without the tightly fitted lid, because it is not considered a vessel but rather like a pit or a cistern that protects over what is inside of it with a cover without a tightly fitted lid/stopper, as is taught in Chapter Five of [Tractate] Ahilot [Mishnah 6].
ואינה פוסלת את המקוה – if rain water [fell] from it to the Mikveh/ritual bath, they are not considered drawn water to invalidate the Mikveh.
ופקקה (inserted a stop-gap) – stopped it up.
מפני שאינם עגולים כלי (because it is not wholly enclosed by the vessel) – meaning to say, that the vessel does not surround the water, that the perforation that is from the bottom neutralizes it from the category of a vessel, for the closing up of a rag does not make it into a vessel. But when the perforation/hole is from the side, the category of a vessel is upon it and we mix with the water that is within it, since the vessel surrounds them (i.e., the waters). And that is that the vessel is round.
עשה לה עטרה (made for it a molding of mud) – a detached trough that was attached with plaster/lime, which is considered a vessel and made a rim of mud/plaster for its fmoutjh and the trough was filled with water until it also filled the rim, the waters are invalid to mix because the addition is not considered a vessel.
ואם היה בריא (but if it was firm) – meaning to say, if this rim was strong and attached to the trough until that if he were to take the trough, he would also take the rim with it, they are fit/appropriate.

Mishnah 8

שתי שקתות שבאבן- here we are speaking of a stone that is carried that is not an attached rock, and these two troughs have the designation of a vessel.
קדש אחת מהן – that he placed ashes fo the heifer/cow in the water that is in one of them.
כשפופרת הנוד (tube/mouth-piece of the leather bottle) – like a kind of reed that he placed on the mouth of the leather bottle that through it he empties out the wine or the water within the bottom. And Is measure, in order that there would be the first two fingers of the palm of the hand are able to go back in through the space, not the thumb, but the fingers adjacent to it.
או שהיו מים צפין על גביהן – as for example that the intermediate wall interrupts between the two trough lower than the other walls.
כקליפת השום ([a film of water] of the thickness of a garlic peel) – that when both of them are filled, the water floats on the middle partition like the garlic peel.

Mishnah 9

הקיפן – made them adjacent/next one to the other. It is the language of two jugs/jars together [to set a pot upon] in Tractate Betzah [Chapter 4, Mishnah 5 and folio 32b].
המים שביניהן – that is between two kneading troughs and that which is between the fissure of the trough. But the rest of the water is mixed, but those that are in the fissure, the mixture of water [and ashes] does not enter into them.
גיפסים – a kind of lime/plaster but it is the whitest. And we call it YISO JIPIS in the foreign language.

Chapter 6



Mishnah 1

המקדש -the waters of lustration (i.e., sin-offering. A person who comes to place from the ashes of the heifer/cow into the water. This is the קידוש/mixing that is stated through our Tractate.
או על הצד – on the side of the vessel.
ואחר כך נפל לשוקת – on the water that is within the trough, those waters are invalid for sprinkling, as it is written (Numbers 19:17): "ולקחו [לטמא מעפר שרת החטאת] ונתן [עליו מים חיים]/”[Some of the ashes from the fire of purification] shall be taken [for the impure person, and fresh water] shall be added to them [in a vessel].” Until the ashes would be would bring within the water from the power (i.e., direct actions) of the person.
נטל מן השפופרת וכיסה – he took the ashes from the tube/reed and covered the tube/reed prior to his mixing it, that is prior to his putting the ashes in the water.
או שהגיף את הדלת (or shut the door) – prior to his mixing [the ashes in the water].
הקידוש כשר – that is the ashes that are in his hands, because the work does not invalidate the ashes, as we have stated (see also the end of Chapter 4).
והמים פסולים – that work was done with the water, and above [at the end] of the Chapter פרת חטאת/the cow of purification (chapter 4) we taught that the work [done by those involved in the ritual] renders the water unfit until they put the ashes into it/"והמלאכה פוסלת במים עד יטילו את האפר".
זקפה בארץ – after he took the ashes from the tube/reed, he placed the read in the ground prior to placing the ashes in the water.
פסול – the filling/drawing, that is the water, because he performed the task with the water. But if he placed the tube/reed in his hand and covered his hand upon it in order that the ashes don’t scatter that are within it and afterwards placed the ashes on the water, the filling/drawing, that is, the water, is not considered labor/work.
לפי שאי אפשר – to preserve the ashes that are within the reed/tube if he will not cover his hand on its mouth, for he is not able to restore the stop-gap/stopper on its mouth until he mixes [the ashes in the water]. Another explanation"זקפה בארץ"/he placed the ashes in the ground, the ashes are invalid, as it is written (Numbers 19:9): “[A man who is pure shall gather up the ashes of the cow and deposit them outside the camp in a pure place,] to be kept for water of lustration for the Israelite community,” [but in the ground, it is not kept/preserved]. But if he placed the ashes into his hand, it is fit/appropriate, for it is possible to protect it, and it is well that we call it [in the Torah] "למשמרת" – and for that reason, we have the reading, "לפי שאפשר"/because it is possible [to do so without distractions].

Mishnah 2

היה קדוש צף על פני המים – that he placed upon the water many ashes. And the ash itself is called קידוש/putting ashes in the water of lustration.
נוטל – he takes from that ash.
ומקדש – [and mixes it] in other waters, and even with that (i.e., the ashes) that touched the water, he mixes and returns and mixes several times, but he dries them off.
זלף את המים (if he used all the water for sprinkling) – he sprinkled from the water that were mixed upon a person and upon vessels until all the water was completed, and the ashes remain in the rim at the bottom o fthe vessel.
וחכמים אומרים וכו' – And the Halakha is according to the Sages in both of these things (i.e., whatever ash has touched the water, they do not mix [another preparation] with it and whatever has touched he water, they do not mix with it.).

Mishnah 3

טפי (vessel with a narrow neck/dripper) – a small flask/jar (with a narrow neck) whose mouth is narrow and the water that descends from it goes down drop by drop.
אע"פ שפיו צר – less than the tube (i.e., mouthpiece) of the leather bottle.
המים שבתוכו מקודשים – and are appropriate/fit to sprinkle even though nothing came in there from the ashes of the cow/heifer at all, for they were as if they were attached to the water in the trough.
היה ספוג – if at the time of the filling the sponge was in the trough, the water that was absorbed in the sponge are invalid, for we require “fresh water shall be added to them in a vessel” (Numbers 19:17), but the sponge is not a vessel.
יזלף עד שהוא מגיע לספוג – when he comes to take the water and to put them into a bottle with a wide belly and a narrow neck/flash, he pours all the water until it reaches the sponge, but he should not pour from the water that is in the sponge at all, in order that the waters that are in the sponge don’t mix which are invalid with the waters that are in the trough that are fit/appropriate and all of them will become invalid.
נגע בספוג – the waters of the sponge were wrung out into the trough and the invalid ones were mixed up with the fit/appropriate ones, and all of them were invalidated.

Mishnah 4

נתן ידו או רגלו [under running water] – behold that the spouting forth/continuous flow descends rapidly from the curve, but it doesn’t descend into the jar when he wants to fill it for mixing [with the ashes], but if he placed his hands above at the tope of the mountain to make it like a kind of spout/duct in order that the waters would pass through his hand to the jar of mixing of waters and ashes. And similarly, the vegetable greens which are appropriate for eating and are susceptible to receiving ritual defilement.
פסולים – the waters [are invalid]. As we derived in the second chapter of [Tractate] Zevakhim (folio 25b) from what is written (Leviticus 11:36): “[However, a spring or cistern] in which water is collected shall be pure, [but whoever touches such a carcass in it shall be impure],” they will be through purity (i.e., in their original status), and even though that this Scriptural verse is written concerning a Mikveh/ritual bath, we derive from it all the possibilities. And this is the implication of the Scriptural verse, that will be with all the waters that purify, that through purity it will be, whether one brings them to become a Mikveh or the filling of water that will be through something that is not susceptible to receive ritual defilement.

Mishnah 5

המפנה את המעין לתוך הגת (he diverts/empties the spring into the wine vat) – that he made a trench from the spring until the wine vat in order that the he could divert there the waters of the spring, and afterwards stop them.
גת – a cistern that they make in front of the wine vat to receive the wine which is called a גת/marked off space for serving as a wine vat.
גבים (cavity for collecting water, cistern) – it is the language of “This wadi shall be full of pools,” that is stated in the [Second] Book of Kings [Chapter 3, Verse 16]. And it is a pool/diluvium of water.
פסולים- for those with gonorrhea for ritual immersion, for they are not fresh water.
ולמצורעים – that we require fresh water to sprinkle upon him with the blood of the bird.
ולקדש מי חטאת – that we require fresh water, and these since they have been stopped up are not fresh water. And that which is taught in the Mishnah because they were not filled up by means of a utensil, in order to invalidate them for mixing in every matter even if he came to mix within the vat or within the pools of water themselves.

Chapter 7



Mishnah 1

חמשה. לקדשן חמשה קידושין – each and every jar on its own.
ונמלכו לקדשן קידוש אחד – to empty five of them into one large vessel and to mix the [the water with the ashes] at once/simultaneously.
הרי כולן כשרים – for since each pone fills his vessel there isn’t here labor invalidating in water whether in filling/drawing water to casting the ashes in the water.
היחיד שמליא חמש חביות כו' – nothing is fit/appropriate other than the last. For the first filling is invalidated with the work that he did when he filled the second [jar] prior to putting the ashes in the first [jar], and similarly, the second [filling] is invalidated when he fills the third [jar], and similarly all of them. But if from the outset he would fill five jars one after another or even one-[hundred jars in order to mix ashes and water in one mixing, as for example, that he needs to sprinkle upon many vessels, they would not invalidate each other and all of them are fit/appropriate, for all are considered one filling/drawing water. But when he filled from the outset for the sake of five mixings, all of them invalidate each other for reason of the labor, for it invalidates in the water until he casts in the ashes, therefore, nothing is fit/appropriate other than the last.
ונמלך לקדשן חמשה קדושין – that he mixed this one on its own and that one on its own.
אין כשר אלא זו שקידש ראשון – for the first mixing [of ashes and water] is considered labor for the others that would be filled ‘with water] but he did not place the ashes into them, for until he places the ashes, the labor invalidates in the water.
אמר לאחד קדש לך את אלו – the individual that filled five jars to perform one mixing [of ashes and water], and he said to another person: “Mix for yourself these,” and he mixed [ashes and water] for five mixings, nothing is fit/appropriate other than the first, for since he said to him: “Mix for yourself and he gave them (i.e., the ashes and the water) to him, they became his and it is as if he filled them, and the mixing [of ashes and water] that he first did became [extrinsic] work to invalidate the others.
אבל אם אמר קדש לי את אלו כולן כשרים – that the person who fills [the jars] did not do work, and the person who mixes [ashes and water] that is not his in order that they will become invalidated by [the actions of] his hand.

Mishnah 2

ועשה מלאכה בידו אחת – the filling/drawing water is invalid for reason of the [extrinsic] work.
לו ולאחר – (etc. at the same time).
שניהם פסולים – for since that for two people he is filling water, it is considered that one does work for his fellow.
בין לו בין לאחר – that even though the water is not his, he has invalidated them with the [extrinsic] work/labor that he did at the time of the drawing of the water.

Mishnah 3

אם לו פסול - if the mixing [of ashes and water] is his, it is invalid, for perhaps, the labor/work preceded the mixing [of the ashes and water] and the water was invalidated.
ואם לאחר – is the mixing [of ashes and water].
כשר – for the owner of the water did not perform any labor/work.
המקדש לו ולאחר – both of them are as one. Alternatively, he mixed [ashes and water] for his fellow prior to his own.
שלו פסול – for the mixing [of ashes and water] of his fellow is considered work to invalidate his waters.
שניהם כשרים – for the water is not his that it can be invalidated through him.

Mishnah 4

קדש לי ואקדש לך – as for example, that each one filled water for himself, and this one came and mixed [with ashes] the water of that one, and that one mixed the water [with ashes] of this one, the one who mixed [the water with ashes] first what he mixed for his fellow is kosher/fit, for his fellow did not do any work other than until after his waters were mixed [with ashes], but when they (i.e., the waters) were mixed with ashes, no work/labor invalidates it. But what the second [person] who mixed [ashes in the water] for the first [person] is invalid, for the first invalidated in that he mixed [water and ashes] in the water of the second ‘person] before his waters were mixed [with ashes].
מלא לי ואמלא לך – the latter drawing of water/filling is kosher/fit, but the first drawing of water/filling is invalid, that is, that the waters that were filled were invalidated through the work of filling/drawing that he filled for his fellow.
קדש לי ואמלא לך – that he had the waters filled/drawn and said to his fellow, “mix for me my waters [with ashes] and afterwards, I will draw [water] for you.”
שניהם כשרים – for the work/labor does not invalidate after the mixing [of ashes with water]. And this also when the waters were drawn/filled for him, his waters are fit/kosher, that from when the waters were filled/drawn for him, he did not do any work.
מלא לי ואקדש לך – that the other that had waters filled/drawn and he said to him: “Fill for me [waters] first, and afterwards I will mix [the ashes in the water] for you.”
שניהם פסולים – this one who filled until his waters were not mixed [with ashes], and this one who mixed [ashes with water] for his fellow from when his waters were filled up/drawn.

Mishnah 5

הממלא לו ולחטאת – the person who fills/draws water, some of them he wants for his own needs and some of them he wants to place ashes for the rite of purification (i.e., sin offering).
באסל (on a pole/yoke – fastening the bucket to the pole)- on a balancing pole/staff. And it was the practice of those who draw water that they would place a balancing pole/staff on their shoulders and a full pitcher was suspended on the top of the pole from in front of him and another pitcher from behind him.
ואח"כ מילא את שלו, פסול- because of work/labor.
ואת של חטאת לפניו – in order to do with them a greater level of guarding/protection.
ואם נתן של חטאת לאחוריו פסולה – as it is written (Numbers 19:9): “to be kept for water of lustration for the Israelite community. It is for purification,” at the time that the are guarded/protected, they are the waters of lustration, [but] at the time that they are not guarded/protected, they are not the waters of lustration.
היו שניהן של חטאת כו' – for since he has in mind that which is in front of him, he is reminded also about what is behind him. And that is because it is possible, meaning to say, it is possible to guard/protect that which is in back of him on account of what is in front of him.

Mishnah 6

המוליך את החבל בידו לדרכו (if one carries the rope – borrowed for drawing water) in his hand to restore it to the owner – on his way to perform the rite – and gave it to him) – after he had filled the bucket with a rope, he returned the rope to its owners, on his way, that it was not necessary to make a circuit/go out of his way or to lengthen his path, but rather, according to his walking , he found the owner of the rope and returned to him what was his, this is not labor (i.e., intermediate act of work) and the filling is kosher/fit/acceptable.
שלא לדרכו – that he went out of his way in order to return the rope, it is work/labor and the drawing [of water] is invalid.
זה הלך – meaning to say, that on this matter, one Sage went to ask from the Sages of Yavneh, the y are the Great Sanhedrin that were exiled there.
הוראת שעה(a special dispensation) – it was a special case of an emergency. But if I was not this, it is not [allowed].

Mishnah 7

המכנן את החבל (he who winds around his hand the rope – for drawing the bucket up – until a sufficient length is wound up) – it is the manner of those who let down a bucket to fill with water, that when he raises the bucket, he surrounds the rope in his hand like a kind of ring so that it is doesn’t drag on the ground. And [the word] "מכנן" – is he language of the coils of the ileum. But if in the midst of raising the bucket, he winds the rope around his hand more than once, it is the need of raising it and this is not work and the drawing/filling of water is kosher/fit/appropriate. But if he winds it after he has completed drawing [the water], it is considered work and is invalid.
לזה הכשירו הוראת שעה – what they validated in Yavneh as a special dispensation, not to bring the rope while not on his way [to the rite], but rather for this [individual] who wound the rope [around his hand] after he finished drawing they validated for him as a special dispensation/emergency.

Mishnah 8

המצניע את החבית – that he draws water with it to put in the trough, and after he emptied [the water] from it, he put it away/hid it prior to mixing the water [with the ashes] in the trough, this putting away [of the bucket] is not considered work, because he still needs it to fill it up [with water], and it is the need of drawing/filling water. And similarly, he inverted/bent it over on its mouth also to dry it because he still wants to fill [water] in it, it is not considered work, and it is fit/appropriate for filling/drawing. But, if he did so to bring the mixed ashes and water, that is, the water that is mixed [with ashes], since it is not for the purpose of filling/drawing water, it is considered work and the filling/drawing [of water] is invalid.
בשביל שתחזיק מים הרבה – this emptying is not considered work.
בשעה שהוא זולף -when he sprinkles.
פסול – this emptying out is considered work.

Mishnah 9

והורה הוראה – to permit or to forbid, to defile or to purify, to make exempt or to make liable.
ודבר שאינו משום הלכה – as for example, a lesson and showing [others] the way.
אם עמד – if he was delayed there because of this.
פסול – because of distraction. And this is the Halakha.

Mishnah 10

המוסר מימיו לטמא – to guard/protect them.
פסולים – whether the first owners did work [or] whether the first owners did not do work, for it was in the possession of the guardian they exist and he was not strict to guard them because he is impure, but the Torah stated (Numbers 19:9): “to be kept for water of lustration.”
ולטהור כשרים – and even if the first owners did work, for they (i.e., the waters with the ashes) had already left the domain of the owners and existed in the domain of the guardian. But however, if the guard did work, they are invalid.
אף לטמא כשרים – for Rabbi Eliezer holds that a person who gave his water over to someone who is unclean, they exist in the possession of the first owners, therefore, if the owners did not do work, they are fit/appropriate. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer.

Mishnah 11

והגביהו זה על זה – that they assisted each other to lift up/raise [the bucket].
ונטל זה לזה קוצו – or that that each one took the thorn that was inserted in his hand.
בקידוש אחד – that both of them were filling [water] for the purpose of one mixing, it is kosher/fit. For each one can assist his fellow, and removing the thorn that is in his hand also - requires filling/drawing water.
בשני קידושין פסול – for each one of them invalidated his water in how he assisted his fellow or removed from him a thorn, because of work.
אם התנו ביניהן – that each one said to his fellow: “when I lift up for you, it will become mine yours in your domain (and similarly the other [person] said to him). But after he lifted/raised it up, each one acquires one of them in his domain. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 12

הפורץ על מנת לגדור (he who breaks down a fence [while carrying water] on condition of putting up a fence) – meaning to say, even on the condition of putting up a fence, is not considered work, and the filling [of water] is kosher/fit.
האוכל על מת לקצות (the person who eats on the condition of storing up [dates and figs}- after he filled up water prior to his mixing [the water with ashes], he would collect/harvest figs on the condition to dry them on condition to make from them dried figs, and after he collected them, eat them, the thought that he wanted to make of them packed figs does not invalidate them in water, but they are as if he harvested/collected them to eat, and he do es not invalidate them, it is similar to someone who breaks down a fence [while carrying water] on the condition to put up a fence, for the thought that he thinks to to put up a fence does not invalidate it until he puts up the fence, the same applies here [as well].
אם קצה (if he stored) – if he placed them in a place where they put the figs to dry, it is invalid.
בשביל שלא יאבד פסול (in order that it not be wasted, it is unfit) – for the person who hides food in order that they not be wasted, is considered work.

Chapter 8



Mishnah 1

שנים שהיו שומרים את השוקת – that was filled for [mixing the ashes with the water] for the lustration/sin-offering.
טהר – he who had become defiled was purified from his defilement.
ונטמא שני – that is his companion who was ritually pure. -
כשרים – the water that is in the trough.
עמד ושעה שני מלאכה – the first person arose from jis work, and the second did work in his place.

Mishnah 2

נטמא וטמאהו- the sandal became defiled and it defiled the person for the [waters of] lustration/purification waters. For the vessels that were defiled through liquids defile the person for the purification, that we don’t count the first and second for purification/sin-offering as it is taught in the Mishnah further on in the chapter כל הראוי/whatever is appropriate (Mishnah 6). Even though that if these liquids fell upon his skin, he is ritually pure, for a person who is ritually pure for the rite of the heifer, if impure liquids came in contact with his flesh, he is pure like he was, except if they touched his hands, because impure liquids defile the hands, and regarding the purity of the sin-offering, we hold that if his hands were defiled, his body is defiled.
מטמאיך לא טמאוני (those things which made you unclean could not have made me unclean) – liquids that defiled the sandal were not able to defile the pure individual, if they came in contact with his flesh, as we have stated, but the sandal that comes from their power defiles him.

Mishnah 3

השורף פרה – the Red [Heifer].
ופרים – that are burned, such as a the bullock of Yom Kippur and the bull of the anointed priest [brought as a sin-offering by an anointed High Priest who unwittingly made an erroneous Halakhic decision] (see Tractate Horayot, Chapter 2, Mishnah 1) a bull for an unwitting communal sin [of an active transgression committed by the Jewish people, as a result of an erroneous halakhic decision handed down by the Great Sanhedrin] (see Tractate Horayot, Chapter 1, Mishnah 5), they defile clothing, for in all of them it is written [in regard to the Red Heifer] (Numbers 19:8): “[He who performed the burning] shall wash his garments [in water],” (see also Tractate Parah, Chapter 4, Mishnah 4 – that all who deal with the Red Heifer from the beginning to the end defile clothing and regarding the sacrifices of Yom Kippur, see Leviticus 16:28 and 16:26), but there is no difference regarding clothing that he touches, and the same law applies to all of the rest of the vessels. That we do not exclude anything other than a person and earthenware vessels alone, that do not defile if they come in contact with them.
ופרה ופרים עצמן ושעיר המשתלח – if they came in contact with clothing, they are ritually pure. And this is what the clothing said to the man: “Things that made you unclean could not have made me unclean, but you made me unclean.”

Mishnah 4

האוכל מנבלת העוף טהור – the carrion of a clean bird, has no defilement if it came in contact with a person or with clothing, but in the esophagus it defiles humans to defile clothing, as it is taught in the Mishnah of Tractate Taharot (Chapter 1, Mishnah 1), and that what the clothing says to a person: “The things which made you unclean could not have made me unclean, etc.”

Mishnah 5

כל ולד הטומאה – as for example first-degree and second-degree, do not defile vessels, but the primary source(s) of ritual impurity. But liquid that was defiled in first-degree or second-degree defiles vessels, as a decree because of the liquid of a male with gonorrhea and/or a woman with a flux, such as his spittle, and his flux and his urine which are primary sources of ritual defilement.

Mishnah 6

אין כלי חרס מטמא חברו – that an earthenware vessel does not ever become a primary source of ritual impurity, and an earthenware vessels is not susceptible to receive ritual impurity other than from a primary source of ritual impurity, so we see, that an earthenware vessel does not defile its fellow earthenware vessel.
אלא משקין – but if does defile liquids and the liquids return and defile its fellow earthenware vessel, as a decree because of the liquid of a male with gonorrhea/flux and a woman with flux as we have stated.

Mishnah 7

כל הפוסל את התרומה – as for example hands which are second-degree [of impurity], make liquids first-degree to defile non-holy things, but hands themselves that came in contact with non-holy foodstuffs, are pure, for something that is second-degree [in defilement] does not make non-holy things third-degree [uncleanness].
חוץ מטבול יום - whose sunset had not yet arrived. Even though he defiles the heave offering, he does not defile liquids to become first-degree [uncleanness], and even the liquids of heave-offering if a person who had immersed himself that day had come in contact with them, other than those things which are invalid alone are not ritually impure (see also Tractate Kelim, Chapter 8, Mishnah 4).

Mishnah 8

כל הימים כמקוה – for all of these words as it is taught at the conclusion [of this Mishnah]. (And also) they do not render clean when running like springs, for a Mikveh does not purify in running/moving waters, but rather in collected waters, as is written (Leviticus 11:36): “However, a spring/אך מעין [or cistern in which water is collected shall be pure,]” a spring purifies in moving/running waters but a Mikveh does not purify in moving/running waters.
ופסולין לזבין – for a man with gonorrhea/flux requires living waters, as it is written (Leviticus 14:9): “and bath his body in water; [then he shall be pure].” (see also Leviticus 16:26 and 16:28), and for the leper [as it is written (Leviticus 14:5): “[The priest shall order one of the birds slaughtered over] fresh water in an earthen vessel/אל-כלי-חרש על-מים חיים” [and for the waters of the sin offering], as it is written (Numbers 19:1): “and fresh water shall be added to them in a vessel.”
הים הגדול כמקוה – Scripture did not call a Mikveh other than the Great Ocean, for in it Scripture refers in the Creation Story for there all the waters of Creation were gathered, and it doesn’t state “seas”/ימים – in the plural, other than because many seas are mixed in together in it, for all the streams travel to it.
ר' יוסי אומר – all the seas and the Great Ocean have the status of a spring upon them regarding the fact that they purify in moving/running waters, because the streams go and flow upon them. But they are invalid regarding the status of living waters, for Scripture calls them Mikveh. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 9

מים המוכין – that damage, as for example, that they are salty and tepid.
פסולין – for the waters of the sin-offering/the Red Heifer.
מים המכזבין (waters which fail at certain times) – that stop, like (Isaiah 58:11): “like a spring whose waters do not fail.”
פסולין – for we require living/fresh waters.
אחד בשבוע (once in seven years) – but once in a jubilee/יובל is well/good as they are called “living waters.”
בפולמסיות – the soldiers of ravaging troops that drink and ruin them.
בשני בצרון – years where rain fall stops.
ור' יהודה פוסל – even those that do not fail other than in wartime or in years of drought. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 10

מי קרמיון ומי פוגה – they are rivers in the land of Israel: 
the swamp waters {see also Talmud Bava Batra 74b, listing the four rivers: The Jordan, the Yarmukh, the Karmiyon and Fugah, whereas the Arukh in its entry on Karmiyon mentions a verse from Second Kings, Chapter 5, Verse 12: “Are not the Amanah and the Pharpar, the rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? I could bathe in them and be clean!”). It is the language of (Job 8:11): “Can papyrus thrive without marsh? [Can rushes grow without water],” meaning to say water in which clay/mortar and plaster/mud is combined/mixed in them. But the All-Merciful stated (Numbers 19:17): “fresh water shall be added to them in a vessel,” but here there is an interposition/an intervening object between the water to the vessel.
מי תערובת (mixed waters)- they are unfit waters for they are combined/mixed.
אחד פסול ואחד כשר – and they combined, it is prohibited to mix from the place of combination/mixture and below.
ר' יהודה פוסל – even if both of them are fit/appropriate, Rabbi Yehuda invalidates taking from the place of combination/mixture, as a decree on account of one that is unfit. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 11

באר אחאב – it is not explained where this is, but it comes to tell us that they are fresh waters.
ומערת פמייס – a cave that is near to the city of Dan from where the Jordan goes out. And in the language of Ishmael (i.e., the Moslems), they call the Dan, Banias.
ר' יהודה אומר הרי היא בחזקת מותרת – but the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.
עד שתצל – until the waters return to become clear/settled as at first. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yishmael.

Chapter 9



Mishnah 1

צלוחית – a vessel that they place in it the waters mixed with ashes (i.e., waters of lustration) after he had cast the ashes into them, is called צלוחית/a flask [with a wide body and a narrow neck- containing the sprinkling water], and the vessel that they place in it the water in order to mix them prior to placing in the ashes is called שוקת/trough.
מים כל שהן – which are not fit for sprinkling.
יזה שתים – for if he sprinkles once, perhaps there isn’t here from the fit/appropriate [waters], but when he sprinkles twice, it is impossible that there isn’t in one of hem from the fit/appropriate [waters]. But the sprinkling does not need a [set] measure.
וחכמים פוסלים – that they hold that sprinkling requires a [fixed] measure, and we don’t combine sprinklings. And the Halakha is according to the Sages. But Maimonides explained that he should make two sprinklings and cast them outside of the vessel, the rest should remain the waters of lustration which are fit/appropriate. And this is a hidden thing in my eyes, for in the Gemara in the chapter, "כל הזבחים"/All of the offerings (Chapter 8 of Tractate Zevakhim) [folio 80a], it is implied as I explained it.
יניחנו בחמה והטל עולה – that it is the manner of the dew to evaporate/to go up towards the sun. And similarly, it (i.e., Scripture) states (Exodus 16:13-14): “In the morning…when the fall of dew lifted, [there, over the surface of the wilderness lay a fine and flaky substance, as fine as frost on the ground].” But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer.
יערה וכו' – he empties out what is within the vessel, and it is not fit to leave in it the waters of purification until it dries from the liquids and fruit juice.
יערה ואינו צריך לנגב – and if there is that remains from it in the vessel, its mark is recognized.

Mishnah 2

ונתבקעו (burst forth) – that they (i.e., the insects and creeping things) within the water a long time until they burst, or even if they didn’t burst, but that the appearance of the water changed.
חפושים (scorpion, beetle/scarabee) – a black worm.
בין כך ובין כך – whether it burst or whether it didn’t burst.
מפני שהיא כשפופרת – [like the tube] of a hollow reed and the water enters from this side and exists from that side, and the moisture that is within it combines with them.
דירה (name of a grain worm) – a worm that is in wheat.
כנה (vermin/louse) – a species of worm that also grows in grain.
כשרים – even if they burst. But this is not the Halakha.

Mishnah 3

שתתה מהן בהמה או חיה פסולים – because of the liquid that is their mouths that returns, and the water and spittle that are in their mouths combine/mix.
מוצצת (sucks) – but the liquid that is its mouth does not return to the water.
מלקת (laps it up) – it laps/licks up (and lets the water drip back out of its mouth) on its tongue and it combines the spittle that is on its tongue with the water.
אף הנחש מפני שהיא מקיאה (and even the snake because it vomits) – And such is the Halakha, but the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer [who adds the mouse].

Mishnah 4

החושב על מי חטאת לשתות ר' אליעזר פוסל – for he invalidates it through intention/thought.
כשיטה – [that he turns up] the barrel to drink, or to take from it water to drink, but mere intention/thought does not invalidate it.
במים שאינן מקודשין – that he filled them in order to place in them the ashes, but he did not yet place them.
רבי אליעזר אומר כשיטה – but here he does not invalidate them with intention, for since they are mixed waters, he was persuaded/reconsidered to change his mind from his intention. Therefore, Rabbi Eliezer does not invalidate until he turns it up [to drink from it].
רבי יהושע אומר כשישתה – because of the liquid that is in his mouth when he returns and combines/mixes with the water, and he invalidates them.
ואם גרגר (if he poured it down his throat – as opposed to setting his lips to the vessel) – it is the language of a gullet/throat. That is to say, that he didn’t drink it in the manner of those who drink but rather, poured the water in his throat.
כשר – for there is no liquid from his mouth in the barrel. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehoshua in both of them.

Mishnah 5

שלא יעשם תקלה לאחרים – that they reach the plaster/mud and they will be defiled in the waters of purification that are in it.
ר' יהודה אומר בטלו – in the plaster/mud. But further, he does not defile after they have been trampled/stamped [in the mud].
מעת לעת – if it was slaughtered within twenty-four hours of its drinking. But it delayed more than this, they became consumed in its intestines.
רבי יהודה אומר באלו במעיה – and even if he slaughtered it within twenty-four hours, its flesh is pure. But the Halakah is not according to Rabbi Yehuda in both of these.

Mishnah 6

מי חטאת – we are speaking of mixed purification waters. But waters that are not mixed are permitted, as it is taught in the concluding clause [of the Mishnah].
ואפר חטאת – even the ash itself without water.
לא יעבירם בנהר ובספינה – that a decree was made because of an incident of one person who was taking the waters of purification and the ashes of purification in a boat on the Jordan [River] and it was found that an olive’s bulk of a corpse was inserted in the bottom of the boat.
ולא ישיטם על פני המים (he should not float them on the water) – for it is similar to a boat, and similarly, he should not stand on this side of the river and cast them to the other side, and also that this is similar a bit to a boat.
אבל עובר הוא – on his feet.
במים – with the waters of purification that are in his hand.
עובר הוא הטהור לחטאת – whether in a boat, whether he floats over the water a vessel which is pure/clean to place in it the waters of purification when they are empty, or that he has water in it water that had not yet been mixed with the ashes of the [Red] Heifer. For they did not decree other than on the mixed waters and on the ashes alone, not on the man or the pure vessels (and the waters that are not mixed).

Mishnah 7

אפר כשר – the ashes of a [Red] Heifer that are suitable/appropriate for sprinkling.
שנתערב באפר מקלה (that were mixed with wood-ashes) the ashes of a portable stove on feet with caves for two pots.
הולכים אחר הרוב לטמא – if the majority are the ashes of the [Red] Heifer, it defiles, [but] if the majority is the ashes of a portable stove on feet with caves for two pots, it does not defile.
ואין מקדשין בו- even if the majority are the ashes of lustration/expiation, but they don’t mix with it, since it was combined with the ashes of a portable stove on feet with caves for two pots and even a little bit.
ר' אליעזר אומר מקדשין בכולן – for Rabbi Eliezer holds that we don’t require a measurement for sprinkling, and it is impossible that there isn’t a little bit from the ashes of lustration/expiation. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer.

Mishnah 8

מי חטאת שנפסלו – as for example, that their appearance changed not on account of themselves, and in a similar manner , from the things that invalidate the waters of purification/expiation.
מטמאין את – the person (see also Tractate Kelim, Chapter 1, Mishnayot 1-2).
הטהור לתרומה – whether he touched them with his hands or whether he touched them with his body, they are considered like suitable/appropriate like waters of expiation/purification, and this defilement is from the Rabbis, for from the Torah, since they were made unfit/invalid, their greater defilement spread all over/blossomed, and because of this, it (i.e., the Mishnah text) teaches that “it renders unclean the person who is clean for heave-offering,” which implies especially for heave-offering but not for non-holy offerings.
ואת הטהור לחטאת לא בידיו – that is to say, it does not defile the pure person for a sin/purification offering whether he touched them with his hands or whether he touched them with his body, for the they are considered appropriate/suitable like the waters of purification/expiation, and these that one carries the waters of expiation that have in them [enough] in order for sprinkling or he touches them, he is impure for all things, but for a sin-offering/expiation, however, he is pure.
נטמאו מטמאין את הטהור לתורמה – like the waters of suitable/acceptable sin-offerings/expiation offerings, but a person who is clean for the purification offering, it defiles him if he touched it with his hands, for since they were defiled, they are not worse than the rest of the impure foods and liquids that defile the hands, for we hold that the purification of the waters of purification/sin-offering, when his hands were defiled/made unclean, his body was made unclean.

Mishnah 9

אפר כשר שנתנו על גבי מים שאינם ראוים לקדש – their law is like the law of the waters of purification/sin-offering that were invalidated.
מטמאין את הטהור לתרומה בידיו ובגופו – like the law of all the rest of the suitable/appropriate waters of expiation/sin-offering, but they do not defile the clean person for a sin-offering, for the waters of expiation/sin-offering do not defile the person who carries them, and the person who touches them, other than the rest of the defilements, not for the purification of the waters of expiation/sin-offering.

Chapter 10



Mishnah 1

כל הראוי לטמא מדרס (all that is appropriate to be made ritually impure by treading – by someone with gonorrhea, a woman in flux, a woman after childbirth and a menstruating woman) – as for example, designated vessels for lying, sitting and riding.
מדף לחטאת (indirect contact for conferring ritual impurity – based upon Rabbinic decree – for objects above a man with gonorrhea for the purification rite) – if the pure person with the waters for purification/sin-offering shook them [so as to move it from its place]. Even they are pure for heave-offering [for a Kohen], those who shake them are defiled as if they are defiled through treading, and it is a mere stringency as we state [in Tractate Hagigah 18b -Mishnah Hagigah 2:7]: "בגדי אוכלי תרומה מדרס לקודש"/”The clothing of those who eat heave offering is in the status of Midras/treading uncleanness for those who eat Holy Things {i.e., officiating priests). We call it מדף/indirect contact by shaking, because it is a mere stringency of the Rabbis. It is he language of (Leviticus 26:36): “The sound of a driven leaf [shall put them to flight].”
ואדם כיוצא בהן – if a person who is clean/pure for a purification/sin-offering shook a person who is pure for heave-offering, the purification/sin-offering is defiled and those who are pure for heave-offering are considered as men who have gonorrhea/a flux regarding the sin-offering.
וכל הראוי ליטמא טמא מת - as for example, vessels that are not trodden subject to Levitical uncleanness through the immediate contact of someone with gonorrhea by treading or leaning against.
ר' אליעזר אומר אינו מדף – if he shook them it was not defiled for the purification/sin-offering.
ר' יהושע אומר מדף – if he shook them, even those that are pure are defiled for the purification/sin-offering. But the Rabbis dispute and divide it between those that are impure and those that are pure. There are three disputes in this matter, and the Halakha is according to the Sages (i.e., that which is [actually] unclean [because of the corpse] is [regarded as unclean with indirect contact/Maddaf uncleanness, and that which is [actually] clean is not [regarded as] unclean with Maddaf/indirect contact uncleanness).

Mishnah 2

שנגע במדף טמא – The upper part of a person with gonorrhea is called a מדף /Maddaf for if there were on top of a person with gonorrhea tent-covers one on top of another, all of them are impure through indirect contact for conferring ritual impurity, even the uppermost one that the person with gonorrhea did not have contact with. Just as [the case of] ten mattresses/beds one on top of the other and a person with gonorrhea lay down on the uppermost one, all of them are ritually impure according to the Torah because of lying, and even though he didn’t come in contact/touch the lowest ones, so also the upper tent-covers that are upon the person with gonorrhea, all of them are impure according to the Rabbis because of indirect contact/מדף and מeven though he did not come in contact with them. But there is a distinction between lying to indirect contact by shaking/מדף, that the person [who defiles] by lying becomes a primary source of ritual uncleanness/אב הטומאה to defile people and vessels, but the מדף/indirect contact through shaking is not other than a secondary source of impurity/ולד הטומאה to defile food and liquids but because of the stringency of the purification/sin-offering, people and vessels that came in contact in an indirect manner through shaking/מדף are impure for a purification/sin-offering (see also Tractate Eduyot, Chapter 6, Mishnah 2 and Tractate Zavim, Chapter 4, Mishnah 6).
לגין של חטאת (a flagon/bottle – smaller than a pitcher and larger than a cup of purification water) – it is a vessel that only requires rinsing to be restored to Levitical cleanness, and he wants to put in it the purification water.
שנגע במדף, טמא – and it requires ritual immersion.
שנגע באוכלין ומשקין – and even if they are ritually pure for heave-offering [for Kohanim] and for Holy Things.
בידו טמא – according to the law of impure food and liquids which defile the hands, that someone who is ritually pure for heave-offering and for Holy Things is invalid for purification/sin-offering, and further, there is an additional stringency regarding the purification/sin-offering that its body was defiled. And therefore, when it touched his hand with food and liquids it is impure.
ר' יהושע מטמא – for he decreed that shaking an object so as to move it from place to place is because of contact/touching. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehoshua.

Mishnah 3

קלל של חטאת (the vessel containing the ashes for lustration) – an earthenware vessel that has in the ashes of the [Red] Heifer. The Aramaic translation [of קלל] is from (Genesis 24:15): "וכדה על שכמה"/ “[Rebekah came out] with her jar on her shoulder,” the vessel/jar on her shoulder.
שנגע בשרץ טהור – for an earthenware vessel does not become defiled from what is on top of it.
שנתנו כל גביו -that he placed the pitcher/jar on top of the insect.
וחכמים מטמאין – because it was placed in an impure place, and the Torah stated (Numbers 19:9): “[A man who is pure shall gather up the ashes of the cow] and deposit them outside the camp in a pure place,” but Rabbi Eliezer holds that since the vessel and the ashes that are within it are ritually pure, it well that we call it, “a pure place.” But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer.
ר' יוסי מטהר – through placing it (i.e., the vessel containing ashes for lustration) on top of food and liquids and Holy Scrolls, since it’s place is ritually pure from a primary source of ritual uncleanness.
וחכמים מטמאים – for we require that it be ritually pure from all defilement, and [regarding] Holy Scrolls, the Rabbis decreed that they defile the hands. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 4

שנגע בתנור – and even if it is ritually pure for Holy Things, if the person who was clean for the purification rite touched the oven.
טמא – and he requires ritual immersion for the purification/sin-offering, for the person who is clean for Holy Things invalidates the purification offering, and especially that he touched it with his hand, that his hands became defiled and his body became defiled. But by his foot, he is ritually pure, that his hand is served above, but his foot is not served above, similar to food and drink above (in the previous Mishnah).
והלגין בתוכו – a vessel that he put into it the waters of purification which is placed within his hand.
וכן האסל (and similarly a yoke/pole carried on one or two shoulders) – a balancing pole/staff that they place wo pitchers on its two heads.
ובו שתי קללות – two vessels that the ashes are placed in them, for one pitcher is tied to the head of the balancing pole/staff, and the other pitcher is tied on its second head, but now the person and the yoke/pole are on top of the oven, and the bottle/flagon and the pitcher that the water and the ashes are in them are outside of the oven.
ר' עקיבא מטהר – that the vessel that contains the ashes does not stand on top of the oven, as it is in a pure place.
וחכמים מטמאין – since he person who carries I is standing on top of the oven, we consider the vessel as if it stands on top of the oven and it is placed in a ritually impure place. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Akiva (see also Talmud Shabbat 97b)

Mishnah 5

היה עומד חוץ לתנור – that the oven forms a partition between himself to the wall, and the window of the wall and in is the flagon of the waters of lustration.
והעבירו על פי התנור – for all of their ovens their mouths are upward.
ר' עקיבא מטמא – for he holds that something that is snatched in the air is like it was placed there, and at the time that it passed it over the mouth of the oven, it is as it he placed it inside it and it became defiled.
וחכמים מטהרין – for they hold that we don’t say that something that is snatched in the air is not like it was placed there. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
ובידו כלי ריקם – that is not as it is and he placed it in a pure place but the ashes of the [Red] Heifer and the mixed water next to the ashes.

Mishnah 6

של חטאת טמא – that the Holy Things and the heave-offering are ritually impure next to the [waters] of purification.
שניהם בשתי ידיו – that the person who carries the purification waters in his one hand and that of Holy Things or of heave-offering in his other hand.
שניהן טמאים – of the purification waters because it touched that of heave-offering in his hand and when his hands were defiled, his body was defiled and it defiles the waters of lustration, and that of heave offering is impure because he carries the waters of lustration.
בשני ניירות – but even though the person is impure because he carries the waters of lustration, nevertheless the heave-offering is pure for the paper interposes and doesn’t touch the heave-offering that is in his hand.
של חטאת בנייר ושל תרומה בידו שניהן טמאין – for when it touched his hand, that of heave-offering was defiled for the purification offering. But the paper that is of the purification/sin-offering does not interpose, for we don’t count first-degree and second-degree [ritual impurity] for purification, and the purification offering was defiled, and a person is impure because he is carrying the waters of lustration and he defiled that of the heave-offering when he touched it with his hand. But heave-offering that is [surrounded by] a piece of paper, the paper interposes for it and even though it touched that of the purification offering in his hand, both of them are pure, for even though he is impure because he carries the waters of purification, nevertheless, the waters of purification do not return and become defiled through a defilement that comes to a person on account of themselves.
ר' יהושע אומר של חטאת טמא – Rabbi Yehoshua according to his reasoning who stated in the Tosefta (Tractate Parah, Chapter 10, Halakha 8) that someone who is pure for the purification waters that moved the key which is pure for heave-offering, lest he forget and move the unclean thing. But here also, even with two pieces of paper it is impure, for when he is carrying the heave-offering, even though he doesn’t touch it, it is a מדף/indirect contact for the purification waters. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehoshua.
היו נתונין על גבי הארץ ונגע בהם – that he placed one hand on that of the purification waters and the other hand on that of Holy Things or of heave offering.
של חטאת טמא – that the person became defiled through the bottle/flagon of heave-offering and he defiled that of the purification offering.
ושל קודש ושל תרומה טהורים – for a person is pure for Holy Things and for heave-offering, for he did not touch the waters of lustration other than the bottle/flagon.
הסיטן, ר' יהושע מטמא – for according to his reasoning that he said that a person who is pure for the purification offering who moved the key which is pure for heave-offering is impure. But the Halakha is not according to him.

Chapter 11



Mishnah 1

צלוחית – [a flask with a wide belly and a narrow neck] of water of purification.
ובא ומצאה מכוסה פסולה – that I say that a person entered to there and covered it, most people are not ritually pure for the purification offering.
אם יכולה חולדה לשתות ממנה פסולה – but if it (i.e., the weasel) is not able to drink we do not invalidate it for the reason that perhaps an unclean/impure man entered and uncovered it, for it is not the manner of people to uncover but rather to cover because of the insects, but insects/moving creature, it is their manner to uncover/reveal but it is not their manner to cover. But specifically, something covered and he found it uncovered, we are concerned for a weasel, but something that is uncovered and he found it uncovered like he left it, we are not concerned, even though they were suspect to supply revealed/uncovered water, for danger is more stringent than a prohibition.
או נחש לדברי רבן גמליאל – who said above (in Tractate Parah, Chapter 9, Mishnah 3) that even the snake invalidates it because it vomits.
החטאת – the ashes of the purification rite or the mixed waters [with ashes] that were in the tent of a corpse within a vessel that has upon it a tight-fitting lid.
אינן נצולין – and are defiled. From what is written (Numbers 19:9): “[A man who is pure shall gather up the ashes of the cow] and deposit them outside the camp in a pure place,” but this is not a pure/clean place. But vessels that stand to place in them the waters of purification or the ashes of purification/sin-offering, and similarly the hyssop that is prepared to sprinkle on it, are protected by a tight-fitting lid.

Mishnah 2

כל הספק טהור לתרומה – any matter of doubt that if it that same doubt appeared in the heave-offering, the heave offering is pure, if it appeared in a similar manner in the purification offering, it is pure (see also Tractate Taharot, Chapter 4, Mishnah 2).
וכל התלוי לתרומה – and an doubt that if it appeared in heave-offering where we suspend it we don’t eat neither do we burn it, if it appeared in a similar manner in the purification offering, the ashes should poured out or the mixed mater. And in the Tractate Taharot, in the Chapter “He Who Threw Something Unclean”/הזורק תרומה (Chapter Four), we taught to them regarding a doubt of something pure and on a doubt that is upon his hands, we suspend it regarding heave-offering (see Tractate Taharot, Chapter 4, Mishnah 5).
ואם עשו על גביו טהרות (and if they prepared clean things on account of it) – if e sprinkled with these ashes that were defined in doubt that was suspended for heave-offering, and made clean things on account of it through that sprinkling, they suspend those pure things, and they don’t eat nor burn them.
הרפפות (cases of Levitical uncleanness arising from vibrations caused by unclean persons) – like a kind of net-work/mat of wood.
טהורת לקודש לתרומה ולחטאת – because they are not vessels and they are not suitable/appropriate for treading [by someone with a flux or a woman after childbirth].
והרעדות (indirect contact through vibrations) – pieces of wood/boards that are not attached well to each other, and when a person leans upon them, they vibrate/tremble and shaking.
טמאות לחטאת – sometimes when a person sis upon them and they are appropriate to become defiled though sitting. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer.

Mishnah 3

אם יש בה כביצה – for a person who eats less than an egg’s bulk does not defile.
בין הרה בין טמאה המים טמאים – for the purification of impure heave-offering next to the purification offering.
והאוכלה חייב מיתה – that was defiled in the waters of lustration at the time of his consuming it, and the heave-offering in the defilement of the body is [punishable] by death.
ר' יוסי אומר בטהורה המים טהורים – for Rabbi Yossi holds that the person who is pure for heave-offering does not defile the waters of lustration/purification water. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.
שהכניס ראשו ורובו בתוך מי חטאת – the Rabbis decreed on all who come with their head and the majority of their body in drawn water, as is explained in the first chapter of Tractate Shabbat (see Mishnah 4), and it is one of the eighteen matters that they decreed on that day (i.e., the day when Rabban Gamaliel was removed as the President of the Academy – see Tractate Berakhot 28a) and these are the drawn waters of the waters of purification, therefore, when he placed his head and the majority of his body in them, he was defiled, and from when he was defiled, and he is not pure for the waters of purification, the waters of purification return and -defile him and he becomes first degree of ritual defilement, for the waters of purification defile the pure person to them, but he who is not ritual pure to them, they defile him.

Mishnah 4

כל הטעון ביאת מים מדברי תורה – as for example, a person who comes in contact with all primary sources of ritual uncleanness (see the first chapter of Tractate Kelim)
מטמא את הקודש ואת התרומה – because it is first-degree of ritual uncleanness, it makes it second-degree of ritual uncleanness and with tithes, and third-degree of ritual uncleanness with heave-offerings and fourth degree of ritual uncleanness with Holy Things.
לאחר ביאתו – that he ritually immersed and did not have a sunset pass, he has the law of second degree of ritual uncleanness, and makes heave-offering third-degree of ritual uncleanness and Holy Things fourth-degree of ritual uncleanness.
וחכמים אומרים פוסל בקודש – in the same way that a person who immersed himself that day invalidates heave-offering, so he invalidates Holy Things, but he does not defile Holy Things, for since he immersed his defilement is weakened, and he is made equivalent to something invalid, [but] he is not made equivalent to being impure.
ואם בא אל המקדש – all who are required to ritually immerse from the [Written] Torah, who comes to the Sanctuary, that is to the Israelite Courtyard, even after he had immersed prior to his sunset, is liable [for extirpation]. And even to the Women’s Courtyard, a person who immersed himself that day is forbidden to enter, but he is not liable [for extirpation] other than in the Israelite courtyard.

Mishnah 5

כל הטעון ביאת מים מדברי סופרים – as for example, that he ate impure foods and drank impure liquids, and the hands and vessels that were defiled by liquids and similar things (see also Tractate Zavim, Chapter 5, Mishnah 12).
וחכמים אוסרים במעשר – and the Halakha is according to the Sages.
לאחר ביאתו – after he ritually immersed, immediately he is permitted to all of them and does not need [the arrival] of sunset.
ואם בא אל המקדש פטור – for the Torah did not forbid his coming into the Sanctuary other than on someone who was defiled by a primary source of ritual uncleanness according to the [Written] Torah, as it is written (Leviticus 5:2-3): “[Or when a person touches any impure thing – be it the carcass of impure beast] or the carcass of impure cattle or the carcass of an impure creeping thing [- and the fact has escaped him, and then being impure, he realizes his guilt;] Or when he touches human impurity [-any such impure whereby one becomes impure – and, though he has known it, the fact has escaped him, but later he realizes his guilt].”

Mishnah 6

מטמא את מי חטאת – and even after he ritually immersed, [but] if he didn’t ritually immerse for the purpose of the purification rite it is as if he did not ritually immerse, as is taught in the [second] chapter [of Tractate Hagigah folio 18b/Chapter 2, Mishnah 6]: "אין דורשין"/They do not expound [upon the laws of prohibited relationships]: “[If] he immersed for eating food in the status of Holy Things and is thereby confirmed as suitable for eating food in the status of Holy Things, he is prohibited from engaging in the preparation of purification water.” But once he ritually immersed for the sake of the purification water, even a person who ritually immersed himself that day, according to the Torah, who is invalid for heave-offering and for Holy Things, is fit/appropriate for the purification water, for a person who ritually immersed himself that day/טבול יום is fit for the [ritual of the Red] Heifer.
ומזה מי חטאת במגע ובמשא (the one who sprinkles the purification water in contact and carrying) – and in this, everyone does not disagree. But regarding hyssop that is pronounced fit to receive ritual defilement, and because the person who eats them he requires being made fit that [purification] water can come upon him, and similarly, with water that is not mixed [with ashes] and stands for Holy Things, and an empty vessel that is clean and stands in order to place in it the purification ashes, but in this, Rabbi Meir (i.e., contact and carrying) and the Sages (i.e., in contact, but not in carrying) dispute (i.e., if he carried them but did come in contact with them, they are not defiled). And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 7

כל אזוב שיש לו שם לווי (all hyssop that has an epithet/surname) – that it is customary to accompany with it another name, such as those that are explained further on (see also Tractate Negaim, Chapter 14, Mishnah 6).
אזוב זה – that is to say, undefined hyssop that a person who sees it says, “this is hyssop” undefined (i.e., without a modifier).
ושל תרומה טמאה – that the hyssop of the garden is liable for heave-offering when they harvested/picked it for eating. But surely it comes to tell us that even though it is less than an egg’s bulk that doesn’t defile the waters of purification, nevertheless, its sprinkling is invalid, since the hyssop itself is unclean.
ושל טהורה לא יזה – because he causes loss to the heave-offering.
תמרות (berries) – like a kind of berries that are on the heads of the hyssop.
אין חייבין על היונקות (they are not liable for young shoots) – that are impure that were sprinkled upon with young shoots and this sprinkling came into the Sanctuary, he is not liable.
רבי אליעזר אומר וכו' – But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer.
גבעולים שלא גמלו (calyx or capsule of plants/stalks [of hyssop] before the buds have ripened) – all the while that the flower is placed within its pouch/pocket before it opens up.

Mishnah 8

מנגבו – in order that the fit/suitable water does not combine/mix with invalid water.
אע"פ שנגבו פסול – and even though it was not defiled, from when it became susceptible to receive ritual defilement.
לקטו לחטאת – to sprinkle upon it the waters of purification.
כמלקט לעצים – and he dries it, and it is fit/suitable. And such is the Halakha (according to Rabbis Yossi and Shimon).

Mishnah 9

שלשה קלחים ובהן שלשה גבעולים (three stalks and on them are three buds) – one bud on each stalk (see Rashi’s commentary on Talmud Sukkah 13a). But we require three stalks, we derive [by analogy/Gezerah Shavah] "לקיחה לקיחה"/taking, taking from the bunch of hyssop (see Exodus 12:22: "ולקחתם אגדת אזוב וטבלתם בדם אשר-בסף"/Take a bunch of hyssop, dip it in the blood that is in the basin) from the Egyptian Passover/פסח מצרים, just as there [it requires] three, and in this it is called an אגודה/bunch, even here, it is called a bunch/אגודה, even here it is three (and see Numbers 19:18: “A person who is pure shall take hyssop, dip it in the water, and sprinkle on the tent and on all the vessels and people who were there, or on him who touched the bones or the person who was killed or died naturally or the grave.” – and just as it is a Mitzvah to take them as a bunch for the Exodus from Egypt, so here as well).
מפסגו ואוגדו (he severs the stalks of hyssop and ties them) – he separates it and divides it so that there will the three stalks that are separated one from the other.
ר' יוסי אומר מצות אזוב שלשה – Rabbi Yossi is more stringent that the first Tanna/teacher [of the Mishnah] (see Talmud Sukkah 13a), for according to Rabbi Yossi, at the beginning, two stalks [and two buds] are invalid, but according to the first Tanna/teacher two are fit/appropriate, and it is not invalid until there would be at the outset that its remnants are one. But when the first Tanna/teacher says that the Precept of the hyssop is three stalks, it is for the mere commandment, and it is not to be indispensable. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yossi.
וגרדומיו כל שהוא (but its stump is any size at all) – the stumps of the buds is any size at all. But its remnants and stumps are two words, for its remnants are the remnants of the three stalks, which are two stalks, and its stumps is the bud itself, that I comb and is broken and there remains from it just a little bit.

Chapter 12



Mishnah 1

האזוב הקצר מספקו – he lengthens it in order to make It sufficient: 
And with a reed used as a spindle. It is the spindle/distaff that the women spin on it.
וטובל ומעלה – and even though it is written (Numbers 19:18): “A person who is pure shall take hyssop, dip it in the water,” and he takes the spindle that the hyssop was placed on its head, it is well that we call it, “[A person who is pure] shall take hyssop,” that taking by means of another thing which is called “taking.”
ואוחז באזוב ומזה – that with sprinkling we require that he holds the hyssop in his hand.
ר' יהודה ור' שמעון אומרים כו' – But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Shimon.

Mishnah 2

ספק מן הכוש ספק מן החוט כו' – for we require definitive sprinkling from the hyssop, because they say: “let the impurity stand on the basis of its presumptive condition.”
מחברו מיצה עליו (from its neighbor it dripped/emptied upon it) – perhaps the waters of purification dripped/emptied of one vessel and went on to the other.
הזאתו פסולה – for if from its neighbor it dripped/emptied upon it, this is not sprinkling from the hyssop.
טובל ומעלה כדרכו – but we don’t say that from out of that its mouth was pressed to go out perhaps the waters would return into the vessel and would not remain in the hyssop according to the measure.
ר' יהודה אומר הזייה ראשונה – we are not concerned/suspect regarding the first sprinkling, but the second sprinkling, because it (i.e., the water) was pressed to come out and also he sprinkled from them, they were all the more lessened and we are concerned with the second sprinkling lest there did not remain in the hyssop according to the measure. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.
לא יספג ([that the hyssop] does not absorb [moisture on the side of the flask as it is pulled out]) – that he will not wipe off/cleanse from the sides of the vessel or from its rim, as it is written (Numbers 19:18):”[A person who is pure shall take hyssop] dip it in the water,” but not absorb.
הזאתו פסולה – for we require the intention of sprinkling and indeed his intention was not performed.
ואפילו הן מאה – that we don’t require sprinkling on its own for each and every person or for each and every vessel.

Mishnah 3

על דבר המקבל טומאה – people and vessels.
על דבר שאינו מקבל טומאה – animals and vessels of stone.
אם יש באזוב לא ישנה – if there remains in the hyssop in order to do sprinkling, he does not need to return and to ritually immerse [the hyssop in the water] a second time, but rather he sprinkles from that which remains in the hyssop on the impure thing and the sprinkling counted for him. As is it is written (Numbers 19:19): “The pure person shall sprinkle it upon the impure person,” until he intends to sprinkle on the impure person, therefore, when he intends at the time of ritual immersion of the hyssop to sprinkle on the impure person, he should not repeat [the dipping of the hyssop in the water,” but rather he should sprinkle from what remains in the hyssop. But if he dipped the hyssop in order to sprinkle upon a thing that is not susceptible to receive ritual defilement, since that the beginning of his immersion is invalid, so his sprinkling is invalid and he should not sprinkle with what remains on the hyssop until he repeats [the dipping of the hyssop in the water.
המים המנטפין (the water that drips off) – from the hyssop that he had ritually immersed it for the sake of something that does not receive ritual impurity, if he immersed those drops of hyssop and sprinkled from them, they are appropriate/suitable.
לפיכך הן מטמאין -because their precepts were not done, for the first immersion was invalid, and behold, these drops are like the rest of the waters of purification that are kosher that they defile.

Mishnah 4

המזה מחלון של רבים – that stands in the window in the public domain and sprinkles there on the impure that pass by, and he sprinkled on an impure person thinking that the waters that are in his hands are pure for sprinkling.
ונמצאו פסולים – if he entered with this sprinkling to the Sanctuary, the impure person is example from a sacrifice [on his entering into the Sanctuary while impure], for this is a doubtful/uncertainty with regard to ritual impurity in the public domain (i.e., by Torah law, if uncertainty arises concerning the ritual purity of a person or an object, and that person or object is in a public domain, they are ritually pure. If the situation arises in a private domain, they are considered ritually impure) and his doubtful purity is deemed to be pure. And Maimonides explained the reason, that this impure person is under compulsion/unavoidably prevented, for he did not have in mind to check if the waters were fit/suitable for sprinkling or not, since he was standing in the public domain and sprinkling on many people. But if he stands in the window of a single individual and sprinkles, the impure person would have to check on the waters if they are fit/suitable, or not, and since he did not check, it is an inadvertent error but not something unavoidably preventable, and if he entered into the Sanctuary with this sprinkling, he is liable for a sacrifice, for this is like a doubtful impurity in the private domain where this doubt is impure.
שאין כהן גדול חייב על ביאת המקדש – as it is written (Numbers 19:20): “[If anyone who has become impure fails to purify himself, [that person shall be cut off from the congregation, [for he has defiled the LORD’s sanctuary],” the waters of purification are equivalent to the congregation, that is to individuals, excluding the High Priest, whose sin is not equivalent to that of individuals.
מחליקין היו (they would slip [on water]) – meaning to say, that there were so much waters of purification there until people would slip upon them, and even so they would trample on them, because they would not defile, since their Mitzvah was done.

Mishnah 5

בכנפו – in the corner of his garment. Because the ax that required sprinkling is a primary form of ritual defilement , and when he holds its corner the corner [of the garment] becomes first-degree of ritual impurity, but the person who holds is not impure, for a person and vessels do not receive defilement other than from a primary source of ritual impurity, and even though there is on the ax water sufficient for sprinkling, the person who holds it is not ritually impure because of carrying the waters of lustration, since the Mitzvah had already been fulfilled.
כדי שיטבול ראשי גבעולין ויזה (in order that he may dip the tips of the buds and sprinkle) - outside from what the hyssop absorbs.
כאילו הן על האזוב של נחושת – which does not absorb [water]. For we see the waters that are absorbed in the hyssop as if they are discernable/in natural form to complete the measure of sprinkling so that those who carry them are impure. And that which is written (Numbers 19:21): “he who sprinkled the waters of lustration”/"ומזה מי הנדה" [shall wash his clothes and whoever touches the water of lustration shall be impure until evening],” for they (i.e., the Rabbis) expound from this to the person who carries according to the measure of sprinkling, that is as if there were discernable/in natural form that they had the measure of sprinkling. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 6

המזה אזוב טמא – as for example, the hyssop of a garden that was picked/harvested for eating.
אם יש בו כביצה – which is the measure of food, whether to susceptible to receive ritual defilement or whether to defile others.
והזאתו פסולה – as it is written (Numbers 19:19): “The pure person shall sprinkle it,” that the person who will be sprinkling is pure and the hyssop is pure.
אפילו הן מאה – all of them are ritually impure for purification/sin-offering, for we don’t count first-degree and second-degree for purification but rather all of them are first-degree.

Mishnah 7



Mishnah 8

שנטמאו אחוריו (that the outer side of which was made unclean) – with impure liquids. That for the rest of the pure things its inside was not defiled, but for purification/sin-offering, it is not the case.
הזוג והענבל (the bell/body of the bell and the clapper) – for if he sprinkled upon one of them, its fellow is pure. And a זוג – is the bell, and the ענבל is the hammer that is inside that strikes the bell that through it strikes/knocks/tingles.
כוש של רובן (a reed used as a spindle of coarse weft/material) – a spindle/distaff that they weave meshes; it is the bulrushes/reed-grass that they make matting.
לא על כוש ולא על הפיקה (not on the reed used as a spindle and not on whorl/ring) – meaning to say, he should not sprinkle on this one alone, nor on that one alone, for there is no attachment/connection. But he must sprinkle upon both of them.
פיקה – what they place at the end of the reed used as a spindle to make it heavy is called a פיקה/whorl/ring. It is called PURSLAV in the foreign language.
ואם הזה – on one of them alone (and not upon both the reed and the whorl/ring), it is considered sprinkled. And Maimonides explained, not on the reed used as a spindle and not on the whorl/ring, but rather on a copper reed that they would regularly put at the tip of the reed/spindle that is called a צנורא/hook or pivot. And upon it they would sprinkle because it is the essence of the vessel, and the sprinkle would rise up to the reed and the whorl.
של פשתן חיבור – that the spindle that they spin on it flax, it is manner is that the whorl is attached to the reed/spindle.
עור של עריסה (leather sheet in the cradle/cot – which is attached to knobs) – leather that they place in the cradle of a baby, and it is the practice that it is attached in the cot/cradle.
המלבן (the frame/base)- like a kind of bowls of hollowed out wood that they bring into it the legs of the bed so that it would not decay from the moisture of the ground. And something similar to it is found in Tractate Bava Batra in the chapter המוכר את הבית (chapter 4, folio 69a), the sockets for the legs of a bedstead.
אינו חיבור לא לטומאה – that if this one was defiled, the other was not defiled.
ולא לטהרה – that if he sprinkled on this one, he did not sprinkle on that one.
הקדוחות חיבור (vessels that have drilled/bored handles are considered attached/connected) – as for example the handles of knives that the iron enters into the sleeve of the handle of wood or of stone is attached to it, it is a connection, if one of them is defiled, its fellow is defiled, and similarly, if one sprinkled on one of them, the he sprinkled on its fellow. קדוחות is the language of borer.
אף החרוקות (even those that are wedged in/squeezed into holes)- It is the language of (Lamentations 2:16): "[All your enemies leer at you; They hiss] and gnash their teeth, [And cry: ‘We’ve ruined her! Ah, this is the day we hoped for; We have lived to see it!].” Meaning to say, even the handles which are sharp/pointed at their tips and they bring in their sharpness in the hole that they make at the tip of the vessel, such as the handle of a spear, even those are a connection. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri.

Mishnah 9

הסלים שבקנתל (the baskets in the pannier on the side of the pack-saddle) – baskets where it was their practice to carry in them produce or manure upon the donkey and they are attached to each other.
מטה של טרבל (threshing sledge – of a couch - consisting of a wooden platform studded underneath with sharp pieces of flint or with iron teeth) – like a species of wood of bronze with which they thresh the grain.
קרן של כליבה (the movable supports of the bier – or the ring for keeping the corpse in position) – the bier of the corpse that they make it like a kind of beam of bronze/copper and they tie to it the bier of the corpse so that it doesn’t fall. And they call the bier of the corpses a כליבה, which is made like coop/shed of fowl.
וקרנים של יוצאי דרכים (horns of those who travel) – the horns of cattle and wild beasts that they carry with them travelers to fill them with water to drink.
ושלשלת המפתחות – chain that suspend upon it keys.
ושלל של כובסים (washers’ materials loosely stitched together -see also Tractate Uktzin, Chapter 2, Mishnah 6) – it is the practice of washers to make chain-stitches of clothing one with another, the small with the large in order that it not become lost.
והבגד שהוא תפור בכלאים – two pieces of woolen clothing that were sewn with threads of flax that ultimately would be separated because of the prohibition of [use of] mixed seeds/threads. And similarly, the washers’ material loosely stitched together that ultimately would be separated, and even so, it is a connection for defilement.

Mishnah 10

המיחם (vessel for heating water) – a kettle of copper/brass that they heat in it the water.
חוץ מטומטום ואנדרוגינוס – because they are doubtfully female, and a woman is not fit/suitable to sprinkle, as it is written (Numbers 19:18): “A person who is pure [shall take hyssop], dip it in water, [and sprinkle on the tent and on all the vessels and people who were there]; a man, but not a woman, טהור/someone pure, to include the minor. And sprinkling is derived from ritual immersion that is compared to each other.
האשה מסעדתו (and a woman assists him – i.e., the child, who sprinkles) – assists him, as it is explained in the last clause of this Mishnah - that "אוחזת לו במים"/that she holds the water for him.
ואם אחזה בידו אפילו בשעת הזאה פסול – it is needless to say “at the time of ritual immersion”, for it is written, “a man” but not a woman, it is written regarding ritual immersion (see Numbers 19:18), but even at the time of sprinkling, for it is not written in Scripture “at sprinkling,” even so, if she held his hand, it is invalid, for we derive sprinkling from ritual immersion.

Mishnah 11

ביום והזה בלילה פסול – as it is written (Numbers 19:19): “The pure person shall sprinkle it upon the impure person on the third day and on the seventh day, [thus purifying him by the seventh day],” during the day, but not at night. And there is an analogy made between ritual immersion and sprinkling, as it is written (Numbers 19:18): “[A person who is pure shall take hyssop] dip it in the water, and sprinkle [on the tent and on all the vessels and people who were there,]” just as sprinkling is during the day, even ritually immersion of the hyssop is during the day.
טובל בלילה ומזה ביום – where he delayed his immersion and did not sprinkle on the seventh day, when he does to sprinkle on the eighth or ninth or tenth [days] he is able to advance ritual immersion to sprinkling. But a person who ritually immerses on the seventh according to his precept, he sprinkles first and afterwards ritually immerses, as it is written (Numbers 19:19): “thus purifying by the seventh day,” and afterwards it is written: “He shall then wash his clothes and bathe in water.” (see also Tractate Megillah, Chapter 2, Mishnah 4 – that a person does not ritually immerse in water nor sprinkle other than during the daytime).
משעלה עמוד השחר כשר – that from then onwards it is day, as it is written (Nehemiah 4:15): “And so we worked on, while half were holding lances, from the break of day until the stars appeared,” and it is written there (Nehemiah 4:16): “[I further said to the people at that time: ‘Let every man with his servant lodge in Jerusalem,] that we may use the night to stand guard and the day to work.’” (see also Tractate Berakhot, Chapter 1, Mishnah 1 for the usage of the phrase "עד שיעלה עמוד השחר"/until the crack of dawn).