Ahevukha Ad Mavet
אֲהֵבוּךָ עַד מָוֶת
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Ahevukha Ad Mavet

Introduction



Preface



Talmudic Sources







Chapter 1

The decision to ascend Beit Natza, the interpretation of the issue and its meaning.
Opening: For the fundamental question that arises for the discussion of the sanctification of God, whether one must surrender one's soul and sacrifice one's life in order to prevent or avoid a crime, there are three situations: the first, the rape to commit a crime under the threat of death. What will a person do when they tell him to commit a crime or be killed, will he be killed or will he pass? This is the discussion of the issue we are dealing with. The second, the discussion on the supervision of a soul that arises in various issues. 1 Yoma, page 15 1a and onwards and page 11a, as well as Passovers page 11a and parallels. The cases in question are desecration of Shabbat or forbidden healing in the case of soul control. The third, 'Deen Rodf', the permission to kill a person who is about to harm his friend, by murder or incest. In the context of persecutory law, the question of whether it is possible to kill a person in order to prevent him from committing a crime is also discussed, where the main example is the crime of idolatry. The main source for the law of persecutor appears in the Talmud in the Sanhedrin, page Ag-Ed, before the discussion on the subject of 'kill and let him not pass'. In all three situations, human lives are at stake in the face of a crime that, in order to prevent, a life must be taken.
The main point of the discussion for Kaman will be on the law of "killing and not passing away" and the methods of the terms and conditions in the issue. Sometimes, and especially in the first chapters, for the purpose of clarifying the methods, we will also need the parallel issues - 'Peace Control' and 'Stalking Law'.
We will open, therefore, by studying the issue of 'killing and not passing away'.

Summary



Expositions



Bibliography

