Peri Tzadik
פרי צדיק
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Peri_Tzadik
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Peri Tzadik

Title



Introduction



Sefer Kedushat Shabbat



Kuntres Shvitat Shabbat



Bereshit



Rosh Chodesh (manuscript)



Rosh Chodesh Cheshvan



Noach



Lech Lecha



Vayera



Chayei Sara



Rosh Chodesh Kislev



Toldot



Vayetzei



Vayishlach



Vayeshev



Chanukah



Chapter 1



Chapter 2

In the <i>al hanisim</i> text of Chanukah, [one finds,] "You delivered the mighty into the hands of the weak, and the many into the hands of the few." And that is the essence of the miracle, as it is contrary to nature. But afterward, we say three phrases, "the impure into the hands of the pure, the wicked into the hands of the righteous, and the insolent into the hands of those occupied with Your Torah." But this is irrelevant to the greatness of the miracle! However it is [actually] all one idea — that God, may He be blessed, delivered the Greeks into the hands of the Jewish people. Yet the idea of the three [different] things that it mentioned are that the sources of husks are jealousy, desire, and honor, the roots of the husks of Esau and Ishmael, from which branched out 35 on the right and 35 on the left, as ARI, may his memory be blessed, said. The husk of Ishmael is called <i>chamor</i> [donkey]. For the two lads that were with [Abraham] at the binding were Ishmael and Eliezer, as it is written in Rashi's commentary, and it is [sourced] in Midrash Rabbah (Emor 20:2). And our father Abraham, peace be upon him, said to them, <i>You stay here with the donkey</i> (Genesis 22:5), a people that is similar to a donkey, as it is taught (Yevamot 62a:14). And this is the husk of desire, as it is stated, <i>whose flesh is the flesh of donkeys, etc.</i> (Ezekiel 23:20). Whereas Esau is the husk of the ox, as it is found (Berakhot 62a:4), "And don’t we see that it causes damage and bites and kicks?" And the ox that gores is the husk of jealousy and murder. And Amalek is the husk of the dog, as it is written (Zohar 2:65a), "A husk comes out of their might which is called, dog, and that is the most insolent of all of them." And that [is supported by] that which the middle letters of donkey [<i>chamor</i>] and ox [<i>shor</i>] are <i>vav, mem vav</i>, the numerical equivalent of dog [<i>kelev</i>, as Rabbi Chaim Vital wrote. And that is the husk of haughtiness and honor. And Scripture says about him, <i>The proud, insolent man, scoffer is his name</i> (Proverbs 21:24). And it is as they expounded (Shemot Rabbah, Yitro, 27:6), "<i>Strike the scoffer</i> (Proverbs 19:25), this is Amalek," who is the scoffer. That is, as all the peoples heard, they shuddered [alluding to Exodus 15:14], once they saw open and explicit miracles, and they could not deny [God's power]. But this one came from haughtiness, that it could not be that there would be something hidden from his intellect and higher than his comprehension. And from this, he became a scoffer and denied everything through mockery. And that is [the meaning of], <i>Amalek is the head of the nations</i> (Numbers 24:20), it is the head of the husks, since its root was the seduction of the snake — <i>and you shall be like God</i> (Genesis 3:5). And that is the culmination of haughtiness, and it is like it is stated about Nebuchadnezzar and Hiram. Moreover, that is the source of the evil impulse. And this is by way of the shattering of the vessels and the primordial kings that died, which was through the haughtiness of, "I shall reign," as is well known. And it is like we said, that it is from that which God, may He be blessed, dresses Himself with this garment, as it is written, <i>The Lord is king, He is robed in pride [geut, which also means haughtiness]</i> (Psalms 93:1), that man increases it (and as it will be explained, Vayera at the end of essay 1). And it is found [about] Greece (Bereishit Rabbah 2:4), "<i>And darkness</i> (Genesis 1:2) – this is the Greek kingdom, which darkened Israel’s eyes, etc." And it is written in the holy books that darkness [<i>choshech</i>] is [composed of] the first letters of <i>shor, chamor, kelev</i>, the three husks mentioned. As the husks of the Greeks were [based in] heresy, and that is the source of all the husks, as it [all] comes from haughtiness. As their hearts made them haughty, to be sages in their own eyes; from that, they came to heresy. And through this, they also arrived at the [other] husks, which are jealousy and desire. For their wisdom is the opposite of the Torah's wisdom. As it is found (Kiddushin 30b), "I have created the evil impulse, and I have created the Torah as an antidote." And that is the light of Torah, which saves from these three husks. As corresponding to the husk of desire, they said there, "If that scoundrel confronts you, drag him to the study hall, etc." And the evil impulse of desire is called a scoundrel, as it is learned (Shabbat 152a), "A woman is a flask full, etc."; and in the Midrash Neelam (Zohar 1:128b), "[The evil impulse] will not be as roguish, etc." See there. And it said, "drag him to the study hall, etc.," that one should pull this passion to the words of Torah, as it will be in the future, that there will be a craving for Torah (as it is written there, Zohar 1:138a). And corresponding to the husk of jealousy, it is found in the Tikkunei Zohar (in the Introduction mentioned above), "When it is taken from Might, it is called the Oral Torah, as so have the masters of the Mishnah established it — the Oral Torah was given from the mouth of the Almighty." And that is as it is written (Taanit 4a), "When a young scholar gets heated up, it is the Torah that is heating him up, as it is stated, <i>Is not My word like fire</i> (Jeremiah 23:29). So the anger of Torah scholars is good for all the sides." And likewise, the essence of the words of Torah are acquired with lowliness and through words of Torah that are connected to the head of thought. The head [<i>bereishit</i>, which also means, In the beginning] is for the sake of the Jewish people which is called the head. And that is corresponding to the head of the husks, the head of the nations, the husk of haughtiness. And their wisdom, which is darkness, the opposite of the light of Torah, brings one to the husks of desire and jealousy, the powers of the evil impulse. And this is [the meaning of] that which is written, "the impure into the hands of the pure," corresponding to the husk of desire. For the main thing called impurity is impurity that comes out from a person's body, and that is a genital flow [<i>zivah</i>], which comes from the power of desire. As it is written (Zavim 2), "We check one with a genital flow [for its cause] in seven ways, etc. By way of fantasies." And [although gentiles] do not have impurity, the sages made them like those with a genital flow in every matter, because their bodies are full of the pollution of this impurity, which is the pollution of the snake that it put into Eve, which has not left them. And that is why they said (Bereishit Rabbah 80:11), "One who engages in sexual relations with an uncircumcised man, it is difficult to pull away." As he puts this pollution of desire into her. And that is the husk of Ishmael, which is the leftovers of our father Abraham, peace be upon him. As he was the trait of love in holiness, since all of his love and passion was only for the Holy One, blessed be He. And the holy power to separate from desire is called purity. And it is like King David, peace be upon him, wrote in that psalm, when he came, etc. — which was about the blemish of desire — <i>Create for me a pure heart, etc.</i> (Psalms 51:12). And the sages, may their memory be blessed, said (Sukkah 52a), "By inference, there is an impure one!" And this is [the meaning of] that which is written, "into the hands of the pure." As it is written, <i>The fear of the Lord is pure, abiding forever</i> (Psalms 19:10). And it is through this fear that they separate from desire, as it is stated, <i>As I said, surely there is no fear of God in this place, etc.</i> (Genesis 20:1), and as a result, they were full of desire. And when our father Abraham, peace be upon him, had the test of the binding, He said to him, <i>Now I know that you are someone who fears God</i> (Genesis 22:12). For the clarification of the completeness of his love for God, may He be blessed, was when another love came against it, as it is written, <i>your son, etc. who you love</i> (Genesis 22:2). Whereas in the previous tests, it was only against wishes of this world, which were like nothing in the eyes of our father Abraham, peace be upon him, in opposition to his love for God, may He be blessed. But his love for our father Isaac, peace be upon him — which was because of his holiness and because he was promised that a holy nation would come out from him — in this test, it was clarified that he feared God. As He thought that since he is his son, it is possible that it is from the angle of the love of any father for his son. So this is the clarification of the completeness of the love of holiness, when he fears God and his heart is pure of any foreign loves that are from the husks of Ishmael. And this is [the meaning of] "into the hands of the pure." For the Jewish people is the woman that fears the Lord [alluding to Proverbs 31:30]. And they are the ones that fear and are pure. "And the wicked into the hands of the righteous" — that corresponds to the husk of Esau, according to that which is written in Midrash Rabbah (Bereshit Rabbah 75:1, the beginning of Vayishlach), "Deliver my soul from that wicked one, who is Your sword through whom You subjugate the world." And it is written, <i>Let favor be shown to the wicked</i> (Isaiah 26:10), which they expounded (Megillah 6a) about Esau, "As Isaac said, 'Let favor be shown, etc.'" And it is written, <i>The wicked draw their swords</i> (Psalms 37:14); and it is written, <i>and they shall be called the border of wickedness</i> (Malachi 1:4). And the trait of holy might is to be mighty as one who conquers his [evil] impulse [alluding to Avot 4:1]. And Joseph is Esau's opponent (as it is written in Bereishit Rabbah 73), as Joseph was also mighty in conquering his impulse. And because of this, he was more distinguished [for this role] than all of the brothers. As that is why he was given the appellation, the righteous one. And this is the distinction between a righteous person and a pure one, as a pure one is completely pure by being filled with a love of holiness. Whereas a righteous one is someone who conquers it with his might, that he strengthens himself against it, so that he is a chariot for the trait of Righteousness [<i>Tzaddik</i>], and that is with the holiness of <i>Like a firstling bull in his majesty, etc. with them he gores the peoples</i> (Deuteronomy 33:17). And that corresponds to the husk of Esau, who is a goring ox. So that is the meaning of "the wicked into the hands of the righteous." And "the insolent" corresponds to the husk of honor, which is arrogance and conceit, as is stated,  <i>The proud, insolent man, scoffer is his name</i> (Proverbs 21:24). And that corresponds to the holiness of the Torah, which is called with holiness, honor, as it is said (Chullin 133a), "There is no honor besides Torah, as it is stated, <i>The wise shall obtain honor</i> (Proverbs 3:35)." And this was merited by our father Jacob, peace be upon him, whose image was engraved into the Throne of Glory, since he sits in tents [alluding to Genesis 25:27), meaning to say, the tents of Torah. Moreover, the voice is the voice of Jacob [alluding to Genesis 27:22] in Torah. And that is the trait of the truth is for Jacob [alluding to Micah 7:20], as it is said (Berakhot 5b), "Truth is Torah, as it is stated, <i>Buy truth</i> (Proverbs 23:23)." And the main spread of the Oral Torah was at the time of the Hasmoneans, and God made one corresponding to the other [alluding to Ecclesiastes 7:14]. So alongside the growth of the Oral Torah, there was the growth of Greek wisdom, which is the opposite of the wisdom of the Oral Torah. And Aristotle was then the head of the sages of the Greeks. And besides their wisdom, they had arrogance and conceit, and they mocked all of the earlier faiths, even idolatry and sorcery. However, they also wanted to eliminate the holy Torah and the word of prophecy. As they said, if prophecy was real in the world, such that God, may He be blessed, speaks with people, they would have grasped it. But because they did not grasp the words of Torah through their wisdom, they did not believe in the words of Torah. As they said that the only wisdom in the world was what they grasped. And that is why they were called the insolent ones. And our father Jacob, peace be upon him, merited Torah by his lowliness in his own eyes, as it is stated, <i>I have been too little for all, etc.</i> (Genesis 32:11); and it is stated, <i>Jacob since he is little</i> (Amos 7:5). As words of Torah leave alone a high place and go towards a low place. So a sign for conceit is poverty in Torah (Kiddushin 49b). And they said (Sotah 21b), "Words of Torah only survive with someone who makes himself as if he were not." And that is [the meaning of] "the insolent ones," which is the husk of haughtiness. And in the blessing of the heretics and all of the insolent ones, it ends, "who humbles the insolent," since they are the source of heresy that comes from haughtiness. "Into the hands of those those occupied with Your Torah," as the Jewish people is called those occupied with Your Torah. For this is always the expression [used] — "anyone who is occupied with Torah." And, likewise in the blessing over the Torah, the formula is "to be occupied with words of Torah." And that is that one's occupation be Torah, as man is born to toil, so that he be occupied and not go around wastefully. And in truth, he was created to be occupied with Torah, and "happy is one who is privileged, who is a receptacle for Torah" (as it is said in Sanhedrin 99b). And in any event, one who is required to also be occupied by the toil of the way of the world, should nevertheless know that he was created only to serve his Maker. It is just that I have committed evil actions, etc. (Mishnah Kiddushin 4:14); that after the corruption, Adam the first man was cursed with, <i>you shall eat bread by the sweat of your brow</i> (Genesis 3:19). So his main intention [in his work] should be that he be able to fix times for Torah [study]. And one who is incapable of such should have the intention that he should raise his children to Torah study. And it is like that which Rambam, may his memory be blessed, wrote, that by way of fulfilling, <i>In all your paths know Him</i>, (Proverbs 3:6), such that all of his actions should be for the sake of Heaven, all of his actions will be commanded actions, since the intended goal is for the service of God, may He be blessed. And that is [the meaning of] "those who are occupied with Your Torah." And also all commanded actions are included in being occupied with Torah. And that is like what we said about the Gemara (Sota 21a), "The verse (Proverbs 6:23) associates the commandment with a lamp and the Torah with light, etc. to say to you [that] just as a lamp only gives light temporarily, etc." And the Gemara explains that the lamp of a commandment is like the lamp of oil and a wick. When it is kindled and lit, it gives light temporarily. But in the holy Zohar (2:166a), it is found that the commandment being like a lamp means a lamp which is oil and a wick without a flame, and a lamp without a flame is nothing. But the Torah is light is that it is the light from which the lamp is lit; see there. And at first glance they contradict one another. But we said that it is all one. And that is that with all of the commandments, the commandment itself, the raw act, is only oil and a wick without any light at all. However in each commandment there is the light of Torah, and that is the intention of the commandment to be for the sake of Heaven, such that it not be like the commandment of someone doing it by rote, but rather to do as the Lord my God has commanded me [alluding to Deuteronomy 4:5]. That is the light of the Torah that is in a commandment, and it is, "the light from which the lamp is lit," which is written in the holy Zohar. And [regarding] the commandment of Torah [study], the study itself is a commandment like all of the positive commandments, and it too is the lamp of a commandment, a lamp without light. And the intention for the sake of Heaven in the Torah study — that is the light of Torah in the commandment of Torah [study]. And the distinction between a commandment and Torah is that the light of Torah in a commandment, meaning the holiness and the intention for the sake of Heaven that is in it, gives light temporarily, whereas this is not the case with the light of the Torah in the commandment of Torah study, which gives light forever. And this is [the meaning of] that which is written in the Gemara, that a commandment only gives light temporarily like a lamp, but Torah gives light forever. And it is well known that every Jew, even one who is not occupied with Torah at all, as he is incapable of it at all and does not have children to raise them for Torah study, is nevertheless at least occupied with commandments. And there is the light of Torah in the commandments as well, that being the intention and the holiness in the commandment. So any occupation with the commandments is the light of Torah, and all of the Jewish people are "those who are occupied with Your Torah."   

Miketz



Chapter 1

And it was at the end of two full years. In the Midrash Rabbah and in the holy Zohar, they began this portion with the verse, "He setteth an end to darkness" (Job 28:3). And it says in the Midrash Rabbah that as long as the evil inclination is in the world, gloom and darkness are in the world. As it is written, "A land of thick darkness, as darkness itself" (Job 10:22). When the evil inclination is uprooted from the world, there is no gloom and darkness in the world. Another interpretation: "He setteth an end to darkness" - He gave a time to Joseph, how many years he should be in darkness, etc. The matter is that beforehand Joseph was in the pit for ten years (as mentioned in Shemot Rabbah, portion 7), and in many places the number ten indicates a complete number of the ten Sefirot. This means that he rectified his aspect in all the ten attributes. And afterwards, he was there for two more years, and they said in Bereishit Rabbah that because he said to the chief butler, "But have me in thy remembrance…and make mention of me" (Genesis 40:14), two years were added to him. And certainly, Joseph did not rely on the chief butler, God forbid, for have they not taught, "Happy is the man that maketh the Lord his trust" (Psalms 40:5) - this is Joseph. Rather, because he saw with the holy spirit that his salvation was destined to come through the chief butler, and as it truly was in the end, therefore he said to him, "But have me in thy remembrance," etc. However, this is still a touch of self-interest, and this comes through the serpent's venom that entered into man to feel the pleasure of the body. And this is considered for the level of Joseph the righteous as a sin, for truly according to his level, he should have left it to God, who would surely finish it for him for the good without his efforts. And it says (Shabbat 55b), "Four died due to the serpent's venom...and the whole Gemara except for Yishai, the father of David, for whom the verse is interpreted, 'Is he then a serpent (נחש)?'…'Is he then one who died due to the serpent's venom?'…and he is called a serpent." And this is according to what is written (Midrash Rabbah, beginning of Parshat Tazria), "'For in iniquity was I brought forth' (Psalms 51:7) - in iniquity is written fully (as opposed to the expected defective spelling). Even if he is the most pious of the pious, it is impossible that he should not have one aspect of iniquity, etc." And this is the serpent's venom that the serpent injected into Adam that he should feel his own pleasure. And therefore, after Joseph the righteous clarified himself in all attributes, he had to further clarify himself regarding the matter of the serpent's venom. And after he clarified himself in these two levels and merited to be "He setteth an end to darkness," that the evil inclination was uprooted from his heart, he still had business in the world, for he lived afterwards for eighty years. And anyone who has no business at all, when he is completely finished, has no life in this world, as it is written, "I can no more go out and come in" (Deuteronomy 31:2). But as long as he still has business, even though he lives without the evil inclination, he still has life in this world, as we find with Jacob our forefather, for it is written, "And Jacob lived" (Genesis 47:28), and it says (Seder Olam Rabbah, chapter 5) that he merited life without suffering and without the evil inclination. And it teaches us in this portion that the main business of man is to be "He setteth an end to darkness," to uproot the evil inclination from his heart. And afterwards, he still has business to rectify the serpent's venom, which is the touch of self-pleasure. And the main rectification is through the Torah, which is called the Tree of Life, as it says (beginning of Seder Olam Rabbah), "There is no Tree of Life other than the Torah." And in the holy Zohar, this portion (202a), "For there is no word to break the evil inclination other than the Torah." And behold, we have already said in what is written in the Tikunei Zohar (Tikun 24), and also in the Tikunei Zohar Chadash, regarding the Tree of Knowledge, one said it was wheat, and another said it was a grapevine, and all is true, the seven species are, etc. And seemingly, how is it possible that they are all true in a matter of dispute about reality? And we said that it is written, "And the tree of life in the midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil" (Genesis 2:9). And this means that the inner essence of all the trees of the garden was the Tree of Life and the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, and this power was given to them that if he had tasted from the Tree of Life first, he would have felt in his eating from every fruit of the garden the taste of the Tree of Life, "Come, eat of my bread" (Proverbs 9:5), which is Torah. And since he tasted from the Tree of Knowledge, the mixture was made, and he tasted in all his eating from the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. And this is what he felt of his own pleasure, which is the serpent's venom. (And it is explained in Genesis, from verse 8). And behold, after the sin, it is written, "And now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever" (Genesis 3:22). And one must understand, what harm would it be if he would eat from the Tree of Life and live forever? And especially according to what is written in the Tanna Devei Eliyahu that the Tree of Life is Torah, let him eat from the Torah and rectify the sin. However, it is according to what is written (Bereishit Rabbah, chapter 21), "And now - there is no 'and now' other than repentance, and he says 'lest' - and there is no 'lest' other than a prohibition." And this means that God opened for him a gate of repentance, and he did not want to repent, and God said "lest" through the serpent's incitement he will "put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life." And in the manner of what is written in the book Divrei Menachem from the holy Rabbi of Rimanov on the verse, "And Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife" (Genesis 22:10), that in all the deeds that were the will of God, the limbs of Abraham our forefather would do them on their own from the great enthusiasm, and so it was in every deed of the binding, except for the deed of taking the knife, which was not in His will, may He be blessed, for He did not want to slaughter him, therefore the hands of Abraham our forefather did not want to take it. Only Abraham our forefather suspected himself that perhaps it is from the incitement and laziness of the evil inclination, and therefore it is written, "And he stretched forth his hand" by force to take the knife, end of quote. And similarly here it is written, "lest he put forth his hand," that is, by force, not with the desire of the heart, only through the serpent's and the evil inclination's incitement. And this is what is written, "and take also of the tree of life" - "also" specifically, that he will not cast away his evil deeds. And the Tree of Life will be secondary, and then it will harm what he eats from the Tree of Life, and to what is written, "But unto the wicked God saith: 'What hast thou to do to declare My statutes'" (Psalms 50:16), etc., and when he learns words of Torah and does not rectify his deeds first to be "turn away from evil" (Psalms 34:15). Through the words of Torah, he adds power to the shell, as it is written (Shabbat 88b), "To those who place it on their left hand, it is a deadly poison." And this is when he learns through the serpent's and the evil inclination's incitement. And after he merits to uproot the evil inclination, man has further business in rectifying the serpent's venom. And "at the end of two years," when he clarifies himself in these two aspects, he merits life without the evil inclination, and nevertheless, he has business in this world. And it is that two indicates that it has become a presumption, for in two times we also find in the Torah that it is written, "Lest he die also, as his brother did" (Genesis 38:11). And it is a dispute of the Tannaim (Yevamot 64b) whether in two times it is a presumption or specifically in three times. And these and these are the words of the living God, that also in two times it is strengthened, as we find (Yoma 86b), "Once a man has committed a transgression and repeated it…it becomes to him as if it were permitted." And good deeds are even greater. And when he clarifies himself in these two aspects, "at the end of two years," then "He setteth an end to darkness," that he is secure from the evil inclination that it will not rule over him. However, he still has business in this world until he clarifies himself in the third aspect, and then it is a presumption, and he is complete in every way, and he has no business at all in this world, as it is written, "I can no more go out and come in." And "at the end of two years" indicates that the evil inclination was uprooted from his heart, and nevertheless, he had business in this world, as we see with Joseph, who lived afterwards for eighty years. And when the evil inclination is uprooted, there is no gloom and darkness, which the serpent caused. And the eating of Shabbat is from the side of the Tree of Life, and they are a rectification for the serpent's blemish, which was in eating. And the Greeks wanted to make them forget Your Torah, for the letters of "darkness" (חש"ך) are "forgetfulness" (שכח"ה), and in Bereishit Rabbah it is expounded, "And darkness - this is Greece, which darkened the eyes of Israel," for all their decrees were to nullify the words of Torah. And through Your holy priests, they merited light, which is the aspect of "remember," a place where there is no forgetting and forgetting does not exist in it, as it is written in the holy Zohar (Part 2, 92b


Vayigash



Chapter 1

To understand the approach of Yehuda (after he had already approached Joseph) by saying  מה נאמר לאדוני - he had accepted the judgement upon himself that they would all be servants and then afterwards when Yosef allowed them all to go free except for the one who had the goblet in his possession would be a servant, he suddenly advances on Joseph with rebukes also on this (he does a 360 degree turn in his approach - why is this? The answer to this is that that when the goblet was found in their possession and the law was that they should all be servants, as the brothers themselves said, then Yehuda himself felt that this was the correct judgement had come down from heaven upon them, to pay them back in measure for selling Joseph into slavery, and as a result of that they should all be servants.  And even though Benjamin wasn't a part of the sale of Joseph, he was included because the world is judged based on the majority.  (The proof for this is that) Reuben was also not involved in the sale of Joseph yet he was also included in the decree of being solved into slavery with his brothers.  Yehuda felt that this was a judgment from G-d as he states "האלהים מצא וגו". However, when Joseph said that only Benjamin should be a servant, Yehuda reconciled in his heart that this decree didn't come from the sale of Joseph.  Rather, the sale of Joseph was inspired by heaven in order to fulfill the decree of the covenant of the parts, and this would be fulfilled through Joseph because he was the best of them.  They (the brothers) saw this when Jacob mourned over his Joseph for many days they could understand that Joseph was truly righteous.  Yehuda thought that it was for this reason that he had been chosen to complete the affliction.  We have said previously that Jacob believed that he had already fulfilled the servitude and affliction (of the בין הבתרים).  It was for this reason that Jacob wanted to sit in tranquillity (c.f. Rashi 41:1).  Yehuda felt that Yosef was the one chosen to complete the servitude. Now, when the ruler of Egypt (Yosef) wanted to have Benjamin as a servant, Yehuda deduced from this that definitely Yosef had died, and now Benjamin had been chosen from heaven to fulfill the decree of servitude instead of him.  In this way, we can lay to rest the statement of "ואחיו מת", even though he said previously that "the other one had disappeared"- what difference would it have made to Joseph if he actually didn't want to believe Yehudah what he said, and also if he didn't know where he was, where would he bring him from! According to our words, he said this as the truth, because he had deduced that Yosef was now indeed dead. It was on this basis that Yehuda became resentful in his soul because he had already caused his father hurt with his mourning of Joseph, and now he had added greater hurt through his responsibility for Benjamin he might G-d forbid, cause death to his father.  He, therefore, approaches with bitterness to request in prayer that he should be accepted as a servant in order to have the servitude and the affliction (of the covenant) fulfilled through him, and Benjamin would be able to return with his brothers. All the words of Yehuda can be heard on various levels.  On a simple level he was speaking to Yosef, and the words were also directed towards a prayer to G-d -   אדני שאל ; בי אדני ידבר נא עבדך דבר באזני אדני (relates to G-d listening to his prayers), because he knew that everything that was happening emanated from G-d in terms of what Joseph had asked them, and in terms of his command to bring Binyamin.  We find a similar thing with regards to Nehemiah who prays to G-d and then speaks to the King.  Even though we don't find any specific prayers, we understand that the intention of his conversation was towards a prayer to G-d. This is the meaning of the Medrash which states that Yehudah entered to war, to appeasement, and to prayer, even though we don't find any apparent words of prayer.  We also find the same thing with Yaakov - when he stands up against Eisav that he prepares himself (for the meeting) with presents, prayer and war as is explained by Rashi, because every act of the Avot is a sign for their children - מעשה אבות סימן לבנים, as explained by the Ramban.  In the same way,  in this week's parashah the revelation of Joseph to his brothers is a hint at the future revelation of the Jewish people as a whole. The intention of Yaakov through the present is known as the element of the שעיר המשתלח on Yom Kippur (as is mentioned in the Zohar).  Yehuda also thought that by calling Yosef his master that this would in some way appease him, and would fulfill his need for enslavement, and in his heart he intended the words for G-d that it should be a prayer.  In the Medrash Rabbah there is a discussion as to what approach Yehuda took - prayer, appeasement or war, and the opinion of Rabbi Eliezer is that it was all three of them.  That is because these elements are what is required for the future redemption, and that (according to some opinions) one of these elements would suffice to reveal a redemption through it, after all we have suffered.  This is reflected in the name of the righteous that the fight between Gog and Magog, and the killing of Moshiach ben Yosef has already occurred. Similarly, Yehuda believed that he was the final element of TIKUN and that he had accepted upon himself the pains that came before Messiah.  After he had accepted upon himself this level of servitude that he was prepared to suffer for the needs of the many, then Joseph was unable to restrain himself even one moment, because this is the moment when he had to reveal himself.  So too, it will be in the time of the time of redemption, that G-d will not restrain himself even one moment, which is the meaning of the verse אני ה' בעתה אחישנה - when the time of redemption comes quickly - it will come incredibly quickly.

Vayechi



Chapter 1

 We find in the Torah that the details of the life of Yaakov are not written clearly, but are alluded to, as is written in Megilla 17A:  Why were the years of Yishmael counted?  In order to relate the longevity of Yaakov's life - to teach us that he was blessed (by Isaac) at the age of 63, and that he was 14 years in the study halls of Shem and Ever (although this was never explicitly stated anywhere in the Torah itself).  This is true especially when he arrived in Egypt and said to Pharoah: The days of my sojourn are 130 years, and since we know that he lived 147 years old, we know from this that he was in Egypt for 17 years.  If this is the case his age is obvious, and there is no need for us to be told his final age of 147 years.  There is therefore no need to mention both his final age or his 17 years that he lived in Egypt (we could derive one from another quite simply (ed))!
The 17 years that Jacob was in Egypt revived some of those bad years which befell him.  This idea is stated (in ) that if an individual lives a good year close to his old age, it is a good sign for him, and G-d considers it as if all his days were good.  All the days of Jacob when he was in pain was not considered to be life because they were not completed in holiness (?) and only in Egypt did he merit to complete them in his holiness.  Logic would dictate that since Israel is the place of greatest holiness in the world, as G-d told Abraham to leave Aram and go to the land of Israel, and Isaac was told that he would be blessed if he lived in this land.  Jacob himself loved the land, and it would have been fitting for Jacob to complete his life in holiness in the holy land, and not in Egypt which is an impure land, and its people are more polluted than any other. 
We find that in the exile in Babylon and in the exile of the second Temple that the main expansion of the oral Torah was specifically in exile.  Specifically there the secrets of the Torah were revealed, more than was revealed while the Jews were in Israel.  It is specifically from Babylon that the people of the great assembly arose and they were able to establish the law of Arava (c.f. Sukkah 44a) We also see in Sukkah (20A) that Ezra rose from Babylon and established Torah, and thereafter Torah was forgotten.  Hillel then went and re-established it (and Hillel was also from Babylon (ed)), Rabbi Chiya and his sons (from Babylon) reconstituted the Torah.  It also states in Medrash Shir Hashirim (4:4) that the righteous after the destruction of the Temple constituted the Torah in a greater way than the righteous in their building of the Temple.
Behold, the creation of the world was with the 12 signs of the zodiac and relates to the creation of the world in space.  The 12 months form the year (SHANA) which is called a SHANA because the sun returns to its original place in the sky a second time (SHEINIS) and strengthens the world a second time.  The world in time has 12 elements.  The 12 tribes represent the soul, because they are the elements which create time and space as is mentioned in SEFER HAYETZIRA.   Everything was created with the Torah, which is G-d's tools (as is expressed in Bereishis Rabbah) and in the book of Bereishit there are 12 Parshiot... The medrash says further that G-d looked into the book of Bereishis and created the world.  this means that this whole book and its stories are part of the creation of the world which was completed with the burial of Yosef who is the righteous one - the pillar of the world.   It is also connected to the story of the last years of Yaakov, his death as well as the blessings given to the tribes of Israel.
This Parasha is closed.  Our Rabbis have explained the reasons for it, and they are all true.  There is another reason for it being closed.  The completion of Jacob's holiness is specifically in Egypt, and not in the land of Israel.  This coincides with the notion that the revelation and arrival of the Jewish People which contains the souls which were prepared for the acceptance of the Torah specifically in a foreign land and not in Israel, and that the end of the creation of the world occurs in the land of Egypt.  These concepts are closed(Satum) from human understanding.
They have said (in the beginning of Vayikra Rabbah) that the purpose of the spaces in the Torah are there in order to give Moshe pause for thought between each parashah.  When something is beyond the understanding of man it is closed.
Nonetheless, this whole parasha alludes to the fact that we should not become discouraged as we are in the in the birth pangs leading to the Messiah, and in every generation the souls become smaller, and how is it possible for us to achieve the final redemption?  The answer lies in the fact that we see what happened to the Jewish people specifically when they were in exile, and specifically in exile they arrived to the exalted levels of holiness because this is the will of G-d.   I also heard in the name of the Rebbe from Parshische of blessed memory, that even though the souls of each generation decrease. nonetheless the hole/point in our hearts becomes more holy in every generation.

Shemot



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3

ויהי בימים וגו' וירא בסבלותם: In the Medrash it is written that G-d saw that they had no rest, and Moshe went and established the Shabbat day.  This needs explanation - how is it hinted to here that Moshe established the day of rest for them?  The verse says that G-d saw their hardships, no more no less.  However, there is undoubtedly a hint towards the Shabbat day.  The idea is that in every element of the creation of the world the words וירא אלהים כי טוב are used. How is it possible for the verse to say that G-d saw - didn't he see before/during his creation of the world? However, the intention of the verse is that through G-d's vision he was able to put the light (that he had created in the first day) into them.  The only time it doesn't say כי טוב  is when G-d created darkness and תוהו ובהו on the first day, and on the second day, G-d created Gehinom according to the Talmud in Pesachim (54A).  The verse that says that G-d created evil, even though such a concept is not mentioned in the Genesis account of the creation of the world.  
This notion is applicable to the Talmud in Shabbat (149B) which states that גם ענוש לצדיק לא טוב means that the evil that occurs to the righteous is by its nature evil.  The Talmud in Sukkah (52A) states that G-d calls the evil inclination 'evil'. This is essentially all one concept because the fire of the evil inclination is the self-same fire of Gehinom, and by its very nature a lack of the label of טוב must be evil.  On the sixth day, the Torah states והנה טוב מאד.  This means that G-d saw the overall creation and provided extra good into all of it as a whole, and even the opposite of good (as defined by the darkness of day one, or the Gehinom of day two) became טוב מאד.  
This idea is mirrored by the holy Zohar which states: " That which has no light, but is taken from darkness, and lacks goodness, and is taken from evil.  However, it can become טוב מאד through the process of repentance because of love.  Those intentional negative actions become merits and this is טוב מאד. After this, perforce rest must come שבת מכל מלאכתו.  G-d rests because he finds merit in the creation of the world.  
The Talmud in Rosh Hashanah 18A states: "Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said: We, too, learn this in the Baraita: The verse states: “He who fashions their hearts alike, who considers all their deeds” (Psalms 33:15). What is this verse saying? If we say this is what it is saying: That He created everyone and unites all their hearts together, there is a difficulty since don’t we see that it is not so, as the hearts of people are not united and are not similar to one another? Rather, is this not what it is saying: The Creator sees their hearts together and considers all their deeds with a single scan." The original assumption of the Talmud is that there can only be one way of all people to have this level of unity, and that is through seeing their hearts (see above) through which he can place light in their hearts, as we see that the Jewish people all camped as one before Mount Sinai.  
 The verse (Psalms 34) states עיני ה' אל צדיקים.  The explanation of this verse means that the righteous merit to have an element of G-dliness which allows them to place spiritual light into objects.  Therefore when the Torah says that Moshe "saw" their affliction it hints to the goodness which he embedded into them, and this is the nod to the concept of Shabbat which Moshe gave to them. They merited to a level of faith which they were playing with from week to week that G-d would redeem them.
G-d himself called the Jewish people believers the son of believers  (מ"ר פ' ג) and it also states they bowed and prostrated themselves.  The Medrash says that it was in the merit of this faith that they were able to sing Shira.  The reason why the Torah tells us this is because the Jews vasilated in terms of their faith.    This idea is carried out in the Medrash which says that all the elders followed Moshe, and one dropped away, and so on until not one elder was with Moshe and Aharon.  This is because they lacked faith and were scared to enter with Moshe and Aharon, and this resulted in the cancellation of the Shabbat (which Moshe had established for them).   
This is like the pangs of the Messiah.... We can now understand Pharoah's statement:  ואל ישעו בדברי שקר.  The Medrash interprets this to mean the scrolls that they had written down the concept that they would be redeemed.  How could Pharoah call their actions a lie?  These scrolls were written down by prophetesses and were the promises written by G-d to our forefathers.  Why then would the Torah write it?  We see that lies are acceptable in the pursuit of peace, when the brothers said to Yosef after Jacob's death כה תאמרו ליוסף...etc. The only reason that the Torah writes it down is so that we can learn a dictum that lies are permissable in order to achieve peace.  How then could the Torah include Pharoah's statement if it was a lie - the scrolls spoke the truth!
According to what has been said the reason that they were using the scrolls in the first place to let them know that they would be redeemed was that they didn't have complete faith, and therefore because they didn't have complete faith, The Torah calls them (these statements of the scrolls) a lie (presumably because they didn't believe them [ed.]). The proof for this is in the fact that the elders disappeared one by one from Moshe's side.  The faith was re-ignited at the sea.  The Mechilta states that a maidservant saw on the sea what Ezekiel wasn't able to see. It was at that moment that they achieved complete faith, and this enabled them to sing shira.  This is alluded to in song of songs (4:8) תשורי מראש אמנה - I looked from the heights of Amana - the Jews merited to complete faith (EMUNA) which occurs when G-d his revealed.
In truth, every Jew believes that everything is from G-d, and he is the one who sustains (life).  Yet at the same time we don't study Torah, and we bother ourselves with the attempt to earn a living. Even though we believe that everything comes from G-d, and we should rely on the fact that there is no obstruction from G-d to save us if we do less.  The reason for this is that we don't have complete faith.  
This is the meaning of the Zohar (concerning the Mannah) where it states שטו העם ולקטו - they collected waste because they didn't have correct faith.  Definitely those who have sufficient faith would be able to achieve their sustenance with a minimum of physical input.  
This concept is also clearly stated in Shabbat (31A):When a man is judged by the heavenly court he is asked: Where your business deals are done in faith.  We also find that it states in Kidushin (40B) that a person's first judgement is towards his study of Torah (which contradicts the Talmud in Shabbat 31A).  These two ideas are actually one - business dealings are done in faith means that you had complete faith that G-d is the one who provides sustenance, and through that realisation a person will make sure that his Torah is his main focus, and spend less time on work...
We also find in Yomah (35B) that Hillel obligated the poor to study Torah.  On the Sabbath every person merits complete belief in G-d - because study of Torah is intricately connected to faith.  It is for this reason that the meals of Shabbat are called meals of faith, and every Jew receives the yoke of Torah in truth and completeness.

Vaera



Rosh Chodesh Shvat



Bo



Pidyon Haben



Beshalach



Tu BiShvat



Chapter 1

......
(a)G-d created man in such a way that he would need to eat in order to exist, and which provides spiritual sustenance, and this takes place through eating in a holy manner. When Man was first created, his food was only from the fruit of the tree, as it states in Genesis: And G-d planted a garden in the east of Eden, and he placed man there, and the planting was of trees, as the verse states :"And from all of the trees of the garden you should eat".  The ideal was that man should eat the fruit of the trees, and the animals should eat the grasses.  You should know that after man sinned, he was cursed to eat the grasses of the field.  The Talmud (Pesachim 118A) states that (when Adam heard this) his eyes were filled with tears.  He said: " Will my donkey and I eat from one trough?" G-d responded then that by the sweat of his brow he could eat bread.  At that moment, the fruits were cursed.... (b) However when the Torah was given, there was freedom from the angel of death and the evil inclination (which are one and the same thing), and its status returned to be before the sin, and the fruit were corrected to their previous status. (c) The month of Sh'vat has connotations of punishment, as there were punishments for the Egyptians through the plagues.  These punishments also caused the cure for the Jewish people, and this is the meaning of the verse "Your staff and your walking stick will comfort me" (Psalms 23), because, through the staff, we merit the walking stick which are words of Torah. (d) Adam, before he sinned, was only involved in studying Torah, because he was created with the free will only to do good.  His food was prepared for him without any effort on his behalf because the trees of the garden gave him food, and even the wheat grew on trees, as is seen in tractate Brachot (40A) where there is an opinion that the fruit of knowledge that Adam ate from was wheat.  Rashi writes that it is, for this reason, that on Shavuot we bring the 2 showbreads (made of wheat) in order that the fruits of the tree increase.  Then, the trees themselves grew loaves, as will be in the future (when the Messiah comes c.f. Shabbat 30B) and there was no need for baking and kneeding of the bread.  (e)  The Zohar states that the strength of the tree of life and the tree of knowledge spread throughout all the other fruit, and the argument is what fruit started the degradation of man.  After this degradation, when choice was given to choose good and its opposite was the commandment given to man to eat bread by "the sweat of his brow", that he would need to work hard in the ways of the land to help him choose life and goodness. (f)  The Ari of blessed memory writes that the souls of the generation which were in the generation of the flood where the same that were enslaved in Egypt.  Even the soul of Moses was part of the generation of the flood as is hinted to in the talmud (Chullin 139B) where it states that Moshe can be found in the words  בשג"ם  which adds up to the letters of Moshe's name.  This is also hinted to when the daughter of Pharoah states:"כי מן המים משיתוהו" which tells us that Moses was drawn from the waters of the flood.  This is so because from the sin of Adam there was a confusion of souls and the exile in Egypt had the purpose of separating the bad from the good and ensuring that the souls who were in the desert were rehabilitated.  (g) It is known that the sin of the generation of the flood was with desire, and the source of desire is in the heart, which is proven through the verse in Proverbs (4:23)  מכל משמר נצור לבך כי ממנו תוצאות חיים . (h) The plagues were smiting the Egyptians and healing the Jewish people, and the order of the plagues from those coming from the ground, till those (clearly coming) from G-d himself, and the plague of locusts was there to heal the Jewish people's understanding of their heart, as it says in the verse:" So you shall tell your children and your children's children how I exalted over Egypt" and this idea is again echoed in the book of Joel where it talks about the הצפוני type of locust.  The Talmud (Sukka 42A) tells us that this refers to the evil inclination which is hidden צפון in the heart of man.  (i) It is for this reason that the plague of locusts occurred in the month of Sh'vat which focuses on purifying the heart from the desires of the heart.  The צדיק only eats to satiate his soul, without any desire.  The month of Sh'vat is therefore a time to improve on the trait of eating from desire. (j) The next month is Adar, and the plague of darkness moves against mortal wisdom (undermining the truth of G-d) and that is the time of wiping out Amalek.  Amalek which is hinted at through the Moshiach the son of Yosef (the TZADDIK) because Amalek only falls through the sons of Rachel.  The month of Sh'vat is therefore a preparation for the destruction of Amalek. It is for this reason to make a feast on Purim, to eat and to drink because eating and drinking (out of desire) has already been ameliorated by the righteous who only eat to satisfy their souls. (k) There is a closeness between the two redemptions from Amalek (during Adar) and from Egypt (Pesach).  The month of Nissan hints to the Messiah from the house of David which relates to the ultimate power of G-d, and that Middah of understanding that ultimate power the Jews were redeemed from Egypt and we will be redeemed in the future. (l) Shavuot is the time of the giving of the Torah which heals the flaw of Adam who had freedom from the evil inclination, where we bring the 2 showbreads in order to bless the trees according to the opinion that the tree of knowledge was wheat, and this hints to the idea that through Torah we can heal the sin of Adam to before his fall.(m)...In Sh'vat when we heal the sin of the gluttony, is the new year for trees, and we make a blessing on the fruit to enhance them with blessing and holiness....  

Yitro



Chapter 1



Chapter 2

וישמע יתרו: the portion dealing with יתרו comes before the giving of the Torah.  There is a discussion whether יתרו's portion came before or after the giving of the Torah.  If the portion of  יתרו came before, we need to understand why the whole giving of the Torah was prefaced with the story of יתרו.  
If the reason that יתרו is mentioned is to connect it to עמלק                                         (- the reason for his coming was because he heard about the war with עמלק), then we should have mentioned יתרו at the end of the last Torah portion together with the war with עמלק.  
However the idea is that main element of the giving of the Torah comes through the love that G-d has for the Jewish people, as is expressed by the verseזכרתי לך חסד נעוריך וגו' לכתך אחרי במדבר וגו'.  The Jewish people made all the elements of this world completely redundant, and went into the desert following the word of G-d. They didn't challenge the word of Moshe- and there many pregnant, weak ladies, but they threw away all the elements of this world , and through it merited to receive the Torah.  This is reflected in the Medrash where it says that if one doesn't make oneself as ownerless as a desert he is unable to acquire Torah and wisdom. The same idea is expressed in Brachot 11A which says that one can fulfil the blessing on the Torah with אהבה רבה because in it is states that we received the Torah in His love for us, because of our trust in Him, "He taught us the laws of life".   The Jewish people did not ask how are we going to earn a livelihood, they became like gods in that they were going to live for ever.  When G-d spoke the first words of the 10 Commandments the study of Torah became thrust into their hearts, and when they heard the words  לא יהיה their evil inclinations became uprooted from within them (Shir Hashirim Rabbah).  Indeed this was the reason for the creation of man before his sin, so that he would be open only to studying Torah and serving G-d.  It was only after the sin of Adam that he had to work for a living, that he needed to create agricultural instruments, and gather your grains (as expressed in the second paragraph of the Shm'a). 
When the Torah was given, and the Jewish people had engraved in their hearts the concept of serving G-d as if it was self service.  In this way they would be open only to the service of G-d and Torah like the opinion of Rabbi Shimon Bar Yochai.
The words בלבב שלם mean that even in the recesses of his left-sided heart that holiness and Torah should reside since the evil inclination has been completely eradicated.  In that same  way, we would like to be taught and given grace - כן תחננו ותלמדנו.
Afterwards we say ותן בלבנו בינה referring to the higher level of fear - when fear is placed in the highest level of his heart, and then there is an understanding of fear of G0d. 









...This is the praise of Yisro.  He left wealth and honour, and donated his heart to go to the desert, a wasteland to hear the words of Torah.

Mishpatim



Parshat Shekalim



Rosh Chodesh Adar



Purim Katan



Rosh Chodesh Adar II



Terumah



Chapter 1

And take for Me an offering - And see the midrash [Shemot Rabbah 33:1] about the king. And the issue is that when Israel heard [the first commandment], the Torah became embedded in their hearts, and when they heard "there shall be no other" the yetzer hara was plucked out from their hearts, as the midrash says [Shir HaShirim Rabbah 1:2]. At that point, there was no distinction between their various camps, rather every camp in Israel was enveloped by the clouds of glory, and it was all called the encampment of the Shechinah since God dwells in the heart of every Israelite. Regarding this, it is said "[vayikechu li] take Me” — as it were, I am purchased together with [the Torah], just as the Zohar says "The Holy One of Blessing is called Torah, and whenever you read Torah you should read the Holy One of Blessing". And this is also in the reason given for the blessing before the Torah "when I call the Name of Ad-nai, give y'all glory" (see Brachot 21a), since Torah is called by the name Havayah since all of Torah is names of the Holy One of Blessing. And it is written "I gave y'all a good portion [lekach tov]" meaning, to each and every person in Israel, as it is written 'the inheritance of the congregation of Jacob'. ... And in the Zohar (Zohar 2:82b:8) it is written that the 613 mitzvot are a mode of counseling, giving advice on how to merit that in your heart the light of Anochi can shine, and it is this recognition is the idea of that Torah is embedded in their hearts through the word Anochi. And so the Name of the Holy One of Blessing dwells in the heart, and this is why it is written "take Me". However, after the evil inclination returned to its place, then God said, “make Me a sanctuary,” that wherever you go make Me a house where I will dwell, that there should be a singular place for the Shechinah/Divine Presence. And we have said that [God is] in the world [space], the year [time], and in the soul, all those are the place of the Sanctuary. The Shabbat, in the year, when God dwells in the heart of of Israel and the heart becomes "My Holy Mount". It is from there that God pours words of Torah in the heart of every person in Israel” and ... there is no space for the accusation of the Yetzer hara. And a Torah scholar, who deals with Torah is called as, and is similar to Shabbat … and so when we deals with Torah, the Holy One of Blessing pours words of Torah, 'the words that I put in your mouth will never leave your mouth nor the mouths of your children' [Amidah, Shabbat Minchah], and so the heart becomes 'My Holy Mount'. And these are the Sanctuary in the soul. Regarding these three it is written “Make Me a sanctuary,” since every Jewish person has a portion in it as it is constructed by Israel, since the Mikdash and the Mishkan were made by the generosity of the hearts of Israel...

Tetzaveh



Parshat Zachor



Purim



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3

In the Midrash Rabbah (Esther Rabbah 7:12) on the verse (Esther 3:8), "There is a certain people" - [Haman] said to [Ahasuerus], "Their teeth are big, as they eat and drink and say, 'Delight in Shabbat, delight in the festivals,' etc." The Holy One, blessed be He, said to him, "Evil one! You place an evil eye upon their appointed times - behold, I shall bring you down before them and add another holiday for them about your downfall, 'these are the days of Purim,' etc.": The idea is that Haman's eye was evil about this and he did not believe that any holiness could be found in the matters of bodily pleasure such as eating and drinking. For this grew out from the source of the Serpent, who seduced man with this. And there is a hint to this in the Gemara (Chullin 139b), "From where in the Torah is Haman? 'Have [you eaten] from (<i>hamin</i>) the tree' (Genesis 3:11). And that is that is written there, "eaten that which I commanded you that you should not eat from it." As this is the root of the husk of Haman, to be overwhelmed by the desire for eating for the sake of bodily pleasure, like the seductions of the Serpent. And likewise did they say (Niddah 31a) that the wicked Bilaam's eye was blinded on account of this thing. "He said (about sexual intercourse), 'Should He, who is pure and holy, and whose ministers are pure and holy, peek at this matter, etc.'" For he could not believe that holiness could be found in this matter. As it is known that that desire is also drawn from the blemish of the Serpent who cast impurity upon Chava (as it is written in Shabbat 146a). And it was about this that the Holy One, blessed be He, said to him that he would make a new holiday from his downfall. And that is as they said (Megillah 7b), "A man is obligated to become inebriated on Purim until, etc." It is specifically with drunkenness with wine, which is with lack of knowledge, that the internality of the holiness of the Jewish people is clarified. For even their eating and drinking is with holiness, based on what they said (Sanhedrin 38a), "Add more wine for the young men, so that they will say something." When the wine entered, the secret came out. And they said (Eruvin 65b), "A person is known by three things, by his cup (when he drinks), etc." That is that specifically from drunkenness, when his knowledge is taken from him, the difference between the holiness of the Jewish people and the nations is recognizable and clarified. For with the Jewish people, also in the matter of the pleasures of this world, there is holiness in its internality. And it is like they said (Megillah 12b), "The seventh day was Shabbat - when the Jewish people eat and drink, they begin with words of Torah and words of praise; but. etc." And that is that with the Jewish people, the internality of their intention, which is only for the holiness that is found in eating and drinking, is revealed specifically by eating and drinking. And through that, they begin with words of Torah, as mentioned above.

Chapter 4

<b>The matter</b> of that which they said (Megillah 6b at the end), "juxtaposing a redemption to a redemption is preferable," meaning the redemption of Egypt to the redemption of Purim: That is since the redemption of Egypt was the beginning of all miracles and the beginning of the revelation of the holiness of Israel in the world. And it was a miracle revealed to the whole world, that God, may He be blessed, chose us as a people and made open miracles which were not in the way of nature. And it was as is stated (Exodus 15:14), "Peoples heard and they trembled." The miracle of Purim, however, is called the end of all miracles (as it is said in Yoma 29b), since everything was with great concealment; and it was clothed almost as if it were the way of nature. For it was caused by that which Ahasuerus took Esther and she found favor in his eyes; it was through this that she [was able to] act and subdue Haman and raise up the Jews. And this is [the meaning of] that which they said (Chullin 139b), "From where in the Torah is Esther? 'And I will surely hide (<i>haster astir</i>)' (Deuteronomy 31:17–18)." And it is like it is found in the holy books, based on this, that the essence of the descent of a person is when it is hidden from him that he is in a state of God hiding his face. And this [is the meaning of] its being stated, "<i>haster astir</i>," that He will hide the hiddenness of His face. And that was the essence of the miracle of Purim. As they were then at the lowest level, when the Jewish people felt that they were in a state of the greatest hiddenness - as it is stated (Esther 4:3), "there was great mourning among the Jews, with fasting, weeping, and lamenting." And, as is known, the matter of mourning and lamenting indicates something that is final in a person's mind; that its hope is already lost. And it is like the matter of mourning and lamentation about a dead person, since there is no way to bring him back. But because they felt the hiddenness of God's face, the mourning flipped into a joyful day. And this is [the meaning of] that which they said (Megillah 11a), "When did all 'the ends of the earth see the salvation of our God?' In the days of Mordechai and Esther." And the intention about that which is stated (Psalms 98:3), "all the ends of the earth have seen," is not about the nations of the world. For they did not see the salvation of our God, since it was clothed and close to being the way of nature, as mentioned above. And that which it is stated (Esther 8:17), "and many of the people of the land became Jews," was only out of fear of the Jews and fear of Mordechai, since they saw that the king elevated him out of respect for Queen Esther. Rather the intention of, "all the ends of the earth have seen," is about the Jewish people, who were then at the lowest point in hiddenness, to the ends of the earth. And it is precise! Through this, they saw the salvation of our God, precisely through this hiddenness! And this matter is strongly present every year on the days of Purim. It should be made known to all the singular Jewish souls that know in the inner recesses of their heart how they are on the lowest level and feel bitter on account of this. With this itself, it becomes known and shines in his heart, that it is flipping for him from despair to joy.

Shushan Purim



Ki Tisa



Parshat Parah



Vayakhel



Pekudei



Parshat HaChodesh



Vayikra



Rosh Chodesh Nisan



Tzav



Shabbat HaGadol



Pesach



Shmini



Rosh Chodesh Iyar



Tazria



Metzora



Achrei Mot



Kedoshim



Pesach Sheni



Emor



Lag BaOmer



Chapter 1

<b>This</b> day is called the celebration (<i>hilula</i>) of Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai, because he departed on that day. However we find that we have fixed fast days on the day of the death of the righteous, such as on the 7th of Adar, the passing of our teacher Moshe, peace be upon him; and likewise Rosh Chodesh (the first day of) Av. Even though it is Rosh Chodesh, it is permissible to fast, since it was the day of Aharon the Priest's passing (as is found in Megillat Taanit and in the Tur/Shulchan Arukh, Orach Chaim 580). So why, with the passing of Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai, did they make it a holiday? However that which they fixed fast days on the days of the death of the righteous is only with the righteous whose root-source was the Written Torah. And [regarding] that which we find fasts with the death of those killed by the [Roman] empire, it is because they were killed and did not die in their beds. And our teacher, Moshe, peace be upon him, was the root-source of the Written Torah; and Rabbi Akiva was the root-source of the Oral Torah (as is found in the writings of the Ari, may his memory be blessed). And it is found in the Midrash (Bemidbar Rabbah 14), "'The masters of assemblies (<i>assifot</i>)' - when are words of Torah planted in a man? At the time when their masters are taken away (<i>ne'esafin</i>) from them. The whole time that one's master is alive, etc." And on the day that he departs, then the words of Torah are fixed in the heart of Israel, his students. And Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai was the student of Rabbi Akiva. And he said (Gittin 67a), "Study my rulings, as my rulings are the finest rulings of the finest rulings of Rabbi Akiva." And that is to say, the root-source of my studies is Rabbi Akiva. And this is on Lag BaOmer, on the counting of Majesty (<i>Hod</i>) within Majesty (according to the kabbalstic association of each day with a trait and a sub-trait). As Majesty is the trait of Aharon the priest - since the seven shepherds correspond to the seven traits (as enumerated in the Zohar Chadash, Toldot) - and he was also the root-source of the Oral Torah. For our teacher, Moshe, peace be upon him, was the root-source of the Written Torah. And Aharon was the root-source of the Oral Torah, as it is stated (Malachi 2:7), "For the lips of a priest, etc. and Torah is sought from his mouth"; and as it is stated (Exodus 4:16), "and he shall be a mouth for you." And the counting of Majesty within Majesty is the root-source of the Oral Torah, like the finest rulings of the finest rulings of Rabbi Akiva. And the day of his departing is called the celebration of Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai, since all of Israel in his generation then accepted and fixed his words of Torah into their hearts - as it is said in the Midrash, "At the time when their masters are taken away from them." And the counting of Majesty begins on the 14th of Iyar, Pesach Sheni (the second Passover). As it is found in the holy Zohar (III, 152b), "The first Pesach is from the right and the second Pesach is from the left, etc. On the right, because the Written Torah is there." And afterwards, on Lag BaOmer, which is Majesty within Majesty - it is the root-source of Aharon, who loves the creations and brings them close to Torah. And it is with Rabbi Akiva, who is the root-source of the Oral Torah, as he would expound the crowns of the letters (as it is found in Menachot 29b). And in the Midrash (Tanchuma, Chukot 8), it is found that there were things that were not revealed to Moshe that were revealed to Rabbi Akiva and his colleagues. And that is the Crown that they expounded in the Gemara (Megillah 16b:9), "'Glory' (Esther 8:16) - that is the head tefillin," which are above, like the Crown. But they could not fix the day of celebration on the day of Rabbi Akiva's passing, since he was killed. And about this, they said (Menachot 29b), "So did it come up in thought before Me." Meaning that he was from the root-source of thought. And he was called Akiva, son of Yosef, since he was like the Messiah, son of Yosef; as it is found in the Gemara (Sukkah 52a), that [this Messiah] would be killed. And it is from the secrets of the Torah that it is needed to be like this for the good of Israel. And so too was it needed with Rabbi Akiva. And that is why they fixed the celebration on the day of Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai's passing, since he was the finest rulings of the finest rulings of Rabbi Akiva. And it was from the secrets of the Torah that Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai was also born on that day, as they proved in the Gemara (Kiddushin 38a),"And from where do we [know] that Moshe was born on the seventh of Adar, etc. As the Holy One, Blessed be He, sits and completes the years of the righteous from day to day." And hence it was on this day that this soul, which was the root-source of the Oral Torah, descended. And that is why it is found in the Yerushalmi (Sanhedrin, Chapter 1), "As Rabbi Akiva said to Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai, 'It is enough for you that I and your Creator know your power.'" As no person knew his power; only the Holy One, blessed be He, and Rabbi Akiva, who was the root-source of the Oral Torah. And every year, when this day comes, every person can merit to grasp - according to his ability - the fixing of the words of Torah that descended on this day about the Oral Torah. And that is why they fixed it as a festival. 

Behar



Bechukotai



Kuntres Amalah shel Torah



Bamidbar



Rosh Chodesh Sivan



Shavuot



Chapter 1



Chapter 2


And now that the Torah has already been given, it is due to this reason that we must remain awake and occupy ourselves with the oral Torah. And it is as it is written in the holy Zohar (1:98a), "Since one must be occupied on that night with the Oral Torah, because, etc." And in another place (Introduction 14:125), it is found, "to be occupied with the Torah, from the Torah to the Prophets, from the Prophets to the Writings, from the Writings to the teachings about the verses and the secrets of wisdom, etc." And that is, that secret [<i>raz</i>] has the numerical value of light [<i>ohr</i>], as it is written in the holy Zohar (3:215a). And that which it said, "from the Torah to the Prophets, etc.," is that also in the verses in the written Torah, there is oral Torah. And it is as we said in the name of our holy rabbi from Izbiza, may the memory of the righteous be for a blessing, about that which they said (Vayikra Rabba 16:2), "Rabbi Yannai said, 'All my life I have been reading this verse, but I did not know how obvious it is until this peddler came and informed [me]'": Even though he only said the verse as it is written — the peddler nevertheless needed a correction with this, since that is why he is called a peddler [<i>rokhel</i>], like the usage of, <i>One who goes talebearing [rakhil]</i> (Proverbs 11:13). And he merited that it be clarified in this way, so he felt light and imbued the verse with a new taste [<i>taam</i>, which also means explanation]. And by way of R. Yannai hearing this verse from him, he also felt this light. And these are the explanations of the light of the Torah that is found in the words of Torah, which make one feel taste and sweetness. And this is the reason it is established that we read the order of Shavuot night [which also includes the reading of verses by themselves]. But the intention is not about only saying it, rather it is necessary that the light of the Torah be planted into the heart. And with us, all of the wisdom of the oral Torah — since it has already been written — is included in the wisdom of the aspect of the written Torah, whereas the essence is to feel the light from the words of the Torah in the heart. The Understanding [<i>Binah</i>] of the heart, that is the aspect of the oral Torah. And this is that on the night before the time of the giving of the Torah each year, a person may merit this, that the words of the Torah be planted into the heart, just like the Jewish people merited then on the night before the giving of the Torah. And because of this, we need to stay awake and be occupied with the Oral Torah. And this is [the meaning of] that which it says in the holy Zohar (Emor 35:171), " What did his mother do that night? She went into the storeroom and brought out a noble crown set with 70 precious stones, etc." And that is <i>with the crown with which his mother crowned him</i> (Song of Songs 3:9). And his mother is the Congregation of Israel, according to that which is said in the midrash (Shir HaShirim Rabbah 3:11:2), "He did not stop loving them until he called them My mother [<i>imi</i>], as it is stated, <i>Heed Me My people, listen to Me My nation [uleumi]</i> (Isaiah 51:4), My mother [ulimi] is written. For the congregation of Israel is called Mother. And that which is written in the Zohar, "the supernal Mother," is the supernal divine presence, Understanding. And that is as it is written, <i>Then you will understand the fear of the Lord</i> (Proverbs 2:5), since the fear entered the depths of the heart. And then God, may He be blessed, called the Jewish people, My Mother, with the crown with which his Mother crowned him, and that is the Congregation of Israel. And here it also said that the crown was with the number of the 70 precious stones, and that is according to the number of the Children of Israel [when they entered Egypt]. And that number is from the powers of the soul, which are 70, as the ancients wrote, and they are the precious stones. And that is according to that which they said in the holy Zohar (Emor 21:91-92), "This secret is that at first, it is, <i>and I will be sanctified amongst the Children of Israel</i>; and afterward, <i>I am the Lord who sanctifies you</i> (Leviticus 22:32)" — since afterward, He crowns the Jewish people with seventy crowns, and as it was on the night before the giving of the Torah. And this is what is written in the holy Zohar (in the Introduction 14:26), "Rabbi Shimon said, 'My sons... shall have their names recorded in the Book of Remembrance, and the Holy One, blessed be He, shall bless them with seventy blessings and adornments of crowns of the supernal world.'" As the original light that was hidden for the righteous in the future to come is in the oral Torah, as it is written in Sefer HaBahir. And so is it written (Tanchuma, Noach 3) that the Holy One, blessed be He, hid it away for those who toil with the oral Torah. It is the dew of the Ancient One, let my saying drip like dew [alluding to Deuteronomy 32:2]. And there are 70 faces to the Torah in the oral Torah, and these are the 70 blessings and the 70 crowns of the supernal world. Be exact, the dew of the Ancient One. And it said afterward in the Raiya Mehemna (Zohar Chadash 98b) [Zohar, Emor 35:172], "Afterwards she went into the house of the bride, etc. she said to them, 'I have prepared a bathhouse, etc.'" Immersing in water is hinting to Torah — there is no water besides Torah (Bava Kamma 17a). And that is the Oral Torah, the aspect of fear, and the fear of the Lord is pure, and it purifies [alluding to Psalms 19:10], that it shall last forever. And it is as it says in the holy Zohar (Kedoshim 3:11), "Since you will find purification in Torah, etc.; as it is always found in that purification, and it does not move away from it." And every year when that night before the giving of the Torah arrives, we can merit to that fear and oral Torah, to sense the light in the words of Torah. And that is why we must remain awake and be occupied with the oral Torah, so that it brings [its] light and sweetness into the heart. 

Nasso



Beha'alotcha



Sh'lach



Rosh Chodesh Tammuz



Korach



Chukat



Balak



Pinchas



Matot



Masei



Rosh Chodesh Av



Devarim



Vaetchanan



The Fifteenth of Av



Chapter 1

<b>In the Mishnah (Taanit 4:8):</b> Rabbi Shimon ben Gamliel said, "There were never such [joyous] holidays for Israel as the fifteenth of Av, etc." And afterward in the Gemara, they gave reasons for this, why there were not [other] holidays like this. But where do we find a hint in the Torah about this, that the fifteenth of Av is called a holiday? And it appears to me that it is from that which it is stated (Judges 21:19-21), "Behold, there is the festival of the Lord from year to year in Shilo, etc. behold, if the daughters of Shilo come out to dance in the dances, etc." And it does not specify which festival was from year to year. But the Radak (R. David Kimchi) explains it to be about Youm Kippur, about which the mishnah mentions, "And the daughters of Jerusalem went out and danced in the vineyards." But where have we have found that Yom Kippur is called a festival? Rather it is only called a holy convocation. As only the three pilgrimage festivals - the festival of matzot, etc - are called a festival (<i>chag</i>). As <i>chag</i> is always a term of joy. For that is why in the language of the Sages, may their memory be blessed, [the word,] <i>chag</i> by itself [always refers to] the festival of Sukkot; since it is the time of our joy. And it is like they said (Chagigah 10b), "<i>chogu chaga</i>" - which Rashi explains, "to increase joy." And that which Tosafot said - that "some say that it is a term of dancing, as in, 'they reeled (<i>yachogu</i>) and moved like a drunkard'" (Psalms 107:27) - also there is it a term of joy, since the heart of a drunkard is merry on account of the wine. And so is it written (1 Samuel 30:16), "eating, drinking and celebrating (<i>chogegim</i>) with all the spoils." That [means] that they were rejoicing with the spoils by way of eating and drinking, and dancing was also included. So it is distant to say that it is hinting to Yom Kippur. Hence it appears that the intention of "the festival of the Lord in Shilo, etc." is about the fifteenth of Av. For none of the festivals are called the festival of the Lord. And even [about] Sukkot, which is the time of our joy and on which the commandment of joy is explicit - it is written (Deuteronomy 16:14), "And you shall rejoice in your holiday." [Hence it embodies] the joy of Israel, in commemoration of the exodus from Egypt. And we have only found Aharon saying, about the seventeenth of Tammuz, "It shall be a festival for the Lord tomorrow" (Exodus 32:5). For the forty first days - upon which our teacher Moshe, peace be upon him, was on the mountain - ended then; and he said that he would descend from the mountain then with the two tablets in his hands. So were it not for the debacle (the golden calf), it would have then been the festival of the Lord. For 'the day of the joy of His heart' of the Holy One, blessed be He, was supposed to be then, like at the giving of the Torah. And it is like it was stated in Egypt (Exodus 5:1), "Send My people, so they may celebrate a festival (<i>veyachogu</i>) to Me in the desert." Yet we did not find that the Israelites made a festival in the desert. And if it is about the three pilgrim festivals that they observed - had they not already observed the festival of matzot in Egypt as well? Rather the intended content of, "so they may celebrate a festival to Me in the desert," is about the giving of the Torah (the tablets). And if there had not been the debacle with the calf and the tablets had not been broken, the seventeenth of Tammuz would have then been the festival of the Lord - for it is 'the day of the joy of His heart.' For then, what our Sages, may their memory be blessed, expounded about the verse, "engraved (<i>charut</i>) upon the tablets" (Exodus 32:16), [that the Torah would bring about] freedom (<i>cheirut</i>) from the angel of death and from the subjugation of the nations and that the words of the Torah would be inscribed into the heart of the Israelites, would have then come to pass. However after the debacle, [the less potent section of] the verse, "on the day of his wedding," was expounded about Yom Kippur - since it is the day upon which the second tablets were given. As there was not so much freedom or inscription upon the heart with the second tablets. So, "and upon the day of the joy of his heart," was [resultantly] only expounded about the building of the Temple - may it be built speedily in our days. As only then will everything be fixed. 



And that is the idea of Tu b'Av at this time. As in the Mishnah (Ta'anit 4:8), it is only found, "There were no days as joyous for the Jewish people as the fifteenth of Av, etc.," which is only during the time of the Temple. And likewise, everything that is stated, "the daughters of Jerusalem would go out, etc., was at the time of the Temple, and it is as it is stated in the Gemara, "the daughter of the king, etc." However, they said six reasons [for it] in the Gemara, although five of the reasons were only at the time of the Temple, there is one reason — that it was the day that those killed in Beitar were permitted to be buried — that was after the destruction [of the Temple]. And Beitar was the kindgom of Ben Koziva. As it is found (Gittin 55b:16), "Jerusalem was destroyed on account of Kamtza and bar Kamtza. The King’s Mountain was destroyed on account of a rooster and a hen. Beitar was destroyed on account of a shaft from a chariot." And the idea of these three destructions is that they correspond to the three bad traits, jealousy, lust, and [the pursuit of] honor, which are the roots of the three [cardinal] sins, idolatry, sexual immorality and the spilling of blood. And that is [the meaning of], "Jerusalem was destroyed on account of Kamtza and bar Kamtza." Meaning, for the sin of baseless hatred, which is the trait of jealousy, and the spilling of blood, which is the husk of Esau — killing. And because of that, the destruction of the Second Temple was through Edom. For whenever there is an accusation against the Jewish people for a certain trait, the nation that has a husk like that trait will then rule over them. For they [then] have a claim that there is something similar to their trait also in the Jewish people. And the destruction of the Second Temple was because of senseless hatred, as they have said (Yoma 9b). "The King’s Mountain was destroyed on account of a rooster and a hen," was through the trait of lust. For it is found there in the Gemara (Gittin 57a:11) that there was wonderous propagation [there]: Six hundred thousand cities and each of them had a population as great as the number of those who left Egypt, except for three of those cities, the population of which was double the number of those who left Egypt. And at first, the intention of this was for the sake of the Heavens. So they would take out a rooster and a hen, as if to say, "Be fruitful and multiply like chickens." For the propagation of the species is [noticeable] with them. For we find [the related comparison] (Berakhot 22a), "that Torah scholars, etc. should not be like roosters." And their intention with this was for the sake of the Heavens, to be fruitful and multiply, etc. But afterward, there was an accusation against them that it [had become] only for the sake of lust. And that is why it was destroyed. And "Beitar was destroyed on account of a shaft from a chariot." That was from the trait of pride and honor, as it is said that when a baby was born, they would plant a cedar. And that indicates pride and honor, as they said (Midrash Tachuma, Chukat 6:1), "Because he raised himself up like a cedar, he was struck with <i>tzara'at</i>, etc." And it is found in the Gemara (Shabbat 139a:7), "If the arrogant will cease, the Persian fire priests will cease, as it is written: <i>And I will purge away your dross [sigayikh] as with lye</i>." And Rashi explains, "<i>Sigayikh</i> are the arrogant ones. It is an expression [like], 'very haughty [<i>yisga</i>].'" It is true that we find in the verse, <i>The righteous shall flourish [yisgeh] like a date-palm</i> (Psalms 92:13). Yet there is good pride as well, as it is stated about Jehoshaphat: <i>His heart was elevated in the ways of the Lord</i> (II Chronicles 17:6). [Still,] it corresponds to the husk of Amalek, which sends sadness and coldness to people, as it is written: <i>Who appeared [karcha] to you on the way</i> (Deuteronomy 25:18). And they expounded [relating to <i>kar</i>, which means cold], "he cooled you down and made you lukewarm." And it is found (in Temurah 16a), "<i>That it may not pain me [aatzvi]</i> (I Chronicles 4:10) — that the evil inclination should not grow stronger and prevent me from studying Torah." And he called it <i>aatzvi</i> [which can also mean my sadness] since the evil inclination sends sadness and lowliness to a person by its seductions that his learning is not considered anything. And that is why there is a need for pride, that he knows that through his Torah [study] and his service, strength is, as it were, added to the celestial retinue. For it is stated: <i>Give might to God</i> (Psalms 68:35). And, God forbid, likewise is it, as it were, the opposite. For it is written, <i>The Rock of your birth you weakened</i> (Deuteronomy 32:18). And that is the pride that is for the sake of the Heavens, as it stated: <i>His heart was elevated in the ways of the Lord</i>. And also in Beitar was this for the sake of the Heavens, to use pride for service to God, may He be blessed. But afterward, when there was an accusation that they took pride for matters of this world, like the nations of the world, the cedar was cut down. And this is [the meaning of, with] a shaft from a chariot, which is the pride of the nations of the world with a chariot and greatness, was Beitar destroyed. But the day that they allowed those killed in Beitar to be buried indicates a rectification of this corruption. For it is found (in Sanhedrin 46b), "Burial is on account of disgrace." And likewise did we find it in Scripture: <i>they shall not be gathered for burial; they shall become dung upon the face of the earth</i> (Jeremiah 8:2), which is a disgrace. And when they were allowed to be buried, that is when it became possible to rectify this corruption. And they saw this through the miracle, which was that they did not rot with the passages of time, since they were flung [on the field] without burial. And it is about this that they ordained the blessing of the Good, and the One who does good. And that is like that which they said (Pesachim 50a), "In the world to come, it will allways be [appropriate to say] the Good and the One who does good. For they will then see that it was all for the good. And so did they see there, from that which they did not rot, which is by way of a miracle, that God, may He be blessed, did not want to disgrace them. However, it was in order to rectify what they distorted with the trait of pride. So they were allowed to be buried afterward. And that is why they ordained this blessing in the grace after the meal: since pride comes from overeating, as it is stated: <i>Lest you eat and be sated, etc. And your heart be lifted, etc.</i> (Deuteronomy 8:12-14).

Eikev



Re'eh



Rosh Chodesh Elul



Shoftim



Ki Teitzei



Ki Tavo



Nitzavim



Rosh Hashanah



Vayeilech and Shabbat Shuvah



Erev Yom Kippur



Motzei Yom Kippur



Ha'Azinu



Sukkot



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29



Chapter 30



Chapter 31



Chapter 32



Chapter 33



Chapter 34

The idea of the blessings for rain on this day is that rain is the infusion of life to the creatures. And on this day, after Yom Kippur and the festival of Sukkot, a new life is brought into the heart of Jewish souls, to absorb the seven traits of holiness into the heart, by way of the renewal of acceptance of the words of Torah into the heart. And this is the idea of the rainfall on this day – the infusion of a drop of life into the heart. And the sages, may their memory be blessed, hinted to this (in Taanit 7a): Great is the day of rainfall (as it is [explained] in the holy book, Avodat HaKodesh). And it can be said that the sages, may their memory be blessed, hinted to this [by mentioning], "The day of rainfall is as great," seven times, which corresponds to the seven traits of holiness that are infused with new life into the heart of Jewish souls. The first, "The day of rainfall is as great as the revival of  the dead," corresponds to the trait of Kindness to Abraham. As the revival of the dead comes from the aspect of great kindnesses. And that is why we read about Ezekiel's [revival of the] dead on Passover, which is from the aspect of the trait of Kindness. As the revival of the deal will be on Passover, through the trait of Kindness. And there is [also] an opinion that, "The day of rainfall is greater than the revival of the dead. As regarding the revival of the dead, etc." For the revival of the dead is the renewal of life to the body after it has died, and that is not such a great novelty, since the dead are free from the commandments and do not have any choice. Whereas the day of rainfall is the infusion of holiness also to the wicked, who are called dead [even] when they are alive, and such a one is still resolved in his choice to do evil. And nevertheless, God, may He be blessed, sprinkles upon him a drop of the life of the renewal of holiness. [Hence] that is a greater novelty than the renewal of the bodily dead. And the second, "The day of rainfall is as great as the day on which the Torah was given," corresponds to the trait of Strength [<i>Gevurah</i>] in holiness, since the Torah came out from Strength. And there is also an opinion about this, that it is [greater] than the day on which the Torah was given. As [regarding] the idea of the giving of the Torah that was on the holiday of Shavuot, the words of the Torah were not absorbed into the heart of the receiver. Rather, it was only on account of the preparation of, "we shall do and we shall hear, that they merited the giving of the Torah – meaning the giving from the side of the Giver. Moreover, it did not exist in the heart, as it did at first, until after Yom Kippur, when the second tablets were given. But after the festival of Sukkot, they merit on this day the receiving the words of Torah that will be absorbed into the heart, to exist there. And that is why it is greater than the day on which the Torah was given. And the third, "The day of rainfall is as great as the day on which the heavens and the earth were created," corresponds to the trait of our father, Jacob, peace be upon him, who subsumes all the souls of the Jewish people, so that no one be pushed away (alluding to II Samuel 14:14). Even if his actions were very corrupted, God, may He be blessed, creates [such an evil person] as a new creature, like the creation of the heavens and the earth, which was a creation ex nihilo (out of nothing). For nothing is the source of creation, which is the skull of the tefillin, and that is where the connection of the Jewish people and the root, which is the aspect of Jacob, extends. As it is written in the tefillin of the Master of the world: <i>And who is like you, Israel, a singular nation on the earth</i> (II Samuel 7:23, cited in Berakhot 6a). And this is what King David, peace be upon him, prayed: <i>Create a pure heart for me, God, and renew a correct spirit within me</i> (Psalms 51:12). It implies that it was impure (Sotah 52a). And this was after the event that occurred to him [with Batsheva], as his heart was not as open inside him as he had thought. And so, he requested from God, may He be blessed, that he should create a new heart and a correct spirit for him. And that is the aspect of Shemini Atzeret, the day of rain, as mentioned earlier. And the fourth is, "Great is the day of rainfall, as even salvation is fruitful and multiplies upon it." For this corresponds to the aspect of Moses, who was the first for redemption and salvation. And the three traits of the holy forefathers correspond to the body and the two forearms. But the traits of Eternality and Majesty, which are the traits of Moses and Aaron, are the extension of the body towards salvation and blessing, that they should be fruitful and multiply. And likewise, the fifth, which corresponds to the aspect of Aaron, is "Great is the day of rainfall, as even a small coin in the purse is blessed upon it," meaning the extension of blessing to all things, such that even a coin is blessed, which is something that is not the natural way. And that is the aspect of Aaron, as it is stated: <i>the beard of Aaron that descends upon his robes. It is like the dew of Hermon</i> (Psalms 133:2-3), for God commanded the blessing of life there forever. And the sixth, "The day of rainfall is as great as the day of the gathering of the exiles," corresponds to the aspect of the Foundation [<i>Yesod</i>] of holiness which gathers together those pushed away in the four corners of the world, meaning the holy sparks that have been scattered. And that is the idea of the gathering of the exiles, as is known from the blessing, "Blow the shofar and gather us from the four corners of the earth." And the seventh, "Great is the day of rainfall, as even the marauding troops cease on it," corresponds to the aspect of Kinghood in holiness. As it is known that Her feet go down to death (an allusion to Proverbs 43:5, which is a reference to the mystical attraction of evil forces to the lower sefirot). Hence it sometimes occurs that marauding troops grab from, plunder, and ransack holiness without knowledge or intent, like the matter which occurred with the righteous Joseph. Even though he withstood the test, he was plundered without his knowledge. And this is what a day of rainfall does, ascertaining that nothing be plundered from holiness without intent, God forbid. But behold, in the [section of] Talmud mentioned earlier, there is also [mention of], "Rainfall is only withheld on account of, etc.," seven times. And it is truly incomprehensible. As the seventh is, "Rainfall is only withheld on account of those who promise charity in public but do not give it." And the wording's implication is that if all of the other sins besides this existed among the Jewish people, [even] all of the six stated before this, they would not cause it to be withdrawn until there would be this small failure of those that promise charity in public. Yet this alone would cause the rainfall to be withdrawn. However, in all seven, it says, "the rainfall is only withdrawn on account of, etc.," which implies that this one sin, and none of the other sins, also causes the withdrawal of the rainfall. So [these statements] appear to contradict one another. However, the idea is that God's governing the world, may He be blessed, is through seven holy traits; and there are set times when it is governed specifically with a given trait, with Kindness or with Mercy, as is known to those who know the hidden wisdom. And that is why, "Rainfall is only withheld," is also mentioned seven times. It is corresponding to failures in the aspects of the seven holy traits. And at each time or instant that God, may He be blessed, is with one specific trait, all of the sins of the other traits do not cause the rain to be withheld except for the sin of a behavior of the trait of this period of time. Hence the first, "Rainfall is only withheld," is "if [the Jewish people] have been sentenced to destruction," since it corresponds to the aspect of Kindness, which is the idea of the spreading of good without limit, to the bad and to the good. And at the time when God, may He be blessed, is governing His world with this trait, all the other sins will not be effective in having the rains withdrawn unless the whole generation has been sentenced to destruction, God forbid. And with this, there is also an injury to the governance of the larger aspect of Kindness. And likewise the second, "Rainfall is only withheld," is "because of the nullification of the priestly tithes and the tithes," which is a matter of poetic justice. It is like their statement, may their memory be blessed, about the verse: <i>And each shall retain his sacred donations</i> (Numbers 5:10) — anyone who does not tithe his fruits and his produce, his field will not, etc." And that corresponds to the aspect of Strength in holiness. So He circumscribed His governance by way of poetic justice. And when at that time God, may He blessed, is governing with the trait of Strength, no other sin makes an impact besides the one that corresponds to that trait. You can likewise learn about all of them in this way. But behold there are two other [related] statements in the Gemara: "Rain falls only if the Jewish people’s transgressions have been forgiven." And after that, "Rain falls only due to faithful people, as it is stated: <i>Truth springs out of the earth, and righteousness has looked down from heaven</i> (Psalms 85:12)." And it is a hint to our words mentioned above, that the idea of rainfall hints to the infusion of the renewal of life in the words of Torah, to be absorbed into the heart on Shemini Atzeret day. And that is specifically after Yom Kippur, since the iniquities of the Jewish people have already been forgiven; meaning, after all the blemishes of the souls of the Jewish people have been rectified from [their] past. And after that, on the seven days of the festival of Sukkot, faith is internalized in the souls of the Jewish people for the future, to trust in Him, may He blessed. And that is on account of the commandment of the sukkah (booth), since [that involves] sitting under the shadow of faith. So with this, they merit that the renewal of the life of the holy is absorbed on Shemini Atzeret. And that is the blessing of rain of Shemini Atzeret, as mentioned above. And that is [the meaning of], "Rain falls only if the Jewish people’s transgressions have been forgiven," on Yom Kippur; and "only due to faithful people" — by way of the holiness of the festival of Sukkot. They then come to the holiness of Shemini Atzeret day.