Mishneh Torah, Sabbatical Year and the Jubilee
משנה תורה, הלכות שמיטה ויובל
Maimonides' Mishneh Torah, edited by Philip Birnbaum, New York, 1967
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH002108864

Mishneh Torah, Sabbatical Year and the Jubilee



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8

In a like manner, as it is forbidden to till the soil in the seventh year, so is it forbidden to encourage Jewish persons who cultivate it, or to sell them working tools, because help must not be given to those who commit a transgression.
A craftsman may not sell the following tools in the seventh year to one who is suspected of ignoring the laws of the sabbatical year: a plough and all its accessories, a yoke, a winnowing fan, or a pick. This is the general rule: any tool used exclusively for the kind of work which is forbidden in the seventh year must not be sold to a suspected transgressor.— —





Non-Jews, however, may be encouraged in the seventh year with words alone. If, for example, one sees a non-Jew plowing or sowing, he should greet him with such expressions as: "Be of good courage!" or "Good luck!" For, they are not under the obligation of observing the sabbatical of the land. Nevertheless, one should not help them manually.— —

Chapter 9

It is a biblical positive command to cancel a cash debt in the sabbatical year, as it is written: "Every creditor shall remit the due that he claims from his neighbor" (Deuteronomy 15:2). If a man claims a debt which has remained over the sabbatical year, he breaks a prohibitive command, as it is written: "He shall not exact it of his neighbor, his brother" (2).
The law concerning remission of funds is biblically applicable only at a time when the jubilee is observed, involving the remission of landed property, inasmuch as land then returns to its original owner without payment. This rule is based on tradition. The sages have declared: At a time when you remit landed property you must remit funds at any place, whether in Eretz Yisrael or in the Diaspora; and when remission of land no longer exists, you are not required to remit funds in the seventh year, even in Eretz Yisrael (Mo'ed Katan 2b).












If one delivered his bonds to the court and said to them: "You will collect this debt for me," it is not canceled, as it is written: "You must remit whatever is due you from your brother" (Deuteronomy 15:3), and in this case it is the court that exacts payment from him.— —
When Hillel the Elder saw that the people refrained from giving loans one to another and transgressed what is written in the Torah: "Beware lest you harbor the base thought…" (9), he ordained a <i>prozbul</i> whereby a loan is secured and not cancelled, so that the people might extend loans mutually. The <i>prozbul</i> is effective only in regard to remission of cash debts at the present time, being applicable on rabbinic grounds; the biblical remission, however, cannot be counteracted by the <i>prozbul</i> at all.

This is the formula of the <i>prozbul:</i> "I inform you, judges so-and-so in such-and-such locality, that I will collect any debt due to me whenever I please." And the judges, or witnesses, sign below.

Chapter 10

It is a biblical positive command to count off seven times seven years and to consecrate the fiftieth year, as it is written: "You shall count seven weeks of years … and you shall hallow the fiftieth year" (Leviticus 25:8-10). These two precepts are within the power of the supreme court alone.
When did they begin to count the jubilees? Fourteen years after they had entered Eretz Yisrael.— — Hence you may say [that they began to count] in the year two thousand five hundred and three after the Creation, from the new year following the birth of the first man, being the second year of Creation.— —
The Israelites counted seventeen jubilees from the time they entered the land until they left. The year in which they left, when the First Temple was destroyed, happened to be the year following the sabbatical year and the thirty-sixth year of the jubilee, since the First Temple lasted four hundred and ten years. As soon as the Temple was destroyed, this counting ceased. When it ceased, the land remained desolate for seventy years, and then the Second Temple was built. It lasted four hundred and twenty years. Ezra came up [from Babylonia to Judea] in the seventh year of its erection. This was the second coming [to the land]. From that year on, they began to use a different counting. They made the thirteenth year of the construction of the Second Temple to serve as <i>shemittah</i> (year of release), and counted seven <i>shemittoth</i> and hallowed the fiftieth year. Although no jubilee was observed during the period of the Second Temple, they counted its years in conjunction with the <i>shemittoth</i> which they did hallow.
Hence you may infer that the year in which the last Temple was destroyed, beginning with <i>Tishri</i> or two months following the destruction, since the count of <i>shemittoth</i> and jubilees is from <i>Tishri</i>, was the year after the sabbatical year and the fifteenth year of the ninth jubilee. According to this computation, the present year, the year one thousand one hundred and seven since the destruction, which is the year one thousand four hundred and eighty-seven of the Seleucidan Era, used in dating documents, which is four thousand nine hundred and thirty-six since the Creation, is a sabbarical year and the twenty-first year of jubilee.









From <i>Rosh Hashanah</i> until <i>Yom Kippur</i>, the slaves [who were to be freed on the occasion of the jubilee year] neither left for their homes nor were they still subjected to their masters, nor were the fields restored to their original owners. The slaves would eat and drink and rejoice as they were wearing wreaths on their heads. As soon as <i>Yom Kippur</i> arrived, the court sounded the <i>shofar</i>. Thereupon the slaves left for their homes and the fields returned to their original owners.

The sabbatical year surpassed the jubilee year in that it cancelled cash debts while the jubilee did not. On the other hand, the jubilee year surpassed the sabbatical year in that it freed the slaves and cancelled land purchases.— — The jubilee cancelled land purchases at its very beginning, while the sabbatical year cancelled cash debts only at its conclusion, as we have explained.

Chapter 11

Any part of Eretz Yisrael, which had been divided among the tribes could not be sold in perpetuity, as it is written: "The land must not be sold beyond reclaim" (Leviticus 25:23). If anyone sold it in perpetuity, both seller and purchaser broke a prohibitive command; their actions were of no avail; the land had to revert to its original owner in the jubilee year.
If, however, a man sold his field for the duration of sixty years, it did not revert in the year of jubilee: only what was sold without specification, or what was sold in perpetuity, reverted in the year of jubilee.
One must not sell his house or his hereditary field, even though they will revert after some time, unless he has become poor, as it is written: "When your brother is reduced to poverty and has to sell part of his property" (25). But one is not permitted to sell it and put the money into his pocket or into business, or spend it on furniture, slaves and cattle; he may sell it only for food provisions. Nevertheless, if he sold it at any rate, the sale is valid.

Chapter 12

If a man sold a house within a walled city, he may redeem it at any time he pleases within the twelve months of the sale, even on the day he made the sale. If he desires to redeem it, he must repay the entire price he took and cannot deduct anything at the expense of the purchaser.





If the day ending the twelve-month period arrived and the purchaser was not available to redeem from him, the man may deposit his money at the court, break the door and enter his house; and when the purchaser arrives, he can appear at the court and collect his money.

If anyone sold a house in a walled city and jubilee arrived within the year of the sale, it does not revert because of the jubilee, but remains with the purchaser until the seller is willing to redeem it throughout the year of the sale; or else, it is sold irredeemably if the year is completed.
If anyone sold a house in a village, or in a city that is not adequately encircled by a wall, it is redeemable by the legal right applied to the sale of fields, and of houses within a walled city. If, for example, the seller wished to redeem it immediately, he can do so in accord with the law governing the sale of houses. If twelve months passed and he failed to redeem it, he can do so until the year of jubilee, in accord with the law governing the sale of fields.




Only an encircling wall existing at the time of the conquest of Eretz Yisrael is to be relied upon [in connection with the law of redemption]. If, for example, a city that was unwalled at the time Joshua conquered the land is walled at present, it is nevertheless counted as a village as to the sale of its houses. On the other hand, a city that was walled in the time of Joshua, even though it is not walled at present, has the legal status of a walled city. When the people were exiled after the destruction of the First Temple, the sanctity of the walled towns during the period of Joshua ceased to exist. But as soon as Ezra came up with the second migration, all the walled towns of that time were consecrated, because their arrival at the time of Ezra, called the second arrival, was comparable to that of the time of Joshua: on both historic occasions, they began counting <i>shemittoth</i> and jubilees, having consecrated the walled towns and obligated themselves to observe the laws of tithing.
So too, in the future, during the third coming of Israel: when they will enter the land, they will begin counting the <i>shemittoth</i> and the jubilees; they will consecrate the houses of the walled cities, and every place they will occupy will be required to maintain the system of tithing.— —

Chapter 13

Although the tribe of Levi was not allotted a share in the land, the Israelites had already been commanded to assign to them special towns to dwell in, and pasture lands surrounding them. Those towns included the six cities of refuge as well as forty-two additional localities.— —










Why were the Levites not allotted land in Eretz Yisrael or a share in its booty along with their brethren? Because they were singled out to serve the Lord and minister to him, to teach his upright ways and just laws to many people, as it is written: "They shall teach thy laws to Jacob, and thy instruction to Israel" (Deuteronomy 33:10). For this reason, they were separated from worldly affairs: they fought no battles like the rest of Israel; they inherited no land; they won nothing by means of their physical ability. They are indeed the Lord's army, as it is written: "Bless, O Lord, his substance" (11). He, blessed be he, has won them for himself, as it is written: "I am your portion and your share" (Numbers 18:20).
Not only the tribe of Levi, but each well-informed thinking person whose spirit moves him to devote himself to the service of the Lord, to know the Lord, and has walked uprightly after casting off his neck the yoke of many a cunning wile that men contrived, is indeed divinely consecrated, and the Lord will forever and ever be his portion. God will provide sufficiently for his needs, as he did for the priests and the Levites. David, may he rest in peace, declared: "The Lord is my allotted portion and my cup; thou holdest my lot" (Psalm 16:5).