Mishneh Torah, Sabbatical Year and the Jubilee
משנה תורה, הלכות שמיטה ויובל
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Mishneh Torah, Sabbatical Year and the Jubilee



Chapter 1

It is a positive commandment to refrain from working the land and caring for trees in the seventh year, as it says, "and the land shall rest a Sabbath for the Lord" (Leviticus 25:2), and it says "in plowing and in harvesting you shall rest" (Exodus 34:21).  Anyone who performs one of the forbidden labors from the working of the land or caring for trees in this year has abrogated a positive commandment and transgressed a negative commandment, as it says, "you shall not plant your field, nor shall you prune your vineyard" (Leviticus 25:4).

Chapter 2

A man may not remove the manure from his courtyard and place it into his field on the seventh year, because it appears like he is fertilizing his field so that it be proper for sowing. But if he removed it and stood it into a dungpile, it is permissible. And he should not make a dungpile in his field until the time passes, in which we fertilize with it for the work on the land. And that is from when the "sweet matter," gets knotty. One may not make a dungpile that is less than one hundred and fifty <i>seah</i> of manure, so that it will be noticeable that it is a dungpile. If he [already] had a little bit, he may add continuously. And one may not make more than three dungpiles in any <i>beit seah</i>.

Chapter 3

Working of the land in the sixth year (of the Sabbatical cycle) is forbidden 30 days in advance of the seventh year, as an oral law given to Moses at Sinai, because he prepares it (for planting) in the Sabbatical year.  By tradition, this labor is forbidden when the Temple is in existence, but the Rabbis legislated additional restriction, that people should not plow orchards in the eve of Sabbatical year during Temple times except until Shavuot, and grain fields only until Passover. When there is no Temple, it is permitted to work the land until New Year as in the law of the [written] Torah.
What defines an orchard? Three trees in a beit seah (plot of land 50 x 50 cubits), whether a non-fruit-bearing tree or a fruit bearing tree.  Even if they belong to three different people, we view them as if they are fig trees.  If they (fig trees of similar size or maturity) would be capable of producing a dried fig cake weighing sixty talents, it is permitted to plow the entire beit seah for them (the trees), as long as the distance between each tree is sufficient for the ox with its utensils (yoke) to pass [between the trees].

Chapter 4
























It is a positive commandment to annul [ownership of] everything that comes out of the ground in the seventh year as it says "and in the seventh [year], annul it and forsake it" and anyone who locks up his vineyard or fences in his field in the seventh year has violated a positive commandment, and similarly someone who harvest all his fruits and brings them inside. Rather everything should be seen as ownerless and everyone has equal claim as it says " and the destitute of your people will eat it." [The owner] may bring in small amounts the way one does from ownerless property e.g. five pitchers of oil or fifteen of wine and if he brought in more it is permitted.

Chapter 5



Chapter 6

One does not sell goods of the fruit of the seventh year.  If one wants to sell a small amount from the fruit of the seventh year, one may sell.  And the same money he receives, this is like the produce of the seventh year. And he can take from it food and  eat with the sanctity of the seventh year.  And the same produce that was sold still has the holiness it has previously.

Chapter 7

The produce of the seventh year can only be eaten as long as that species is still growing in the field, as it is said (Leviticus 25:7) "Your cattle and the beasts in your land may eat all its yield." [We understand this to mean that] for as long as beasts are eating this species in the field, you may eat whatever is stored at home. When it is no longer in the field, this species must be destroyed at home - this is known as <i>bi'ur shevi'it</i>.
How so? If, for example, one has dried figs from the seventh year at home, they me be eaten for as long figs grow on the trees in the field. When there are no longer figs in the field, those at home may not be eaten and must be destroyed.
If one has a lot of fruit that needs to be destroyed, it should be distributed in the community, in the quantity of three meals at a time. After the time of destruction, it may not be eaten, neither by rich nor poor. If one could not find anybody to distribute it to at the time of destruction, it should be burned in a fire or thrown into the Dead Sea or destroyed in any way possible.
If one has raisins left over from Shemitah, and, there were no longer any grapes in the fields,  gardens, and orchards that are hefker, even if there remain grapes on the vines in the courtyards, one may not eat the raisins given the grapes in the courtyard, because they are not accessible to (street) animals. If, however, there are firm grapes that do not mature until year's close [i.e. still growing], one can eat the raisins  because of those. Similar laws apply similarly.

Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13

