Likutei Tefilot
ליקוטי תפילות
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Likutei Tefilot

Introduction

Our Rabbi, may his memory be a blessing, cautioned us many times, in several wordings to make prayers from the teachings.  He would say: That one should make from this great delight above. He would say: That still, the only delights like these that would go up before Hashem Yitbarach were not delights made from prayers (in general)) rather that are made from the teachings.  Further, he would say this many times with many people.
Truly, he did not clarify the mater well regarding his holy intention with this, but from his general words we understand that the essence of his intention was simple: that we should try hard to delve into the holy, awesome teachings that he revealed to us to understand and to become wise through the intent of this practical teaching.  (For this is the essence, that it's not about understanding, rather the essence is doing, as clarified to us many times, that the whole essence of the intent of our holy and awesome teachers, z'l in all the instructions that are revealed, was that they are only for the sake of action, that we should try hard and be strong and courageous in all strength to fulfill all that was said in each teaching.) and we considered our ways, how far we were from these recalled words in each teachings, and we prayed and begged to Hashem, in a multiplicity of insistent pleading, and requests, and supplications that God would have mercy on us and remember us and bring us close in God's great mercy, the we merit to uphold all that was said in that teaching, and we poured out our words before Hashem Yitbarach on every matter that was said there, and we should merit to uphold and arrive to them in wholeness

Volume I



Prayer 1

May it be Your will, Lord our God and God of our ancestors.  That You should be our help, and cause us to merit by Your great compassion and lovingkindness, to learn, teach, and occupy (ourselves) with Your Holy Torah, always for it's own sake, to speak of it day and night.  With merit and strength of learning the Holy Torah, cause us to merit with Your Great Compassion to overpower, break, and expel the evil inclination from within us, and cause us to merit to expel and annul the spirit of triviality and all kinds of insanity that clings to us by way of our evil deeds.  All this will be merited to expel and annul through study and occupation fo the Holy Torah that is all Your Holy Names.  That there should be no strength for the trivial spirit and insanity to confuse our minds at all, only that we should to expel it and to remove it from us and from our borders.  
Please Lord, You know the many distracting thoughts that confuse and distract us from serving You in truth, at every moment and hour.  They all come by way of the spirit of triviality and insanity that clings to us by way of our evil deeds, but way of our sins and transgressions, and many missteps, until they confuse our minds and greatly spoil our wisdom endlessly.  Our Parent in Heaven, Good to all and His Kindness is on all His creations, give us mercy so we are not lost, cause us to merit by Your great compassion to overpower, expel, and annul the trivial spirit and insanity from us by way of occupation with the Holy Torah.  

Prayer 2

May it be will Your Will Lord Our God and God of our ancestors, who hears prayer of His People Israel in compassion, (the prayers) they awaken Your compassion and Your kindness upon us for Your sake, and prepares our hearts to pray before You with a complete heart and soul, and that our prayers should be regular in our mouths always, and there should not be any impediment, obstruction, or confusion in our prayers.  Master of the Universe, "O shepherd of Israel who leads Joseph like a flock! You who are enthroned on the cherubim, (Cause to) Appear to us in Your great compassion Your holy light that draws on us holiness and purity, in order that we can compel, subdue, and break our evil inclination, and we should merit in Your abundant compassion and great kindness, that our children and us will guard the holy covenant, and help us always, and save us in Your all-encompassing compassion and great kindness from all types of damages of the covenant &lt;italic&gt; Chas V'Shalom, whether in thought, speech or deed, whether by mistake or intention, whether compelled by force or through desire, whether through the sense of sight, hearing, or all other senses.  Through all of these let us be holy and pure in the holiness of the covenant without any damage or passing thought.  For in Your great compassion You chose us from all nations, and elevate us from all languages, and separated us from all their impurities and from their abhorrences, as You wrote to us in Your Torah, "I have set you apart from other peoples to be Mine." (Lev. 20:26) And You call us Tzaddikim as is written: "And Your nation are all Tzaddikim" (Isaiah 60:21)
Please, in Your great compassion, do not make Your Holy  Torah an empty document, chas v'shalom, for Your words are true and everlasting.  Therefore, make for us in Your compassion, and help us, that we will truly be amongst Tzadikim in order that we merit to be of those who guard the covenant.  In order that just by that alone it will be fitting for us to be called by the name "Tzaddkim" just as you made known to us through the teaching of Your holy sages, that only someone who guards the covenant is called "Tzaddik".  Therefore, just as You helped Yosef, your Tzaddik, in the hour that he came to be tested, and You saved him and gave him strength to overcome his inclination, so too, arouse from Your body and Your compassion on us, and cause us to merit with merit, and the strength of Yosef the Tzaddik, and give us wisdom, experience, discernment, knowledge, strength, and power of holiness, so that we can be saved from all types of damages to the covenant and we can overcome our inclination.  May we merit that our thoughts be connected and attached to Your holiness always without a moment of interruption. So that we will have strength, by virtue of this (through purifying ourselves and guarding the covenant), to appropriately order our prayers before You without any inhibitions, delays or confusion. In the way that You should accept our prayer before You, and arouse Your compassion upon us, and return Your face to us. And quicken us to our redemption and bring to us our righteous Moshiach, do it for Your sake and not ours. Help us that our prayers will be ordered as is proper, and give to us wisdom and knowledge that we will be able to use judgement to measure our words. And we will not stumble in the words of our mouths, and our prayers will not be tilted to the right or left from the straight and true path. And cause us to merit in Your great mercy to give Tzedaka to appropriately poor people. And cause us to have a lot of money and poor people to merit it (money). "Mighty king who loves justice, it was You who established equity, You who worked righteous judgment, in Jacob." (Psalms 99:4) Because everything comes from You and from Your hand we have given to You. Maker of Tzedakah, with everyone You deal justly/righteously, You cause us to merit in Your mercy to included among the doers of Tzedakah. And remove the wickedness from our hearts that we will merit to give Tzedakah joyously with kind faces, and our hearts will have no bad feelings in giving it. Surely open our hands not only to give to a poor or desolate person what is sufficient for their lacking. Let my heart go out to the hungry and clothe the naked. 
You who worked righteous judgment in Jacob
it was You who established equity,
You who worked righteous judgment in Jacob. 

Volume II



Prayer 1



Prayer 2



Prayer 3



Prayer 4



Prayer 5



Prayer 6



Prayer 7



Prayer 8



Prayer 9



Prayer 10



Prayer 11



Prayer 12



Prayer 13



Prayer 14



Prayer 15



Prayer 16



Prayer 17



Prayer 18



Prayer 19



Prayer 20



Prayer 21



Prayer 22



Prayer 23



Prayer 24



Prayer 25



Prayer 26



Prayer 27



Prayer 28



Prayer 29



Prayer 30



Prayer 31



Prayer 32



Prayer 33



Prayer 34



Prayer 35



Prayer 36



Prayer 37




Master of the Universe, You know that in the midst of our descent and fall into the valley of this bitter exile, and in the increasing spiritual pain that befalls every person from Israel, and even on me privately, and in the increasing depths of the sea that is washing over me, and is pursuing me on all sides, and in the great pain I never have any measure of relief, and I do not know at all where the opening for hope is to repair and save from all of this, for all of this I need NOW miracles and wonders and a great, awesome redemption, just like you did for all of Israel in the generations before miracles and wonders that were never like them before.  In the days of Mordechai and Esther when the Evil Haman (may his name and memory be blotted out) stood against them, the miracle of the Great Purim from all the miracles that You did in the world, when You made known to us by way of Your great and holy wise teachers may their memories be blesses, and all of the appointed times that will be one day null, but the days of Purim will never be null.  At the beginning of all beginnings from Pesach, for all the appointed times they remember the Exodus from Egypt. 





Master of the Universe, who causes life, Living God and Sovereign of the world: Have mercy on us, give us life and sustain us.  Sanctify us and purify us from the impurity of death which is the greatest source of impurity, which is (the Granddaddy) the highest category of impurity.  They are the stirrings of adultery that overpower and spread out in the world greatly, until "we are sinking into the slimy deep, and find no foothold, we have come into the watery depths and the flood sweeps us away." (paraphrase Psalm 69:3).  We merited in the strength of the holiness of the Mitzvah of Purim that we should merit to receive and to continue upon us the holiness and purity of the completely Red Heifer, to purify us in truth from the impurity of death in this world and the next world.  And may I merit in this way to receive the Festival of the Holy Pesach, the time of our Freedom in great holiness and great and all-encompassing joy.  And may we merit in Your mercy to fulfill all the mitzvot of Pesach in great holiness, happiness, and great joy.  And help us, save us, and guard us in Your great compassion, from any amount of chametz or leaven, should not be found in our boundaries or property, absolutely any amount of leaven or chametz all the days of Pesach.  For it is revealed and known before You, Master of all the world, that it is impossible for flesh and blood alone to be careful about a miniscule amount of chametz without Your saving grace.  Be compassionate upon us with Your great compassion, redeeming strength, true mercy, guard and save us from any amount of chametz all the holy days of Pesach, and help us and cause us to merit to go from slavery to freedom, from sadness to joy, from mourning to festival, from darkness to great light.  Cause us to merit to organize the Seder of Pesach with great presence, wonderous passion, and all encompassing happiness.  May we merit that should come upon us and cause enlighten within us, in this wonderous enlightenment all of the expansive and small mind that cause the light of Pesach in the great, wonderous, and awesome light.    