Rambam on Mishnah Bekhorot
רמב"ם על משנה בכורות
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Rambam_on_Mishnah_Bekhorot
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Rambam on Mishnah Bekhorot



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Mishnah 1

There is a firstborn for inheritance, but he is not the firstborn for priesthood, etc. Which firstborn is for inheritance and which firstborn is for the priestly office, the dispute is resolved beautifully, etc.
The firstborn for inheritance is the firstborn child born to a Jewish woman, regardless of whether his mother gave birth to him before or after his older sibling. This is based on the verse "רֵאשִׁית אוֹנוֹ" (Deuteronomy 21:17). 
As for the firstborn for the priesthood, it is the first child born to a woman, regardless of whether he is born to his father first or after another child. This is based on the verse "פֶּטֶר רֶחֶם" (Exodus 34:20). 
These four categories mentioned do not apply to someone who did not precede any of them in any way as the firstborn. This matter is clear. However, the statement of someone who is a firstborn, even if another child was born before him, does not negate the significance of that earlier birth. 
Regarding the statement that "his head came out alive," it means that the child has not fully emerged until he has died, even if he has not completed nine months of gestation. "Sandal" is a term for a formed flesh. 
Regarding the statement "the one who comes after them," it means that after a head has come out alive and the fetus had the form of a human being, and all the mentioned conditions have been met, if a woman converts and then gives birth in Israel, the second-born is not called "פֶּטֶר רֶחֶם" (the firstborn). This is only according to the opinion of Rabbi Yossi, based on the gender of the child. 
Regarding the statement "after she converted, she became pregnant, or after she was freed, she became pregnant," it means that whether a woman converted and then gave birth or she was freed and then became pregnant, or a woman who has not given birth and she is a kohenet or a levite or a woman who has already given birth, these cases are exempt from the five shekalim, as it is stated "פֶּטֶר רֶחֶם בִּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל" (Exodus 13:2). 
Regarding the statement "levite who is pregnant or has relations of adultery," she receives from the tithes and eats. However, a pregnant kohenet who has relations of adultery is liable for five shekalim because her sanctity remains intact. This is explained further in the order of women. 
Regarding the statement about the child who did not wait for her husband for three months, he is not the firstborn for inheritance, and furthermore, he has no inheritance at all because we do not know who his father is, as explained in Yevamot. And here, the intention is to bring the case after him, meaning that the one who comes after him is not the firstborn for inheritance because it is possible that the uncertain child is the lastborn, and the halacha does not follow Rabbi Yossi.