Peninei Halakhah, The Nation and the Land
פניני הלכה, העם והארץ
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Peninei_Halakhah,_The_Nation_and_the_Land
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Peninei Halakhah, The Nation and the Land

Introduction







Chapter 1



Section 1



Section 2



Section 3



Section 4



Section 5



Section 6



Section 7



Section 8



Section 9



Section 10



Section 11



Section 12



Hence the commandment of the release of slaves is critical to our existence in the Land of Israel. A regular slave is released after six years, and a pierced slave [one who has asked to stay past the six years] at the Jubilee. And this was one of the sins on account of which the king of Babylonia came against Jerusalem to besiege it and destroy it. But when the officers of Jerusalem saw that the evil was set against them, they hearkened to Jeremiah's call of rebuke and freed their slaves. So a miracle was performed for them, and the king of Babylonia broke off the siege against Jerusalem and went to fight against Egypt. However, they turned back to their evil and subjugated their slaves once again. So the king of Babylonia returned to besiege Jerusalem and destroyed it (Jeremiah 34:21).

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Section 1

... Guarding The Land / From Foreigners in the Land of Israel
The great vision of the people of Israel in God's land is that the land will be settled by the people of Israel, and the Temple will stand on the Temple Mount in Jerusalem, and all of national life will be arranged and conducted according to the ways of Torah, ethical instruction, and holiness.  Israel will be a light unto the nations, that they will come to visit to land and receive inspiration for the improvement of the nations and the world.  According to the Prophet Isaiah (2:2-4) "In the days to come, The Mount of the LORD’s House Shall stand firm above the mountains And tower above the hills; And all the nations Shall gaze on it with joy. 3And the many peoples shall go and say: “Come, Let us go up to the Mount of the LORD, To the House of the God of Jacob; That He may instruct us in His ways, And that we may walk in His paths.” For instruction shall come forth from Zion, The word of the LORD from Jerusalem. 4Thus He will judge among the nations And arbitrate for the many peoples, And they shall beat their swords into plowshares And their spears into pruning hooks: Nation shall not take up Sword against nation; They shall never again know war."

Supplement

Responsa of Rabbi Shlomo Goren

Introduction







Responsa of Rabbi Avraham Shapiro



Responsa of Rabbi Nahum Rabinovitch

