Rashba on Berakhot
רשב״א על ברכות
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Rashba_on_Berakhot
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Rashba on Berakhot



Daf 1a



Daf 1b



Daf 2a



Daf 2b



Daf 3a



Daf 3b



Daf 4a



Daf 4b



Daf 5a



Daf 5b



Daf 6a



Daf 6b



Daf 7a



Daf 7b



Daf 8a



Daf 8b



Daf 9a



Daf 9b



Daf 10a



Daf 10b



Daf 11a



Daf 11b



Daf 12a



Daf 12b



Daf 13a



Daf 13b



Daf 14a



Daf 14b



Daf 15a



Daf 15b



Daf 16a



Daf 16b



Daf 17a



Daf 17b



Daf 18a



Daf 18b



Daf 19a



Daf 19b



Daf 20a



Daf 20b



Daf 21a



Daf 21b



Daf 22a



Daf 22b



Daf 23a



Daf 23b



Daf 24a



"And Rav Chisda says, the leg of a woman is nakedness". And specifically [it is nakedness] to others and to men, because of [sexual] thoughts, but to herself it is not, as we teach (Mishna Challah 2:3) "A woman may sit and separate challah naked" (implying she may make the accompanying blessing whilst naked). And so with Rabbi Yitzchak's statement, "a handbreadth of a woman is nakedness" -- the scope of his statement is narrow and applies specifically with a man's own wife and [whilst he, the husband, is] saying Shema. The Ra'avad of blessed memory analyses this: it is possible specifically in a private place she comes, and it arises Rav Chisda's saying that the thigh of a woman is a hidden place and is nakedness -- but even on the back of her husband, even though this is not a hidden place on a man. But her face and her feet and her voice when it speaks and does not sing, and her hair that comes out of her braid and isn't covered, we aren't concerned about them because he is accustomed to seeing them and won't be distracted. And with another woman, it is forbidden to stare at her because of the place, and even her little finger or her hair, and forbidden to hear her even when she is speaking, as we said in Kiddushin 70a; "'Let the Master send greetings to Yalta,' and he said to him, 'This is what Shmuel says: the voice of a woman is nakedness'". And rather it appears that this is specifically the voice of sending or returning greetings, since the reason [of the prohibition?] is closeness of mind. And the Rav Alfasi of blessed memory, that he should not be recalled for this at all, wrote the Raavad of blessed memory that it is possible that this is because we said, see the letters, that this is not because of nakedness. The Rav of Blessed Memory thought this is all because a handbreadth of her thigh and hair and voice is nakedness. And he of blessed memory wrote that this is not a good reason, rather in this case it is because of distraction and because there is seeing, and the issue of buttocks is explained specifically with regards to herself, and with regards to his wife if he doesn't see [buttocks] and even if he is touching [them], and everything he does not see but there is only touching, he is not distracted he is "arrogant" [familiar] with her. 