Teshuvot HaRosh
תשובות הרא"ש
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Teshuvot HaRosh



Klal 1



Klal 2



Klal 3



Klal 4



Klal 5



Klal 6



Klal 7



Klal 8



Klal 9



Klal 10



Klal 11



Klal 12



Klal 13



Klal 14



Klal 15



Klal 16



Klal 17



Klal 18



Klal 19



Klal 20



Klal 21



Klal 22



Klal 23



Klal 24



Klal 25



Klal 26



Klal 27



Klal 28



Klal 29



Klal 30



Klal 31



Klal 32



Klal 33



Klal 34



Klal 35



Klal 36



Klal 37



Klal 38



Klal 39



Klal 40



Klal 41



Klal 42



Klal 43



Klal 44



Klal 45



Klal 46



Klal 47



Klal 48



Klal 49



Klal 50



Klal 51



Klal 52



Klal 53



Klal 54



Klal 55



Siman 1

A woman that gives her husband the rights to collect after her death half of the inheritance to her children, according to Takanat Toledo is this a valid condition or not? And following is the text of the Takana. If the wife dies before the husband, and she has living children from him, boys or girls. And the meaning of living is that they were alive during their mother's life and after her passing for at least 30 complete days. Then all her what remains of her dowry, clothes or land, the husband splits them evenly with her children. And if there are no living children then half her assets go to the husband, and the other half to her heirs. As if the husband died before her. This applies to both land and chattels. 
Answer. It seems from the text of the Takana, that they intended that assets left by the wife to her family is not diverted towards the husband. That is why they stipulated that half of the inheritance remain for her family. And they removed half the inheritance from the husband, who according to the Torah was to receive all her assets, and gave it to her heirs, after the death of the wife. But while the wife was still living, they did not limit half her assets to give to whomever she wished, for this was not inferred at all from the Takana. Their intent was not to prevent her from spending her money, but only to make sure that the inheritance remains accessible to her inheritors. It is better that her inheritance does not go entirely to the husband. Instead, when the time comes for the husband to inherit the wife, the Takana removes half the inheritance to be given to her heirs. And if the wife had the power to leave it to whomever she wished than there would be no purpose in the Takana. For the husband would always be asking his wife for leaving him her assets. And because “a person does not reside in a basket, i.e., in close quarters, with a snake” she would favour him more than any of her relatives. And this is also apparent from the text in the Takana which refers to diverting from the husband half of the assets which he is entitled to by law, according to the inheritance priorities. The Takana treats the case as if he would have died before her, and so we pretend that for this case the husband died before her and the heirs need to be protected (just as when he dies first the heirs receive at least half the assets, also in our case when the wife dies first the heirs receive at least half the assets). But while the wife is still alive, they did not limit the power of the husband at all, thus she is unable to sell or gifts her assets while the husband is alive. The Takana was very specific, to be applied only in the way they decreed without change for they wrote that if she has children from him, girls or boys, that they should inherit half her assets, but her children from another man have no claim to those assets. Thus, the inheritance does not come from her power at all, to bequeath assets to her heirs, only as stated in the Takana. They removed the inheritance from the husband, who is entitled to inherit his wife’s assets after her death, and gave it to those who they believed needed it more. But while she is alive, they did not enhance her rights at all, for if she wished to distribute half her assets to her children, whether they are the children of her current marriage or an earlier marriage, she could not do so. For if she had the power to do so, she would always give the assets to the children from the earlier marriage, who would remain orphaned from their mother and father (assuming her earlier husband died) which would defeat the purpose of the Takana to divert the inheritance that would have gone to the husband, to his children, and not to her children. She certainly does not have the power to change the Takana in any way, for they have granted the assets to whom they wished to merit. They also diverted assets from her heirs, and gave them to their mother when she has no rights to inherit when the assets cam from her power (associated with the Kethuba). Therefore, all Takanot need to be kept as they were setup without any changes. 

Siman 2



Siman 3



Siman 4



Siman 5



Siman 6



Siman 7



Siman 8



Siman 9



Siman 10

All the customs for which the Sages said that one should follow the custom, that is for a custom made to prevent a transgression such as the one in Pesachim 50: a place in which it is customary to do work on the eve of Passover until noon one does work, and if not to do work one does not. For according to the Torah it is forbidden to do work from noon onwards, for it is the beginning of the time to slaughter the Passover sacrifice. And there are places where they distanced and refrained from work the entire day, and the custom should not be changed. And likewise, the Mishnah (Pesachim 53): in places with a custom to sell small animals to non-Jews one sells, places with a custom not to sell one does not; in places with a custom to eat roasted meat on Passover eve one eats, in places with a custom not to eat one does not; in places with a custom to light candles Yom Kippur eve one lights, in places with a custom not to light one does not; in places with a custom (Pesachim 54) to work on the 9th of Av one works, in places with a custom not to work one does not.  And it says in Pesachim 50 As the mishna discusses the requirement to observe local customs, the Gemara relates: The residents of Beit She’an were accustomed not to travel from Tyre to market day in Sidon on Shabbat eve. Their children came before Rabbi Yoḥanan. They said to him: Due to their wealth, it was possible for our fathers however, it is not possible for us to do so. He said to them: Your fathers already accepted this virtuous custom upon themselves, and it remains in effect for you, as it is stated: “My son, hear your father’s rebuke and do not abandon your mother’s teaching” (Proverbs 1:8). All these customs are to distance from Torah transgressions. And the Sages said not to change them. But if there is a custom in a place to transgress, it should be changed even if great rabbis follow the custom, for a court cannot remove a biblical law, even the Sanhedrin in Jerusalem has no such right, except to withhold action but not to perform actions. Even a prophet is not heeded, unless he is established as Elijah on the Carmel, who was obeyed to offer sacrifices outside the temple on a special occasion. And not only should one change a custom to transgress, but also a custom to distance from transgression bit which may result in transgressions should be changed. As it is said in Perek Makom Shenahagu (Pesachim 50b):  The residents of the city of Ḥozai were accustomed to separate hallah from rice dough. They came and told Rav Yosef about this custom. He said to them: Let a non-priest eat this dough in their presence to show them unequivocally that this custom has no legal basis. For we are concerned that they will end up mixing up what is permitted with what is forbidden. For from this custom they will think that rice is a type of grain. This is also in the Yerushalmi: If you become unsure of the Halakha do the customary, meaning that if there is a loosening in the Halakha, you become unsure of what the Halakha is, and you see the customary actions of others, then follow their customs. For you can rely for the great rabbis to lead others to follow the Halakha. But if you are sure of knowing the Halakha you have no right to follow the custom that contradicts the Halakha. This is the ruling for customs related to what is permitted and forbidden. In financial matters the courts have the power to make financial regulations according to the times and needs. Even to transgress a Torah law and to transfer assets from one to another, per the Baraita in the first Perek of Baba Batra 8a:  Similarly, it is permitted for the residents of the city to set the measures, the prices and the wages, and to fine people for violating their specifications. And it is said in Yevamot Perek Ha'Isha Raba (89): As Rabbi Yitzhak said: From where is it derived that property declared ownerless by the court is ownerless? As it is stated: “And whoever does not come within three days, according to the council of the princes and the Elders, all his property should be forfeited...” (Ezra 10:8). Rabbi Elazar says that the proof is from here: “These are the inheritances that Elazar the priest, and Joshua, son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers’ houses of the tribes...” (Joshua 19:51). What do heads have to do with fathers? This comes to tell you: Just as fathers bequeath to their sons anything they want to, so too, the heads bequeath to the people anything they want to. And all this by making regulations that declare one person's assets ownerless and give it to another. But according to a custom I do not know how they take money from one to another. Understandably with transgressions the custom spreads so that everyone in one place considers the same act a transgression. Even if in other places it is permitted, such as a certain fat that is eaten in Israel but not in Babel. Also working on Passover eve and Av 9th and others. But in finance when the early Sages introduced a marital custom for which there is no source nor hint to allow the wife to bequeath her assets to whom she wishes. And later generations continued this custom to allow the wife to bequeath to whom she wishes. And the scribes wrote and the witnesses signed, even though this is certainly a mistake. And even if there was a judge in the generation who permitted what was written, and through this,  the custom is spread and perpetuated. This is not a custom on which one may rely to take assets from one to another.  For one may only transfer assets by a court order. Certainly if the judge based his ruling on the early Sages we would listen. But I have seen that judges rule to begin with that the wife has the right to bequeath to whom she wishes, without relying on the earlier ruling, but believe this is the halakha.  And it is not permitted to transfer assets, it can only be declared ownerless by the court. Also heard of a judge who ruled in agreement to an earlier judge, but was not able to justify his ruling; he just considered it the custom since he followed the earlier judge. And I said this is not appropriate. Even if judges repeated the same judgment generation after generation based on the first ruling, it is a mistaken custom, and it has to be abolished. For it allows a Torah transgression to move assets away from the rightful heir, other than allowing the court to declare assets ownerless. Also when Sages setup a regulation they obligated others to follow it, without additions nor detractions. And if later Sages wish to add to or detract from the regulation they need to first abolish the first regulation and then to institute a new one as they wish. And as long as they did not do so, there is no power in a custom to abolish a regulation. Asher ben HaRav Yechiel. 