Isaiah
ישעיהו
Rabbi Mike Feuer, Jerusalem Anthology
https://www.sefaria.org

Isaiah



Chapter 1



























Zion shall be redeemed through justice and her penitent through righteousness.

Chapter 2



And many peoples shall go, and they shall say, "Come, let us go up to the Lord's mount, to the house of the God of Jacob, and let Him teach us of His ways, and we will go in His paths," for out of Zion shall the Torah come forth, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

Chapter 3



Chapter 4



And it shall come to pass that every survivor shall be in Zion, and everyone who is left, in Jerusalem; "holy" shall be said of him, everyone inscribed for life in Jerusalem.

And the Lord shall create over every dwelling of Mount Zion and over all those summoned therein, a cloud by day and smoke, and splendor of a flaming fire at night, for, in addition to every honor, there will be a shelter.

Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22









And the cracks of the city of David you saw that they had increased, and you gathered the water of the lower pool.

Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28
















Therefore, so has the Lord God said: "Behold, I have laid as a foundation a stone in Zion, a fortress stone, a costly cornerstone, a foundation well founded; the believer shall not hasten.

Chapter 29



Chapter 30



Chapter 31



Chapter 32



Chapter 33




















See Zion, the city of our gathering; your eyes shall see Jerusalem, a tranquil dwelling, a tent that shall not fall, whose pegs shall never be moved, and all of whose ropes shall not be torn.

Chapter 34



Chapter 35



Chapter 36



Chapter 37



Chapter 38



Chapter 39



Chapter 40


Bid Jerusalem take heart, and proclaim unto her, that her time of service is accomplished, that her guilt is paid off; that she hath received of the LORD’S hand double for all her sins.






Upon a lofty mountain ascend, O herald of Zion, raise your voice with strength, O herald of Jerusalem; raise [your voice], fear not; say to the cities of Judah, "Behold your God!"

Chapter 41



























The first one to Zion, behold, behold them, and for Jerusalem I will give a herald.

Chapter 42



Chapter 43



Chapter 44



Chapter 45



Chapter 46



Chapter 47



Chapter 48



Chapter 49














But Zion said: ‘The Lord has forsaken me, and the Lord has forgotten me.’

Chapter 50



Chapter 51



For the LORD has comforted Zion; He has comforted all her waste places, and has made her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the garden of the LORD; Joy and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving, and the voice of melody.












And I placed My words into your mouth, and with the shadow of My hand I covered you, to plant the heavens and to found the earth and to say to Zion [that] you are My people.
Awake, awake, Stand up, O Jerusalem, That hast drunk at the hand of the LORD The cup of His fury; Thou hast drunken the beaker, even the cup of staggering, And drained it.

Chapter 52

Awake, awake, Put on thy strength, O Zion; Put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city; For henceforth there shall no more come into thee The uncircumcised and the unclean.






The voice of your watchmen- they raised a voice, together they shall sing, for eye to eye they shall see when the Lord returns to Zion.

Chapter 53



Chapter 54

Sing, O barren, thou that didst not bear, Break forth into singing, and cry aloud, thou that didst not travail; For more are the children of the desolate Than the children of the married wife, saith the LORD.









O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted, behold, I will set thy stones in fair colours, And lay thy foundations with sapphires.

Chapter 55



Chapter 56



Chapter 57



Chapter 58



Chapter 59




















And a redeemer shall come to Zion, and to those who repent of transgression in Jacob, says the Lord.

Chapter 60

Arise, shine, for thy light is come, And the glory of the LORD is risen upon thee.












And the sons of them that afflicted thee Shall come bending unto thee, And all they that despised thee shall bow down At the soles of thy feet; And they shall call thee The city of the LORD, The Zion of the Holy One of Israel.

Chapter 61



Chapter 62

For Zion’s sake will I not hold My peace, And for Jerusalem’s sake I will not rest, Until her triumph go forth as brightness, And her salvation as a torch that burneth




I have set watchmen Upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, They shall never hold their peace Day nor night: ‘Ye that are the LORD’S remembrancers, Take ye no rest,





And they shall call them The holy people, The redeemed of the LORD; And thou shalt be called Sought out, A city not forsaken.