Ner Mitzvah
נר מצוה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Ner Mitzvah

Volume I


Daniel (7:2-7)- “In my vision at night, I saw the four winds of heaven stirring up the great sea. Four mighty beasts different from each other emerged from the sea. The first was like a lion but had eagles’ wings. As I looked on, its wings were plucked off, and it was lifted off the ground and set on its feet like a man and given the mind of a man. Then I saw a second, different beast, which was like a bear but raised on one side, and with three fangs in its mouth among its teeth; it was told, ‘Arise, eat much meat!’ After that, as I looked on, there was another one, like a leopard, and it had on its back four wings like those of a bird; the beast had four heads, and dominion was given to it. After that, as I looked on in the night vision, there was a fourth beast—fearsome, dreadful, and very powerful, with great iron teeth—that devoured and crushed, and stamped the remains with its feet. It was different from all the other beasts which had gone before it; and it had ten horns. While I was gazing upon these horns, a new little horn sprouted up among them; three of the older horns were uprooted to make room for it. There were eyes in this horn like those of a man, and a mouth that spoke arrogantly."
There is to ask, these four empires which Hashem established in his world, there is no doubt this occurrence is an accident. Rather, it must be that is necessitated by the order of the world which Hashem arranged the world. If so, why is it that there needed to be exactly four empires?
If you think deeply you will find, that when Hashem created his world, the Torah verse hides a secret hint to these four empires: [(Genesis: 1,2) "the earth being unformed and void, with darkness over the surface of the deep and a wind from God sweeping over the water—".] 'Reish Lakish explained the depth of the verse as reference to the exiles: "the earth being unformed"- this is a reference to the empire of Babylon, as it says in (Jeremiah, 14) "I saw the earth and it was unformed". "and void" - this is a reference to the empire of Persia, as it says in (Ester: 6,14): "and hurriedly [same root as 'void'] brought Haman". "with darkness" - this is reference to the empire of Greece, who darkened the eyes of Yisrael with their decrees. They would say to them, write upon the horn of an ox that they have no part in the God of Israel. "over the surface of the deep" - this is a reference to the evil empire, which is innumerable like the deep; just as the deep as no end, just so these evil people. "and a wind from God sweeping" - this is the wind of the King the Messiah, as it's written (Isiaih: 11,2) "The spirit [same root as 'wind'] of the Hashem". Through what merit will [Moshiach] be summoned and come? "sweeping over the waters" - in the merit of Teshuva, which is likened to water, as it says (Lamentations: 2,19) "Pour out your heart like water".(B'R: 2,4). If you think deeply you will find that when Hashem created his world he arrange these four empires! If so, we must ask, for what purpose and why would Hashem build into his world these four empires. 
The explanation is this: it is appropriate that these four empires would be hinted and concealed within the beginning of creation. For these four empires which have dominated the world, they only exist because it would have been impossible without them. For the world is a dependent created entity of Hashem. It must that this dependent created entity must definitionally be lacking, and therefore we find within it lacks! [R' Hartman gives two reasons for this principle: 1.) A created entity cannot be on the same exact level as the creator so therefore Hashem's creation must contain within it imperfection and 2.) A created entity didn't always exist, and the void which preceded it is contained within it]. And this axiomatic lack is the four empires, for they minimize the glory of Hashem in his world. And since the world was created by Hashem, it was fitting that everything would be under the dominion of Hashem, for Hashem created everything, and therefore everything was fitting that it should be created for his glory. But since it creation is a dependent entity, it's impossible for it to be without lack. This thing [the lack] is not from Hashem, for there is no emptiness or lack within the creative act whatsoever, rather the lack is within the world for it is a dependent created entity. From this the lack is generated, that these empires should dominate in the world and detract from the glory of Hashem. And this concept is appropriately concealed and hinted within the beginning of creation itself. From the side of creation itself it was appropriate that everything should dwell under the dominion of Hashem, as it says (Yoma: 38a) 'Whatever the Holy One, Blessed be He, created, He created in His honor, as it is stated: “Everyone who is called by My name, I have created for My glory” (Isaiah 43:7)
[This Talmudic statement] means to say that after Hashem created everything, certainly he created everything for his own glory, for it's definitionally impossible for an entity to go out from Oneness which is contrary to it, for if so this entity would be a self-contradiction. The matter cannot be such, rather everything must have been created for his glory. If this is true, how could it be that these empires erase the glory of Hashem? Rather, there must be a definitional lack in the creation itself, for lack does not exist within Hashem, and this [lack] must be a cause unto itself. 
Therefore the empires are appropriately four, for the empires are the deviation from the glory of Hashem, and Hashem is One, and the center is connected to One because the center is the point of oneness. Accordingly, the Holy Temple and Jerusalem are both One, and thus they are the center of the world. For the center is suited for this. So too Yisrael are one nation, suited for them is the land [Israel] which is one alone, for it is the center of the world. The general principle is that an entity which is one is suited to be in the center. A deviation from oneness connects to fourness, corresponding to the four directions which diverge from the middle. Therefore the empires are four, corresponding to the four directions which diverge from the center. It's for this reason that we expounded from the language "unformed and void" four empires, because this wording speak to the essential lack within creation itself, and from the aspect of lack within the creation itself these four empires were born. They [the four empires] are unique for this matter, for their dominion deviates from Hashem until they erase his Oneness in the world. And the disposal of these four empires was said: (Zecharia: 14,9) "And the LORD shall be king over all the earth; in that day there shall be one LORD with one name." As long as these four empires rule the world, the glory of Hashem will not be revealed in his world. Therefore these four empires, vis-a-vis the lack within creation itself (for it would be definitionally impossible to find a creation in total completeness, it must contain lack). And this lack is not vis-a-vis Hashem who created everything, rather vis-a-vis the created world itself. And this is concealed and hinted at through the verse: "When God began to create heaven and earth—. the earth being unformed and void" etc.. for the earth which is the lower [element of creation] therewith darkness over the surface of the deep and a wind from God sweeping over the water—"
From the aspect of this lack which is inherent in the creation were born these four empires, who took royalty/kingship/dominion from Yisrael. As this nation [Yisrael] was created for the Glory of Hashem, as it's written: (Isiah 43:21) "This nation I created to speak of my praise". These four empires that inherited rulership from Yisrael detract from the glory of Hashem in the this lower world. For even if one is to find something within them which augments the honor of Hashem's name, as we will explain, for [as people say to a hornet] neither any of your stingers nor any of your honey does Hashem desire, for the essence of his Glory is when Hashem is One in his world and there is none beside him, and this particularly the other nations diminish. No nation was created for this with the exception of Yisrael, for they also are one, as is hinted at in the verse: (Isiah 43,21) "This nation I created to speak of my praise". For in this verse is the phrase "This Nation" ["עם "זו], and the Gematria of the word זו is 13, which is the also the Gematria of the word One [אחד]. For Yisrael are 13 tribes including the tribe of Levi, for Ephraim and Menashe are two (Of the twelve brothers, Yosef is split into his two sons which makes 13). And thus, we find a parallel between the word One [אחד] and the tribes. The Tribe of Levi is a singular tribe and separated from all the other tribes, and it a tribe unto itself, and it is represented by the א [Aleph] in the word אחד [One], for א represents singularity [as the Gematria of Aleph is 1]. And the ח [Chet] corresponds to the children of the Foremother [Rachel and Leah] for they are eight outside of Levi [Reuven, Shimon, Yehuda, Issaschar, Zvulin, Binyamin, Ephriam, Menashe] and this is hinted at in the ח of אחד. The other 4 [ד] are the children of the maidservants [Billah and Zilpah who gave birth to Gad, Asher, Dan, and Naftali]. There the verse says "This Nation" ["עם "זו] to allude to the Oneness of Yisrael, "they will speak of my praise" the essential praise here is that Hashem should be One with nothing besides. This [the number of tribes] is not accidental but purposefully done by Hashem from the outset of creation, for this nation [Yisrael] testifies that Hashem is One, as it is said in the Midrash that Yisrael testify about Hashem that he is One. We don't have room to expand on this idea here. But the four empires nullify the unity of God in the world, for the take rulership from Yisrael, and they [Yisrael] testify on the Unity of Hashem. Therefore, at the end of the four empires, when Kingship/Royalty will return to Yisrael, the following is written (Obadiah 1:21): "For liberators shall march up on Mount Zion to wreak judgment on Mount Esau; and dominion shall be the LORD’s." and in (Zecharia 14,9) "Hashem will be King over all the world - on that day Hashem will be One and His Name will be One." And this is as we have said, that the empires are four and this number represents a deviation from Unity. For a central point which has no sides and is singular is One, as is known, and it is impossible that there could be two corresponding to a center, for a center is one and one alone. And the directions are divergent, for this one stretches to the East, and this one the opposite direction to the West, and this to the South and this to the North. If you think deeply you will realize that these four directions are definitionally divergent, and therefore they are the antithesis of Unity. As such, Yisrael is concealed in a hint in the verse at the beginning of creation: " בראשית". [This word, the first in the Torah, classically translated as "in the beginning" is deeply problematic from a grammatical standpoint. The Maharal quotes Rashi quoting the Midrash on how to resolve this conflict with a different translation]. For the sake of Yisrael was the world created! They are the primary dependent entity created by Hashem, and therefore it is appropriate that they be hinted to at the beginning of creation. A similar idea is seen in the hinting of the four empires, which is a result of a definitional lack found in the creation through its inherent lack of being created [as we have at length seen above]. 
And further still you must understand, during Hashem's creation of is world it was appropriate that these empires alluded to. This is because with the name י"ה did Hashem create his world. The world to come was created with a י from His Great Name, and this world was created with a ה from His Great Name. This is because the Blessed Name י"ה, the י from the Name י"ה teaches that Hashem is One and there are no divisions in Him whatsoever. This is because the י is small, which is to say it is indivisible and represents oneness, and therefore the י express this aspect of Hashem's Oneness. The ה teaches, that one should not say that Hashem is One and not all things are within His control, and He is like all other things which are one without power over everything. But Hashem is One and his power extends to everything. This concept is expressed by the ה from His Great Name, because the ה has a "ד" and it also has a point [a י which represents Unity] within the "ד", and we have already said that the "ד" represents the expansion towards the four directions, and this teaches that Hashem is One AND has in his power everything. Therefore, what that was said [by secular philosophers] that it is impossible that Hashem could be One in his world, for if this was the case He would have would have made Himself One in his world! For always the derivative is obligated to be representative of the primary entity: it is definitional any derivative of fire is hot, so too coldness necessitates its derivatives be cold, and so on with all derivatives from primary entities each one must be representative of the primary entity. And therefore, they [secular philosophers] decreed and said: 'From a primary entity which is One it is impossible that its derivative be anything but one! And consequently that we see in front of us a multiplicity of derivatives interchanging in the world, we can deduce that from the outset they were duplicitous [and therefore not One].' Yet we have already explained this idea in another place and disproved this blunder. On the contrary, the multiplicity of entities expresses a beginning in oneness! We have explained this principle at length in the Sefer "Gevuros Hashem" in reference to the Korban Pesach, which was commanded to eat "upon Matzah and bitter herbs", look over there. [In quick summation, the Korbon Pesach is a sacrifice directly to Hashem, which is an action of explicit acknowledgement of Hashem's Oneness. We eat this Korban between Matzah and Marror, for they are opposites. Matzah represents freedom and Marror represents slavery. Says the Maharal we purposefully eat the Korban Pesach between opposites as a way of declaring that the duplicity of this world is ultimately sourced in Oneness.] . This concept is expressed in the "ה" because the "ה" is made up of a "ד", and "ד" expressed the four directions, and an indivisible "י" within the "ד" which is one, corresponding to the center, and the one is connected with everything and is connected to everything. Therefore with the letter "ה" did Hashem create this world, because this world is a world of multiplicity, even still it is one world [universe], for this multiplicity is ultimately unity. The world to come is One entirely, so it was created with a "י". 
And because these empires have importance within the world, therefore there must be within the world exactly four empires corresponding to the differentiation inherent in this world [as we've seen, represented by the number 4]. And there does exist in the world an aspect of unity, and corresponding to this is Yisrael, who are unified. However, in truth, it's fitting that there should be these four empires connected and joined together with Yisrael, and enjoined to Yisrael until everything is one! But on account of the lack inherent in a created entity, which is inherent within creation, which definitionally must lack perfection, it's impossible for our creation to be as such, for [as we have seen] the creating entity must be distinct from the created entity. And specifically in our time before the Kingship of Yisrael. On account of this [the lack of Kingship of Yisrael] we deviate from the Unity of Hashem until the four empires end and the King, the Messiah, comes. Therefore vis-a-vis this lack, the four empires became distinct, but when their rulership ends, so the world will indeed become complete as has always been fitting. Therefore, in conjunction with the creation of the world, these four empires were hinted at and concealed. And also Yisrael, as it's written in the verse: "And the LORD said Let there be light etc..", and this is the light of the Messiah. For all this [the unfolding of world history in this order] was necessary from the outset of creation, no later than when Hashem actually made his world. Therefore Daniel said in his prophecy: “In my vision at night, I saw the four winds of heaven stirring up the great sea. Four mighty beasts different from each other emerged from the sea." He [Daniel] said that these four winds were stirring up the great sea, as we have said, that these four are lie the four directions which differ, as we have explained. As such, it was said in Daniel (7:2-7)- “In my vision at night, I saw the four winds of heaven stirring up the great sea. Four mighty beasts different from each other emerged from the sea." And it is said these [specifically] four winds stirring up the sea as we explained, for these four are like the four directions which [represent] differentiation [in this world] as we have explained. 
And these four winds beget these four animals from the sea, because each nation is considered next to Yisrael like the sea, for they are not from a settled domain, and Yisrael is compared to dry land [which is settled]. It says in the Midrash (Vayikra Rabbah: 13,5) ' "And four might beasts different from each other emerged from the sea" - If you [the Jews] are meritorious, from the sea, and if not from the forest. The beasts from the sea, for when they rise from the sea they already begin to die, whereas if they rise from the forest they aren't weak from the outset.' This is the explanation, the sea is far from the dry land, and if Yisrael are meritorious, so the nations will lack true existence, like any entity within the sea which lacks true existence. It's for this reason that fish, which are from the sea, do not require Shechita [any ritual slaughtering], and this is because they lack existence, for existence is found within being settled. Therefore if Yisrael merit, the empires don't have strength, and they arise from the sea. As it is said, if from their beginning of their existence they lacked strength and power, so it must be that they arose from the sea. And if [Yisrael] do not merit, so they will arise from the forest, which is settled. Even if the forest is separate from settlement as well, for within a forest one doesn't find human beings, only wild animals, but still in any event it [forest] is not entirely separate from settlement. Therefore it says [in Daniel] "And four winds stirring upon the sea". And it is such that when Daniel sees the empires, he sees four beasts, for in this manner it is appropriate that that the four empires possess dominion. And this is, because Man has the power and dominion over beasts, as it is written in the Torah [Bereshit 1, 28, 2 19]. And therefore it is appropriate that the empires of the world should appear in image and depiction of man. It's just that the dominion of these four empires are lacking the virtue of G-dliness which is distinct to Man, and from this aspect that they are lacking the virtue of G-dliness, their power is without G-dliness. Therefore, they [the empires] appear in the depiction of animals, for beasts lack this power of transcendent G-dliness. But power without transcendent G-dliness is actually stronger [in terms of brute force], which is something we also see within these empires. Therefore Daniel sees these them in the image and depiction of beasts. And when [Daniel] sees the Kingship of the King the Messiah, he sees him in the image and depiction of a human. For after he sees the empires in the form of four beasts, he sees the Kingship of Yisrael in image and depiction of a human, as it is said (Daniel, 7,13) "One like a human being came" for the Kingship of the King the Messiah, will be entire G-dly, therefore it [Yisrael] is called "The Son of Man". 
In truth, when one sees Nebuchadnezzar, the evil one, of the four empires, one sees him in the depiction and image of a person. As Daniel sees in another dream, [and is called directly in from of Nebuchadnezzar to share this dream. In it he shares a different vision of Nebuchadnezzar. This occurs several chapters before the dream we have been analyzing, which is Chapter 7, - in Chapter 2 of Daniel]. (2:32-33) "The head of that statue was of fine gold; its breast and arms were of silver; its belly and thighs, of bronze. its legs were of iron, and its feet part iron and part clay." For by Nebuchadnezzar there was not the same lack as by the other [three] empires, and therefore he [Daniel] sees him in the image and representation of a Man, just in the same way that [in our dream] Daniel saw the King the Messiah. This is a huge topic with a deep explanation, as we are about to explain. Actually, it was appropriate that all four of these empires should appear as one man. For a Man has four parts: the first - the שכלי capacity [intellectual/cerebral/spiritual]. Lower than the שכל - the נפשי [emotional] capacity. Lower than the נפש -- the גופני [bodily/physical] capacity - which is entirely intertwined in the body, and these are the three parts. And there is here one other capacity which is connected, this is the the one that encompasses all these three together, as we are about to explain right now. We have already explained this concept of these four aspects that make up a person in many place, for example in the Pirkei Avos (4, 23) in the Mishna that speaks about jealousy, lust, and honor. There is not space here to elaborate on this topic, but these ideas are known to anybody with wisdom. But each of these capacities are not an attribute essential to man in his essentially being Man, which is to say that he was created in the Image of G-d. For a man has a further attribute which is essential to him being Man, this is his G-dly Image, which encompasses everything about him, and this wasn't given to these four empires. This idea is known, for as the Rabbis of the Gemara say (Yvamos, 61a) "You [the Jewish people] are called Man, but the nations are not called Man". In truth this topic we explained in it's proper place, for the Image of G-d was not given only to Yisrael, yet neither was it given to the nations. For these four empires correspond to the capacities of Man, and therefore when Nebuchadnezzar sees the dream [first dream of Daniel] he sees these four empires in the depiction of Man. For the verse says (Yechezkiel 34:31) "Men you are" - which is to say you are called Man, but the nations are not called Man. For in many places [in Torah] are we [Yisrael] called Man. But rather the explanation is this, that by Yisrael the Image of G-d is essential/primary and everything else is ancillary/secondary with respect to the Image. For the this (G-dly) Image is distinct from the body, and therefore everything is negligible next to it. And Nebuchadnezzar did not see this Image without a body, rather he saw the Image standing in gold, and silver, and copper, and iron. For the nations of the world do indeed have an Image, which is intertwined with the physical. And therefore, he sees this Image, which has a head of gold, and of arms of silver. And gold and silver and copper and iron are the essential/primary, and the Image is negligible next to them, for the Image isn't distinct as is with Yisrael. But when Daniel sees the Kingship of Yisrael, he only sees the Image alone, no bodily component whatsoever, as it said "One like a human being Came with the clouds of heaven" and what came through here was nothing except the Image of G-d. But when Nebuchadnezzar the Evil sees the four empires, he sees them in the Image of gold, and of silver, and of copper, and of iron, because the Image is not the essential/primary, rather it [the Image] is almost painted upon the gold and silver, and the form isn't the essential/primary whatsoever. Here lies your explanation. 
For with certainty that when [Daniel in first dream shared with Nebuchadnezzar] sees these four empires in the Image of Man, for these four empires are like the capacities within a person. The first is the body. The second - the נפש [emotional]. This capacity, even though it is very similar to the body of a person, it is not imprinted within the body, as the capacity of the body is. The third - שכל [mind], which is entirely distinct from the body. as is true with any true thought/abstraction which is definitionally transcendent/distinct. And even if it seems clear that the capacity of the שכל within a person is incredibly lofty in its value, in any event it's not so dominant and power [for the נפש is the dominant force in the average person]. And therefore, this is the order of the empires, for the נפשי capacity is the most active force within a person, as is known. And below it is the bodily capacity which isn't so activated. And the שכלי capacity, even though it certainly is higher, but the power of dominance must come through its connection with the נפשי capacity.
Therefore, one must give the נפשי capacity to the first empire, for the first empire possessed an importance and dominance that was superlative, as it was said about them [this empire] by Daniel (2, 37): "You, O king—king of kings." And therefore Daniel also said in his second vision (2, 38): "[and to whom He has given dominion over them all]—you are the head of gold. Therefore it says (Daniel 7, 4): "but had eagles’ wings" for the eagle which flourishes in its height, as we shall explain, and this corresponds to the component of the נפש with a person, for it is the dominant capacity. The second empire was the Persian Empire, which is the bodily capacity within a person; a capacity which is actually lower than the first one. The entire concept of the capacity of the body is that is perpetually and definitionally lacking, and that it is perpetually receiving. This capacity corresponds to the second empire. Therefore Daniel relays about this empire (Daniel 7:5): "Then I saw a second, different beast, which was like a bear"...
And they said in the [Talmudic] Chapter "Ten Classes" (Kiddushin, 72a): "And behold a second beast, similar to a bear” (Daniel 7:5). Rav Yosef taught: These are Persians, who eat and drink copious amounts like a bear, and are corpulent like a bear, and grow hair like a bear, and have no rest like a bear. The explanation is that they [bears] seek always to swallow, this is their temperament. And so was it written about this [Persian] empire in Megillas Ester (Ester 10,1): "King Ahasuerus imposed tax on the mainland and the islands." What in actuality did that verse come to teach us? That the king imposed a tax on the land? [All kings do this, why would the verse waste ink sharing this information?]. Rather, what it is coming to say, is that the entire power of Ahasuerus was derived from his sense of lacking, and he sought perpetually to fulfill his נפש from wealth, and this was the essence of the second empire. And so Daniel about this beast (Daniel 7:5) "it was told, ‘Arise, eat much meat!’". And so they said [in the Gemara] (Megillah 11a) on why he was called "Ahasuerus" אחשורוש: 'And Rabbi Ḥanina said: The name alludes to the fact that everyone became poor [rash] in his days, [as it is stated: “And the king Ahasuerus imposed a tax on the mainland” (Esther 10:1).]'. And all of this was because he [Ahasuerus] wanted to fulfil his נפש from his bodily desires. And such that Haman understood this aspect of Ahasuerus, he [Haman] wanted also that he [Ahasuerus] would sell him Yisrael for money [The following is a direct quote from Megillas Ester about Haman's proposition (Ester 3:9): "If it please Your Majesty, let an edict be drawn for their destruction, and I will pay ten thousand talents of silver to the stewards for deposit in the royal treasury.”]. For this is the concept of the power of Ahasuerus, for through this, G-d Forbid, Yisrael could have been swallowed up. And because Ahasuerus is perpetually desiring to swallow up, therefore Haman says (Ester 3:11) "[And the king said,] 'The money is given to you [and the people yours to do with as you see fit.”]. And he didn't say 'I don't want this money of yours', rather it must be that 'I [Ahasuerus] accepted the money from you [Haman] and I will return and give it to you. But he didn't want to hold on to your money, because this would have certainly been an insult to him [Ahasuerus], to accept money, and to give another nation over to be killed simply because of money. Rather [this whole money exchange] was because of the love of money, so he accepted and returned and gave the money to him [Haman]. And we already explained in its place this topic. The general principle here is that the concept of the second empire is the desire to swallow everything. 
The empire which is next [third], Daniel sees it as a leopard, because this empire corresponds to the third aspect within a Man. For the third aspect is the שכל, as this empire contained wisdom and understanding, as we will explain at length. For the entire essence of this empire was the search for wisdom, as is well known about the Greeks, as we will explain. And therefore their attention was fixed upon the Torah and to nullify it from Yisrael, for they didn't want this wisdom, specifically in that it [the Torah] is a great wisdom and more elevated wisdom than human wisdom which they [the Greeks] had. For it is the Torah, and it is the wisdom of everything. And this wisdom, which is upon everything, is not suitable to the nations, as is explained in the Midrash. So it says in the Midrash (Lamentations Rabbah 2:13): ""Her king and her leaders are in exile, Torah is no more": if a man should say to you: 'There is wisdom among the nations', believe it. See! It is written: "I will make the wise vanish from Edom, understanding from Esau’s mount (Obadiah 1:8)". If a man should say: 'There is Torah among the nations', do not believe it, as it is written: "Her king and her leaders are in exile, Torah is no more"." And thus the empire, which are the Greeks, did not oppose Yisrael except for regarding their Torah, as we will explain this idea. 
And this is what Daniel saw, that this third empire was in the form of a leopard, for this is the animal which is the most fierce, as it says in (Pirke Avos 5,20): "Be fierce like a leopard". This is the character attribute which is suitable to those are ready for wisdom, as the Rabbis said (Pirke Avos 2:5): "The intrinsically shamefaced cannot learn". Therefore also, the character attribute of Yisrael is fierceness, as we said in the Tractate Beitzah (25b) "It is taught in a Baraita in the name of Rabbi Meir: For what reason was the Torah given to the Jewish people? It is because they are [intrinsically] fierce. A Sage of the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught [the following with regard to the verse:] “From His right hand went a fiery law for them” (Deuteronomy 33:2); The Holy One, Blessed be He, said: These ones [the Jews] are fit to be given a fiery law. There are those who say [a different version of this baraita]: The ways of these people [the Jews] are like fire, as, were it not for the fact that the Torah was given to the Jewish people, no nation or tongue could stand up to them. And behold this is the same as what Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: There are three fierce ones: The Jewish people among the nations; [the dog among animals; and the rooster among birds.]". The explanation, that because they [the Jews] have the Torah, and for this reason their ways are fire, for fire is [definitionally] aggressive and fierce, therefore Yisrael are the fierce ones among the nations. And know, that matter is acted upon, and therefore human beings who are material entities, are definitionally not fierce and strong, but Yisrael who were given the Torah are fierce and strong entirely, and this concept we have explained in many place. [This is based in abstract philosophical tenet. In the Maharal's works he speaks of a dichotomy between matter and form, which in short the matter is the acted upon entity (i.e. the clay) while the form would be the acting entity (i.e. the hands).]. Therefore Daniel sees this nation [Greece], which is exceedingly eager for wisdom compared to any other nation, he sees it like a leopard which is the fiercest of all. 
Therefore, this nation [Greece] sought to have the Rabbis write for them a Greek Torah, as is explained in the Tractace Megillah (Megillah 9a) [This is a fascinating Gemara, so we must bring it for you to see:"There was an incident involving King Ptolemy, who assembled seventy-two Elders from the Sages of Israel, and put them into seventy-two separate rooms, and did not reveal to them for what purpose he assembled them, so that they would not coordinate their responses. He entered and approached each and every one, and said to each of them: Write for me a translation of the Torah of Moses your teacher. The Holy One, Blessed be He, placed wisdom in the heart of each and every one, and they all agreed to one common understanding. Not only did they all translate the text correctly, they all introduced the same changes into the translated text.]. Even though this nation [Greece] certainly has no portion in the Torah, as we have said, in any event they sought to write for themselves a Torah in their own language [Greek], for this would express that wisdom is suitable for them more than any other nation. This is what Chazal [the Rabbis of the Talmud] (Megillah 9b): "Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said: This is the reason [that we allow a Sefer Torah to be written in Greek], as it is written (Bereshit 9:27): "יפת אלוק'ם ליפת" “God shall enlarge/extend Japheth” [יפת is etymologically similar to the Hebrew term for beauty (יפה)]. The beauty of Japheth shall be in the tents of Shem." Which is to say, from the beauty of the children of Japheth, which is the Greek language, which is exceedingly beautiful [see Rashi on this Gemara], and meanwhile the Torah dwells in the tents of Shem, for it is permissible to have the Torah in their language. And all of this is because they [the Greeks] have exceeding wisdom compared to all other nations. And this comparative closeness itself was the cause of them wanting to annihilate the Torah, for a man is does not become jealous except of a man who resembles himself. Therefore, they [the Greeks] wanted to annihilate the Torah.
...And therefore it is said that the third empire is connected to the beast which is a leopard with four wings (Daniel 7:6), for wisdom expands to all directions and wide and far, and it has no borders whatsoever, rather it extends to every place. And therefore it is compared to the leopard which has four wings, for wings illustrate [the concept] of expansion in all four directions, and we have already explained this in another place, and it's clear in all places. And therefore it is said about this nation [in the first vision of Daniel] (Daniel 2:39 "[then yet a third kingdom, of bronze,] will rule over the whole earth". For after this nation possess wisdom, behold the intellect (שכל) expands throughout the entire world, as this is the concept of the intellect (שכל). And therefore corresponding to the attribute of the intellect, they ruled over the entire world, and all was according to this attribute (the שכל). And therefore this empire did not oppose Yisrael except in line with the Torah שכלי, and the Mitzvot of the G-dly Torah. [The Greek nation decreed specifically upon Bris Milah, on Rosh Chodesh, and Shabbat]. And thus all aspects of this third empire was to nullify from Yisrael the influence of G-dly Torah, and G-dly matters [supra-rational mitzvot] specifically. 
...This nation wanted that there should not be, G-d Forbid, a G-dly influence/element to Yisrael.
 This is what is said in the Midrash (Vikyra Rabbah 13:5) {R' Hartman suggest Bereshit Rabbah 2:4} "the Greeks darkened the eyes of the Jews with their decrees, that they said to them, 'write on the horn of an ox that you don't have a portion in the G-d of Yisrael'." For the third empire said to Yisrael 'write on the horn of an ox' specifically [the Maharal is highlighting the specific and odd detail in Midrash's telling of the Greek decree to the Jewish people]. The explanation of this can be found in the [Talmudic] chapter 'One doesn't stand' (Berachos, 32b) "[The Gemara cites a Midrash on the following verse from Isaiah, relating to the sin of the Golden Calf and Moses’ supplication for forgiveness:] “But Zion said: The Lord has forsaken me and the Lord has forgotten me. [Can a woman forget her suckling baby, that she would not have compassion for the child of her womb? These may forget, but you I will not forget”] (Isaiah 49:14–15). The Gemara seeks to clarify: Forsaken is the same as forgotten. [They are synonymous; why repeat the same idea twice?] Reish Lakish said: The community of Israel said before the Holy One, Blessed be He: Master of the Universe, even when a man marries a second wife after his first wife, he certainly recalls the deeds of his first wife. Yet You have not only forsaken me, but You have forgotten me as well. "Can a woman forget her suckling child?"(Isaiah 49:15) The Holy One, Blessed be He, said to Israel: My daughter, I created twelve constellations in the firmament, and for each and every constellation I have created thirty armies, and for each and every army I have created thirty legions [ligyon], and for each and every legion I have created thirty infantry division leaders [rahaton], and for each and every infantry division leader I have created thirty military camp leaders [karton], and for each and every military camp leader I have created thirty leaders of forts [gastera], and on each and every leader of a fort I have hung three hundred and sixty-five thousand stars corresponding to the days of the solar year. And all of them I have created only for your sake; and you said 'the Lord has forsaken me and the Lord has forgotten me'? [The verse goes on to say: “Can a woman forget her suckling baby"] The Holy One, Blessed be He, said to the community of Israel: Have I forgotten the ram offerings and firstborn animals that you offered before Me in the desert? The community of Israel replied to Him: Master of the Universe, since there is no forgetfulness before the Throne of Your Glory, perhaps you will not forget my sin of the Golden Calf? God responded to Israel: “These (אלה ) too shall be forgotten.” (Isiah 49:15). [“These” is a reference to the sin of the Golden Calf, regarding which Israel said: “These [אלה ] are your g-ds.”]. The community of Israel said before Him: Master of the Universe, since there is forgetfulness before the Throne of Your Glory, perhaps You will also forget the events revolving around the revelation at Sinai? G-d said to Israel: "I [ואנכי] will not forget you"(Isiah 49:15). [the revelation at Sinai, which began with: “I [ואנכי] am the Lord your G-d.”]. End quote. [The Maharal will now quote a line from this Gemara to explain in greater depth]. Let us note that the quote from the Gemara of the Jewish people to Hashem was: "Have I forgotten the ram offerings and firstborn animals that you offered before Me in the desert?" yet, the quote could very well have been "All the Korbanot which we have offered to you" [the Maharal is highlighting the odd specificity of the Jewish people's statement, in which they refer to only ram offerings and firstborn animals, rather than all sacrifices]. This odd specificity comes to teach us, that there is no deviation of the Jewish people from Hashem, because they were created by Hashem in essence and first, and therefore there is no removal or deviation at all such that forgetting would be relevant to them [the Jewish people relative to G-d]. And because in the desert was the first Korban, for the first Korban is the principal and essence of the matter, and because it is first - for all firsts are principal, which is the essential, which is to say not incidental/happenstance, and matters which are principal and essential are not forgotten. For a matter which is not primary, but which is merely incidental is indeed forgotten, because it is happenstance; but a matter which is the essential, it isn't forgotten. And therefore [G-d] says "Have I forgotten", the essential matter, i.e. that [the Jewish people] "brought Korbonot in front of me in the desert". And this [the essential and unforgettable nature of the Jewish bringing that first sacrifice to Hashem in the desert] teaches that the Jewish people are Servants to Hashem in their essence. [Can a woman] "forget" [her suckling baby?] - this statement [above in the Talmud] should be read as wonder, for the question comes from the incompatibility of this [both in the verse referring to a woman and child also in its application of the Jews and Hashem] to forgetting, for it is a matter which is definitionally essential.
The forgetfulness that is being mentioned here, it is not akin to the forgetfulness found by humans, for G-d forbid should one say that Hashem could possible forget. Rather the forgetfulness being mentioned here alludes to a deviation or removal from Hashem, as the verse says (Isiah 49:14) "Zion says, 'The L-RD has forsaken me, My Lord has forgotten me.'" Behold [forgetting] alludes to the deviation or removal from Hashem. And it says there (Isiah 49:15) "Can a woman forget her baby?" for there is no deviation to the fruit of the womb of a mother from the mother, for there is tremendous joining and connection between a mother and her child, therefore there is no deviation or separation between Yisrael from Hashem, due to the tremendous joining and connection between Yisrael with Hashem, from the aspect that they [the Jews] are considered children [of Hashem]. This concept is seen by their offering sacrifices in front of Hashem in the desert, for it's not regular or common for bulls [for the sacrifices] to be found within the desert, and even still they [the Jewish people] sacrificed. And all of this is because the essence of Yisrael is that they are created for this [a connected conjoining with Hashem], and it is impossible for them [the Jews] [to exist] without this, and specifically in such that in the beginning when Hashem took Yisrael as a nation, therefore at the beginning as soon as they leave, even if they were in the desert, so they brought sacrifices, and this connection illustrates the essential aspect of Yisrael. 
And there is also a deviation in this matter, in such that Yisrael were separated from Hashem through the act of the [Golden] Calf, that immediately after [Hashem] took them out of Egypt, and gave them the Torah, they made the Calf. And this illustrates that there is separation and deviation for Yisrael in a matter from Hashem, away from the essence of Yisrael; for if there was to Yisrael a complete connection to Hashem vis-a-vis their essence, they never would have made the Calf in the first place, and in such that Hashem took Yisrael as a nation, and immediately after he takes them from Egypt, and gives them the Torah, they make the Calf, and this concept teaches that certainly there is here [in the relationship between Yisrael and Hashem] deviation and separation. And just as there is to them [the Jews] a connection and closeness to Hashem vis-a-vis their essence, so too there is also to them separation vis-a-vis their essence. And this is because just like a father has a connection and relationship to his son which is bidirectional, for this one is the father, and this one the son, so too there is to them a distinction on these ground. For a father and a son they are essentially different, for this one is the father and this one the son, and this is considered separation. And therefore certainly there is separation and deviation vis-a-vis this, and therefore they [the Greeks] said to Yisrael (Vayikra Rabbah 13:5) "'Write on the horn of an ox that you don't have a portion in the G-d of Yisrael'." For from the aspect of the Calf, which Yisrael made the Calf immediately after [Hashem] gave them the Torah, this matter teaches that there is deviation and separation with their [Yisrael's] essential makeup. 
And on this it was said that (Isiah 49:15) "Though she might forget" [This is the latter half of the verse quoted above which said "Can a mother forget her child? While that phrase rhetorically suggests no, this latter half of the verse seems to suggest indeed it yes is possible. Maharal explains]. The explanation of the word "might" is that it [is a word that expresses] a difficult/harsh language, as we have seen in the 2nd chapter of [tractate] Yevamos (21a): "As Rabbi Levi said: The harshness of the punishment for using dishonest measures is more than the punishment for transgressing the prohibition of forbidden relationships, as with regard to this [forbidden relations], it is stated only: “These אל,” [(Leviticus 18:27) "for all those [אל] abhorrent things were done by the people who were in the land before you"] whereas with regard to that [dishonest measures], it is stated: “These [ אלה]” [Deuteronomy 25:16) “For all that do these [אלה] things, even all that do unrighteously, are an abomination unto the L-rd your G-d”]. [This implies that the word אלה indicates harshness and not the word אל. For everyone who does those things, everyone who deals dishonestly, is abhorrent to the L-rd your G-d.] And all uses of the word אלה implies difficult/harsh language, as it's written (Ezekiel 17,13) "and he carried away the nobles of the land" which is a language which is harsh and difficult. And it is said even though this subject, which is a connection of a mother to its child in the womb, which is a subject which is harsh and difficult if there would be here separation and deviation, so then it's fitting that according to Yisrael who are his [Hashem's] children so there shouldn't be deviation and forgetting regarding this matter, but in any event there is indeed deviation and separation in this matter for a father and a son are indeed different, as we mentioned. And therefore there is a deviation when Yisrael does not do the will of Hashem, and so enters the forgetfulness, when Yisrael are not connected to Hashem as his son. Even if this is a harsh matter, there is still forgetfulness. 
But the connection and bond that Yisrael has with Hashem is from another aspect, which is a connection from the cause itself. And a connection through the cause, there is no entity which is from the cause which is changeable. For from the perspective of the cause there is no change, it's just the transformation is from the perspective of the caused entity, which is definitionally in flux. And this is because Yisrael has no matter in themselves until there was deviation relevant to them, rather it is that Hashem chose them, and this matter is vis-a-vis the cause [Hashem]. Therefore, "I am" (for Hashem said to them "I am Hashem your G-d", for this is from the perspective of the cause, and there is no forgetting for to it, anything which is from the cause. And this is because "I am" is from the perspective of Hashem being their [the Jews] cause, and specifically a cause which obligates, as is proven with the language "I am Hashem your G-d that took you out of Egypt" (Exodus 20:2). And already many wise people have asked challengingly, it's not mentioned here any Mitzvah, for rather if it was [a commandment] the verse would have said 'I am Hashem your G-d that took you out of Egypt, therefore I will be to you a G-d', and here this matter isn't said as a commandment whatsoever. [The Maharal is highlighting that the first "commandment" is actual not in the form of a commandment at all, for the verse does not say 'I will be to you a G-d' but rather a statement of a fact independent of the Jews 'I am Hashem']. After the 10 commandments, and the removal of "I am" from the entirety of the 10 commandments, as we have explained in the book "Tiferet Yisrael "(CH 37). But the essential explanation is this, that if it had said 'I am Hashem your G-d that took you out of Egypt, therefore I will be to you a G-d', if so this would have implied that Hashem's being a G-d to the Jews would be dependent on the Jews, and thus this [the relationship] would have been from the perspective of the caused entity, who are receivers [not causers] of Hashem being their G-d. [In summation, Hashem is the causative entity while Yisrael are the caused entity. Causative entities are antithetical to any fluctuation, while caused entities are intrinsically in fluctuation. We see in the nature of the first of the ten commandments that our connection to Hashem is defined through Hashem, the cause, not through us, the caused. Therefore, fortunately for us, while the connection from our perspective can be severed or 'forgotten', from Hashem's perspective our connection is intrinsic or 'unforgettable']. And if so, it is impossible that there could be a removal in this, a matter which is from the perspective of the cause, for Hashem is the cause and binds Yisrael, and this is from the perspective of the cause and there is no separation here whatsoever. And therefore Yisrael said (Exodus 24:7) "We shall do, and we shall understand". And if they had said 'We shall understand, and we shall do', they would have has understanding [Daas] in and of themselves, as does every creation which has self-awareness. And they wouldn't have had this thing [proprietary Daas], rather they would have been drawn out from Hashem, who is the cause, and all is from the perspective of the cause and not from their own perspective, and [to the extent] that is as if they weren't an entity unto themselves. And therefore, "we shall do" precedes "we shall understand", and they were not dependent on their own proprietary Daas, rather it was all [the Sin of the Golden Calf] decreed upon them from from Hashem, that they should do [it] without choosing the matter from their Daas. If so, they didn't have proprietary Daas. And an entity which has no existence unto itself, but only is dependent upon the Blessed One, there is not relevance to removal or deviation [divergence] from it. And this is what it says (Isaiah 49:15) "I never could forget you", it's explanation, even though there is deviation and removal, even if they are considered children, as we have said, in any event from the perspective of the Source [The upper/transcendent], which is Hashem the Blessed One, and they are not independent to themselves, there is no deviation for them, and behold [this is expressed in the verse] "I never could forget you". For this that Yisrael are called children to Hashem be Blessed, and this matter is from the perspective of the receiver, that they are called children, and this isn't from the perspective of the Source [Upper/Transcendent], and for this matter [the recipient's perspective] there is deiation and removal. But ואנכי - "And I am", which is the Blessed One your G-d. This is as it says (Exodus 20:2): "I am Hashem your G-d", which is to say that I am Hashem your G-d and I am not dependent on you, rather it's essentially obligated from Hashem the Blessed One who is the Source, and from Hashem the Blessed One who is the Source is obligated that 'I am your G-d'. And this matter which is essentially obligatory is [definitionally] unchanging, and they have accepted me for their G-d, and such this matter obligated in every facet. And therefore (Isaiah 49:15) "I never could forget you", for this matter is from the perspective of the Source. 
And behold! This subject has been explained in the worlds of the Scholars of Greece, in what they wanted in this that they said (Bereshit Rabbah 2:5) "They wrote on the horn of an ox that they have no portion in the G-d of Yisrael". For they said that onsidering that Yisrael made the Calt as soon as they were taken out from Egypt, so that illustrates that they, G-d forbid, have no portion in the G-d of Yisrael. For an entity which is essential is first, and the Calf was first. And this is what they mean when they wrote on the 'horn of the ox', whereas they didn't write it on paper, for the horn is from the ox itself [i.e. it is an entity which extends from the creation, and while not an essential part of the creation is an extension of the creation], which means to say that they made the Calf, and this Sin is an essential matter to them, and not a matter of happenstance, and therefore they do not have a portion in the G-d of Yisrael. And one does not have an entity which is harder than a horn, and they said that this thing [the Sin of the G.C.] was to Yisrael from the aspect of their stick-neckenedess which they exhibited, and their stick-neckedness certainly was from their intrinsic perspective, and therefore the Calf was from their perspective, so says Hashem be Blessed in the act of the Calf (Deuteronomy 9:13-14) "I see that this is a stiffnecked people. Let Me alone" [end of verse: and I will destroy them and blot out their name from under heaven, and I will make you a nation far more numerous than they]. So said the Greeks, and they didn't understand the response to this, which is stated in the versed (Isaiah 49:16) "I never could forget you": And all of this, because this nation [Greece] wanted to negate from Yisrael the attribute of Transcendent G-dliness which there is to Yisrael, and therefore they [Greece] decreed upon them [Yisrael] to nullify from them the G-dly Torah. And even also the fourth kingship decreed destructions (? - unsure of translation) upon Yisrael in various things, however it's not similar. For the fourth kingship didn't do this because they said to us the 'transcendent G-dly attribute' as the Greeks said, rather they [the Romans] wanted to destroy them [the Jews] for they [the Jews] wouldn't do as they [the Romans] has decreed upon them, and they wanted to murder them therefore they decreed upon them decrees and destructions. And this was their fundamental drive to murdered, as we will explain. But the Greeks were not driven for their [the Jews'] destruction, rather they said that they didn't have a portion in the Blessed, but indeed we do have the G-dly attribute. 

And in the Midrash (Vayikra Rabba 13,5) This is the opinion of Rebbe Yochanan, that said Rebbe Yochanan (Jeremiah 5:6) "Therefore, the lion of the forest" - this is Babylon, "the wolf of the desert ravages them" - this is Persia, "The leopard lies in wait" - this is Greece, "Whoever leaves them will be torn to pieces" - this is Rome. Why? "For their transgressions are many, their rebellious acts unnumbered". (Daniel 7:6) "After that, as I looked on, there was another one, like a leopard" - this is Greece, for they established their decrees and they said to Yisrael write on the horn of an ox that there isn't to you a portion in the World to Come (in the G-d of Yisrael). (Daniel 7:7) "After that, as I looked on in the night vision, there was a fourth beast—fearsome, dreadful, and very powerful" - this is Rome. Daniel saw three in one night, and this one [the vision of Rome] in one night. Why? Rebbe Yochanan and Rebbe Shimon Ben Lakish: Rebbe Yochanan says, that is [Rome] is weighted against the three, and Rebbe Shimon Ben Lakish says, even more. Rebbe Yochanan challenged Rebbe Shimon Ben Lakish (Ezekiel 21:19) "O mortal, prophesy, striking hand against hand". This is what Rebbe Shimon Ben Lakish was using (Ezekiel 21, 19) "A second time [doubling]". Behold you can explain these worlds as we have said, for the fourth empire is weighted against the other three empires. And therefore Daniel sees the three empires in one night, and the fourth empire in one night unto itself. And what that Reish Lakish reasons that it [the fourth empire] was weighted more than the other three, this concept is because in such as there exists within it [the fourth empire] the three in such that there are three empires, each power has assistance to it from the second one [each power bolsters the next]. For certainly the years of people who are together, versus one who is alone, the [years of] one aren't weighted like half the the years of those who are together, for good are the years together rather than alone, for one individual assists the second one. And therefore, Reish Lakish says that the Empire which incorporates these three [empires] is actually bigger than these three, in such that they are divided, each one unto itself. And the attacking question of Rebbi Yochanan upon Reish Lakish, from the verse (Ezekiel 29:19) "O mortal, prophesy, striking hand against hand", this concept is that he hit hand against hand in renewal and wonder, and this concept was said when he said that there would be established a fourth Empire. And upon this it said "striking hand against hand", for the Empire will be forceful within the world, for this empire will be weighted against the other three Empires. And therefore it was said, "striking hand against hand", for a hand is three Empires, and the second hand is unto itself, this is the fourth Empire, which is weighted equal to the other three, and not more, for it is not mentioned more, but that it should be striking hand against hand. And upon this Reish Laish responds, "A second time [doubling]" (Ezekiel 21:19) it was written, which his to say that there will be two occasions of striking, hand against hand, that the fourth Empire will be weighed equal to the three and then further still than the three, which is a further wonder, and that's why [the verse] says "A second time [doubling]". And therefore this empire, it demands that it should be everything, and none other should be with it in existence whatsoever, and this isn't so with the three initial Empires. For to each one of the four empires there was a specific attribute: [G-dliness, for to each one of the four empires there was a specific attribute: -- this line is taken out of R' Hartman edition and seemingly sensibly for it appears a mimic of the previous sentence]. 
And this, is because the first empire - the Babylonian Empire - sought the important of being considered "everything", as it is written in Daniel (Daniel 2:38) "you are the head of gold", which is to say that he [Babylon] is the head with the most importance. And this is what he sought in his elevation upon everything, and when Daniel saw this first beast, it was similar to a lion. For the lion is the most important of the beasts, as it is said in [the Talmud] (Chagigah 13b) "As the Master said: The king of the beasts is the lion". And it sought only the most exceeding importance, and therefore [Daniel] saw that it had (Daniel 7:4) "wings of an eagle", for the eagle is the bird of the sky that soars to the highest heights. But the second empire [Daniel] said about it (Daniel 2:32) "its breast and arms were of silver". For this empire loved the accumulation of wealth, and 'the lover of money will never be satiated by money' [(Ecclesiastes 5:9) - this version does not quote to original source as does in R' Hartmann]. And the third Empire [Daniel] saw it (Daniel 2, 39) "Copper", because it was bold and swift to go and conquer distant lands, and therefore it's empire was aggressive and bold like copper which is bold, and he [Daniel] called it a leopard for it is bold faced. 
And the fourth, its power was in its destruction, and therefore it is metaphored (Daniel 2, 40) to iron, which cuts and destroys everything. 
And according to this the second Emire was corresponding to the גופני (bodily) capacity within a person, and the Greek Empire corresponding to the שכלי (intellectual) capacity within a person. And understand that the second Empire did not have its intentions except to take from them [the Jews] this world, to murder and to destroy them from their bodies, and to take from them this גופני physical/bodily world. The third empire did not seek except to take from them [the Jews] התורה השכלית (the intellectual Torah), and therefore Daniel say it as a leopard, which is bold. And therefore this empire behaved according to this attribute, for bold faced one stands opposite another and opposes it, and it doesn't one that the other should have any attribute/advantage, but only that it should stand in its boldness opposite it [it wants pure competition for the sake of competition, not for any productive results of a competition]. And therefore this empire stood in opposition to Yisrael in boldness, they didn't want that they [the Jews] should guard their law, for this is the behavior of the bold, it competes against another. And it doesn't do this thing so it should be great and important, as this was the trait of the first Empire [Babylon], and it didn't do it in order that everything should be under its dominion, but rather that it stood in opposition to another and it opposed it so that it's opponent shouldn't have any attribute/advantage, and so was the Greek empire. And there wasn't to them [the Greeks] any benefit, rather its like the bold-faced that don't enjoy in their boldness, rather they simply just oppose the other. And therefore, just like the first empire [Daniel] saw him, Nebuchadnezzar the evil one, 'head of gold', due to the importance, as Daniel said (Daniel 2:38) "you are the head of gold", and h saw the second empire as silver (Daniel 2:32), ad we have already said because all of its dealings were to accumulate and amass wealth as we have explained, and therefore because of the boldness which existed in the third Empire, he [Daniel] saw the third empire of copper because it is bold, as it says (Isaiah 48:4) "and your forehead copper". And I found in a Midrash, they gave to the Babylonian Empire silver and gold together, and to the Greek empire iron. And according it seems clear that a mistaken has befallen this, for it's not possible to say as such, and it's not found as such. And behold Daniel who say the second [should read third - R' Hartman amends] beast as a leopard (Daniel 7:6), and Nebuchadnezzer sees it as copper (Daniel 2:39), it's all one theme, for as was said about bold facedness, which is shown by the [comparison to] the leopard, which is bold (Avos 5:20), and a "forehead of copper" (Isaiah 48:4). And it seems that because of this, the leopard that Daniel saw had four wings of a bird, for because they [the Greeks] were bold, they went and conquered the entire world. For one who is not bold has the heaviness of physicality and seeks comfort and doesn't seek movement, but one who is bold is like fire, as was said above, for boldness is like fire which has no comfort/rest whatsoever, and therefore this empire extends across the entire world. And therefore Alexander, who was the quintessence of the third [Greek] empire went to conquer the entire world, as is well-known that he went to conquer the entire world, that which no Emperor had done. And this is what [Daniel] saw in this leopard [in that it had] four wings (Daniel 7:6), that it extends like a bird to all four directions of the world. And all of this is because they [the Greeks] were bold, and this is the course of boldness because the power of his boldness and his might, that he [Alexander] wanted to be overpowering to all that opposed him until he conquered it all, and from the power of his boldness he went out to the whole world to complete his boldness. 
In truth the fourth empire, because it sees itself as everything and nothing exists outside of it, therefore it wants that there shouldn't exist another, and therefore it destroys everything, and this nothing but [pure] destruction. And therefore Daniel sees this beast which has teeth of iron (Daniel 7:7), because iron destroys and cuts everything, as we explained in its place, that the entire interest of this empire is just destruction. And just as they burned the House of our G-d, and destroyed it, and this is just destruction to the utmost degree. And even if the first empire also burned the House of our G-d, this incident was because they [the Babylonians] wanted to conquer Yisrael under their hands/authority. And this wasn't because of [pure] destruction, rather because this empire wanted to be above/condescending upon everything, as we explained above, and there they conquered Yisrael. And because they wanted a complete conquering, they conquered and burned everything. But the fourth empire, which [Yisrael] was already under their hands/authority from before, and the nation that rebelled against them in a small matter as is known, [R' Hartman notes this is a reference to the incident described in the Gemara Gittin, 55b, which details the events leading up to the Roman destruction of the second temple, which was sparked by the minuscule rebellion of the Jews not wanting to offer a sacrifice of the reigning caesar that was blemished], and in any event it's certain that they [the Jews] were under their [Roman] hands and dominion. And this thing was for no reason except to destroy them, and they found a justification to destroy them. 
And all of this is because the fourth empire has attached/intrinsic to them Emptiness, for this empire is the end and finish of the empires, and there will be loss and Lacking to all the empires, and in the fourth empire is attached intrinsically to Emptiness. And in that attachment to Emptiness this brings Emptiness upon another, and because of this it [Rome] destroys everything as well. And therefore [Daniel] says: (Daniel 7:7) "Great iron teeth", and it says (Daniel 2:40) "But the fourth kingdom will be as strong as iron; just as iron crushes and shatters everything—and like iron that smashes—so will it crush and smash all these". And behold, each and every thing which is close to Emptiness and Nonexistence, is lesser. And therefore the first [empire] was compared to gold, and after it silver, and after it copper, and after it iron, which is lesser than all of them. And in this empire [Rome] is intrinsically connected to Lacking and Emptiness, and because of this it also cuts and destroys everything, and therefore [Daniel] said : (Daniel 2:34-35) "As you looked on, a stone was hewn out, not by hands, and struck the statue on its feet of iron and clay and crushed them. All at once, the iron, clay, bronze, silver, and gold were crushed etc..". The beginning here [in this verse] is with iron, for it is the beginning of emptiness, and after that are drawn towards the second [metals/empires] also Emptiness. 
And this is what the Midrash says (Vayikra Rabbah 13:5) "Another idea: "the camel"- this is Babylon, "for it chews its cud", for it praises the Holy One Blessed be He. Rabbi Barachya and Rabbi Chelbo in the name of Rabbi Yishmael the son of Nachman [said], all that which [King] David specified, this wicked one [Nebuchadnezzar] included in one verse, as it says (Daniel 4:34) "So now I, Nebuchadnezzar, praise, exalt, and glorify the King of Heaven..." ["...all of whose works are just and whose ways are right, and who is able to humble those who behave arrogantly"]: "praise" - (Psalms 147:12) "O Jerusalem, praise Hashem"; "exalt" - (Psalms 30:2) "I exalt You, Hashem"; "glorify" - (Psalms 104:1) "Hashem, my G-d, You are very great, You are clothed in glory and majesty"; "all of whose works are just" - (Psalms 138:2) " Upon your kindness and upon your truth"; "and whose ways are right" - (Psalms 96:10) "He judges the peoples with equity"; "and those who behave arrogantly" - (Psalms 93,1) "Hashem is king, He is robed in grandeur"; "he is able to humble" - (Psalms 75:11) "All the horns of the wicked I will cut". "And the Deman" (Vayikra 11:5), this is Persia, "for it chews its cud", for it praises the Holy One Blessed be He, as it says (Ezra 1:2) "Thus says Koresh, king of Paras" [All the kingdoms of the earth have been given me by the L-rd, the G-d of the heavens. And He has commanded me to build Him a house in Jerusalem, which is in Judah.]. "And the hare" (Vayikra 11:6), this is Greece, "for it chews its cud", for it praises the Holy One Blessed be He. Alexander of Macedon [don't know what " כד הוי חמי" means...] towards Rebbe Shimon HaTzadik. He [Alexander] said Blessed is the G-d, the G-d of Shimon HaTzadik. "And the pig" - this is Rome, "it does not chew its cud" - for it doesn't praise the Holy one Blessed be He. And it's not sufficient that it [Rome] doesn't praise [Hashem], but it insults and it profanes and says (Psalms 93:25) "Whom else have I in heaven?"". And the explanation [of this Midrash] is like we have said, for all of the [first three] empires are not intrinsically connected to emptiness, besides for the final empire [Rome]. And even though each and every empire incited the empire after it, this is also because emptiness arrives at the end. In any event, emptiness isn't attached to the essence of the empire [in the first three instances], but in the fourth empire emptiness is attached to it completely. And so emptiness brings a new existence, as is known, and therefore this emptiness brings a return of experience to Yisrael. And therefore the fourth empire is called "חזיר"- "Pig", for "שתחזור" it will "Return" the Kingship to Yisrael, which is to say considering the aspect of the emptiness to which the fourth empire is attached, it will usher in the experience of the Kingship of Yisrael. For the emptiness is a cause of the experience, as this matter is known to the intelligent people of wisdom, and therefore the fourth empire is Pig. And because of this, this empire is compared to iron, which destroys everything, and just as it is attached in essence fo emptiness, there it wants to cause everything to become empty and destroy everything. 

And you must understand and fully comprehend, that Hashem be Blessed, who organized within the creation four empires, and even if these empires are from the aspect of lacking within the creation as we said, in any event it's impossible for these four empires to be removed entirely from the arrangement/unfolding of the world until they are removed entirely by Hashem be Blessed. But certainly they [the empires] have an aspect in what that they are connected to Hashem the be Blessed. And therefore it was hinted in the three first: the camel, the Deman, and the hare, and to these there is to each and every one a sign of purity, that behold they all chew their cud. And this sign is in the hidden domain, and this illustrates that from the perspective of the hidden, there is to these three empires a bond and connection to Hashem be Blessed to some degree, and this thing is not a sign of purity in revealed actuality, but a sign of purity which is hidden. But the fourth empire has no sign of purity in the hidden realm, only in the revealed/external realm, for this is the bond that the fourth empire has to Hashem be Blessed, that they make themselves seem as if they are pure. And this concept illustrates the truth of the fourth empire that it stretch out its hooves and shows them off as if it was pure (Vayikra Raba 13:5), and this concept [of external purity] isn't an intrinsic concept, but it just displays itself as if it was pure, and therefore the sign of purity is on its hooves which are revealed and external. 
There are people who ask, where is the allusion the empire of Yishmael, which is the most grand and fierce empire. And the answer to this question of why the empire of Yismael hasn't been mentioned, is because scripture only considers the empires which receive the holy and exalted dominion, that they inherited the dominion of the kingship of Yisrael and their power, and those are these four empires. And if the Kingship of Israel had not been nullified, Kingship would not have reached them [(i.e. the dominion of the four Empires: Babylon, Persia, Greece, and Rome, was directly inversely related to the demise of the Jewish empire)]. Whereas the empire of Yishmael did not inherit its power from the Kingship of Israel, for its power and their might were given to it by Hashem be Blessed unto itself, because it is of the seed of Avraham, and Hashem be Blessed said (Bereshit 17,20) "And as for Yishmael, I have heeded you". And behold Hashem be Blessed gave power and might to Yishmael because of itself, and from this it doesn't speak when we mention these four empires, only since they inherit power and their might from Israel and in the end they will return dominion to Yisrael. And it further it seems there is to say, that Yishmael could be included within the Empire of Persia, which in totality is the second Empire. And even though it says (Daniel 7:5) "And the Kingship afterward", which is Persia, it didn't write Persia explicitly in the verse, rather it wanted to say that Persia includes the Empire we taught (I.e. Yishmael). 
[Maharal will now explain the power dynamic between Yisrael and the nations, in which the power of the nations is sources in physical force whereas for Yisrael the source of their power is in the G-dly and Disinct Intellect [Sechel Nivdal V' Eloki]. Maharal uses the parallel of a human being's lifespan to world history to illustrate the inverse dynamic of these two powers]. As we have explained above, the value of the four empires compared to the empire of Yisrael is akin the value of a beast to that of a human. For regarding a beast it's power is found vis-a-vis its body, and if a human were to lack its intellectual power over the beast in order to trap it with cunning, for this is the power of man, a human would not b able to stand opposite a beast, due to the bodily/physical power that the beast possesses. And so too with the nations: if Yisrael doesn't posses that attribute of distinct G-dliness, so Yisrael cannot stand against them [the nations], because of the greatness of their [physical] strength. However, just as every physical body has a finite end, so too to the power of the nations there is a finite end. But the distinct Sechel [intellect] is not finite, for the Sechel has not borders and finitude. Therefore there is not to attribute of Yisrael, which is an attribute of holy G-dliness, an end or finitude. Only when the physicality overpowers the intellectual/spiritual [Sichli], then there is a nullification of the Sechel, as this matter is known. In any event, the physicality with reference to itself has an end and borders as we have said. And where there is nullification of the physicality, so then there isn't an obstruction or nullification of the distinct Sechel, and the Sechel remains alone, as the physical power has been stripped and ended. This is similar to old age, when the bodily/physical power dissipates, and when the intellectual/spiritual power is strengthened, and it [I believe pronoun here refers to the Sechel, but a chance it refers to the Old Man] is in his strength. For the physical aspect of a person in his childhood overpower the intellectual, whereas at the time of old age so the physical goes way and what remains is intellect alone, and it's as if the person is entirely intellectual/spiritual. And then certainly the powers of the four empires, which have to them power which is not Distinct [Nivdal], overpower Yisrael at the beginning of the world. But at the end of the days of the world, so the powers that are physical powers will go away, and the holy and distinct power of Yisrael with become stronger, and there won't be left for them any obstacle. And these are words which are very clear. And when Nebuchadnezer the wicked saw the empires that they were in the form of a human (Daniel , 32-33), there is not power to nullify the power of these four empires except by the means stated [there] (Daniel 2,34) "As you looked on, a stone was hewn out, not by hands, and struck the statue on its feet of iron and clay and crushed them."
[Maharal will now reveal the depth of the above verse as an allusion the Yisrael's power to overcome the empires]. And in the Midrash [it says] [see R' Hartman on source listed in this version] '"Stone" this is Yaakov, as it's written (Bereshit, 49, 24) "There, the Shepherd, the Rock of Israel"'. And this explanation, for great is the power that these four empires possess, for Hashem Yisbarach gave to these four empires the power of Man, for to Man Hashem Yisbarach gave dominion, as we have explained, and this power could not be nullified except through Yaakov for his power is called stone. And this thing is a very deep concept that Yaakov is called the power of stone, for Yaakov has power which was Holy and Distinct, as we have explained in another place, for Yaakov specifically was the holy one, as is widely known in all places, and therefore it's written (Isiah 29, 23) "Men will sanctify the Holy One of Jacob", and here is not the place for elaboration. And from the power of his [Yaakov's] holy attribute/essence, he is able to nullify the power of these empires. And therefore he is called "stone", and as it's written (Bereshit, 49, 24) "There, the Shepherd, the Rock of Israel", and we have elaborated in another place [on the concept] that a distinct entity [Dvar Nivdal] is comparable to a stone, for physicality is acted upon, but the distinct [Nivdal] is not acted upon, rather it acts upon another, and it doesn't get acted upon. For this reason Yaakov is called a "stone", for a stone is not acted upon, for it is exceedingly strong, and it acts upon other entities. Therefore the Torah [the 10 commandments] was not written on a tablet of gold or silver, but rather upon stone, and this is as we have explained in the [Talmudic] tractate of Eruvin. And because of this stature and attribute, which Yaakov possessed, that he was Holy, therefore [in Nebuchadnezzar's vision, CH 2 V 34], it was hewn on the statue's foot, for the foot is connected to emptiness, as we have explained also this concept elsewhere, for wherever it says foot so there its connected to emptiness, and understand these things very well.
[Maharal will now proceed to bring a lengthy, and rather windy, Midrash. This Midrash expounds the particular wording in a series of verses at the beginning of Parhas Chukas, near the end of the 4th book of the Torah - Bamidbar. These verses detail the paradigmatic suprarational commandment of the Torah: the sacrifice of the red heifer. The Midrash leverages verses from various prophets in connection to particular word choices in this Torah passage in order to reveal an underlying message about the journey of the Jewish people throughout their various exiles through history. Our Midrash here operates in very similar style to the Midrash based on the opening verses of the 1st book of the Torah - Bereshit, which we already encountered at the beginning of this Sefer.]And it's found in the Midrash (Yalkut Shemoni, Chukas, 19) '"Heifer" - this is Egypt, as it says (Jeremiah 46:20) "Egypt is a handsome heifer...". "Red" - this is Babylon, as it says (Daniel 2:38) "...you are the head of gold". "Unblemished" - this is Persia. Says Rebbi Chiya Bar Abba 'the kings of Persia were unblemished, HaKodesh Baruch Hu had nothing on them except for their idol worship, which they merely received from their forefathers.' "In which there is no defect" - this is Greece. Alexander of Macedon [don't know what כד חמא means...maybe "when he saw"] for Shimon HaTaadik he would bow at his feet and [Alexander] would say Blessed is the G-d of Shimon HaTzadik. They said to him [ פלטין דידיה], in front of this Jew you bow?! [Alexander] said, when I go to battle, the I see his likeness and I am victorious. "on which no yoke has been laid" - this is the fourth empire, for they did not accept upon themselves the Yoke of HaKodesh Baruch Hu, and it wasn't sufficient that they didn't accept it, they disgrace it and blaspheme it and say (Psalms, 73:25) "Whom do I have in heaven?". (Bamidbar 19:3) "You shall give it to Eleazar the priest. It shall be taken outside the camp" - this teaches that in the future he [Eleazar] will push out [don't know what של כרך גדול is... maybe Rome's minister its great city] out of his designated area. "and slaughtered in his presence", this is as it says (Isiah 34, 6) " For the LORD holds a sacrifice in Bozrah..[great slaughter in the land of Edom]". Said Rebbe Berachya, there will be a great massacre in that land. "The heifer shall be burned in his sight" [this is an allusion to] (Daniel 7:11) "it was consigned to the flames". "its hide, flesh..." [don't know what this means: דוכסיא ואיפרכיה ואיסתרטליטיה], as it says (Ezekiel 27:27) "Your wealth, your wares, your merchandise, Your sailors and your pilots, The men who made your repairs, Those who carried on your traffic...[And all the fighting men within you— All the multitude within you— Shall go down into the depths of the sea On the day of your downfall.]. Says Shmuel the son of Yitzhak, even those that were from my community, and came to be connected to your community, even they their hearts will fall for days on the day of your downfall.'
[Having quoted the above Midrash, the Maharal explains the fundamental question underpinning the entire Midrash: why of all places is the red heifer a place to learn about the historical exiles of the Jewish people? How are those two concepts connected at all? The Maharal explains their connectedness is being sourced from an exceedingly lofty level, which gives both concepts the qualities of being very hard to grasp and being very powerful. With beauty and total relevance, Maharal offers intellectual solace to the feeling of exasperation at the length of our final exile]. And one must be very amazed! For what does the idea of these four empires have to do with the red heifer, in such that it would be fitting to hint within [the passage of] the red heifer the [concept of] the empires. But the explanation of this idea is, the red heifer is a mitzvah from the loftiest place, so much so that no human being is able to comprehend this particular Mitzvah. And even Shlomo, with his Cochmah, said (Ecclesiastes 7:23) "I thought I could fathom it, but it eludes me." - this particular Mitzvah [the Red Heifer]. And similarly, in such that the four empires arose in the world, and so too will they be removed from the world, this [concept] comes from a very lofty place. And when you understand these matters, there won't be to you wonderment [confusion?] as to the length of the exile, and in particularly regarding the fourth empire one shouldn't be amazed as just how long of a time span it is, for there is tremendous power to them [the empires], and their power is hinted at the passage of the red heifer, in such that there is for this particular Mitzvah a exceedingly great lofty level. As such, when Yaakov Avinu sees his dream (Bereshit 28:12) "And behold a ladder standing on the ground..." (Vayikra Rabbah 29,2) 'He [Jacob] saw the four empires ascending and did not see them descending'. And all of this, for just as one is unable to reach the secret [depths] of the red heifer, so too a person is unable to reach the depths of the power of the fourth empire. Therefore they [the Rabbis] of blessed memory hinted in [the Midrash above] (Yalkus Chukas 19), the concept of the four empires from within the context of the Parsha of the Red Heifer, to illustrate to us all of this, for a person should not be amazed [stupefied?] at the length of the exile. For the power of these four empires is a very lofty power, and therefore it [their power/sovereignty] is drawn out more.

Volume II














And it was appropriate that it would be on the twenty-fifth of Kislev, since the light emerges at that time. Because it was on the twenty-fifth of Elul that the light was created in the world, since the world was created on the first of Tishrei, and on it was created the Man that was created in the six days of creation; and the light that was created on the first day, it was on this twenty-fifth day of Elul that the light was created. And light has four boundaries: One boundary, [which is] that the light is at the end of its increasing and the darkness is at the end of its contraction, and from there the light begins to contract and the darkness to increase, and this is Tamuz [i.e., summer solstice]. And there is a [second] boundary where the light and the darkness are equal, and from there on the light begins to contract and the darkness to increase, and this is the month of Tishrei, since at that time the light and the darkness are equal and from there on the darkness increases and overcomes the light [i.e., autumnal equinox]. And there is a [third] boundary where the darkness overcomes the light completely, and this is in the Month of Tevet, and from then on the light begins to increase [i.e., winter solstice]. And there is a [fourth] boundary where the light and the darkness are equal and afterward the light proceeds to increase, and this is in the month of Nisan [i.e., vernal equinox], since at that time the light and the darkness are equal and afterward the light increasingly strengthens until the month of Tamuz, and thus it repeats. And behold, the beginning of the light that emerges from the darkness is on the twenty-fifth of Kislev, since the creation of the light of the world was at a time in which the day and night were equal, and this was on the twenty-fifth of Elul - or on the twenty-fifth of Adar according to the opinion (Rosh HaShanah 11a) that the world was created in Nisan - in which case the beginning of the light was on the twenty-fifth of Kislev since at that time the light began to increase. And therefore the miracle with the oil was made, and the light on the twenty-fifth was even if there was no oil to light, and the miracle was for all eight [days] when it was at that time which is singled out for the beginning of the light.