Targum Jonathan on Ezekiel
תרגום יונתן על יחזקאל
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Targum Jonathan on Ezekiel



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16

And the word of prophecy from before the LORD was with me, saying:
Mortal man, rebuke the residents of Jerusalem and show them their abominations.
And say: Thus said the LORD God to the residents of Jerusalem: Your settlement and youth was from the land of the Canaanites; there I was revealed upon Abraham your father between the pieces, and I showed him that you would go down to Egypt, with a high hand I would liberate you, and by merit of your ancestors I would drive out from before you the Amorites and expelled the Hittites.
But when your ancestors went down to Egypt, dwelling in a land not theirs, enslaved and afflicted was the congregation of Israel, like a child abandoned by the mouth of a pit, with uncut cord, unwashed in water for cleaning, and not rubbed with salt, nor swaddled in swaddling.
The eye of Pharaoh had no mercy on you, not even doing one good thing to have compassion on you, and decreed against you a decree of annihilation, to throw your males into the river, to destroy you at the time you were in Egypt.
And for the memory of the ancestral covenant before Me, I revealed Myself to liberate you, for it was revealed before Me that you were afflicted and enslaved, and I said to you, "In the blood of the circumcision I will have mercy on you," and I said to you, "In the blood of the paschal-sacrifice I will liberate you."
Myriad like the plants of the field I made you, and you increased and strengthened, and became families and tribes, and by the upright works of your ancestors the time to liberate your congregation had arrived, for you were enslaved and afflicted.
And I revealed myself to Moses in the bush, for it was revealed before Me that the time had come for your liberation, and I protected you by My word, and I removed your sins, and I swore by My word to liberate you, as I had sworn to your ancestors — said the LORD GOd — to be a people serving before Me.
And I liberated you from Egyptian slavery and removed their strong dominion from you and led you in freedom.
And I dressed you in embroidered garments from your enemies' treasure, and placed a shoe of glory on your feet, and sanctified from among you the priests to be serving before Me in a linen turban, and the high priest in colored garments.
And I fixed before you the correct words of the Torah, written on two tables of stone, and I gave them by the hand of Moses, and in the sanctity of My great Name I sanctified you.
And I gave you the ark of My covenant among you, and the could have My glory went over you, and an angel sent from before Me leading ahead of you.
And I gave My tabernacle among you, affixed with gold and silver and linen and colored embroidered hangings, and manna as good as semolina and honey and oil I fed you, and I enriched you and strengthened you and made you prosper and have dominion over all kingdoms. 
And your name went out, congregation of Israel, among the nations, in your beauty, for complete was My glory that I set upon you — said the LORD God.















































Look - this was the debt of Sodom your sister: pride, plenty of bread, and ease and tranquility were hers and her villages, yet the hand of the poor and hungry she did not strengthen.
And they claimed themselves superior, and did an abomination before Me, so I exiled them, just as has been revealed from before Me.