Numbers
במדבר
Edited for shnayim mikrah Metsudah Chumash, Metsudah Publications, 2009 [with Onkelos translation]
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH002691623

Numbers



Chapter 1

And Hashem spoke to Moshe in the Sinai desert, in the Tent of Meeting, on the first [day] of the second month, in the second year of their exodus from the land of Mitzraim, saying:...
Take a head count [ the sum ] of the entire congregation of Bnei Yisroel according to their families to the house of their fathers counting the names of all males individually.
From twenty years old and above, all those eligible for the army [ who go to war ] of Yisrael , you shall count them according to their divisions, you and Aharon.
Along with you, there shall be one man for each shevet, each man shall be the head of his fathers’ house.
These are the names of the men who shall stand along with you. For [the shevet of] Reuven, Elitzur the son of Shdeiur.
For [the shevet of] Shimon, Shlumiel the son of Tzurishadai.
For [the shevet of] Yehudah, Nachshon the son of Aminadav.
For [the shevet of] Yissachar, Nesanel the son of Tzu’ar.
For [the shevet of] Zevulun, Eliav the son of Cheilon.
For the sons of Yoseif, for [the shevet of] Ephraim, Elishamah the son of Amihud. For [the shevet of] Menasheh, Gamliel the son of Pedahtzur.
For [the shevet of] Binyamin, Avidan the son of Gid’oni.
For [the shevet of] Don, Achiezer the son of Amishadai.
For [the shevet of] Asher, Pagi’el the son of Ochran.
For [the shevet of] Gad, Elyasaf the son of De’uel.
For [the shevet of] Naftali, Achira the son of Einan.
These are the ones called from the congregation, the leaders of their fathers’ shevets; they are the heads of the thousands of Yisroel.
Moshe and Aharon took these men who were designated by name.
They gathered together the entire congregation on the first [day] of the second month and they were registered by family ancestry according to the house of their fathers. according to the number of names each man of twenty years and above; individually.
Just as Hashem commanded Moshe. He counted them in the Sinai desert.
These were the sons of Reuven, Yisroel’s firstborn, their births according to their families according to the house of their fathers. according to the number of individual names every male of twenty years and above, all who go forth into the army.
Their numbers, for the shevet of Reuven, is forty-six thousand five hundred.
For the sons of Shimon, their births according to their families according to the house of their fathers, his numbers according to the number of individual names every male of twenty years and above, all who go forth into the army.
Their numbers, for the shevet of Shimon, is fifty-nine thousand three hundred.
For the sons of Gad, their births according to their families according to the house of their fathers in a counting of names. From twenty years and above, all who go forth into the army.
Their numbers, for the shevet of Gad, is forty-five thousand six hundred and fifty.
For the sons of Yehudah, their births according to their families according to the house of their fathers, in a counting of names. From twenty years and above, all who go forth into the army.
Their numbers, for the shevet of Yehudah, is seventy-four thousand six hundred.
For the sons of Yissachar, their births according to their families according to the house of their fathers, in a counting of names. From twenty years and above, all who go forth into the army.
Their numbers, for the shevet of Yissachar is fifty-four thousand four hundred.
For the sons of Zevulun, their births according to their families according to the house of their fathers, in a counting of names from twenty years and above, all who go forth into the army.
Their numbers, for the shevet of Zevulun, is fifty-seven thousand four hundred.
For the sons of Yoseif; For the sons of Ephraim their births according to their families according to the house of their fathers, in a counting of names from twenty years and above, all who go forth into the army.
Their numbers, for the shevet of Ephraim is forty thousand five hundred.
For the sons of Menashe, their births according to their families according to the house of their fathers, in a counting of names from twenty years and above, all who go forth into the army.
Their numbers, for the shevet of Menashe is thirty-two thousand two hundred.
For the sons of Binyamin, their births according to their families according to the house of their fathers, in a counting of names from twenty years and above, all who go forth into the army.
Their numbers for the shevet of Binyamin, is thirty-five thousand four hundred.
For the sons of Don, their births according to their families according to the house of their fathers, in a counting of names from twenty years and above, all who go forth into the army.
Their numbers, for the shevet of Don, is sixty-two thousand seven hundred.
For the sons of Asher, their births according to their families according to the house of their fathers, in a counting of names from twenty years and above, all who go forth into the army.
Their numbers, for the shevet of Asher is forty-one thousand five hundred.
The sons of Naftali, their births according to their families according to the house of their fathers, in a counting of names from twenty years and above, all who go forth into the army.
Their numbers, for the shevet of Naftali is fifty-three thousand four hundred.
These are the numbers which were counted [by] Moshe, Aharon and the leaders of Yisrael , [being] twelve men, each man was the head of his fathers’ house.
All the numbers of Bnei Yisroel according to the house of their fathers, from twenty years and above, all who go forth into the army of Yisrael ,
All their numbers were six hundred and three thousand five hundred and fifty.
The Levi’im, according to the shevet of their fathers were not counted among them.
Hashem spoke to Moshe, saying;
However, the shevet of Levi you shall not count and you shall not take [ accept ] their head count among Bnei Yisroel.
You shall appoint the Levi’im to oversee the Mishkan of Testimony and over all of its utensils and over all that belongs to it. They shall carry the Mishkan and all its utensils, and they shall administer it, and they shall camp around the Mishkan.
When the Mishkan is to be moved the Levi’im shall take it down, and when the Mishkan is to rest [in one place] the Levi’im shall erect it, and the stranger who approaches, shall die.
Bnei Yisroel shall camp, each man at his own camp and each man at his own banner, according to their divisions.
The Levi’im shall camp around the Mishkan of the Testimony, so that there will not be anger upon the congregation of Bnei Yisroel, and the Levi’im shall be careful to preserve the Mishkan of Testimony.
Bnei Yisroel did according to all that Hashem commanded Moshe; they did it [exactly].


Chapter 2

Hashem spoke to Moshe and to Aharon, saying;...
Each man at his own banner, with the insignia of their fathers’ houses shall Bnei Yisroel encamp, at a distance around the Tent of Meeting they shall encamp.
Those whose camp is in the forefront, on the eastern side is the camp of the banner of Yehudah according to their divisions, and the leader of the sons of Yehudah is Nachshon the son of Aminadav.
Its division and their numbers is seventy-four thousand six hundred.
Those who camp along with [ near ] him are; the Shevet of Yissachar, and the leader of the sons of Yissachar is Nesanel the son of Tzu’ar.
Its division and its numbers is fifty-four thousand four hundred.
The Shevet of Zevulun, and the leader of the sons of Zevulun is Eliav the son of Cheilon.
Its division and its numbers is fifty-seven thousand four hundred.
The total numbers for the encampment of Yehudah is one hundred eighty-six thousand four hundred according to their divisions, [and] they travel [in the] first [position].
The banner of the camp of Reuven is on the south side, according to their divisions, and the leader of the sons of Reuven is Elitzur the son of Shdeiur.
Its divisions and its numbers is forty-six thousand five hundred.
Those who camp along with him are; the Shevet of Shimon, and the leader of the Shevet of Shimon is Shlumiel the son of Tzurishadai.
Its division and their numbers is fifty-nine thousand three hundred;
The Shevet of Gad, and the leader of the sons of Gad is Elyasaf the son of Re’uel.
Its division and their numbers is forty-five thousand six hundred fifty.
The total numbers for the encampment of Reuven is one hundred fifty-one thousand four hundred and fifty, according to their division, and they travel [in the] second [position].
The Tent of Meeting shall travel [along with] the camp of the Levi’im in the center of the [other] camps, just as they camp so shall they travel, each man in his place according to their [various] banners.
The banner of the camp of Ephraim, according to their divisions is on the west side, and the leader of the sons of Ephraim is Elishamah the son of Amihud.
Its division and their numbers is forty-thousand five hundred.
Along with [ near ] him are; the Shevet of Menashe, and the leader of the sons of Menashe is Gamliel the son of Pedahtzur.
Its division and their numbers is thirty-two thousand two hundred.
The Shevet of Binyamin, and the leader of the sons of Binyamin is Avidan the son of Gid’oni.
Its division and their numbers is thirty-five thousand four hundred.
The total numbers for the camp of Ephraim is one hundred eight thousand one hundred according to their divisions, and they travel [in the] third [position].
The banner of the camp of Don is on the north side according to their divisions, and the leader of the sons of Don is Achiezer the son of Amishadai.
Its division and their numbers is sixty-two thousand seven hundred.
Those who camp with him are; the Shevet of Asher, and the leader of the sons of Asher is Pagi’el the son of Ochran.
Its divisions and their numbers is forty-one thousand five hundred.
The Shevet of Naftali, and the leader of the sons of Naftali is Achira the son of Einan.
Its divisions and their numbers is fifty-three thousand four hundred.
The total numbers for the encampment of Don is one hundred fifty-seven thousand six hundred and they travel [in the] last [position] according to their [various] banners.
These are the numbers of Bnei Yisroel according to their fathers’ houses. The total numbers of the camps according to their divisions is six hundred three thousand five hundred fifty.
The Levi’im were not counted among Bnei Yisroel just as Hashem commanded Moshe.
Bnei Yisroel did all which Hashem commanded Moshe, so they camped according to their [various] banners and so they traveled, each man with his family according to his fathers’ house.


Chapter 3

These are the descendants of Aharon and Moshe on the day that Hashem spoke to Moshe on Mount Sinai....
These are the names of Aharon’s sons; the firstborn, Nadav, and Avihu, Elazar and Isamar.
These are the names of Aharon’s sons, the anointed kohanim, whose hands are occupied with bringing offerings, to serve [God].
Nadav and Avihu died in the presence of Hashem, when they offered a strange fire-offering before Hashem, in the Sinai desert, and they had no sons. [However] Elazar and Isamar served in the presence of their father Aharon.
Hashem spoke to Moshe, saying;
Bring the Shevet of Levi near and have it stand before Aharon the kohein, and they shall serve him.
They shall take care to preserve his guardianship and the guardianship of the entire congregation before the Tent of Meeting, to serve in the service of the Mishkan.
They shall guard all the utensils of the Tent of Meeting and the watch of Bnei Yisroel to serve in the service of the Mishkan.
You shall place the Levi’im in the charge of Aharon and his sons; they are presented [ and given ] to him from [among] Bnei Yisroel.
You shall appoint Aharon and his sons and they shall guard their priesthood, and an outsider (non- kohein ) who comes near shall be put to death.
Hashem spoke to Moshe, saying;
Behold! I have taken the Levi’im from among Bnei Yisroel instead of all the firstborn who have opened the womb, among Bnei Yisroel, and [therefore] the Levi’im shall be Mine [ serve before Me ].
For all the firstborn are Mine, since on the day I smote all the firstborn in the land of Mitzraim I sanctified to [ before ] Me all the firstborn of Bnei Yisroel from man to beast; they shall be Mine, I am Hashem.
Hashem spoke to Moshe in the Sinai desert, saying;
Count the sons of Levi according to their fathers’ houses according to their families. All males from the age of one month and above, you shall count them.
Moshe counted them according to the word of Hashem, just as he was commanded.
These were sons of Levi according to their names, Gershon, Kehos and Merori.
These are the names of Gershon’s sons according to their families; Livni and Shim’i.
The sons of Kehos, according to their families were; Amram, Yitzhar Chevron and Uziel.
The sons of Merori, according to their families were; Machli and Mushi. These are the families of Levi according to their fathers’ houses.
Of Gershon, the family of Livni and the family of Shim’i. These are the families of the Gershonites.
Their numbers, in a count of every male of one month and above; their numbers are seven thousand five hundred.
The families of the Gershonites shall camp behind the Mishkan on the west side.
The leader of the household of the Gershonites is Elyasaf the son of Lael.
The guardianship of the sons of Gershon in the Tent of Meeting [was]; the Mishkan and the Tent, its cover and the Curtain for the entrance of the Tent of Meeting,
The hanging Curtains of the courtyard and the Curtain at the entrance of the courtyard which is around the Mishkan and Mizbeach, and its ropes, for all of the work involving these things [ its service ].
Of Kehos, was the family of Amram, the family of Yitzhar, the family of Chevron and the family of Uziel, these are the families of the Kehosites.
The number of every male from one month and above is eight thousand six hundred. [They were] the guardians of the sacred vessels.
The families of the children of Kehos shall camp on the south side of the Mishkan.
The leader of the household of the families of the Kehosites, is Elitzafan the son of Uziel.
Their guardianship is the Aron, the Table, the Menorah, the Mizbeachs and the sacred utensils with which they serve. And the Curtain, and all of the work involving these things.
The leader of the leaders of Levi shall be Elazar, the son of Aharon, the kohein [who is] in charge of the appointment of the guardians to safeguard the holy [Sanctuary].
Of Merori, was the family of Machli and the family and Mushi; these are the families of the Merorites.
Their numbers, in a count of every male of one month and above, is six thousand two hundred.
The leader of the household of the families of the Merorites is Tzuriel the son of Avichail, they shall camp on the north side of the Mishkan.
The appointed task of the guardianship of the sons of Merori shall be the beams of the Mishkan, its bars, pillars and sockets; all of its utensils, and all of the work involving these things [ its service ].
Also the pillars of the surrounding courtyard and their sockets, pegs and ropes.
Those who camped in front of the Mishkan in the forefront, in front of the Tent of Meeting on the east side [are]; Moshe, Aharon and his sons, guardians of the guardianship of the Sanctuary to guard on behalf of Bnei Yisroel. Any outsider (non- kohein ) who comes near, shall be put to death.
The number of all the Levi’im whom Moshe and Aharon counted at the word of Hashem according to their families; every male from one month and above was twenty-two thousand.
Hashem said to Moshe: Count every male firstborn of Bnei Yisroel from the age of one month and above and take the number of their names.
You shall take the Levi’im for [ before ] Me, I, [who am] Hashem, instead of every firstborn of Bnei Yisroel; and the animals of the Levi’im instead of every firstborn among the animals of Bnei Yisroel.
Moshe counted just as Hashem commanded him to, every firstborn of Bnei Yisroel.
Every male firstborn according to the number of names of one month and above according to their numbers, was twenty-two thousand two hundred and seventy-three.
Hashem spoke to Moshe, saying:
Take the Levi’im instead of every firstborn of Bnei Yisroel, and the animals of the Levi’im instead of their animals, and the Levi’im shall [ serve before Me ] be Mine, I am Hashem.
And the redemption of the two hundred and seventy-three that are in excess of the number of Levi’im from the firstborns of Bnei Yisroel.
You shall take five shekolim apiece from each individual; you shall take it in holy shekolim at twenty gerah for each shekel.
You shall give the money to Aharon and to his sons as a redemption for those whose numbers are in excess [of the Levi’im.]
Moshe took the redemption money from those whose numbers were in excess of those who were redeemed through the Levi’im.
From the firstborn of Bnei Yisroel, he took the money. One thousand three hundred sixty-five, in holy shekel.
Moshe gave the money of those who were redeemed to Aharon and to his sons according to the word of Hashem, just as Hashem commanded to Moshe.


Chapter 4

Hashem spoke to Moshe and to Aharon, saying;...
Take the count of the sons of Kehos from among the sons of Levi according to their families according to the house of their fathers.
From thirty years and above until fifty years, all who enter into the division to perform service in the Tent of Meeting.
This is the service of the sons of Kehos in the Tent of Meeting, the Holy of Holies.
Aharon and his sons shall enter when the camp is about to travel, and take down the screening curtain and, with it they shall cover the Aron of the Testimony.
They shall place upon it a covering of tachash [ multi-colored ]-hide and spread an entirely blue woolen cloth on top of it, and put its [carrying] poles [in place].
On the Show Table [ table of the show bread ] they shall spread a blue woolen cloth and they shall place upon it the molds, spoons, rods and the covering props, and the continual bread shall be upon it [ continually ].
They shall spread upon them a cloth of crimson thread and they shall cover it with a covering of tachash [ multi-colored ]-hide and put its [carrying] poles [in place].
They shall take a blue woolen cloth and they shall cover the Menorah that illuminates and its lamps, its tongs and its scoops and all of its oil vessels; those with which you use to perform its service.
They shall put it and all of its utensils into the covering of the tachash [ multi-colored ] -hide and put it on the carrying frame.
On top of the golden Mizbeach they shall spread a blue woolen cloth and they shall cover it with a covering of tachash [ multi-colored ] -hide, and put its [carrying] poles in place.
They shall take all the service utensils with which they serve in the Sanctuary and they shall put them inside a blue woolen cloth, and they shall cover them with a covering of tachash [ multi-colored ] -hide, and put it on the carrying frame.
They shall remove the ashes from [atop] the Mizbeach and they shall spread upon it a cloth of purple [wool].
They shall put upon it all of its utensils which they use in service, those that are used on the Mizbeach-top; the firepans, forks, scoops and sprinklers, all the utensils of the Mizbeach. They shall spread upon it a covering of tachash [ multi-colored ] -hide, and put its [carrying] poles in place.
Aharon and his sons shall complete the covering of the Sanctuary and all of the holy utensils whenever the camp is about to travel, and after that, the sons of Kehos shall come to carry [these items], and they shall not touch the Holy [objects] and they will [not] die. These are what the sons of Kehos must carry for the Tent of Meeting.
Encharged [ given ] to Elazar, the son of Aharon the kohein, is the oil for illumination, the incense of spices the continual [daily] meal-offering and the anointing oil; the charge of the entire Mishkan and all of its contents in the Sanctuary, and its utensils.
Hashem spoke to Moshe and to Aharon, saying:
Do not cut off the Shevet of the families of the Kehosites, from among the Levi’im.
This is what you must do for them, that they may live and not die when they approach the Holy of Holies; Aharon and his sons shall [first] come and appoint them each man individually, to [perform] his own service, and to carry his own load.
They shall not come in to see when the holy is [ utensils are ] being covered and [they will not] die.
And Hashem spoke to Moshe, saying;
Take the count of the sons of Gershon as well, according to the house of their fathers according to their families.
From thirty years and above, until fifty years, you shall count them; all those who enter the division to serve in the Tent of Meeting.
This is the service of the families of the Gershonites to serve, and to carry.
They shall carry the tapestries of the Mishkan and [of] the Tent of Meeting, its covering and the covering of tachash which is on top of it, and the screen for the entrance to the Tent of Meeting,
the hanging [tapestries] of the courtyard, the screen for the entrance to the gate of the courtyard which are over the Mishkan and Mizbeach on all sides, their ropes and all of their service utensils and all that will be given [ delivered ] to them, and thus shall they serve.
By instruction of Aharon and [one of] his sons shall be all the services of the sons of the Gershonites for all that they carry and for all their service. You shall fix specified appointments for them for everything they carry.
This is the service of the families of the sons of the Gershonites in the Tent of Meeting. Their guardianship is in the hands of Isamar, the son of Aharon the kohein.
The sons of Merori, according to their families and according to the house of their fathers you shall count them.
From thirty years and above until fifty years, you shall count them; all who enter the division to serve in the Tent of Meeting.
This is what they are entrusted to carry according to all their duties in the Tent of Meeting; the beams of the Mishkan, its bars, pillars and sockets.
The pillars around the courtyard, their sockets, stakes and ropes; with all their utensils and for all their service; and by name shall you appoint the utensils to the charge of those who will carry them.
This is the service of the families of the sons of Merori for all their service in the Tent of Meeting, under the direction of Isamar, the son of Aharon, the kohein.
They counted—Moshe, Aharon and the leaders of the congregation—the sons of the Kehosites according to their families and according to the house of their fathers.
Those, from thirty years and above, until fifty years; all those who enter the division to serve in the Tent of Meeting.
Their numbers, according to their families were two thousand seven hundred and fifty.
These are the numbers of the families of the Kehosites of all who serve in the Tent of Meeting whom Moshe and Aharon counted according to the word of Hashem, through Moshe.
The numbers of the sons of Gershon, according to their families and according to the house of their fathers.
Those, from thirty years and above, until fifty years; all who enter the division to serve in the Tent of Meeting.
Their numbers, according to their families, according to the house of their fathers were two thousand six hundred and thirty.
These are the numbers of the families of the sons of the Gershonites, of all those who serve in the Tent of Meeting, whom Moshe and Aharon counted, according to the word of Hashem.
The numbers of the families of the sons of the Merorites according to their families, according to the house of their fathers.
Those, from thirty years and above, until fifty years; all who enter the division to serve in the Tent of Meeting.
Their numbers were, according to their families, three thousand two hundred.
These are the numbers of the families of the sons of the Merorites whom Moshe and Aharon counted according to the word of Hashem, through Moshe.
The total of the numbers counted by Moshe, Aharon and the leaders of the congregation [of] the Levi’im according to their families, according to the house of their fathers.
Those from thirty years and above, until fifty years; all who enter to serve the service of service and the service of carrying in the Tent of Meeting.
Their numbers were eight thousand five hundred and eighty.
According to the word of Hashem he counted them, by the hand of Moshe, each man according to his service and according to what he carries; and they were counted, as Hashem commanded Moshe.


Chapter 5

Hashem spoke to Moshe, saying;...
Command Bnei Yisroel that they must expel from the camp. anyone with tzora’as, and anyone from whom flows a [seminal] discharge and anyone who became defiled by a (departed) [ the bones of the ] soul [ of a person ].
Whether male or female you shall send them out. Beyond the camp you shall send them, and they shall not defile their camps in which I dwell [ My Shechina dwells ] among them.
Bnei Yisroel did so, and they sent them beyond the camp; just as Hashem spoke to Moshe, so did Bnei Yisroel do.
Hashem spoke to Moshe, saying;
Speak to Bnei Yisroel: When a man or a woman commits any of the sins against man, acting treacherously [ untruthfully before ] against Hashem, and that person is guilty.
They shall confess the sins which they committed and return the principal amount [of the object] of his guilt, and add one fifth to that amount. He shall then give it to whom he is indebted.
But if the man has no redeemer (relative) to whom the debt may be returned, the debt being returned then belongs to Hashem, [then] to the kohein. This is besides the ram of forgiveness with which he [his sin] will be atoned.
Every terumah -gift of all the sacred things of Bnei Yisroel that they will bring to the kohein, shall be his.
A [ tenth of ] man’s sacred objects shall be his; whatever a man gives to the kohein, shall be his.
Hashem spoke to Moshe, saying;
Speak to Bnei Yisroel and say to them: If any man’s wife goes astray and acts treacherously [ untruthfully ] toward him.
And a man has lain with her conjugally but it was hidden [ covered ] from her husband’s eyes and she was concealed and has become defiled and there is no witness against her, and she was not seized forcibly.
[When] a spirit of jealousy comes upon him and he is jealous of his wife and she was defiled or, a spirit of jealousy comes upon him and he is jealous of his wife and she was not defiled,
that man shall bring his wife to the kohein and he shall bring her offering for her; [which is] one tenth of an epha [ three se’in ] of barley flour; he shall not pour oil over it and he shall not put frankincense on it, for it is a meal-offering of jealousy, a meal-offering of remembrance, recalling an iniquity.
The kohein shall bring her near and station her before Hashem.
The kohein shall take sanctified waters [ water from the copper wash basin ] in a clay utensil, and of the earth that will be on the floor [ base ] of the Mishkan, the kohein shall take and put into the water.
The kohein shall station the woman before Hashem, and expose the woman’s hair, and place on her palms [ hands ] the meal-offering of remembrance; it is a meal-offering of jealousy and there will be in the kohein’s hand, the bitter, lethal waters.
The kohein shall place her under oath and say to the woman: If a man has not lain with you [conjugally] and if you have not gone astray to be defiled while you were married to [ by someone other than ] your husband, you shall be absolved of these bitter, lethal waters.
[But] you, if you have gone astray while you were married to your husband, and if you have been defiled, and if a man has lain conjugally with you, [a man] other than your husband.
The kohein shall place the woman under oath with the oath of accursedness, and the kohein shall say to the woman: “Hashem shall make you a curse and an oath among your people, when Hashem causes your thigh to collapse [ fall away ] and your abdomen to swell.
This bitter, lethal water will enter your abdomen to swell [ inflate ] the abdomen, and collapse [ fall away ] the thigh and the woman shall say “Amein, Amein”.
The kohein shall write all these curses, on the scroll and dissolve them (the writing) in the bitter waters.
He shall have the woman drink the bitter, lethal waters and the lethal waters, shall enter her to become bitter.
The kohein shall take from the woman’s hand the meal-offering of jealousy and he shall wave the meal-offering before Hashem, and bring it close to the Mizbeach.
The kohein shall scoop out from the meal-offering its commemoration and burn it on [ bring it up to ] the Mizbeach, and after that he shall cause the woman to drink the water.
He shall make her drink the water, and it shall be that if she had been defiled and had deceived [ been untruthful to ] her husband, the lethal waters shall enter her to become bitter, and her abdomen will swell and her thigh will collapse [ fall away ], and the woman will be a curse among her people.
But if the woman was not defiled and [she] is pure, she will be cleansed [ go out exonerated ] and shall bear seed [ will conceive ].
This is the law of jealousies, when a woman goes astray during her marriage to her husband and is defiled.
If a man is overcome with a spirit of jealousy and he is jealous of his wife, then he shall have the woman stand before Hashem, and the kohein shall do unto her all of these laws.
The man is cleansed [ innocent ] of sin and that woman shall bear [the burden of] her iniquity.


Chapter 6

Hashem spoke to Moshe, saying;...
Speak to Bnei Yisroel and say to them: If a man or a woman sets apart a vow, a nazirite vow, to set [himself] apart for [ from before ] Hashem.
From new or old [intoxicating] wine, he must abstain. Vinegar made from new wine and vinegar made from old wine he shall not drink; anything steeped in grapes he shall not drink; moist grapes or dried grapes (raisins) he shall not eat.
As long as he is a Nazir from anything made of the grape-vine, from seeds to skin, he shall not eat.
As long as [ all the days ] he is under his nazirite oath a razor shall not pass over [to touch] his head. Until he completes his days as a Nazir to Hashem he shall be sacred, he shall let the hair of his head grow long.
All the days that he is a Nazir to Hashem, he shall have no contact with the dead.
For his father, mother, brother and sister he shall not [ritually] defile himself for them when they die. For, the nazirite crown of his God is upon his head.
All the days of his separation, he is sacred to Hashem.
If someone died near him suddenly, or unexpectedly, and caused his nazirite crowned head to be defiled, he shall shave his head on the day of his purification, he shall shave it on the seventh day.
On the eighth day he shall take two turtledoves or two young pigeons to the kohein, to the entrance of the Tent of Meeting.
The kohein shall prepare one for a sin-offering and one for a burnt-offering and atone on his behalf from his sin [of contact] with a [departed] soul, and he shall sanctify his head on that day.
He shall set apart, for Hashem, his nazirite days, and bring a sheep in its first year as a guilt-offering. The first days shall elapse because his nazirite crown was defiled.
This is the law of the Nazir : when the days of his nazirite status are fulfilled, he shall bring himself to the entrance of the Tent of Meeting.
He shall bring his offering to Hashem; one unblemished sheep, in its first year, as a burnt-offering, and one unblemished ewe, in its first year as a sin-offering, and one unblemished ram as a peace-offering [ sacred sacrifice ].
A basket of matzos of fine flour, loaves mixed with oil and matzoh -wafers spread with oil and their meal-offerings and libations.
The kohein shall bring it before Hashem and do the service of his sin-offering and of his burnt-offering.
He shall make the ram a peace-offering [ sacred sacrifice ] for Hashem along with the basket of matzos, and the kohein shall do the service of his meal-offering and libation.
The Nazir shall shave—at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting—the nazirite crown of hair on his head, and he shall take the hair from the nazirite crown on his head and put it in the fire which is under the [ cauldron of the ] peace-offering [ sacred ] sacrifice.
The kohein shall take the cooked foreleg from the ram and one matzoh -loaf from the basket, and one matzoh -wafer, and put it on the palms [ hands ] of the Nazir after he has shaved his nazirite crown.
The kohein shall wave them as a wave-offering, before Hashem. It is consecrated to the kohein besides the breast of the wave-offering and the separated thigh portion. After this, the Nazir may drink wine.
This is the law of the Nazir who has vowed—[this is] his offering to Hashem for his nazirite vow, aside from what he can afford [lit. may attach to his hands ] to bring according to his vow that he vows. So shall he fulfill in addition to the laws of his nazirite [vows.]
Hashem spoke to Moshe, saying;
Speak to Aharon and to his sons, saying; This is how you shall bless Bnei Yisroel, saying to them:
May Hashem bless you and protect you.
May Hashem cause His countenance [ Shechinah ] to shine upon you and favor you.
May Hashem lift His face to you, and grant you peace.
They shall bestow [ the blessing of ] My Name upon Bnei Yisroel, and I will bless them.


Chapter 7

It came to pass, on the day Moshe finished erecting the Mishkan, and he anointed it and consecrated it and all of its utensils, and the Mizbeach and all its utensils, and he anointed them and consecrated them.
The leaders of Yisroel brought, [those who were] the heads of their fathers’ houses; they were the leaders of the Shevatim, they stood by during the counting.
They brought their offerings before Hashem; six covered wagons and twelve oxen; a wagon for each two leaders and an ox for each individual, and they placed them before the Mishkan.
Hashem said to Moshe, saying:
Take [the offering] from them, and let them be used for the service of the Tent of Meeting. Give them to the Levi’im, each man according to [ the needs ] his work.
Moshe took the wagons and the oxen and gave them to the Levi’im.
Two [of the] wagons and four [of the] oxen he gave to the sons of Gershon, according to [ the needs ] their work.
Four [of the] wagons and eight [of the] oxen he gave to the sons of Merori. According to their work they were in the charge of Isamar the son of Aharon the kohein.
He did not give any to the sons of Kehos because the sacred work was [incumbent] upon them, which they had to carry on their shoulders.
The leaders brought forward the [offerings for] the consecration of the Mizbeach on the day it was anointed. The leaders placed their offering before the Mizbeach.
Hashem said to Moshe: One leader each day, one leader each day, they shall bring forth their offering, for the dedication of the Mizbeach.
The one that brought his offering on the first day [was] Nachshon the son of Aminadav, of the Shevet of Yehudah.
His offering was one silver tray, its weight was one hundred thirty shekolim; one silver bowl [that weighed] seventy shekolim according to sanctuary weights. Both were filled with fine flour kneaded with [olive] oil, for a meal-offering.
One spoon of ten gold [ shekolim ], filled with [ fragrant ] incense.
One young bull, one ram, and one yearling sheep for a burnt-offering.
[And] one he-goat, for a sin-offering.
For the peace [ sacred ]-offering, two oxen, five rams, five kids, and five yearling sheep. This was the offering of Nachshon the son of Aminadav.
On the second day, [he that] brought [was] Nesanel the son of Tzu’ar, the leader of Yissachar.
He brought forward his offering, one silver tray, its weight was one hundred thirty [ shekolim ]; one silver bowl [that weighed] seventy shekolim according to sanctuary weights. Both were filled with fine flour kneaded with [olive] oil, for a meal-offering.
One spoon of ten gold [ shekolim ] filled with incense.
One young bull, one ram, and one yearling sheep for a burnt-offering.
[And] one he-goat for a sin-offering.
For the peace-offering sacrifice, two oxen, five rams, five kids, and five yearling sheep. This was the offering of Nesanel the son of Tzu’ar.
On the third day, the leader of the sons of Zevulun, Eliav the son of Cheilon.
His offering was one silver tray, its weight was one hundred thirty shekolim ; one silver bowl [that weighed] seventy shekolim according to sanctuary weights. Both were filled with fine flour kneaded with [olive] oil, for a meal-offering.
One spoon of ten gold [ shekolim ], filled with incense.
One young bull, one ram, and one yearling sheep for a burnt-offering.
[And] one he-goat for a sin-offering.
For the peace-offering sacrifice, two oxen, five rams, five kids and five yearling sheep. This was the offering of of Eliav the son of Cheilon.
On the fourth day, the leader of the sons of Reuven, Elitzur the son of Shdeiur.
His offering was one silver tray, its weight was one hundred thirty shekolim ; one silver bowl [that weighed] seventy shekolim according to sanctuary weights. Both were filled with fine flour kneaded with [olive] oil, for a meal-offering.
One spoon of ten gold [ shekolim ], filled with incense.
One young bull, one ram, and one yearling sheep for a burnt-offering.
[And] one he-goat for a sin-offering.
For the peace-offering sacrifice, two oxen, five rams, five kids and five yearling sheep. This was the offering of Elitzur the son of Shdeiur.
On the fifth day, the leader of the sons of Shimon, Shlumiel the son of Tzurishadai.
His offering was one silver tray, its weight was one hundred thirty shekolim ; one silver bowl [that weighed] seventy shekolim according to sanctuary weights. Both were filled with fine flour kneaded with [olive] oil, for a meal-offering.
One spoon of ten gold [ shekolim ], filled with incense.
One young bull, one ram, and one yearling sheep for a burnt-offering.
[And] one he-goat for a sin-offering.
For the peace-offering sacrifice, two oxen, five rams, five kids and five yearling sheep. This was the offering of Shlumiel the son of Tzurishadai.
On the sixth day, the leader of the sons of Gad, Elyasaf the son of Deu’el.
His offering was one silver tray, its weight was one hundred thirty shekolim ; one silver bowl [that weighed] seventy shekolim according to sanctuary weights. Both were filled with fine flour kneaded with [olive] oil, for a meal-offering.
One spoon of ten gold [ shekolim ], filled with incense.
One young bull, one ram, and one yearling sheep for a burnt-offering.
[And] one he-goat for a sin-offering.
For the peace-offering sacrifice, two oxen, five rams, five kids and five yearling sheep. This was the offering of Elyasaf the son of Deu’el.
On the seventh day, the leader of the sons of Ephraim, Elishamah the son of Amihud.
His offering was one silver tray, its weight was one hundred thirty shekolim ; one silver bowl [that weighed] seventy shekolim according to sanctuary weights. Both were filled with fine flour kneaded with [olive] oil, for a meal-offering.
One spoon of ten gold [ shekolim ], filled with incense.
One young bull, one ram, and one yearling sheep for a burnt-offering.
[And] one he-goat for a sin-offering.
For the peace-offering sacrifice, two oxen, five rams, five kids and five yearling sheep. This was the offering of Elishamah the son of Amihud.
On the eighth day, the leader of the sons of Menashe, Gamliel the son of Pedahtzur.
His offering was one silver tray, its weight was one hundred thirty shekolim ; one silver bowl [that weighed] seventy shekolim according to sanctuary weights. Both were filled with fine flour kneaded with [olive] oil, for a meal-offering.
One spoon of ten gold [ shekolim ], filled with incense.
One young bull, one ram, and one yearling sheep for a burnt-offering.
[And] one he-goat for a sin-offering.
For the peace-offering sacrifice, two oxen, five rams, five kids and five yearling sheep. This was the offering of Gamliel the son of Pedahtzur.
On the ninth day, the leader of the sons of Binyomin, Avidan the son of Gidoni.
His offering was one silver tray, its weight was one hundred thirty shekolim ; one silver bowl [that weighed] seventy shekolim according to sanctuary weights. Both were filled with fine flour kneaded with [olive] oil, for a meal-offering.
One spoon of ten gold [ shekolim ], filled with incense.
One young bull, one ram, and one yearling sheep for a burnt-offering.
[And] one he-goat for a sin-offering.
For the peace-offering sacrifice, two oxen, five rams, five kids and five yearling sheep. This was the offering of Avidan the son of Gidoni.
On the tenth day, the leader of the sons of Don, Achiezer the son of Amishadai.
His offering was one silver tray, its weight was one hundred thirty shekolim ; one silver bowl [that weighed] seventy shekolim according to sanctuary weights. Both were filled with fine flour kneaded with [olive] oil, for a meal-offering.
One spoon weighing ten gold [ shekolim ], filled with incense.
One young bull, one ram, and one yearling sheep for a burnt-offering.
[And] one he-goat for a sin-offering.
For the peace-offering sacrifice, two oxen, five rams, five kids and five yearling sheep. This was the offering of Achiezer the son of Amishadai.
On the day of the eleventh day, the leader of the sons of Asher, Pagi’el the son of Ochran.
His offering was one silver tray, its weight was one hundred thirty shekolim ; one silver bowl [that weighed] seventy shekolim according to sanctuary weights. Both were filled with fine flour kneaded with [olive] oil, for a meal-offering.
One spoon of ten gold [ shekolim ], filled with incense.
One young bull, one ram, and one yearling sheep for a burnt-offering.
[And] one he-goat for a sin-offering.
For the peace-offering sacrifice, two oxen, five rams, five kids and five yearling sheep. This was the offering of Pagi’el the son of Ochran.
On the day of the twelfth day, the leader of the sons of Naftali, Achirah the son of Einon.
His offering was one silver tray its weight was one hundred thirty shekolim ; one silver bowl [that weighed] seventy shekolim according to sanctuary weights. Both were filled with fine flour kneaded with [olive] oil, for a meal-offering.
One spoon of ten gold [ shekolim ], filled with incense.
One young bull, one ram, and one yearling sheep for a burnt-offering.
[And] one he-goat for a sin-offering.
For the peace-offering sacrifice, two oxen, five rams, five kids and five yearling sheep. This was the offering of Achirah the son of Einon.
This was the dedication of the Mizbeach on the day that it was anointed, given by the leaders of Yisroel; twelve silver trays twelve silver bowls and twelve golden spoons.
One hundred thirty [ shekolim was the weight of ] each silver tray and each bowl weighed seventy [ shekolim ]. All the silver vessels weighed two thousand four hundred [ shekolim ] according to sanctuary weights.
Twelve golden spoons filled with [ fragrant ] incense; each spoon weighed ten [ shekolim ] according to sanctuary weights. The total of the golden spoons is one hundred twenty [ shekolim ].
The total of the oxen for the burnt-offering is twelve oxen, twelve rams, twelve yearling sheep and their meal-offerings, and twelve he-goats for a sin-offering.
The total of the oxen for the peace [ sacred ]-offering sacrifice is twenty-four oxen, sixty rams, sixty kids and sixty yearling sheep. This was the dedication of the Mizbeach after it was anointed.
When Moshe would enter the Tent of Meeting to speak with Him (God), he would hear the Voice being spoken to him from above the Aron-cover which is atop the Aron of the Testimony from between the two cherubim; and He spoke to him.


Chapter 8

And Hashem spoke to Moshe, saying;
Speak to Aharon, and say to him; When you light the lamps towards the face of the Menorah shall the seven lamps cast [their] light.
Aharon did so; towards the face of the Menorah he lit its lamps, just as Hashem commanded Moshe.
This is how the Menorah was made; beaten from [a block of] gold, from its base until its flowers it is beaten out [of a solid block], according to the vision which Hashem showed to Moshe, so he made the Menorah.
Hashem spoke to Moshe, saying;
Take [ bring near ] the Levi’im from among Bnei Yisroel and purify them.
This is what you shall do to them, to purify them; sprinkle them with the sin-offering waters, and cause a razor to pass over (shave) their entire bodies, and they shall wash their garments and purify themselves.
They should take a young bullock and its meal-offering of flour mixed with oil, and you shall take a second young bullock, for a sin-offering.
You shall bring the Levi’im near, before the Tent of Meeting, and you shall gather the entire congregation of Bnei Yisroel.
You shall bring the Levi’im near, before Hashem, and Bnei Yisroel shall lay their hands on the Levi’im.
Aharon shall wave the Levi’im as a wave-offering before Hashem from Bnei Yisroel and they will be [entrusted] to do the worship of Hashem.
The Levi’im shall lay their hands on the head of the bulls and make the one for a sin-offering and the [other] one for a burnt-offering to Hashem, to atone for the Levi’im.
You shall set the Levi’im before Aharon and before his sons, and lift them up as a wave-offering to Hashem.
You shall separate the Levi’im from among Bnei Yisroel and the Levi’im shall be Mine [ serve before Me ].
After this is done, the Levi’im shall come to work in the Tent of Meeting, and you shall purify them, and you shall lift them up as a wave-offering,
For they are given [ have been separated ]; they are given [ have been separated ] to Me from among Bnei Yisroel in place of those who open the womb,—every firstborn of Bnei Yisroel—I have taken them to be Mine.
For every firstborn of Bnei Yisroel is Mine, human and animal; on the day in which I slew every firstborn in the land of Mitzraim, I have sanctified them to be Mine.
I have taken the Levi’im instead of all firstborn of Bnei Yisroel,
and I have given the Levi’im to be given as a gift to Aharon and to his sons from among Bnei Yisroel to do the duties of Bnei Yisroel in the Tent of Meeting, and to atone for Bnei Yisroel, so that there will not be a plague among Bnei Yisroel when Bnei Yisroel approach the sanctuary.
Moshe, Aharon, and the entire congregation of Bnei Yisroel did to the Levi’im just as Hashem commanded Moshe regarding the Levi’im, so did Bnei Yisroel do to them.
The Levi’im underwent purification and they washed their garments, and Aharon lifted them as a wave-offering before Hashem; and Aharon achieved atonement on their behalf, to purify them.
Afterwards, the Levi’im came to perform their duties in the Tent of Meeting in the presence of Aharon and in the presence of his sons; just as Hashem commanded Moshe regarding the Levi’im, so they did unto them.
Hashem spoke to Moshe, saying;
This concerns the Levi’im; from the age of twenty-five years and above he shall enter the division for the duties of the Tent of Meeting.
From the age of fifty he shall retire from the work force, and shall no longer work.
But shall serve his brethren in the Tent of Meeting to keep the watch, and he shall not do any service; so you shall have the Levi’im do in their guard duties.


Chapter 9

Hashem spoke to Moshe in the desert of Sinai in the second year of their exodus from the land of Mitzraim, in the first month, saying;...
Bnei Yisroel shall perform the Pesach -offering in its proper time.
On the fourteenth day of this month, in the afternoon, you shall perform it in its proper time; according to all its statutes and according to all its laws [ that are appropriate for it ] you shall perform it.
Moshe spoke to Bnei Yisroel [telling them] to perform the Pesach-offering.
They performed the Pesach-offering in the first [month] [ in Nissan ] on the fourteenth day of the month in the afternoon in the Sinai desert; according to all that Hashem commanded Moshe, so did Bnei Yisroel do.
There were men who were impure, having had [contact with] a corpse, and they were not able to perform the Pesach-offering on that day, and they drew near before Moshe and before Aharon, on that day.
Those men said to him: “We are impure, having had contact with a corpse; why should we be excluded and not be able to bring the offering of Hashem in its proper time, among Bnei Yisroel?”
Moshe said to them: “Stand [ wait ] and I will listen to what Hashem will instruct [ command ] for [ regarding ] you.”
Hashem spoke to Moshe, saying:
Speak to Bnei Yisroel, saying; any person, if he will be impure from a corpse, or [is] on a distant road, [whether among] yourselves or for your descendants, he shall perform the Pesach-offering for Hashem
in the second month, on the fourteenth day in the afternoon he shall perform it. Together with matzohs and bitter herbs they shall eat it.
They shall not leave any of it over until the morning and they shall not break any of its bones; according to all the statutes of the Pesach-offering they shall perform it.
The person who is pure and was not on the road, and refrained from performing the Pesach-offering, that soul shall be cut off from its people, for the offering of Hashem he did not bring in its proper time; that person shall bear his sin.
If a proselyte dwells among you and brings the Pesach-offering to Hashem; according to the statues of the Pesach-offering and according to its laws so shall he perform it; there shall be the same statute for yourselves; [both] for the proselyte and for the native born citizen.
On the day that the Mishkan was erected, the Cloud covered the Mishkan [which served] as the Tent of Testimony; and in the evening, there was over the Mishkan an appearance of fire, until morning.
So it always was, the Cloud covered it, and an appearance of fire, at night.
Whenever the Cloud was lifted from the Tent, afterwards, did Bnei Yisroel travel; in the place where the Cloud came to rest, it is there that Bnei Yisroel did camp.
On the word of Hashem, did Bnei Yisroel travel and on the word of Hashem, did they camp; all those days on which the Cloud will rested above the Mishkan, did they camp.
When the Cloud tarried above the Mishkan, for many days, Bnei Yisroel would keep the watch of [ the word of ] Hashem and they would not travel.
It sometimes happened that the Cloud was for a number of days above the Mishkan ; on the order of Hashem did they camp and on the order of Hashem did they travel.
It sometimes happened that the Cloud was [there] [but] from evening until morning, and then the Cloud rose in the morning and they traveled; or, [the Cloud was there] for a day and a night and the Cloud was lifted, and they traveled.
Or two days or a month or a year [ period of time ] that the Cloud prolonged its stay above the Mishkan to rest upon it; Bnei Yisroel remained encamped and they did not travel; when it rose they traveled.
On the order of Hashem they camped and on the order of [ the word of ] Hashem they traveled; they kept the watch of Hashem on the order of Hashem, through Moshe.


Chapter 10

Hashem spoke to Moshe, saying:...
Make for yourself two silver trumpets; you shall make them, beaten [from one block], and they shall be used by you to summon the congregation and to initiate the departure of the camps.
When they will blow them, the entire congregation shall present itself to you at the entrance of the Tent of Meeting.
But if they blow one of them, the leaders shall present themselves to you, the heads of Yisroel’s thousands.
When you blow a teruah [ a wailing sound ]; the camps that are camped eastward shall travel.
If you blow a second teruah, then shall travel the camps that are camped on the south side. They shall blow a teruah for their journeys.
But when gathering the congregation, you shall blow [a blast], but not a teruah.
The sons of Aharon, the kohanim, shall sound the trumpets. This shall be for you an everlasting statute, for all your descendants.
If war shall come into your land against the oppresor who oppresses you and you shall blow teruahs [ wail ] with the trumpets and you will be remembered [ your remembrance will come beneficially ] before Hashem, your God, and you will be delivered from you enemies.
On your joyous days and on your festivals and on the beginnings of your months you shall blow with the trumpets for your burnt-offerings and for your peace-offerings; and it shall be a remembrance for you before your God, I am Hashem your God.
It was in the second year, in the second month on the twentieth of the month that the Cloud rose up from above the Mishkan of the Testimony.
Bnei Yisroel traveled along on their journeys, from the Sinai desert, and the Cloud came to rest in the desert of Paran.
This was the first time that they traveled, on the order of Hashem, through Moshe.
Then traveled the banner of the sons of Yehudah’s camp in the forefront according to their divisions; in charge of its divisions [was] Nachshon the son of Aminadav.
In charge of the division of the Shevet of the sons of Yissachar, [was] Nesanel the son of Tzu’ar.
In charge of the division of the Shevet of the sons of Zevulun, [was] Eliav the son of Cheilon.
[Then] the Mishkan was dismantled and the sons of Gershon traveled, with the sons of Merori, those who carried the Mishkan.
[Then] the banner of Reuven’s camp traveled, according to their divisions. In charge of its division [was] Elitzur the son of Shdeiur.
In charge of the division of the Shevet of the sons of Shimon, [was] Shlumiel the son of Tzurishadai.
In charge of the division of the Shevet of the sons of Gad, [was] Elyasaf the son of De’uel.
[Then] the Kehos family traveled, the carriers of the sacred, and they erected the Mishkan by the time of their arrival.
[Then] the banner of the sons of Ephraim’s camp traveled according to their divisions. In charge of its division, [was] Elishamah the son of Amihud.
In charge of the division of the Shevet of the sons of Menashe, [was] Gamliel the son of Pedahtzur.
In charge of the division of the Shevet of the sons of Binyamin, [was] Avidan the son of Gid’oni.
[Then] the banner of the sons of Don’s camp traveled; the gatherer for all the camps, according to their divisions. In charge of its division, [was] Achiezer the son of Amishadai.
In charge of the division of the Shevet of the sons of Asher, [was] Pagiel the son of Ochran.
In charge of the division of the Shevet of the sons of Naftali, [was] Achirah the son of Einan.
These are the journeys of Bnei Yisroel according to their divisions; and they journeyed.
Moshe said to Chovav the son of Reuel, the Midianite, Moshe’s father-in-law: “We are journeying to the place about which Hashem said; ‘I will give it to you’, come along with us and we will treat you well, for Hashem spoke of bringing good [fortune] on Yisroel.”
He said to him “I will not go, but rather to my land and to my birthplace will I go.”
He said to him “please do not forsake us, for, because you know of our encampment in the desert, and you will be our eyes [ the great things that were done for us you saw with your eyes ].
It will be, that when you go with us, it shall be that the very good which Hashem will bestow on us we will bestow on (share with) you.
They traveled from the mountain of Hashem [ upon which the glory of Hashem was revealed ] a journey of three days, and the Aron of the Covenant of Hashem traveled in front of them a journey of three days, to prepare for them a place to settle.
The Cloud [ of the glory ] of Hashem was above them by day when they traveled from the camp.
Whenever the Aron departed Moshe woud say: “Rise, [ reveal Yourself ] Hashem, and may Your enemies disperse, and those who hate You flee before You.”
When it rested, he would say: “Come to rest, Hashem, [ dwell in Your glory ] among the myriads and thousands of Yisroel.”


Chapter 11

The people were like complainers; [it was] wicked in the ears of [ before ] Hashem. Hashem heard [ before Hashem it was revealed ] and His Anger flared and the fire of [ from before ] Hashem burned among them and consumed [some] of the outcasts of the camp....
The people cried out to Moshe, and Moshe prayed to Hashem, and the fire subsided.
He called the name of that place Taveirah, for it was there that burned among them the fire of [ from before ] Hashem.
The collection [of nationalities] among them began to have strong cravings [ make demands ], and Bnei Yisroel turned and began to weep; and they said “Who will feed us meat?
We remember the fish which we ate in Mitzraim freely; the cucumbers, watermelons, leeks, onions and garlic.
Now our bodies are withered, there is nothing at all, but the manna before our eyes.”
The manna was like coriander seed and it is similar to the appearance of crystal.
The people [merely] strolled about and they gathered it and [ if they so desired, ] they ground it with a millstone or [ if they so desired, ] crushed it in mortars and cooked it in pots and made cakes out of it. Its taste was like the taste of cake kneaded with oil.
When the dew would descend on the camp, at night, the manna would descend on it.
Moshe heard the people weep according to their families, at the door of each one’s tent. The Anger of Hashem was greatly aroused and in Moshe’s eyes, it was evil.
Moshe said to Hashem: “Why have you dealt poorly with Your servant, and why have I not found favor in Your eyes that You place the burden of the entire people upon me?
Have I conceived [ am I a father to ] this entire people? have I given birth to it [ are they my children ] that You say to me, carry it [ with might ] in your lap as a nurse carries an infant, to the land which You swore to their forefathers?
From where do I have meat to give to this entire people on account of which they cry to me, saying: “Give us meat and we shall eat.”
I alone cannot carry this entire people, for they are too burdensome for me.
If this is the way you treat me, please kill me, if I have found favor in Your eyes [ before You ]; so that I will not see my evil.”
Hashem said to Moshe: “Gather seventy men for [ before ] Me, from among the elders of Yisroel, [men] whom you know to be the people’s elders, and its officers, and you shall take them to the Tent of Meeting, and they shall stand there with you.
I will descend [ appear ] and speak there with you, and I will make greater the spirit which is upon you, and place it on them, and they will bear, along with you, the burden of the people so that you need not bear it alone.
You shall say to the people, prepare yourselves for the morrow and you shall eat meat, for you have cried in the ears of [ before ] Hashem, saying: “Who will feed us meat; we had it good in Mitzraim;” [now] Hashem gives you meat and you shall eat.
Not for one day will you be eating and not for two days; not for five days, not for ten days, and not for twenty days.
But rather for a month of days, until it comes out of your nostrils [ will disgust you ] and it will be repulsive to you; [this is] because you have rejected [ the word of ] Hashem Who[ ’s Shechinah dwells ] is among you, and you have cried before Him, saying: “Why have we come out from Mitzraim?”
Moshe said: “The people are six hundred thousand on foot that I am among and You say that I will give them meat, to eat it for a month of days?
Will sheep and cattle be slaughtered for them would that be sufficient for them? If all the fish of the sea would be gathered for them, would that be sufficient for them?”
Hashem said to Moshe: “Has [ can ] the Hand [ word ] of Hashem become short [ be restrained ]? Now you will see if My words will occur unto you or not.”
Moshe went out and spoke the words of Hashem to the people, and he gathered seventy men from the elders of the people and he had them stand around the Tent.
Hashem descended [ appeared ] in a cloud and spoke to him, and He magnified the spirit which was upon him and He gave it unto the seventy men, [who were] the elders. When the spirit [ of prophecy ] came to rest upon them they prophesied, and they did not cease.
Two people remained in the camp; one’s name was Eldad and the second one’s name was Meidad. The spirit [ of prophecy ] rested upon them; they were among those inscribed, and they did not go out to the Tent, and they prophesied in the camp.
The youth ran and told Moshe, and said: “Eldad and Meidad are prophesying in the camp.”
Yehoshua the son of Nun answered, [he being] the attendant of Moshe, from his youth, and he said: “My master Moshe, destroy [ bind ] them!”
Moshe said to him, “Are you vengeful for me? Would (that) it be that all Hashem’s people were prophets, that Hashem would give His Spirit upon them.”
Moshe entered into the camp, he and the elders of Yisroel.
From [ before ] Hashem there gusted a wind and He caused quail to fly from the sea and spread them over the camp, about a day’s journey from this side and about a day’s journey from that side, around the camp, and about two amo’s above the ground’s surface.
The people arose all of that day, the entire night and the entire next day, and they gathered the quail. He who gathered the least amount, gathered ten heaps and they spread them for themselves around the camp.
The meat was still between their teeth before it was [even] finished, when the wrath of Hashem was incited upon the people, and Hashem smote the people an enormous blow.
He called the name of that place Kivros Hataavoh [ Graves of the Demanders ], for it was there that they buried the people who had these cravings.
From Kivros Hataavoh the people journeyed to Chatzeiros, and they stayed in Chatzeiros.


Chapter 12

Miriam and Aharon spoke about Moshe concerning the Cushite [ fair ] woman that he married, for, he married [ sent away ] a Cushite [ fair ] woman....
They said: “Is it only to Moshe that Hashem has spoken? Did He not also speak with us?” and [ it was heard before ] Hashem heard.
The man, Moshe [was] most humble, more so than any other person on the face of the earth.
Hashem said, suddenly, to Moshe, Aharon and Miriam: “Come out, all three of you, to the Tent of Meeting,” and the three of them went out.
Hashem descended [ appeared ] in a pillar of cloud and He stood at the entrance of the Tent, and He called [to] Aharon and Miriam, and both of them went out.
He said: “Please listen to My words. If there will be a prophet among you, [I,] Hashem, will make [ reveal ] Myself known to him in a vision; in a dream I will speak to him.
That is not the case with My servant, Moshe; in My entire house he is trusted.
Mouth [ speaker ] to mouth [ speaker ] I speak to [ with ] him, in a vision and not in riddles; he gazes at the [ glorious ] likeness of Hashem; so why are you not afraid to speak about My servant, about Moshe?”
Hashem’s anger flared against them and He left.
The cloud departed from atop the Tent and behold! Miriam became afflicted with tzora’as white as snow; and Aharon turned towards Miriam and behold, she was afflicted with tzora’as.
Aharon said to Moshe: “Oh, my master please do not put iniquity upon us for what we have foolishly done and for what we have transgressed.
Please let her not be like the dead [ separated from among us for she is our sister ]; That, since he came from his mother’s womb, it would be as half of his own flesh was consumed [ pray now for this dead flesh which is in her, so she will be healed ].”
Moshe cried out [in prayer] to Hashem, saying: “Please, God, please heal her.”
Hashem said to Moshe: “If her father were to spit in her face [ strongly chastise her ] would she not be in shame for seven days? She shall be closed off for seven days, beyond the encampment, and after that, she may join again.”
Miriam was closed off beyond the encampment for seven days, and the people did not depart until Miriam was brought in to join them.
After that, the people traveled from Chatzeiros and they camped in the desert of Paran.


Chapter 13

And Hashem spoke to Moshe, saying;...
“Send, for yourself, men, and have them scout the Land of Cana’an, which I am giving to Bnei Yisroel; one man, one man each, for his father’s Shevet you shall send them, each leader among them.”
Moshe sent them from the desert of Paran by the word of Hashem; all of them [were] men of distinction, they were the heads of Bnei Yisroel.
These are their names; for the Shevet of Reuven, Shamua the son of Zaccur.
For the Shevet of Shimon, Shafat the son of Chori.
For the Shevet of Yehudah, Caleiv the son of Yefuneh.
For the Shevet of Yissachar, Yigal the son of Yoseif.
For the Shevet of Ephraim, Hosheiah the son of Nun.
For the Shevet of Binyamin, Palti the son of Raphu.
For the Shevet of Zevulun, Gadiel the son of Sodi.
For the Shevet of Yoseif, for the Shevet of Menashe, Gadi the son of Susi.
For the Shevet of Don, Amiel the son of Gemali.
For the Shevet of Asher, Sesur the son of Michael.
For the Shevet of Naftali, Nachbi the son of Vofsi.
For the Shevet of Gad, Geu’el the son of Machi.
These are the names of the men whom Moshe sent to scout the land, and Moshe called Hosheiah the son of Nun, Yehoshua.
Moshe sent them to scout the land of Cana’an and he said to them: “Go up this [way], to the south and go up to the mountain.
See what the land is; and the people living on it; are they strong or weak, if they are few or many;
and how is the land in which they live, is it good, or bad? And how are the cities in which they reside; are they open, or are they fortified [ walled-in ]?
How is the land (soil) is it fat (rich) or lean (poor), does it have trees, or not? You shall strengthen yourselves, and you shall take some fruit of the land.” Those days were the days of the first ripening of the grapes.
They went up and they scouted the land from the desert of Tzin until Rechov, at the entrance of Chamas.
They went up, into the southern part [of the land] and [he] came to Chevron; and there, were Achiman, Sheshai and Talmai, the offspring of the giant[ s ]. [The city of] Chevron was built seven years before the city of Tzo’an [ Tonas ] in Mitzraim.
They came until the Valley of Eshkol, and from there they cut off a branch and one cluster of grapes, and they carried it between two on a pole, [and they took] some pomegranates and some figs.
That place they called the Valley of Eshkol, because of the event of the cluster that Bnei Yisroel cut from there.
They returned from spying the land, at the end of forty days.
They went and came to Moshe and Aharon and to the entire congregation of Bnei Yisroel [that came] to the desert of Paran, in Kadeish [ to Rekom ]. They brought word back to them, and to the entire congregation, and they showed them the fruit of the land.
They recounted to him, and they said: “We came into the land into which you sent us, and it indeed flows with milk and honey, and this is its fruit.
However, the nation is mighty, those who inhabit the land, and the cities are greatly fortified to the utmost, and we also saw the offspring of the giant[ s ] over there.
Amalek dwells in the southern part of the land, the Chiti, Yevusi and Emori dwell in the mountain and the Cana’ani dwell by the sea and next to the Yardein.”
Caleiv silenced the people to [hear about] Moshe, and he said: “We can surely go up [to the land] and we shall possess it for we are surely able to overcome it.”
But the men who went up with him said: “We are not able to go up against the nation, for they are more powerful than we.”
They spread slander about the land that they had scouted, to Bnei Yisroel, saying: “The land through which we have passed to scout it, is a land which consumes [ slaughters ] its inhabitants; and every one of the people we saw in it, are men of dimensions [ stature ].
There we saw the giants, the sons of the giant [ Anok ], of the Nephilim [ giants ], and we were like grasshoppers in our [ own ] eyes, and so we appeared in their eyes.”


Chapter 14

The entire community arose and raised their voices; and the people wept that night....
They railed against Moshe and Aharon—all of Bnei Yisroel—and the entire congregation said to them: “Would we had died in the land of Mitzraim or in this desert, would that we had died.
Why does Hashem bring us into this land to fall by the sword; our wives and infants would be as spoils; is it not better for us to return to Mitzraim?”
They said to each other: “Let us appoint (lit. place) a head and we will return to Mitzraim.”
Moshe and Aharon fell on their faces before the entire gathering of the congregation of Bnei Yisroel.
Yehoshua the son of Nun and Caleiv the son of Yefuneh, who were among those who scouted the land, tore their clothing [in grief].
They said to the entire congregation of Bnei Yisroel, saying: “The land through which we have passed to scout it; that land is very, very good.
If Hashem desires us, He will bring us into this land and give it to us, a land which flows with [ produces ] milk and honey.
However, do not rebel against [ the word of ] Hashem and you do not be afraid of the nation of the land, for they are [as] our bread [ delivered into our hands ], their protection [ strength ] is removed from them, and [ the word of ] Hashem is with [ supports ] us; do not be afraid of them.”
The entire congregation said that they should be stoned to death, when the glory of Hashem appeared in the Tent of Meeting, to all of Bnei Yisroel.
Hashem said to Moshe: “Until where will this people provoke [ before ] Me, and how much longer will they have no faith in Me [ my word ], despite all the signs which I have done in their midst.
I shall smite them with the plague and annihilate them; and I shall make you into a greater and stronger people than they.”
Moshe said to Hashem: “But Mitzraim will hear, that You, in Your might have brought up this people from among them.
They will say concerning the inhabitants of this land, they have heard that You, Hashem, are [ Your Shechinah dwells ] among this people, Who appears to them eye to eye (face to face) [ who have seen Your glorious Shechinah ], You, Hashem; Your Cloud stands over them, in a Pillar of Cloud You go before [ lead ] them daily and in a Pillar of Fire, nightly.
If You kill this nation like a single man, the nations will say—they who have heard of Your reputation [ the fame of Your power ]—as follows:
“It is because of Hashem’s inability to bring this people into the land that He swore to them, that he slaughtered [ killed ] them in the desert.”
Now, please, let my Master’s power be enhanced [ before Hashem ] as You spoke, saying;
Hashem, slow to [ distances ] anger and abounding in [ performing ] kindness, forgiving iniquity, [ rebellion ] and transgression; Who does not completely acquit [ pardoning those who return to His Torah, but to those who do not return, He does not acquit ], Who will visit the inquities of the fathers upon their [ rebellious ] children, to the third [generation] and to the fourth [generation.]
Please forgive this people according the magnitude of Your kindness, and as You have borne this people since Mitzraim until this time.”
Hashem said, “I have forgiven them, just as you spoke.
However, just as I live and the Glory of Hashem fills the entire land;
For, all the people who see My glory and My signs which I have done in Mitzraim and in the desert, and they have tested [ before ] Me these ten times and they have not listened to My voice [ word ].
If they will see the land that I have sworn to their fathers; all those who angered [ before ] Me will not see it.
My servant Caleiv, because he possesed in him a different spirit, and followed Me fully [ in fear of Me ], I shall bring him into the land to which he came, and his children will cast [its inhabitants] from it.
The Amaleki and the Cana’ani are now dwelling in the valley. Tomorrow turn back and you shall travel the desert by way of the Reed Sea.”
Hashem spoke to Moshe and to Aharon, saying:
“Until when will this wicked congregation [exist], those who provoke Me? The complaints of Bnei Yisroel, which they complain against Me, I have heard [ before Me ].
Say to them: “As I live, says Hashem, if I do not [do to you] as you have spoken in My ears [ before Me ]; so I shall do to you.
In this desert your corpses shall fall, all of you who were counted according to your numbers, from twenty years and above, because you have complained against Me,
Surely you shall [not] come into the land to which I raised My Hand [to swear] [ sworn by My word ] that I would cause you to live in it; except for Caleiv the son of Yefuneh and Yehoshua the son of Nun.
Your infants, about whom you said that they will be as spoils, I shall bring them [there] and they will know the land which you despised.
Your corpses—yours, shall fall in this desert.
Your children, they shall be wanderers [ delayed ] in the desert for forty years, and they will bear [the burden of] your dissoluteness, until the last of your corpses are in the desert.
According to the number of days which you scouted the land; forty days, a day for a year, a day for a year you will bear the burden of your iniquity forty years, and you will know My displeasure [ that you have murmured against Me ].
I am Hashem; I have spoken—[ decreed by My word ]—if I do not do this to this entire evil congregation that are gathered against Me; in this desert they shall be finished and there they shall die.”
Those men whom Moshe sent to scout the land, who returned and provoked the complaints of the entire congregation against him, by spreading slander about the land;
Those men died—who spread evil slander against the land—in a plague, before Hashem.
Yehoshua the son of Nun and Caleiv the son of Yefuneh, lived, from among those men who went to scout the land.
Moshe spoke these words to all of Bnei Yisroel, and the people mourned greatly.
They awoke early in the morning and went up to the peak of the mountain, saying: “We are ready to go up to the place of which Hashem spoke (promised), for we have sinned.”
Moshe said: “Why are you now transgressing the word [ decree ] of Hashem; it will not succeed.
Do not go up, for Hashem is not among you, and do not die before your enemies,
For the Amaleki and the Cana’ani are there before you, and you will fall by the sword, for, you turned from following [ the service of ] Hashem, and [ the word of ] Hashem will not be with you [ to your aid ].”
They defiantly went up the mountain peak, but the Aron of the Covenant of Hashem, and Moshe, did not move from amidst the encampment.
The Amaleki and the Cana’ani swooped down, they who were dwelling in that mountain, and they smote and crushed [ persued ] them until Chormah.


Chapter 15

Hashem spoke to Moshe, saying;...
“Speak to Bnei Yisroel, and say to them, when you arrive into the land in which you will dwell, which I am giving to you.
When you make a fire-offering [ sacrifice ] to Hashem, a burnt-offering or a sacrifice, by verbalizing as a pledge or as a donation or on your festivals to provide a pleasing fragrance to [ to be accepted with pleasure before ] Hashem, from cattle or from sheep.
The one bringing his offering to Hashem shall present one tenth of flour mixed with one fourth of a hin of oil,
Along with wine, for a wine-offering, one fourth of a hin, so you shall do for a burnt-offering or a sacrifice, for the one sheep.
If for a ram you shall make a meal-offering of two tenths, mixed with one third of a hin of oil.
Wine, for a wine-offering shall be one third of a hin. This is how you shall offer a pleasing fragrance to [ to be accepted with pleasure before ] Hashem.
If you are making a calf as a burnt-offering or sacrifice by verbalizing as a pledge or for a peace-offering, to Hashem.
Along with the calf he shall bring a meal-offering of three tenths mixed with one half of a hin of oil.
You shall bring wine, for a wine-offering, one half of a hin, a fire-offering of pleasing fragrance to [ which will be accepted with pleasure before ] Hashem.
So you shall do for each ox or ram or for the sheep or goats.
According to the number, which you offer, so you shall make for each one according to the[ir] number[s].
Each citizen shall do this as stated, to bring a fire-offering of pleasing fragrance to [ which will be accepted with pleasure before ] Hashem.
If a proselyte will live with you or among you, for all of your generations and makes a fire-offering of pleasing fragrance to [ which will be accepted with pleasure before ] Hashem, in the same fashion as you make it, so shall he make it.
The assembly has one statute for yourselves and for the proselyte who resides; one statue for all of your generations, just as it is for yourselves, so shall it be for the proselyte, before Hashem.
One law and one rule will apply to you, and to the proselyte who lives with you.”
Hashem spoke to Moshe, saying:
“Speak to Bnei Yisroel and say to them, at your coming to the land into which I am bringing you,
When you eat from the bread of the land you shall separate a terumah for [ a separation before ] Hashem.
[From] the first portion of your doughs you shall separate a loaf as a separated portion; like the terumah -gift of the granary, so shall you separate it.
Of the first portion of your doughs you shall give to [ before ] Hashem as a terumah - offering, throughout your generations.”
If you should err, and not fulfill all of these commandments which Hashem said to Moshe;
All that Hashem commanded you through Moshe, from the day on which Hashem commanded, and from then on, throughout your generations.
If it was obscured from the eyes of the congregation, having been done in error, then the entire congregation shall offer one young bullock as a burnt-offering for a pleasing fragrance to [ to be accepted with pleasure before ] Hashem. Its meal-offering and its wine-offering are according to its law, and one he-goat, as a sin-offering.
The kohein shall atone on behalf of the entire congregation of Bnei Yisroel, and they shall be forgiven; for they have erred unwittingly and they have brought their offering, as a fire-offering to Hashem, and their sin-offering before Hashem (to atone) for their error.
And it shall be forgiven to the entire congregation of Bnei Yisroel and the stranger amongst them; for the entire people sinned unintentionally.
If one person will sin erroneously, that person shall bring a yearling she-goat as a sin-offering.
The kohein shall atone for that erring soul which has sinned unwittingly before Hashem; to achieve atonement for him, and he will be forgiven.
[For] the citizen among Bnei Yisroel, and the proselyte who dwells among them there shall be one law for you all, for he who sins unwittingly.
A person who commits a sin high-handedly [ publicly ] among the citizens or among the proselytes, blasphemes [ provokes before ] Hashem; the soul of that person shall be cut off from among its people.
For he has denigrated the word of Hashem and he has violated His commandment; The soul of that person shall certainly be cut off; its iniquity is upon it.
Bnei Yisroel were in the desert, and they found a man gathering wood on the day of the Shabbos.
Those who found him brought him near—he who was gathering wood—to Moshe and to Aharon, and to the entire congregation.
They placed [ bound ] him under guard since it was not specified, what was to be done to him.
Hashem said to Moshe: “That man shall be put to death, the entire congregation shall stone him beyond the encampment.”
The entire congregation brought him outside beyond the encampment, and they stoned him with stones, and he died, just as Hashem commanded Moshe.
And Hashem spoke to Moshe, saying:
Speak to Bnei Yisroel and tell them to make for themselves, tzizis -fringes on the corners of their garments—throughout their generations; and they will place with the fringes of each corner a thread of blue.
And it will be to you for fringes and you will look upon it and you will remember all of Hashem’s commandments and you will perform them; and you will not search [ stray ] after [the desire of] your hearts and after [ the sight ] your eyes which cause you to go astray.
In order that you will remember and perform all My commandments; and you will be holy unto [ before ] your God.
I am Hashem, your God, Who brought you out of the land of Mitzraim to be your God. I am Hashem your God.


Chapter 16

Korach took [ divided ], [Korach], the son of Yitzhar the son of Kehos, the son of Levi, and Dasan and Aviram the sons of Eliav, and On the son of Peles, the sons of Reuvein....
They rose up before Moshe with men from Bnei Yisroel [numbering] two hundred and fifty, who were the leaders of the congregation, those who were called to meetings, men of [prominent] name.
They gathered against Moshe and Aharon, and they said to them: “You have [taken] too much for yourselves [and] since the entire congregation are all holy and Hashem is [ the Shechinah of Hashem dwells ] in their midst, why do [ what is this that ] you raise yourselves above the assembly of Hashem?”
Moshe heard, and he fell upon his face.
He spoke to Korach and to his entire congregation, saying: “[In the] morning, Hashem will make known who is [ qualified to be ] His, and who is holy, He will bring close to Him; and whoever He chooses, He will bring near to Him [ to His service ].
Do this: Take, for yourselves, fire pans, Korach and his entire congregation,
and place fire in them and put [ fragrant ] incense upon them before Hashem, tomorrow; and it will be that the man who will be chosen by Hashem, he is the holy one; [you have taken] too much upon yourselves, sons of Levi.”
Moshe said to Korach, “Please listen sons of Levi,
is it but a pittance for yourselves that the God of Yisroel has separated you from the [rest of the] congregation of Yisroel to bring you closer to [ before ] Him to perform the services of the Mishkan of Hashem, and to stand before the congregation to serve them?
He brought you near with all of your brethren the sons of Levi with you, and yet [ now ] you ask to be kohanim [ Kohein Gadol ] as well?
Therefore, you and your entire congregation who are gathered against Hashem; and what is Aharon that you rail against him?”
Moshe sent to call for Dasan and Avirom the sons of Eliav and they said “We will not go up.
Is it but a pittance that you have brought us up from a land flowing with [ that produces ] milk and honey to kill us in the desert, that you must excercise power over us to make yourself powerful as well?
Even into a land flowing with [ that produces ] milk and honey you have not brought us, and [not] given us an inheritance of fields and vineyards if you put those people’s eyes out, [even then] we would not go up.”
Moshe was extremely distressed, and said to [ before ] Hashem: “Do not turn to [ accept ] their offering [ with pleasure ]; not a donkey did I sequester from any one of them nor have I done ill to any one of them.”
Moshe said to Korach: “You and your entire congregation will be before Hashem, you, and they, and Aharon, tomorrow.
Each man will take his firepan and place [ fragrant ] incense in them and you will offer before Hashem each man his firepan, two hundred and fifty firepans, and you and Aharon will each take his own firepan.”
Each man took his firepan and they placed fire in them and they put [ fragrant ] incense in them and they stood at the entrance of the Tent of Meeting along with Moshe and Aharon.
Korach congregated against them, the entire congregation at the entrance of the Tent of Meeting, and the glory of Hashem appeared to the entire congregation.
Hashem spoke to Moshe and to Aharon, saying:
“Separate yourselves from among this congregation, and I will annihalate them in an instant.”
They fell upon their faces, and they said: “Almighty, the God of the spirits of all flesh; if one man sins shall You be angry with the entire congregation?”
Hashem spoke to Moshe, saying:
Speak to the congregation, saying: “Depart from the vicinity of the dwelling of Korach, Dasan and Avirom.”
Moshe rose up and went to Dasan and Avirom and the elders of Yisroel went along after him.
He spoke to the congregation, saying: “Please get away from the tents of these evil [ guilty ] men, and do not touch [ come near ] anything belonging to them, lest you be swept away [ smitten ] in all their transgressions.”
They withdraw from the dwelling of Korach, Dasan and Avirom, and all around; and Dasan and Avirom went out, and stood at the door of their tents with their wives, children and infants.
Moshe said: “This is how you will know that Hashem has sent me to perform all of these deeds, for, I did not devise them myself [ from my own will ].
If as all men die will these men meet their deaths, and the reckoning (fate) of all men will be reckoned upon them, then Hashem has not sent me.
If Hashem will create a [new] creation and the ground will open its mouth and swallow them along with all of their belongings, and they will go down alive to the grave, then you will know that these men have angered Hashem.”
As he was finishing speaking all these words the ground beneath them split.
The earth opened its mouth and swallowed them and their houses [ household members ] and all the people belonging to Korach and all of the possessions.
They, and all belonging to them, went down alive to the grave, and the earth covered them and they perished from among the assembly.
All of Yisroel who were around them fled from their uproar, for they said, perhaps the earth will swallow us.
A fire came forth from [ before ] Hashem and consumed the two hundred and fifty men who were bringing the [ fragrant ] incense.


Chapter 17

Hashem spoke to Moshe, saying;...
“Say to Elazar the son of Aharon, the kohein and have him lift up the firepans from the inferno, and you, scatter the fire yonder, for, they were sanctified;
[These] firepans of these sinners [who paid] with their souls, and make them into hammered sheets to overlay the Mizbeach, for they were brought in offering before Hashem and they were sanctified; and they shall be for a sign for Bnei Yisroel.
Elazar the kohein, took the copper firepans, those that the fire victims brought and hammered them into a covering for the Mizbeach,
to be a reminder for Bnei Yisroel so that a commoner shall never offer, one who is not a descendant of Aharon, to burn [ fragrant ] incense before Hashem; so as not to be like Korach and his congregation; as Hashem spoke to him, through Moshe.
They complained—the entire congregation of Bnei Yisroel—on the next day against Moshe and Aharon, saying: “You have killed [ caused the death ] the people of Hashem”
When the congregation assembled against Moshe and Aharon, they turned to the Tent of Meeting and behold! The cloud covered it, and the Glory of Hashem appeared.
Moshe and Aharon came to the front of the Tent of Meeting.
Hashem spoke to Moshe, saying:
“Remove [ separate ] yourselves from this congregation and I shall annihalate them in an instant,” and they fell upon their faces.
Moshe said to Aharon: “Take the firepan and put fire from atop the Mizbeach on it and place [ fragrant ] incense on it, and go quickly to the congregation and atone for them, for anger has come forth from before Hashem; the plague has commenced.”
Aharon took, just as Moshe spoke, and he ran to the middle of the assembly and behold! The plague had commenced among the people. He put on incense and he atoned for the people.
He stood between the dead and between the living and the plague was halted [ ceased ].
The dead in the plague totaled fourteen thousand seven hundred, excluding those who died due to Korach’s rebellion [ division ].
Aharon returned to Moshe to the entrance of the Tent of Meeting and the plague was halted.
Hashem spoke to Moshe, saying:
“Speak to Bnei Yisroel and take from among them a staff, a staff for each father’s [tribal] house, from all the leaders according to their fathers’ houses, twelve staffs; and you shall write each man’s name on his staff.
You shall write the name of Aharon on the staff of Levi, for, [there is] one staff for the head of their fathers’ house.
You shall leave them inside the Tent of Meeting before the testimony where there I [ My word ] meet you.
It shall be that the man whom I choose, his staff shall blossom; and I will abate from Myself [ before Me ] the complaints of Bnei Yisroel that they complain against you.”
Moshe spoke to Bnei Yisroel and all the leaders gave to him a staff for each leader; a staff for each leader, according to their fathers’ house, twelve staffs, and the staff of Aharon [was] among their staffs.
Moshe placed the staffs before Hashem in the Tent of the Testimony.
It was on the next day, Moshe came inside the Tent of the Testimony, and behold! The staff of Aharon blossomed for the house of Levi, a blossom came forth, and bloomed buds and bore ripe almonds.
Moshe then brought out all the staffs from before Hashem to all Bnei Yisroel, and each (man) saw [ recognized ], and retrieved his staff.
Hashem said to Moshe, “Return the staff of Aharon before the (Aron of) Testimony to be preserved as a symbol to the rebellious people, so that their complaint will end [ from before Me ] and they not die.”
Moshe did (this), as Hashem commanded him—so he did.
Bnei Yisroel said [the following] to Moshe: “Behold, we perish, we are lost—we are all lost [ killed by sword, some of us swallowed by the earth, some of us perish by plague ].
Anyone approaching, who comes close to the Mishkan of Hashem will die—have we been consigned to die?”


Chapter 18

Hashem said to Aharon: “You, your sons, and your father’s house with you will bear the sin of the Sanctuary, and you, and your sons with you will bear the sin of your kehunah....
Also, your brothers, the tribe of Levi—the tribe of your father—bring to you, and they shall join you, and serve you, you and your sons with you, before the Tent of Testimony.
They shall guard their duties to you and all the duties of the Tent, but to the holy furniture or to the Mizbeach they must not approach, that neither they, nor you, shall die.
They shall join you and guard the duties of the Tent of Meeting—all the service of the Tent, but a commoner, [a non- kohein ] should not approach you.
You shall discharge the sacred duties and the duties of the Mizbeach, so that there will be no more wrath on Bnei Yisroel.
Behold, I have brought your brothers the Levites from among Bnei Yisroel, given to you as a gift—for Hashem—to perform the work of the Tent of Meeting.
You and your sons with you shall guard your kehunah [duties] regarding the Mizbeach and all that is within the Curtain—you shall serve—the service, as a gift, I give the kehunah to you, and the commoner who approaches shall be killed.”
Hashem spoke to Aharon: “Behold I have given you the guarding of my terumah -gifts, and all the hallowed things of Bnei Yisroel, to you and your children I give them for consecration, as a portion forever.
This is yours from the most holy from the fire, [of] all their sacrifices—their minchah -offerings, their sin-offerings and their guilt-offerings which they return to Me shall be most holy to you and your sons.
You shall eat it in the supremely holy (place), every male may eat it—it shall be holy to you.
Their terumah -gift is yours, of all of the wave-offerings of Bnei Yisroel I give to you and to your sons and daughters that are with you as an everlasting portion; all those ritually pure in your house may eat it.
The best of the oil, and the best of the wine and grain—their terumah -gift that they present to Hashem—I have given to you.
The first fruits of all that is in their land, which they bring before Hashem, shall be yours; all those ritually pure in your house may eat it.
Everything consecrated in Yisrael  shall be yours.
Every firstling of every being which they offer before Hashem—man or beast—shall be yours; but you must redeem the firstborn of man and redeem the firstborn of unclean beasts.
Its redemption—from a month old you should redeem them—the valuation is five silver sela’im of holy silver shekalim which is twenty gerah.
However, a firstborn ox, a firstborn sheep or firstborn goat do not redeem because they are holy; sprinkle their blood on the Mizbeach and burn their fats as a fire-offering as a pleasing fragrance to Hashem.
Their flesh is yours; like the breast which is waved and like the right thigh—it shall be yours.
All of the sacred terumah -gifts that Bnei Yisroel offer to Hashem, I have given to you, your sons and daughters with you as an everlasting portion; an eternal covenant of salt before Hashem to you and your children that are with you.”
Hashem said to Aharon: “You will have no inheritance in their land, and you will not have a share among them; I am your inheritance and portion among Bnei Yisroel.
Behold, I have given to the sons of Levi all the tithes in Yisrael  for an inheritance in return for their service which they perform—the service of the Tent of Meeting.
Bnei Yisroel shall no longer approach the Tent of Meeting, to become guilty and die.
The Levi[tes]—[they] shall perform the service of the Tent of Meeting and they will bear their guilt; it is an everlasting decree—throughout your generations—among Bnei Yisroel they (the Levites) shall have no inheritance.
For the tithe of Bnei Yisroel which they must set aside to Hashem as a terumah -gift I gave to the Levites as an inheritance; therefore, I told them: ‘among Bnei Yisroel they shall have no inheritance.’”
Hashem spoke to Moshe, saying:
“Speak to the Levites and say to them: ‘When you take the tithe from Bnei Yisroel, which I gave you from them for your inheritance, set aside from it the terumah -gift of Hashem, a tithe of the tithe.
Your terumah -gift will be considered the same as grain from the granary and [wine and oil of] fully ripened fruit from the cistern.
So must you, too, set aside the terumah -gift of Hashem from all your tithes which you take from Bnei Yisroel; give from them the terumah -gift of Hashem to Aharon the kohein.
From all your gifts you must set aside all of the terumah -gifts of Hashem; from each thing—its finest part—the part that is to be consecrated.’
Say to them: ‘When you set aside the finest part of it, it will be considered for the Levites like the produce of the granary and the produce of the cistern.
You may consume it anywhere—you and your household; since it is the reward for your service in the Tent of Meeting.
You will not bear a sin because of it, when you separate its best part; but sacred things of Bnei Yisroel you must not profane, and you will not die.”


Chapter 19

Hashem spoke to Moshe and Aharon, saying.
This is the statute of the Torah which Hashem commanded, saying; speak to Bnei Yisroel that they shall take to you a red, perfect cow without a blemish, upon which no yoke was laid.
Give it to Elozor the kohein ; he shall take it outside the camp, and someone shall slaughter it in his presence.
Elozor the kohein shall take some of its blood with his finger and sprinkle it directly facing the Tent of Meeting, some of its blood seven times.
Someone shall burn the cow in his presence; its skin, flesh, blood, with its waste (that are in its intestines) shall be burned.
The kohein shall take a piece of cedar wood, hyssop, and crimson wool, and throw them into the burning of the cow.
Then the kohein shall wash his garments and bathe his body in water, and afterwards he may enter the camp; [however,] the kohein shall be impure until the evening.
Also, the one who burns it must wash his garments and bathe his body in water; he shall remain unclean until the evening.
A ritually clean person shall gather the cow’s ashes and place [it] outside the camp in a clean place; it shall remain a keepsake for the community of Bnei Yisroel for sprinkling water for purification.
The one who gathers the cow’s ashes shall wash his garments, and remain unclean until the evening; it shall be for Bnei Yisroel and for the proselyte who lives among them an eternal statute.
One who touches the corpse of any [human] soul shall become unclean for seven days.
He shall cleanse himself with it on the third day and on the seventh day, so that he may become clean; if he does not have himself cleansed on the third day and on the seventh day, he will not become clean.
Whoever touches a corpse of a [human] soul, who died and does not have himself cleansed defiles the Mishkan of Hashem (if he enters it), that soul will be cut off from Yisroel; because the sprinkling water was not sprinkled on him, he will be impure his impurity remains.
This is the law [regarding] a person who dies in a tent; anyone who enters the tent and everything that is in the tent shall be unclean for seven days.
Any open utensil that has no cover fastened to it, shall be unclean.
Anyone who touches, in an open field, one slain by the sword, a corpse, human bone, or grave, shall be unclean for seven days.
They shall take for the unclean person of the ashes from the burnt purification-offering and he shall place upon them living [spring] water in a vessel.
He shall take hyssop and dip it into the water; [this is done by] a ritually clean person, he shall sprinkle it on the tent, on all the utensils and people that were there, and on anyone who touched the bone, murder victim, corpse, or grave.
The ritually clean person shall sprinkle upon the unclean person on the third day and on the seventh day; he shall purify him on the seventh day when he must wash his garments and bathe in water, and then he becomes clean in the evening.
A person who became ritually unclean [and enters the Sanctuary] without purifying himself, that soul will be cut off from the community; for he defiled the Sanctuary of Hashem, the sprinkling water was not sprinkled upon him, he remains unclean.
This shall be the statute for all times; one who sprinkles the sprinkling waters shall wash his garments, and one who touches the sprinkling waters shall remain unclean until the evening.
Anything which the unclean person touches, shall become unclean; and anyone touching him shall be ritually unclean until the evening.


Chapter 20

The entire community of Bnei Yisroel came to the wilderness of Tzin, in the first month. The people settled in Kodeish, and Miriam died and was buried there....
There was no water for the community, and they assembled against Moshe and Aharon.
The people quarreled with Moshe and said, “Would that we had died by our brothers’ death before Hashem.
Why did you bring the congregation of Hashem into this wilderness for us and our livestock to die there?
Why did you take us out of Egypt and bring us to this terrible place? It is not a place for seed, figs, grapes, or pomegranates; and there is no water to drink!”
Moshe and Aharon moved away from the assembly to the entrance of the Tent of Meeting, and fell on their faces; the glory of Hashem appeared to them.
Hashem spoke to Moshe, saying.
“Take the staff and assemble the community, you and Aharon your brother, and speak to the rock in their presence that it may give forth its water; you will then bring forth for them water from the rock, and give drink [to] the community and their livestock.”
Moshe took the staff from before Hashem, as He instructed him.
Moshe and Aharon assembled the community before the rock; [Moshe] said to them, “Listen, you rebels! Can we extract water from this rock for you?”
And Moshe raised his hand and struck the rock with his staff twice; water rushed out abundantly, and the community and their livestock drank.
Hashem said to Moshe and Aharon, “Because you did not believe in Me to sanctify Me in the presence of Bnei Yisroel; therefore, you will not bring this congregation into the land that I have given them.”
They are the waters of dispute where Bnei Yisroel contended with Hashem, and He was sanctified through them.
Moshe sent emissaries from Kodeish to the King of Edom (saying), “This is what your brother Yisroel declares; you know of all the hardship that we have encountered.
Our forefathers went down to Egypt and we remained in Egypt for a long time; the Egyptians mistreated us and our forefathers.
Then we cried out to Hashem, and He heard our voice, He sent an emissary and led us out of Egypt; now we are in Kodeish, a city at the edge of your border.
Please let us pass through your land, we will not pass through any field or vineyard, and we will not drink well water; we will travel by the king’s road, we will not turn aside to the right or left, until we have passed through your territory.”
Edom responded, “You shall not pass through me (my land), lest I go out against you with the sword!”
Bnei Yisroel said, “We will go up by the highway, and if we or our cattle drink your water we will pay for it, it is just nothing, we only want to pass through on foot.”
Then (Edom) responded, “Do not pass through!” Edom came to confront [Bnei Yisroel] with a massive number of people and a strong hand.
Edom refused to allow Yisroel to pass through its territory, and Yisroel turned aside from him.
They traveled from Kodeish, and the entire community of Bnei Yisroel came to Mount Hor.
Hashem spoke to Moshe and Aharon at Mount Hor, at the border of the land of Edom, saying.
“Aharon will now be gathered (die) to his people, for he shall not enter the land that I have given to Bnei Yisroel, because you defied My word at the waters of dispute.
Take Aharon and his son Elozor, and bring them up to Mount Hor.
Remove Aharon’s vestments and dress his son Elozor in them; Aharon will be gathered in and die there.”
Moshe did as Hashem commanded; and they went up Mount Hor in the presence of the entire community.
Moshe then removed Aharon’s vestments and dressed Aharon’s son, Elozor, in them; Aharon died there on top of the mountain, and Moshe and Elozor descended from the mountain.
The entire community saw that Aharon died; and they wept for Aharon thirty days, the entire house of Yisroel.


Chapter 21

The Canaanite King of Arad heard—who lived in the south—that Yisroel had come by the route of the spies; he attacked Yisroel, and he took from them a captive....
Yisroel made a vow to Hashem and said, “If You will deliver this people into my hand, I shall consecrate their cities.”
Hashem heard Yisroel’s voice, and He delivered the Canaanites (into Yisroel’s hand), and he (Yisroel) destroyed them and [consecrated] their cities; the region was named Chormo.
They then traveled from Mount Hor by the Reed Sea route, in order to circle around the land of Edom; traveling was insufferable to the people.
The people spoke out against God and Moshe, “Why did you bring us up out of Egypt to die in the wilderness? There is no food and no water, and we are disgusted with this rotten bread.”
Hashem sent against the people the consuming snakes, and they bit the people, and many people of Yisroel died.
The people came to Moshe and said, “We have sinned by speaking against Hashem and you; pray to Hashem that He remove the snakes from us.” Moshe prayed on behalf of the people.
Hashem said to Moshe, “Make yourself [the image of] a consuming snake, and place it upon a banner; and anyone bitten will look at it and live.”
Moshe made a copper snake and placed it on the banner; whenever a snake bit a person, he would gaze upon the copper snake and live.
Bnei Yisroel traveled on and camped in Ovos.
They traveled from Ovos and camped in the wasteland passes in the wilderness, facing Moav, eastward of the sun.
They traveled from there and camped in the valley of Zered.
They traveled from there and camped opposite Arnon, in the wilderness, extending from the Emorite border; Arnon being the Moav border between Moav and the Emorite.
Concerning this will be told in the Book of the Wars of Hashem, “He gave at the Reeds (Sea) and the valleys of Arnon.
And the spillage in the valleys when it turned to dwell at Ar, and then leaned on the border of Moav.
From there, to the well; this is the well of which Hashem said to Moshe, ‘Gather the people and I will give them water.’”
It was then that Yisroel sang this song : “Arise, O well, sing to it!
The well dug by princes, that the nobles of the nation excavated, through the lawgiver, with their staffs; from the wilderness a gift.
The gift (traveled) to the valley, and from the valley to the heights.
And from the heights to the valley that is in the field of Moav, at the top of the peak that overlooks the wastelands.”
Yisroel sent emissaries to Sichon, King of the Emorite, saying.
“Let me pass through your land, we will not turn aside into the fields and vineyards, we will not drink well water; we will go by the King’s road until we have passed through your territory.”
But Sichon did not allow Yisroel to pass through his territory; Sichon gathered all his people and went out against Yisroel to the wilderness; he came to Yohatz and attacked Yisroel.
Yisroel defeated him with the edge of the sword and took possession of his land; from Arnon to the Yabok, as far as Amon[’s border], because Amon’s border was impregnable.
Yisroel took all these cities; Yisroel settled in all the cities of the Emorite, in Cheshbon and all its daughters.
For Cheshbon was then a city of Sichon, King of the Emorites, and he had waged war against the first king of Moav, and took all his land from his hand, as far as Arnon.
Concerning this, the parable tellers say: “Come to Cheshbon, may it be built and established as the city of Sichon.
For a fire went forth from Cheshbon, a flame from Sichon’s capital; it consumed Ar, of Moav, the masters of Arnon’s heights.
Woe to you, O Moav, you are destroyed, people of Kemosh, he rendered your sons as refugees, and your daughters captives, of Sichon, King of Emori.
Their kingdom was uprooted from Cheshbon as far as Divon; we made them desolate as far as Nofach near Meidva.”
Yisroel settled in the land of the Emorite.
Moshe sent [men] to spy on Ya’zer, and they captured its surrounding villages, and drove out the Emorites that were there.
They then turned and headed toward the Bashan; and Og, King of the Bashan, came out against them he with all his people, to wage war at Edre’i.
Hashem said to Moshe, “Do not be afraid of him, for into your hand I have delivered Ihim and all his people and territory; do to him as you have done to Sichon, King of the Emorite, who lives in Cheshbon.”
And they killed him (Og), his sons, and all his people, leaving no survivors; and they took possession of his land.


Chapter 22

Bnei Yisroel traveled and camped in the western plains of Moav, across the Yardein from Yereicho....
And Balak the son of Tzipor saw all that Yisroel had done to the Emorite.
And Moav became terrified of the people [of Yisrael ] because of their great numbers, and so, Moav detested the Bnei Yisroel.
Moav said to the elders of Midian, “Now this assembly will lick up everything around us, just as the ox laps up the herbs of the field.” Balak the son of Tzipor was King of Moav at that time.
He sent emissaries to Bil’am the son of Beor, to Pesor—which is by the river, the land of his people—to call him, saying: “Behold, a nation came out of Egypt, behold they have covered the face of the earth, and is located across from me.
And now, please come and curse this nation for me, for it is too mighty for me, perhaps it will enable us to strike at him, and banish them from the land; for I know, that whomever you bless is blessed, and whomever you curse is cursed.”
And the elders of Moav and Midian went with magic charms in their hands; they came to Bil’am and conveyed Balak's message to him.
He replied to them: “Spend this night here and then I will give you an answer according to what Hashem tells me,’’ and the dignitaries of Moav remained with Bil’am.
God appeared to Bil’am and said, “Who are these men with you?”
Bil’am replied to God: “Balak son of Tzipor, King of Moav, has sent them to me [saying]:
‘Behold, the people that came out of Egypt has covered the face of the earth; come now, and curse him for me so that I will be able to wage war against him, and banish him’.”
God said to Bil’am: “Do not go with them! You shall not curse the people, for they are blessed.”
Bil’am arose in the morning and said to Balak's dignitaries: “Go back to your land, for Hashem refuses to allow me to go with you.”
Moav's dignitaries got up, and came to Balak and said: “Bil’am refuses to go with us.”
Balak persisted and sent dignitaries in greater number and of higher rank than these.
They came to Bil’am and said to him: “The following is a message from Balak the son Tzipor: ‘Please do not refuse to come to me.
For I will honor you greatly and whatever you tell me, I will do, if you would just please come and curse this people for me.’”
Bil’am answered and said to Balak's servants: “Even if Balak would give me silver and gold enough to fill his house, I cannot transgress the word of Hashem my God, by doing anything small or great.
Now, you also, please remain here overnight, and I will get to know what more will Hashem tell me.”
God appeared to Bil’am that night and said to him: “If the men have come to call you, arise and go with them; however, whatever I will say to you, you will do.”
Bil’am arose in the morning, saddled his donkey, and went with the Moavite dignitaries.
God showed anger because he went, and an angel of Hashem placed himself in the way to thwart him, as he was riding on his donkey accompanied by his two attendants.
The donkey saw the angel of Hashem standing in the way with his sword drawn in his hand; the donkey turned aside from the way and went into the field; Bil’am struck the donkey to get it back on the way.
But the angel of Hashem stood in a narrow path of the vineyards with a barrier at either side.
When the donkey saw the angel of Hashem, she was pressed against the wall and pressed Bil’am's foot against the wall; and he struck her even more.
Hashem’s angel passed further ahead and stood in a narrow place, where there was no room to turn [either] to the right or to the left.
When the donkey saw the angel of Hashem, it crouched beneath Bil’am; Bil’am became angry and beat the donkey with the stick.
Hashem opened the mouth of the donkey, and she said to Bil’am: “What have I done to you, that you have hit me these three times?”
Bil’am said to the donkey: “Because you have ridiculed me; would that I had a sword in my hand, I would kill you now.”
The donkey replied to Bil’am: “Am I not the very same donkey that you have been riding on all your life until this very day? Was it ever my habit to do this to you?” And he said: “No.”
Hashem then enabled Bil’am to see, and he observed the angel of Hashem standing in the way with his sword drawn in his hand. He bowed his head and prostrated himself on his face.
The angel of Hashem said to him: “Why did you hit your donkey these three times? Behold, I came out to obstruct you, because your way is contrary to me.
And when the donkey saw me, it turned aside these three times; had she not turned aside before me as [she did] now I would surely have killed you and she, I would let live.”
Bil’am said to the angel of Hashem: “I have sinned because I did not know that you were standing in the way before me; now therefore, if it is wicked in your eyes, I shall return.”
The angel of Hashem said to Bil’am: “Go with the men, but only the word that I will speak to you shall you speak” Bil’am then continued to go with Balak's dignitaries.
When Balak heard that Bil’am was coming, he went out to meet him, to the city of Moav, which is on the boundary of Arnon—at the very edge of the boundary.
Balak said to Bil’am: “Did I not send so many [dignitaries] to invite you? Why did you not come to me? Am I really incapable of honoring you?”
Bil’am replied to Balak: “Now that I have come to you, have I any power to say anything? Only the word that God puts in my mouth will I speak.”
Bil’am went with Balak and they came to Kiryas Chutzos.
Balak slaughtered cattle and sheep and he sent some to Bil’am and to the dignitaries that were with him.
In the morning, Balak took Bil’am and he led him up to Bamos Ba’al; from there he saw part of the people.