Judges
שופטים
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Judges



Chapter 1

1 It was after the death of Yehoshua, and Bnei Yisrael asked Hashem saying, "Who will go up to the Canaanites first to fight him?" 
2 Hashem said, "Yehuda will go up; behold I have put the land in his hand." 
3 Yehuda said to Shimon his brother, "Go up with me in my portion, and we will fight the Canaanites, and I will also go with you in your portion," and Shimon went with him. 
4 Yehuda went up, and Hashem put the Canaanites and the Perizites in their hand, and they struck them at Bezek - ten thousand men. 
5 They found Adoni-Bezek in Bezek, and they fought him; they struck the Cannanites and the Perizites. 
6 Adoni-Bezek fled, and they chased after him and grabbed him, and they cut off his thumbs and big toes.
7 Adoni-Bezek said, "The cut-off thumbs and toes of seventy kings were gathered under my table; like I have done, so God has repaid me." They brought him to Yerushalayim and he died there. 
8 The people of Yehuda fought in Yerushalayim, and they captured her, and struck her by the sword; and the city they sent up in fire. 
9 And afterwards the people of Yehuda went down to fight the Canaanites, who lived in the mountain, and the Negev and the Shefela. 
10 Yehuda went to the Cannanite who lived in Chevron, and the name of Chevron before had been Kiryat Arba; they struck Sheshai, Achiman, and Talmi.
11 They went from there to the inhabitants of Devir, and the name of Devir before had  been Kiryat Sefer. 
12 Calev said, "The one who strikes Kiryat Sefer and captures her - I will give him Icsa my daughter as a wife."
13 Otniel son of Kenaz, the younger brother of Calev, captured her, and he gave him Icsa his daughter as a wife.
 14 It was when she came, she convinced him to ask from her father for the field. She got down from the donkey, and Calev said to her, "What is with you?" 
15 She said to him, "Give me a blessing, because you have given me the land of the Negev, and give me springs of water." Calev gave her the upper springs and lower springs.
16 And the children of Keni, the father-in-law of Moshe, went up from the City of Palms to the people of Yehuda in the desert of Yehuda in the Negev of Arad, and they went and lived with the nation.
17 Yehuda went with Shimon his brother, and they struck the Canaanites living in Tzefat, and they proscribed in, and the city was called Chormah.
18 Yehuda struck Aza and its borders, and Ashkelon and its borders, and Ekron and its borders. 
19 Hashem was with Yehuda, and he inherited the mountain, because he did not inherit the inhabitants of the valley, because they had iron chariots.
20 They gave Chevron to Calev, as Moshe had spoken, and he inherited from there the three people of Anak.
21 And the Yevusi, inhabitants of Yerushalayim, the people of Binyamin did not inherit, and the Yevusi people lived with the people of Binyamin in Yerushalayim until this day. 
22 The people of Yosef went up also to Beit El, and Hashem was with them. 
23 The people of Yosef spied out Beit El, and the name of the city before was Luz.
24 The guards saw a man going out of the city, and they said to him, "Show us please how to come into the city and we will do kindness to you." 
25 He showed them how to come into the city, and they struck the city with the sword, and the man and his family they sent away.
26 The man went to the land of the Hittites, and he built a city and called it Luz, that is its name until this day.
27 Menashe did not inherit Beit Shean and  its suburbs, and Taanach and its suburbs, and the inhabitants of Dor and its suburbs, and the inhabitants of Yivliam and its suburbs, and the inhabitants of Megido and its suburbs, and the Canaanites continued to live in this land. 
28 It was when Israel was strong, they put a tax on the Canaanites, but they did not inherit them. 
29 And Efraim did not inherit the Canaanites that lived in Gazer, and the Canaanites lived in his midst in Gazer.
30 Zevulun did not inherit the inhabitants of Kitron, and the inhabitants of Nahalol, and the Canaanites lived in his midst and they were taxed. 
31 Asher did not inherit the inhabitants of Acco, and the inhabitants of Tzidon, and Achlav and Achziv and Chelba, and Afik and Rechov. 
32 The Asherites lived in the midst of the Cannanites, inhabitants of the land, because they did not inherit him. 
33 Naftali did not inherit the inhabitants of Beit Shemesh, and the inhabitants of Beit Anat, and he lived in the midst of the Canaanites, inhabitants of the land, and the inhabitants of Beit Shemesh and Beit Anat were taxed by them. 
34 The Amorites pressed the people of Dan to the mountain, because they did not let him go down to the valley. 
35 The Amorites continued to live in Mt. Cheres in Ayalon and in Shalavim, and the hand of the house of Yosef was strong and they were taxed. 
36 And the border of the Amorites at the top was Akrabim, from Sela and above. 