Bereshit Rabbati
בראשית רבתי
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Bereshit_Rabbati
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Bereshit Rabbati

Parashat Bereshit



Parashat Noah



Parashat Lech Lecha



Parashat Vayera



Parashat Chayei Sarah








(Genesis 24:34): It was learned — there were 13 that never tasted the taste of death. These were them: The <i>milcham</i> [phoenix] bird and its [species], Enoch the son of Yered, Serah the daughter of Asher, Batya the daughter of Pharaoh, Jabez, Hiram the king of Tyre, Elijah, Ebed-melech the Kushite, the Messiah, the cohort of Jonadab the son of Rechab, Rabbi Judah the Prince's grandson, Rabbi Yehoshua the son of Levi, and Eliezer the servant of Abraham. Why the <i>milcham</i> bird? Because when Eve ate from the tree, and afterward they both gave [from it] to all the creatures to taste, when they gave [it] to the <i>milcham</i> bird, it did not want to eat [it]. The Holy One, blessed be He, [then] said, "I will make it stand forever as an example for all the generations. It and its species will testify about the merit of the Jewish people in the future." And it is still in that city that the angel of death built, and they are fruitful and multiply like the other creatures. But when they become a thousand years old, they become small like a chick and then grow to be like an eagle and never die. Why Enoch? Since everyone in his generation was completely wicked and he was completely righteous. Hence, he resembled the ministering angels. Serah the daughter of Asher, because she had always been righteous. And when the sons of Jacob went up from Egypt and found Joseph alive, the holy spirit disappeared from Jacob until the day he was told, <i>Joseph is still alive</i> (Genesis 45:26). At that time, he said to her, "You should likewise live forever." And it clung to her since she had always been righteous. So she is still sheltered in the Garden of Eden. Batya the daughter of Pharaoh, because she raised Moses and saved him from death. Jabez, because everyone in his generation was righteous, but he was the greatest of them all. And he was Othniel the son of Kenaz. Hiram the king of Tyre went into the Garden of Eden but left. He entered because he toiled [in building] the Temple. Hence they placed him in the Garden of Eden for 400 years. In the end, he became haughty-hearted and said: <i>I am a god; I sit enthroned like a god</i> (Ezekiel 28:2) — hence the Holy One, blessed be He, said to Ezekiel: <i>say to the prince of Tyre, "Because you have been so haughty [... You have been] in Eden, the Garden of God, etc."</i> (Ezekiel 28:2-13). So He therefore expelled him from the Garden of Eden and he is [now] in Geihinnom. And were it not that the Holy One, blessed be He, wanted to punish Hiram, the Temple would still not be destroyed. As it were, the Temple would have been embarrassed to [take part in] hurting Hiram. Once the Temple was destroyed, He permitted the ministering angels to give him his full sentence for everything he said in front of the divine presence. Why Elijah? Because he was a righteous zealot, son of a zealot. Hence He gave him a covenant of peace to live forever. Ebed-melech the Kushite, because he had mercy upon the prophet Jeremiah, peace be upon him, and took him out from the pit. [So] Jeremiah prayed for him to the Holy One, blessed be He, and He gave Him eternal life. Why the Messiah? Because he was in a wicked generation and he saw his fathers, the kings of the House of David, worshipping idolatry; but he repudiated them and chose the Holy One, blessed be He, and sought mercy for the Jewish people, to fast and to pray for them, as it is stated: <i>But he was wounded because of our sins, etc. and by his bruises we were healed</i> (Isaiah 53:5). Hence he was hidden, so that he will redeem the Jewish people with the ingathering of the exiles and rejoice with them during the resurrection of the dead. Why Jonadab and his cohort? Because he was in a wicked generation, but when he heard the rebukes that Jeremiah was giving over to the Jewish people at the time of Jehoiakim and Zedekiah, that the Temple would be destroyed in the future and the Jewish people exiled, he stood and made his children and all of his cohort take an oath that they would not build houses, etc. <i>so that you may live long</i> (Jeremiah 35:7). Because of this, the Holy One, blessed be He, said: <i>There shall [never] cease to be a man of the line of Jonadab, etc.</i> (Jeremiah 35:19). And they are still in the land of Eden and they will live forever. Rabbi Judah the Prince's grandson, due to his great humility and righteousness, he was of a lowly spirit. He never lifted his eyes even towards his wife, all the more so towards the wife of his fellow. And due to his great modesty and fear [of God], he merited to enter the Garden of Eden while living. Why Rabbi Yehoshua the son of Levi? Since he never asked [to annul] his oath, and [due to] that which happened with the angel of death. Eliezer, because he said, "I am a descendant of Cham who was cursed together with his descendants by Noah to be a servant to his brothers forever. It is better for me to serve a servant of God, may He be blessed, and not to serve a servant of idolatry." So he converted and stood with Abraham to learn humility, righteousness, and justice. Come and see his humility! For when they wanted to honor him greatly in Aram Neharaim, he belittled himself and said: <i>I am the servant of Abraham</i> (Genesis 24:34). And also [because] he was suspected of something that was not true about him. 

Parashat Toldot



Parashat Vayetze



Parashat Vayishlach



Parashat Vayeshev



Parashat Miketz



Parashat Vayigash

(Genesis 44:30-31) "And his soul is bound to his soul." Rabbi Chanina bar Ido said: Because it says, 'and He forms the spirit of man within him' (Zechariah 12:1), tied within him. If not for this, when the trouble came upon him, he would collapse and be cast away. You might think the soul of Jacob as well. No, but 'And his soul is bound to his soul.' If his spirit is tied within him, and the soul of Benjamin is bound to his soul, once the soul of Benjamin is removed from him, his soul will also be removed. As it says, 'And it will be, when he sees that the youth is gone' (Genesis 44:31), immediately he will die due to his grief."...
Now therefore, please let your servant remain instead of the youth." This is similar to what is stated in the Book of Esther (Esther 2:5), "Now there was a Jewish man in Shushan." Was he from the tribe of Judah that he is called a Jew? Wasn't it Benjamin who is described as a man of the right-hand side (Genesis 44:17)? However, when the tribes went down to Egypt and the cup was found in Benjamin's sack, he searched all of them, and it was found in Benjamin's possession. Judah said to him, "Please, my lord, we already have a bad incident. I sold my brother, as it is written, 'Come, let us sell him to the Ishmaelites' (Genesis 37:27), and now you want me to bring back the same evil? I sold my brother as a slave, and now I am taking him back to be a slave. I have no standing either before my father or before the Holy One, blessed be He. I must be a slave, as I sold Joseph, my brother. It is just that I should be a slave for him. This is indicated by the phrase 'Now therefore, please let your servant remain.' God said to him, 'Judah, you have offered yourself as collateral for Benjamin; therefore, the Redeemer who will arise from you over Israel will be named after you.' This is why it is written, 'Now there was a Jewish man.
(Genesis 45:8) "So it was not you who sent me here, but God; and He has made me a father to Pharaoh." I am like a creditor to him, as it is stated (Exodus 22:24), "Do not impose interest upon him." Just as the way of a creditor is to lend to a borrower (Proverbs 22:7), in the book of Rabbi Meir, it is written, "And he has made me a father," as it says, "which the Lord, your God, gives you" (Deuteronomy 15:2). This is a legal judgment derived from the full texts written in the Torah, which emerged from Jerusalem during the Sabbatical year and ascended to Rome, and the scrolls were stored in the synagogue of Asvyros. "And God saw all that He had made, and behold, it was very good" (Genesis 1:31). "For a man and his wife, leather tunics" (Genesis 3:21). "I will descend now and see their outcry" (Genesis 18:21). "The Lord who took me from my father's house and from the land of my birth" (Genesis 24:7). "And he sold his birthright" (Genesis 25:33). "Behold, now, I am old; I do not know the day of my death" (Genesis 27:2). "The fragrance of a field that the Lord has blessed" (Genesis 27:27). "And Oholibamah bore Jeush" (Genesis 36:5). "Eliphaz, the son of Esau" (Genesis 36:10). "These were the sons of Oholibamah, the wife of Esau" (Genesis 36:14). "They arose and went down to Egypt" (Genesis 43:15). "And I buried her there on the way" (Genesis 48:7).And he has made me a father to Pharaoh." And here are the names that came down to Egypt (Genesis 46:8). "So shall you say to the children of Jacob, and tell the children of Israel" (Exodus 19:3). "The children of Israel journeyed from Rameses" (Exodus 12:37). "For it is a sign between Me" (Exodus 31:13). "Five for the planks on one side" (Exodus 26:27). "We have no barricade against it." "And the priest shall take from its blood" (Leviticus 4:34), for if it is a lamb. "And when the zav becomes purified with living water" (Leviticus 15:13). "One lamb of the first year without blemish" (Leviticus 14:10). "All who come to join the ranks must be counted in their census" (Numbers 4:3). "From the first of your dough, you shall give" (Numbers 15:20). "Avenge the vengeance of the children of Israel" (Numbers 31:2). "And they came to Moses and to the congregation of the children of Israel" (Numbers 12:1). "The heads of the families of the house of Joseph approached" (Numbers 36:1). "But I have not the power to go up" (Deuteronomy 1:26). "And they shall inherit it, they and all the people of the land" (Numbers 32:22). "To give us into the hands of the Amorites" (Deuteronomy 1:27). "Nor take a mother upon her young" (Deuteronomy 22:6). "Brimstone and salt burning" (Deuteronomy 29:22). "Like the upheaval of Sodom and Gomorrah" (Deuteronomy 29:22). "I said, I would scatter them" (Deuteronomy 32:26). So they are written in the Torah that emerged from Jerusalem.
(Genesis 45:19) "Take wagons from the land of Egypt for your little ones [and for your wives] and bring your father." The nations of the world, since they are not commanded regarding honoring their father and mother, Pharaoh preempted this by urging the sons and their wives to bring their father. But the sons of Jacob, who were righteous and careful about honoring their father and mother, initially carried their father, and afterward their sons and wives. This is beloved, as it is stated, "And the children of Israel carried Jacob, their father," and afterward, "and their little ones and their wives" (Exodus 46:5).
(Genesis 45:22) "Three hundred pieces of silver." This hints that he was destined to have a daughter (who would be taken), [who would ask] from the king that they be executed on the same day. Three hundred men would fall on that day. As it is stated, "Let it be given tomorrow, and [the request of] Haman [shall be granted], and they [the Jews] shall be hanged in Shushan" (Esther 9:13–15). And [it was] for him to give silver, hinting at the slain, corresponding to the silver that Haman offered to destroy the Jews, and it turned around that they prevailed over their enemies.
(Genesis 46:2) "In visions of the night." In two visions, the Holy One, blessed be He, showed him on that night. He showed him the enslavement of his sons in Egypt, and "I will also surely bring you up" (Genesis 46:4) — this refers to redemption. Why at night? Corresponding to the exile, which is complete darkness, as it is stated, "Guard what is left until night" (Isaiah 21:11). And corresponding to the redemption from Egypt, which is destined to begin at night. The plague of the firstborn occurred at night, as it is stated, "And it came to pass at midnight" (Exodus 12:29). Pharaoh sent for Moses and Aaron at night, as it is stated, "And Pharaoh called to Moses and Aaron at night" (Exodus 12:31).
... In Dan, he placed one, and the other he gave to Bethel, which was in the portion of his tribe. One was given to Dan because the rest of the tribes did not want to receive it, and the tribe of Dan accepted it.
(Genesis 46:24) "And the sons of Naphtali: Jahzeel and Guni." All the sons of Naphtali merited, as no member of their family intermarried with others, and their name did not change in any place. The Scriptures did not change their name, and their name was called based on the merit of their family. Jahzeel, who made a partition between the Holy One, blessed be He, and idolatry, trusting in the Holy One, blessed be He, and rejecting idolatry. And Guni, to whom the Holy One, blessed be He, became a shield. And "Jezreel and Shillem," why? Because their inclination was complete for the Holy One, blessed be He.

Parashat Vayechi

