Pesikta DeRav Kahana
פסיקתא דרב כהנא
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com

Pesikta DeRav Kahana



Paragraph 1



Paragraph 2



Paragraph 3



Paragraph 4

Red cow. [1] Who is pure from unclean, not one (Job 14:4), such as Abraham from the land of Reh, Hezekiah from the land of Azaz, and Mordecai from the land of Isra, the world to come from this world. Who did so, who commanded so, who decreed so, not one, not one of the world. Teman will give them a clean like grain, unclean, a flower in its entirety, pure. Who did so, who commanded so, who decreed so, not one of the world. Teman will give them a woman who has died and given birth in her bowels, and the living creature reaches out its hand and touches it, the living creature is unclean for seven days, and the woman is clean until the birth comes out. The dead person in a clean house, coming out of it is unclean. Who did so, who commanded so, who decreed so, not one, not one of the world. And Teman will give them all who are busy with the cow from beginning to end, they are unclean with their clothes, it itself purifies the unclean. But the Lord, the Holy One, has decreed a law, and decreed a decree, and there is no power to transgress my decree. This is the law of the Torah, which the Lord commanded, saying (Numbers 19:2).
...[2] Rabbi Tanhum bar Hanilei opened the words of the Lord, saying, "Pure words, pure silver, clearly added to the earth, refined seven times" (Psalms 12:7). Rabbi Tanhum bar Hanilei said, "Pure words, pure words, the words of the Lord, the Blessed One, are words, not words. In the world, a king of flesh and blood enters a country and the people of the country flatter him and give him a pound of silver, saying, "Tomorrow I will build you baths and baths, tomorrow I will bring you a measure of water," and he slept for him and did not stand, where is he, where are his words, but the Lord, the Blessed One, is not like that, but the Lord is the true God (Jeremiah 10:10). What is truth, Ar Avon, who is the living God and King of the world (ibid.). Purity, Rabbi Yoda in the name of Rabbi Yochanan, Rabbi Barakiya in the name of Rabbi Lazar, Rabbi Yaakov of Kfar Hanin, and Amrim to him in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi, we find that the Blessed One, blessed be He, has cut off two or three verses in the Torah so that nothing unclean may come out of His mouth, as it is written: Of every clean animal you shall take seven for yourself (Genesis 7:2), and of the animal that is unclean there is no writing here, except that which is unclean, both the man and his wife (ibid.). Rabbi Yoda admitted that Rabbi Menashe, when he came to open to them the signs of an unclean animal, he did not open to them except the signs of a clean animal: the camel, because it does not divide the hoof, there is no such thing, but because it chews the cud (Leviticus 11:4). The rabbit, because it does not divide the hoof, there is no such thing, but because it chews the cud (Ibid. 5). The hare, because it does not divide the hoof, there is no such thing, but because it chews the cud (Ibid. 6). The pig, because it does not chew the cud, there is no such thing, but because it chews the cud (Ibid. 7). Rabbi Yossi of Melechiah, Rabbi Yehoshua of Sakhnin, in the name of Rabbi Levi, infants in the days of David, until they tasted the taste of chaat, would know how to study the Torah, forty-nine faces unclean and forty-nine faces clean. And David would pray about it, "And oh, you, O God, will preserve them" (Psalms 12:8), the Netrat Oreithon, in the heart, preserve us from this generation forever. (Ibid.), from that generation that is in debt. After all this praise, they go out to war and fall, but because of those who were corrupters among them, they would go out to war and fall. He is David, O', my soul will lie down among the Levites, I will lie down in fiery flames, etc. (Psalms 77:5). My soul will lie down in fiery flames, this is Abner and Amesh who were in the Torah. I will lie down in fiery flames, this is Doag and Achitophel who were in fiery flames after slander. Men whose teeth are spears and arrows (Psalms 77:1), if the men of Keilah had said, "The men of Keilah would have delivered me and the men of Keilah up" (1 Samuel 23:12). And their tongue is a sharp sword (Psalms 77:1), if the spies had said, "When the spies came, they said to Saul, etc." (Psalms 45:2). At that time, David, the Holy One, before the Lord, the Lord of the worlds, said, "What does the Divine Presence do on earth? You are exalted above the heavens, O God, and the third (Psalms 77:6), remove Your Divine Presence from among them." But Ahab's generation were all worshipers of the Lord, and because there were no adulterers among them, they would go out to war and be victorious. He whose worshipers were told by Elijah, "Didn't he tell my Lord what I did when Jezebel killed the prophets of the Lord, etc. (1 Kings 18:13), if there was bread, why water?" Rather, he teaches that the water was harder for him to bring than the bread. And Elijah proclaims at the top of Carmel, "I alone remain a prophet of the Lord" (1 Kings 22), and all her people know it, but they do not announce it to the king. Rabbi Shmo' Bar Nachman said to him, "Why are you between the boundaries?" They said, "I am the one who broke through the boundary of the world." Why do you walk with your tongue in a drunken manner? Amen to them, it is because of me. Why do all beasts and animals bite and do not kill? And you bite and kill? Amen to them, if the snake bites without a hiss (Ecclesiastes 10:11), it is possible for it to be a slave, so that it is not said to me from above. And why do you bite with one limb and all the limbs feel? Amen to them and to me, you say, "They said to the tongue-wielding person, that he is O here and kills in the Romans." And why is his name called Third, that he kills three, they say, and those who received him, and those who are said about him. And in the days of Saul, he killed four, they say, Saul whom they received, Ahimelech, who is said about him, and Abner. Why was Abner killed? Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi, Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish, and Rabbanin. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi, or by the one who preceded his name. In the name of David, it is written, "And Abner sent messengers to David in his place, saying, 'To whom is the land?'" (2 Samuel 3:12), written by Abner to David. And Rabbi Shema ben Lakish says, "By the blood of the young men, who were playing, he said, 'And Abner said to Joab, "Let the young men rise up and play before us" (ibid. 2:14). And the rabbis say, by the blood of David, when he did not wait to be asked to reconcile with David, when he said, "And my father saw also, he saw the wing, etc." (1 Samuel 24:11), "Abi, what are you from Gilgal, David, in the burning boat?" And as for Dathan, concerning the circle of Am, will Abner not answer (1 Samuel 22:14), "By the wing, you said, in the burning boat, the spear and the shield were burned in the boat." And there is a saying, by the blood of the young men, who had the power in his hand to destroy Nob, the city of the priests, and did not destroy it." Rabbi Hanan bar Pazi, a reading in the parashat A cow that has seven sevens in it, seven cows, seven fires, seven visions, seven washings, seven unclean, seven clean, seven priests. If a man says to you, "These are lacking," then let him know that even Moses and Aaron were present, and the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying, "This is the law of the Torah" (Numbers 19:1, 2).
[3] Rabbi Yitzchak opened all this: I have tried wisdom, and I said, "Wisdom, and it is far from me" (Ecclesiastes 7:23). And God gave Solomon wisdom and very much understanding, etc. (1 Kings 5:9). Rabbi Levi and the Rabbis. Our Rabbis say, "He gave him wisdom in proportion to all the righteous." According to Rabbi Levi, as this sand is a barrier to the sea, so wisdom was a barrier to Solomon. Word 1: You have acquired knowledge, what is lacking knowledge? What have you acquired? A city that is broken through has no walls, etc. (Proverbs 25:28), like a city that is broken through without walls, is a man whose spirit has no restraint (ibid.). And Solomon's wisdom exceeded the wisdom of all the ancients, etc. (1 Kings 5:10). And what was the wisdom of the ancients, who knew about fortune-telling and were naked in the wilderness? A. Rabban Shema ben Gamel: In three things I praise the people of the East who do not kiss with their mouths but with their hands, and do not bite with their tongues but cut with a knife, who do not take advice except in a spacious place, as our father Jacob wrote: And Jacob sent and called Rachel and Leah to the field to his flock (Genesis 33:4), to a spacious place. And from all the wisdom of the Egyptians (1 Kings 1:1). And what was the wisdom of the Egyptians, except that when Solomon sought to build the Temple, he sent to Pharaoh a cripple, and if he had sent me craftsmen for their wages that I ask to build the Temple. What did he do? He gathered all his Eshtarol and looked and saw people who were destined to die that year and sent them to him. And when they came to Solomon, he looked through the Holy Spirit that they were destined to die that year and gave them their shrouds and sent them to him, and sent a letter to him and said to him: You did not have shrouds to bury your dead, and behold, they are here, and behold, their shrouds. And he was wiser than all men (1 Kings 5:11), this is Adam the Seer. And what was the wisdom of the first Adam, except that when the Blessed One, Blessed be He, sought to create the first Adam, He sent one of the ministering angels to them, and they made him a man (Genesis 1:25). They said before Him, “O Lord of the worlds, what is man that You remember us? And the son of man that You have formed us?” (Psalms 8:5). But they said to Him, “This man whom I seek to create in the worlds is more wise than you. What did he do? He gathered together every beast and animal and bird and brought them before them. But they said to Him, “What are the names of these?” And they did not know. And when He created the first Adam, He gathered together every beast and animal and bird and brought them before him. But He said to Him, “What are the names of these?” And He said to Him, “This one is suitable to be called a horse, and this one is suitable to be called a lion, and this one is suitable to be called a camel, and this one is suitable to be called an ox, and this one is suitable to be called an eagle, and this one is suitable to be called a donkey.” This is what is written: “And the man gave names to all the beasts and to all the animals 2:20). A: Him and you what is your name, Am: Him Adam. Am: Him why, because I was created from the earth. Am: Him and what am I my name, Am: Him Y"Y. Am: Him why, Am: Him that you are Lord over all your creatures. Am: Rabbi Acha Am: God, blessed be He, I am Y"Y is my name (Isaiah 24:8), He is the one who called the Lord of the first, He is the one I made between me and myself, He is the one I made between me and the ministering angels. Ethan, this is our father Abraham, written as Maskil to Ethan the citizen (Psalms 55:1). Heman (Kings there), this is Moses, not so the servants of Moses and 3 (Numbers 12:7). And El (Kings there), this is Joseph, and Joseph made El his father and 3 (Genesis 44:12). The Egyptians said, "Is this servant king over us except by his wisdom?" What did they do? They took seventy scrolls and wrote seventy languages ​​on them and would throw them before him, and he would read each one in his own language, and not only that he would speak in the holy language that they could not hear him. This is the testimony of Joseph, his name, when he went out into the land of Egypt, etc. (Psalms 15:6), I hear it written. And Darda (Kings there), this is the generation of the wilderness, and why does he call him Darda, who were all full of understanding. The sons of Machol (there), if it is correct, sons to whom the Shekhina had afflicted them because of the act of the calf. And he spoke three thousand parables, etc. (1 Kings 5:12). Rabbi Shmuel bar Nachman has consulted the entire Bible and we have not found that Solomon prophesied except for close to eight hundred verses and thirty thousand proverbs, but rather teaches that every verse and verse that was prophesied has two or three reasons, as many as the golden ring and the blemish (Proverbs 25:12). And the rabbis say that there are three thousand proverbs for every verse and verse, one thousand and five reasons for every proverb and parable, and the song of Solomon is not written in it except that his song (Kings 13:13) is the song of a proverb. And he spoke about the trees (Kings 13:13). And did he allow a person to speak about the trees, from the cedar that is in Lebanon to the moss that comes out of the wall (Kings 13:13), but Solomon said, "Why is this leper purified in the highest of the high and the lowest of the low, except by the fact that if this person exalts himself like a cedar, he is afflicted with leprosy, and since he humbles himself like moss, he is healed by moss." And he spoke about the beast and the bird (ibid.) And if it was permitted for man to speak of beasts and birds, but Solomon said, "Why is beasts permitted with two signs and birds permitted with one sign? But the beasts were created from the dry land, and the birds are written one by one from the dry land and one by one from the sea, as it is written, "And the Lord God formed out of the ground every living creature of the field," etc. (Genesis 2:19), and "And the Lord God formed from the sea every living creature of the field," etc. (Genesis 1:20). Bar Caphra, or Marrakesh, was the bird created in the sea. Rabbi Avon, in the name of Rabbi Shmuel of Kapodakia, also said, "On the back of the talons of Tarnogala, he imagined the scaly And if it was permitted for a person to speak about the scaly, except for Am Shlomo because of what is stated in the Torah as a side, and the one who cuts them is liable, and the rest of the abominations and scaly, the one who cuts them is exempt, because they have skins. And about the fish (ibid.). And if it was permitted for a person to speak about the fish, except for Am Shlomo because of what is stated in the Torah as a side, and the beast and the bird are subject to slaughter, and the fish are not subject to slaughter. The parents of Jacob, a man from Kfar Gaboria in Tyre, about the fish that are subject to slaughter, heard Rabbi Haggai Shelah and his companions. First, from what is the Orita, First, from what is the Orita, And God said, Let the waters teem with the swarming soul of a living creature and a bird (Genesis 1:20), why is the bird subject to slaughter, and even the fish are subject to slaughter. He said, "Let them be forty." And the word "never" is from the word "orita" (from the word "orita"). What is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, the sheep and the cattle he shall slaughter for them and find for them (Numbers 11:22), if he slaughters for them all the fish of the sea, there is no such thing, he shall not gather for them and find for them (ibid.).