Pesikta DeRav Kahana
פסיקתא דרב כהנא
Rabbi Mike Feuer, Jerusalem Anthology
https://www.sefaria.org

Pesikta DeRav Kahana



Paragraph 1



Paragraph 2



Paragraph 3















R’ Yehoshua ben Levi said in the name of R’ Alexandri: one verse says “…you shall obliterate the remembrance of Amalek…” (Deuteronomy 25:19) and another verse says “…I will surely obliterate the remembrance of Amalek…” (Exodus 17:14) How will both of these verses be fulfilled? Before he has reached out his hand against the throne ‘you shall obliterate Amalek.’ Once he has reached out his hand against the throne ‘I will surely obliterate the remembrance of Amalek.’ And is it possible for flesh and blood to raise his hand against the throne of the Holy One?! Rather, since he was about to destroy Jerusalem, as it is written “At that time, they will call Jerusalem the Throne of the Lord…” (Jeremiah 3:17) therefore “…I will surely obliterate the remembrance of Amalek from beneath the heavens.”

Paragraph 4



Paragraph 5



Paragraph 6



Paragraph 7



Paragraph 8



Paragraph 9



Paragraph 10



Paragraph 11



Paragraph 12



Paragraph 13















“To whom the word of the Lord came… until the end of eleven years of Zedekiah son of Josiah, king of Judah, until the exile of Jerusalem in the fifth month.” (Jeremiah 1:2-3) R’ Avon said: the lion (ari) came up during the constellation of the lion and destroyed Ariel. ‘The lion came up’ refers to Nebuchadnezzar the wicked, as it is written “A lion has come up from his thicket…” (Jeremiah 4:7) ‘In the constellation of the lion’, “…until the exile of Jerusalem in the fifth month.” (Jeremiah 1:3) ‘And destroyed Ariel’, “Woe, Ariel, Ariel, the city wherein David encamped!” (Isaiah 29:1) This happened in order that the lion would come in the constellation of the lion and rebuild Ariel. ‘The lion would come’ refers to the Holy One, as it is written “A lion has roared; who will not fear?” (Amos 3:8) ‘In the constellation of the lion’, “…and I will turn their mourning into joy…” (Jeremiah 31:12) ‘And rebuild Ariel’, “The Lord is the builder of Jerusalem; He will gather the outcasts of Israel.” (Psalms 147:2)


Paragraph 14



Paragraph 15



Paragraph 16



Paragraph 17



“Why should a living man complain? A man for his sins.” (Eicha 3:39) R’ Aba bar Yodan said, ‘what is it that person complains while he is still alive? It is enough that he lives!’ R’ Berachia said, ‘I lived next to you, he lives and complains.’ R’ Levi said, ‘what is it that a person complains to the Life giver of the worlds? Rather, if one wants to complain, let him complain of his sins. R’ Yodan said, ‘let him stand up like a man and confess his sins, and not complain. Rebbe said, ‘the Holy One said 'malcontents, the children of malcontents they are!' I busied myself with finding Adam a companion, “…I will make him a helpmate opposite him." (Bereshit 2:18) and he complains before me, saying "The woman whom You gave [to be] with me, she gave me…" (Bereshit 3:12) Even Yaakov did so to Me! I made it My business to make his son king in Egypt, “Now Joseph was the ruler over the land…” (Bereshit 42:6) and he complains saying "...My way has been hidden from the Lord..." (Is. 40:27) Even his sons did so to Me in the wilderness - I made it My business to choose out for them refined food, like that which kings eat, in order that none of them would have indigestion or be seized with diarrhea, and they complain before me saying "...we are disgusted with this rotten bread." (Bamidbar 21:5). Even Zion did so to Me! I busied myself with her to remove the kingdoms from the world, have I not already removed Bavel, Maday and Greece and in the future will remove this wicked kingdom? And she complains before me, saying "The Lord has forsaken me, and the Lord has forgotten me." (Is. 49:14)

Paragraph 18



Paragraph 19



Paragraph 20

“He seats the barren woman of the house as a happy mother of children. Hallelujah!” (Psalms 113:9) There are seven barren women: Sarah, Rivka, Rachel and Leah, Manoach’s wife, Chana and Zion…Another explanation. ‘He seats the barren woman’ this refers to Zion. “Sing you barren woman who has not borne…” (Isaiah 54:1) ‘a happy mother of children,’ “And you shall say to yourself, Who begot these for me…” (Isaiah 49:21)





A  story (This translation of דלמה follows the Penei Moshe on the Yerushalmi Berachot 7:3, Pesachim 5:5). R’ Elazar ben Azaryah and R’ Elazar haModa’i were sitting occupied with these verses: “At that time, they will call Jerusalem The Throne of the Lord…” (Jeremiah 3:17) R’ Elazar ben Azaryah said to R’ Elazar haModa’i: can Jerusalem really hold it? He replied: in the future the Holy One will say to her - spread out and widen to receive your population, “Widen the place of your tent…” (Isaiah 54:2) R’ Yochanan said: in the future Jerusalem will reach to the gates of Damascus, and why do I say this? “The prophecy of the word of the Lord in the land of Chadrach. And Damascus is His resting place…” (Zechariah 9:1) What is Hadrach? This is an argument of R’ Yodan and R’ Nechemiah. R’ Yodan says: this language of ‘chadrach’ refers to the King Messiah who will be sharp (chad) with the nations and soft (rach) to Israel. R’ Nechemia says: the name of the place is Chadrach. R’ Yosi ben Dormaskit said: by the Temple service! I am from Damascus and there is a place there that they call Chadrach. He said to him: what do you do with rest of the verse ‘And Damascus is His resting place’? Rather, just as a fig tree is narrow below and wide above, to in the future Jerusalem will spread out and rise and the exiles will come and take their rest beneath her. This is to fulfill what is written ‘And Damascus is His resting place’ when in truth His resting place is Jerusalem, as it says “This is My resting place forever; here I shall dwell for I desired it.” (Psalms 132:14) He said to him: and what do you do with the verse “…and the city shall be built on its mound…” (Jeremiah 30:18)? He replied: it will not move from its place in the future, but rather rise up and spread out to all sides and the exiles will come and take their rest beneath her to fulfill what is written ““For right and left shall you prevail…” (Isaiah 54:3) This refers to length, where do we learn breadth? This refers to length, from where do we learn width? The scripture says “…from the tower of Hananel until the king's wine-cellars.” (Zechariah 14:10) R’ Berachia said: until the ocean. R’ Zakai Raba said: to the pits of Yafo. They are not arguing – the one who says to the ocean understands the verse as referring to the cellars dug out by the King, king of kings, and the one who says to the pits of Yafo understands it as the pits dug by King Shlomo. We have length and breadth, from where do we learn height? “And it became wider and it wound higher and higher to the cells…” (Ezekiel 41:7) R’ Eliezer ben Yaakov taught: in the future Jerusalem will rise and be lifted up until it reaches the Throne of Glory, until she says to the Holy One “The place is too narrow for me; move over for me so that I will dwell.” (Isaiah 49:20) R’ Yosi son of R’ Yirmiyah Dostai said in the name of R’ Levi: and you still do not know Jerusalem’s praiseworthiness. Rather, what is written “But I will be for it-says the Lord-a wall of fire around, and for glory I will be in its midst.” (Zechariah 2:9) From here you know the praiseworthiness of Jerusalem.

Paragraph 21




… R’ Hoshaya said in the name of R’ Afes – in the future, Jerusalem will be as a torch for the nations of the world and they will go by her light. What is the reason? “And nations shall go by your light…” (Yeshayau 60:3) R’ Acha said – Israel is compared to an olive, “A leafy olive-tree fair with goodly fruit, has the Lord called your name…” (Yirmyahu 11:16) and the Holy One to a lamp, “Man's soul is the Lord's lamp…” (Mishle 20:27) Just as it is the way to put oil in a lamp and they give light together as one, so to the Holy One said to Israel – My children, since My light is your light and your light Mine, you and I will go together and illuminate Zion, “Arise, shine, for your light has come…” (Yeshayahu 60:1)

Paragraph 22





... “For, like the earth, which gives forth its plants…” (Isaiah 61:11) R’ Pinchas and R’ Chilkiya in the name of R’ Simon: like someone who says to his friend ‘may the Holy One make you grow, may you win your judgment, “And nations shall see your righteousness…” (Isaiah 62:2) R’ Levi said: since in this world anyone who explicitly pronounces the name of the Holy One is liable for death, as it says “And one who blasphemously pronounces the Name of the Lord, shall be put to death…” (Leviticus 24:16) so too in the time to come anyone who explicitly pronounces the name of Jerusalem is liable for death, as it says “…and you shall be called a new name…” (Isaiah 62:2) R’ Levi said: there are six things which the Holy One will renew in the time to come and they are: heavens and earth, the heart, the spirit, the name of the Messiah and the name of Jerusalem. From where do we learn the heavens and earth? “For behold, I create new heavens and a new earth…” (Isaiah 65:17) From where do we learn the heart and the spirit? “And I will give you a new heart, and a new spirit will I put within you…” (Ezekiel 36:26) And from where do we learn the name of the Messiah? “May his name be forever; before the sun, his name will be magnified…” (Psalms 72:17) And from where do we learn the name of Jerusalem? “…and you shall be called a new name…” (Isaiah 62:2) R’ Levi said: happy is the city whose name is the same as that of her king and whose king’s name is the same as that of her God. Whose name is the same as her king? “…and the name of the city from that day will be ‘The Lord is There.’” (Ezekiel 48:35) Whose king’s name is the same as that of her God? “…and this is his name that he shall be called, The Lord is our righteousness.” (Jeremiah 23:6) 