Kitzur Shulchan Aruch
קיצור שלחן ערוך
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.org



Kitzur Shulchan Aruch

Siman 1

"I have set the Lord always before me." This is a cardinal principle in the Torah and (a fundamental rule) of life among the pious who go before G-d. Because it is not how a person sits, moves and works when he is alone at home but how he sits, moves and works when he is in the presence of a great king. Similarly, neither his conversation, nor his attitude, when he is among his family and friends, like when he is in the presence of royalty. For then he will certainly take care on his behaviour and his speech that they will be suitably correct. How much more should a man watch himself, because the Great King, the Holy One, blessed be He, whose glory fills all the earth, is standing over him and observing his actions, as it is said: "Can a man hide himself in secret places that I cannot see him?" says the Lord, "Do I not fill heaven and earth?", he will certainly immediately acquire a feeling of reverence and submission from fear of the Blessed Name and he will be ashamed [to do wrong].
...And when he lies down on his bed at night as well, he should know before Whom he lies. And immediately upon waking from his sleep he should remember the kindnesses that God, blessed be His Name, has done with him, as He returned his soul to him which he entrusted to him in a tired state, as new and calm in order to perform the service of God, blessed be His Name, with all of his ability and to serve him the entire day. For this is the entire purpose of man, as Scripture has stated, "New [souls] in the mornings, how great is Your faithfulness!". The explanation being that each morning man is made into a new creation. He should therefore thank God, blessed be His Name, with all his capabilities for this. And while he is still lying on his bed, he should say "I thank You, O Living and Eternal King, for you have returned my soul to me with compassion; great is your faithfulness!" And even though his hands are still not clean, he can say this, since it does not include God's Name. He should also pause briefly between the word "with compassion" and the word "great". 
"Yehudah Ben Teima said: Be strong like the leopard, light like the vulture, quick like the gazelle, and mighty like the lion to perform the will of your Father in Heaven'" (Avot 5:20).  "Strong like the leopard" means that one must not be ashamed by people who mock his service of the Lord, blessed be His Name.  "Light like the vulture" refers to sight of the eyes.  That is, is should be easy to shut your eyes against evil, for that is the beginning of sin--the eye sees, the heart desires, and the actions finish the deed.  "Quick like the gazelle" refers to the legs, that your legs should run toward good.  And "mighty like a lion" refers to the heart, for strength in the service of the Creator, blessed be His Name, resides in the heart.  He [Yehudah son of Teima] means that you must strengthen your heart in the service [of the Lord] and overcome your desire to defeat it, as a hero who overcomes his enemy to defeat him and throw him to the ground.
Therefore a person must make himself mighty like a lion, and immediately after he wakes from his sleep and says "I thank," he must rise quickly to perform the service of the Creator, blessed and exalted is He, before the evil desire may overcome him with reasons and excuses not to rise.  But it will become clever and catch him in the winter--how will you rise now early in the morning when the cold is so great?  And in the summer it will catch him--how will you rise from your bed when you have not yet slept your fill?  Or it will use other similar reasons.  For the evil desire knows well how to ensnare people in not rising.  And therefore anyone who fears and trembles before the word of God must overcome it and pay heed.  And even if it is difficult for him because of the sluggishness of the body and his laziness, he must make his purpose the will of the King who is king of kings, the Holy One Blessed is He.  And he should imagine as though someone was calling him to do business from which he would profit, or to collect his debt, or he was calling him to save him from losing his property, for instance if there were a fire in the city or the like--certainly he would be quick to rise immediately because of his love for his property, and he would not be negligent, lest something befall him or to find favor in the eyes of the king.  How much more some for the service of the King who is king of kings, the Holy One Blessed is He, should he be careful to rise quickly?!  And one who accustoms himself to this four or five times, it will not be difficult for him afterward.  And "if he comes to purify himself, he is helped."
If it is possible for him to arise early at midnight to perform the midnight service, how great is this, as it is said, "Arise, cry out in the night, at the beginning of the watches" (Lamentations 2:19).  He is like the Holy One Blessed is He, who laments at this time, as it is said, "The LORD doth roar from on high, and utter His voice from His holy habitation; He doth mightily roar because of His fold" (Jeremiah 25:30), and He says, "Woe to the children, on account of whose sins I destroyed My house and burnt My temple and exiled them among the nations of the world" (Berachot 3a).  And if it is not possible for him to arise at midnight, he should anyhow strengthen himself to arise before dawn.  This is like what King David said, "I will awake the dawn" (Psalms 57:9)--I wake the dawn, but the dawn does not awake me.  Even after midnight, he may perform the midnight service, and afterward busy himself with Torah study, each man according to his ability.  And the study of Mishnah precedes all else.
...And through this he merits a soul, as "Mishnah" has the same letters as "Neshamah" [soul]. But if he is not capable of learning Mishnayot, he should involve himself in the recital of Psalms and Ma'amadot prayers, and the study of ethical works. Yet it is better to recite less prayers with concentration, than to recite more prayers without concentration. Rabbi Hiya taught, "The Divine Presence faces anyone who studies Torah at night, as it says in Scripture, 'Arise, sing at night, at the beginning of the watches; pour out thy heart like water opposite the Presence of the Lord'". The explanation being, that the Divine Presence then faces you [who studies Torah at night].  Our Rabbis, may their memory be a blessing, further stated, that anyone who studies Torah at night is called a servant of God, as it is written in Scripture: "All of the servants of the LORD who stand in the House of the LORD during the nights". And on the short nights when it is impossible to wake up so early, he should at least exert himself to arise early enough so that he will have time to prepare himself to go to synagogue in order to pray together with the congregation. 
Chapters of Psalms and portions of Torah, Prophets, and Writings which are normally not said by heart, even one who does know them by heart should be careful not to say them by heart. A blind man is allowed.

Siman 2

Because when a person rises from his bed in the morning he is like a new creation regarding the service of the Creator, may His name be blessed, he must sanctify himself and wash his hands from a vessel, like a priest who would sanctify his hands every day from the laver [in the Temple] before beginning his service.  And the basis for this washing is in Scripture, as it says, "I will wash my hands in innocency; So will I compass Thine altar, O LORD, That I may make the voice of thanksgiving to be heard" (Psalms 26:6-7).  There is yet another reason for this washing:  During the time of sleep, when the holy soul leaves him, an impure spirit comes and rests on his body.  And when he wakes from his sleep, the impure spirit leaves his entire body, except for his fingers, which it does not leave until he pours water on them three discrete times.  It is forbidden to walk four cubits without having washed the hands unless there is a very great need.
He first dons the small <i>talit</i>, so that he does not walk four cubits without <i>tsitsit</i>.  And because his hands are not yet clean, he does not make a blessing on [the <i>tsitsit</i>].
Washing the hands in the morning is done in the following manner:  He takes the vessel in his right hand and passes it to his left hand,  pours first on his right hand, and afterward takes the vessel in his right hand and pours on his left hand.  He shall do so three times.  It is good to wash them until the wrist.  However, in a pressing situation, it is enough [to wash] up to the knuckles.  He washes his face in honor of his Maker, as it says, "For in the image of God made He man" (Genesis 9:6).  He shall also wash his mouth because of the mucus that is in it, as he must mention the Great Name [of God] in sanctity and purity.  Afterward he dries his hands.  He must be careful to dry his face well.
He must use a vessel to wash his hands.  It is forbidden to benefit from the waters of the washing, for an evil spirit rests in them, and he shall pour them in a place where people do not go.
He must not, before washing, touch his mouth, or his nose, or his eyes, or his ears, or his anus, or any foods, or any open wound, for an evil spirit rests on his hands prior to washing, and it harms these things.
It is good to be careful about the washing of the hands in the morning using a vessel, water, and human effort as in the washing of the hands before a meal (see below, Siman 40).  However, in a pressing situation when he has no fitting water and he wants to pray, he may wash his hands from anything with any type of water and without human effort, and he may bless, "On the washing of the hands."  If there is a river before him, it is better that he dip his hands in it three times, or even in snow.  But if he has no water at all, he must wipe his hands on something and bless, "On the cleaning of the hands," and this is enough [to allow him] to pray.  When water becomes available to him afterward, as well as a proper vessel, he washes his hands again as is fitting, but he does not make another blessing.
It has been written, "Bless the LORD, O my soul; and all that is within me, bless His holy name" (Psalms 103:1).  And since a person must bless the Lord with all that is within him, it is forbidden to bless until he cleans his insides of excrement and urine.  In the morning when he arises, he typically must defecate, or at least urinate.  Therefore he may not make the blessing on the washing of the hands at the time of washing until he cleans himself and washes his hands one more time.  Then he may make the blessings, "On the washing of the hands" and, "Who formed" [the blessing recited after relieving oneself], and the blessings on studying Torah, and "My God, the soul," etc.
If woke early and washed his hands while it was still night, as is the law, and he remained awake until the light of day, or if he went back to sleep while it was still night, or if he sleeps "sixty breaths" during the day (about one half of an hour), and so too one who is awake all night and does not sleep [even] sixty breaths--there is doubt as to whether all of these cases require washing of the hands.  Therefore, he must wash his hands three discrete times (as mentioned above, Se'if 3), but he does not make the blessing on it.
The following cases require washing of the hands with water:  One who arises from his bed, one who leaves the bathroom or the bathhouse, one who trims his fingernails, one who cuts his hair, one who removes his shoes, one who engages in sexual intercourse, one who touches an insect, and who checks his clothing [for insects] even if he did not touch an insect, one who combs his hair, one who touches his body in places that are generally covered, one who leaves a cemetery, one who escorts a dead body or enters a room with a dead body, and one who lets blood.

Siman 3

It has been written, "And to walk humbly with thy God" (Micah 6:8).  Therefore, a person must be modest in all his ways.  And therefore when he puts on or takes off his robe or other garment that is upon his flesh, he must be very exacting so as not to reveal his body.  Rather, he should dress and undress while he is under the covers of his bed.  And do not say, "I am in the innermost room, and in the darkness, who can see me?"  For the Holy One, Blessed is He--the world is filled with His glory, and darkness is like light before Him, may His Name be blessed.  And modesty and shame bring a person to submission before Him, may His Name be blessed.
We do not act in the ways of the nations, and we do not emulate them--not in dress, nor in hair style, and the like--as it says, "And ye shall not walk in the customs of the nation" (Leviticus 20:23).  And as it says, "Neither shall ye walk in their statutes" (Leviticus 18:3).  And as it says, "Take heed to thyself that thou be not ensnared to follow them" (Deuteronomy 12:30).  One must not dress in clothing unique to them for pride, i.e. clothing worn by officers.  For example, it is stated in the Gemara (Sanhedrin 74a) that it is forbidden for a Jew to act like them, even regarding shoelaces.  If they would tie [their shoes] in one way, and Jews would tie another way, or if their custom was to have red laces, and Jews would have black (for the color black is instructive in humility, lowliness, and modesty), it is forbidden for a Jew to differ.  And from this every person should learn, according to his time and place, that the clothing that is made for arrogance and licentiousness--a Jew may not use it.  Rather, his dress must be made in a way that is instructive of submissiveness and modesty.  So it is said in the Sifri that you must not say, "Since they go out in purple, I too will go out in purple," or "Since they go out with <i>kolasin</i>, i.e. weapons, I too will go out with weapons."  For these are matters of arrogance, and this is not the portion of Jacob.  Rather, their [the children of Jacob] way is to be modest and humble, and not to turn toward conceit.  And so too anything which they [the nations] do that can be suspected of containing an iota of foreign worship, a Jew may not do it.  And so he may not shave his head or grown his hair like them.  Rather, he must separate himself from them in dress and speech and in all his other actions, just as he separates himself from them in his knowledge and opinions.  And so it is said, "And I have set you apart from the peoples" (Leviticus 20:26).
One must wear neither expensive clothing--for this brings a person to arrogance, nor very scant or dirty clothing--so that he will not be disgraced in the eyes of others.  Rather, his clothes must be moderate and clean (see Rambam, Hilchot De'ot 5:9).  A person must always sell even the beams of his home to buy shoes for his feet (Orach Chayyim 2:6).
Because we find that the right is favored by the Torah with regards to [Divine] service, such as the thumb and big toe [of the priests] at the inauguration [of the Tabernacle] and of the leper and regarding the commandment of <i>chalitzah</i>.  Therefore, in dressing and in other things, the right must always precede the left.  And in removing the shoes and other clothing, one must remove the left first--for this is the honor of the right.  However, with regards to tying, the left is favored, for we tie <i>tefillin</i> upon it [that is, the left arm].  And therefore when he needs to tie, he ties the left first.  For example, for shoes that require tying, he puts on the right shoe and does not tie it, then he puts on the left and ties it, and afterward he ties the right.  And so too in other articles of clothing.
One must be careful not to don two garments together, for this causes forgetfulness.
It is forbidden to walk four cubits or utter sacred words while bareheaded.  We must also accustom children to covering their heads, so that the fear of Heaven should be upon them.  It is as we find with Rabbi Nachman son of Yitzchak.  "Astrologers told the mother of Rabbi Nachman son of Yitzchak, 'Your son will be a thief.'  She did not allow him to go bareheaded.  She said, 'Cover your head so that the fear of Heaven will be upon you.'"  (Shabbat 156b).
It is forbidden to walk with an upright posture and an outstretched neck, as it is said, "And walk with stretched-forth necks" (Isaiah 3:16) (see Orach Chayyim 2:6).  Nonetheless, one must not bend his head too much, but rather a moderate amount, such that a passerby can see his face and that he can watch his step (Sefer HaYir'ah).  Even from the manner in which a person walks it is recognizable whether he is wise and knowledgeable or a fool.  And so said Solomon in his wisdom, "Yea also, when a fool walketh by the way, his understanding faileth him, and he saith to every one that he is a fool" (Ecclesiastes 10:3).  [That is], he makes it known to all that he is a fool (Rambam, Hilchot De'ot 5:9).
There is cause to be careful that a man not pass between two women, nor between two dogs or two pigs.  And so too two men should not allow a woman or dog or pig to pass between them (Pesachim 111a).

Siman 4

One must accustom himself to defecate in the evening as well as the morning, as this reflects alacrity and cleanliness. If one is unable to defecate, he should walk a distance of four cubits and sit until he is able to defecate, or he should distract himself with other matters. One who constrains his bowels violates the Scriptural prohibition of "Thou shalt not defile thyselves". And if he delays urinating when he needs to, he also violates the prohibition of "There shalt not be a barren man amongst thee". 
One must be modest in the restroom. One may not uncover himself until he sits down. And even then he should limit what he uncovers, so he only uncovers what is necessary in order to not soil his clothing. He must also be careful regarding this at night as he is during the day. If one defecates in an open area where there are no barriers, he should orient himself such that he faces the south and his back is to the north, or vice versa. However, if there is a barrier, he may defecate in any direction as long as his back is facing the barrier. And it is permitted to urinate in any direction. He may not defecate in front of any person. Even in front of a Gentile, it is forbidden. But to urinate is permissible even during the day in front of many people if it is necessary, because there is a potential danger if he withholds himself. Nevertheless, he should remove himself to the side [out of the sight of people]. 
One may not defecate while standing. And one should not force himself too much to defecate, so that he does not detach the teeth-like protrusions of the bowels. He should also not hurry to leave the restroom until it is clear to him that he no longer needs to relieve himself. And when he urinates while standing, he must take care that the urine does not drip on his shoes and clothing. He must also be very careful not to hold his male organ--see later 151:3...
It is forbidden to think about Torah in the restroom, as is stated later on in 5:2. Therefore, when he is there, it is best for him to think about his business dealings and calculations, so he does not come to think Torah thoughts or illicit thoughts, God forbid. And on the Sabbath, when he may not think about his business dealings, he should think about remarkable things that he saw or heard, and so on--85
One must be careful to wipe himself well. Because even if he has a minuscule amount of excrement on his anus, it is forbidden to recite any word of sancity - as is stated later on in 5:3. He must not wipe with his right hand, because he uses it to fasten his phylacteries. And for this reason as well, he should not wipe with the middle finger of his left hand, because he wraps the Tefillin-strap around it. And a left-handed person must wipe with his "left" [weaker] hand, which is the "right" [stronger] hand of all right-handed people.
Each time one defecates or urinates, even one drop of urine, he must wash his hands with water and recite the blessing "He Who formed". If he urinated or defecated and forgot to recite "He Who formed", and afterward urinated or defecated again and remembered that did not recite the blessing after the first time he relieved himself, he only needs to recite the blessing once. And one who is drinking a laxative remedy and knows that he will have to defecate several times, he should only recite the blessing when he is finished relieving himself. 

Siman 5

It is written: "And you will cover that which comes out from you because Hashem your God walks amidst your camp... And your camp will be holy, and it will not be seen in it anything that is immodest." From here our Rabbis taught, may their memory be blessed, that anytime that Hashem our God walks among us, that is when we're dealing with a matter of holiness (i.e. reading Shema, Shmona Esrei, Torah, etc.), our environment must be holy. There must not be any revealed feces, and one who is reading the Torah or praying must not see a something that is immodest.
Even just thinking about things that are holy is forbidden in a place that has feces, urine, or anything else that exudes an unpleasant smell until one covers it up, as the verse states: "And you will cover that which comes out from you." Alternatively, one may pour a revi'it of water into urine that was from one session [which dilutes it enough to make it acceptable to think and do holy things by]. It's the same whether the urine was originally in a vessel and then one pours in it water or the water was originally in a vessel and then one pours in it the urine. But if the urine was in a vessel that is exclusively designated for urine, then pouring water doesn't help [make the urine acceptable] as is mentioned later in sif 13. Two revi'it of water is needed for urine from two sessions, and so on. Even if the urine was absorbed in the ground or in clothing, water is still needed to dilute the urine as long as the item is still a little damp.

Siman 6


when he says a blessing, his mouth should be free from saliva and other things in his mouth, as the verse says "I will fill my mouth with your praise".







A person should be careful to say the word Amen properly not swallowing the aleph or nun. One should be sure not to answer amen before the person reciting the bracha finishes the bracha because this is called 'a cutoff amen'. However, one shouldn't delay too long to answer amen because that's considered 'an orphaned amen'. Rather one should answer amen immediately as the one reciting the bracha finishes the bracha. He should raise his voice above the voice of the one making the bracha as it says "aggrandize Hashem with me and praise His name together" (Tehillim 124). 

Siman 7


The blessing of הנותן לשכוי בינה should not be recited until the morning is bright.

Siman 8



Siman 9

The commandment of tzitzit is very important, since the verse teaches that all the commandments depend on it, as it says, "And you will see them and remember all of the commandments of Hashem." Tzitzit is 600 in gematria (which is a numbering system, assigning each letter in the alphabet to a number. For example, aleph to 1, beit to 2, etc.) (See further in the Tur). There are 8 strands and five knots. All of this together adds up to 613 (which is the total number of commandments). Therefore, every person needs to be diligent to wear a tallit katan all day. It should be made of white wool from lambs and should be big enough to meet the size requirements, which are 3/4th amot long and a half of an amah wide. Some hold it needs to be an amah by an amah. Regarding those who sew the sides of talit katan together (making it look more like a shirt than a four cornered garment), you need to be careful to make sure both sides remain visibility open. You shouldn't even use hooks to connect the sides together. Also, every person needs to be diligent to wrap himself in a talit gadol during prayer times. Your talit should also be beautiful, just like regarding all commandments we require that they be done the most beautiful way possible, as it is written, "That is my God and I will glorify Him." We learn from here that I will glorify Him through the commandments. One should be particular to buy tzitzit from a trustworthy man, whom you are certain twined and spun the tzitzit with the intention of doing so for the commandment. The tzitzit should be long enough too, according to the required length. 

Siman 10



Siman 11



Siman 12



Siman 13



Siman 14

From <i> Hodu </i> until after the song (<i> Az Yashir </i>), this is <i> Pesukai D'Zimra </i>. And <i> Baruch Sheamar </i> is the blessing before them, and <i> Yishtabach </i> is the blessing after them. From when he starts <i> Baruch Sheamar </i> until after the end of <i> Shemoneh Esrei </i>, it is forbidden to interrupt by speaking, even in Hebrew - and so too, any place [in davening] where it is forbidden to interrupt, it is forbidden even in Hebrew. But regarding an interruption for a <i> Mitzvah </i>, there is a distinction between <i> Pesukai D'Zimra </i> and its blessings, and <i> Shema </i> and its blessings. In <i> Pesukai D'Zimra </i>, even in the middle of <i> Baruch Sheamar </i> or <i> Yishtabach </i>, if he hears a certain blessing, it is permitted for him to say <i> Amen </i>. And so too, if he hears the congregation saying <i> Shema </i>, he should say with them the verse <i> Shema Yisrael </i> etc. And all the more so for <i> Kadish </i> and <i> Kedusha </i> and for <i> Barchu </i> that it is permitted for him to interrupt and answer with the congregation. Nevertheless, if it is possible for to try to make the [necessary] interrupt in a place of interruption (i.e. where it is less problematic to interrupt), for example between paragraphs (lit. from <i> Mizmor </i> to <i> Mizmor </i>), or at least between verses, he should do it. And <i> Baruch Hoo U'Baruch Shimo </i> should not be said during <i> Pesukai D'Zimra </i>, even in a place of interruption - because it is not mentioned in the Talmud. And so too the text <i> Yisbarach V'Yishtabach </i> etc. (in <i> Kadish </i>) that we say when the <i> Chazan </i> sings <i> Barchu </i>, he should not say, because it is only a custom. And so too, if he goes to the bathroom (lit. does his needs) and washes his hands [during <i> Pesukai D'Zimra </i>, it is my opinion that he does not say <i> Asher Yatzar </i>, because he is able to say it after [davening] - and say earlier Seif 8. And the laws of interrupting during <i> Shema </i> and its blessings will be explained in Seif 16.

Siman 15



One should be careful not to count the members of the Minyan individualy (using numbers), because it is forbidden to count Jewish people even if it is for a mitzvas. As the 

Siman 16



Siman 17



Siman 18






One should be careful to be quiet while davening, so only he is able to hear what he is saying, and the person next to him cannot hear him.  Like it is said by Hannah "Her lips our moving, but her mouth is silent."

Siman 19







If one made a mistake in the summer and said "[God who gives] dew and rain,"  he should return to "Bless us," [i.e. the beginning of that blessing,] and if he didn't remember that he did that until he said the verse, "May the words of my mouth, etc." [at the end of the Amidah], he should return to the beginning of the Amidah.

Siman 20



Siman 21



Siman 22

After the Amidah, [we] say Tachanun in a prostrated position; and one should not converse idly between the Amidah and Tachanun.
During the morning service (Shacharit), since one is wearing t'fillin on his left hand, one should incline his head to the right in deference to his t'fillin. In the afternoon service (Minchah), he should incline his head to the left.
One should say Tachanun seated, but in pressured circumstances one may be upstanding. After Tachanun, we say "And we do not know..." - which should be said seated - after which we stand to say "what to do..." (i.e. we stand between the words "we do not know" and "what to do").
We only falls on our faces (i.e. place the forehead/face on one's forearm) in a place where there is a Torah Scroll. In a place where there is no Torah Scroll, even though there are other holy books, we do not fall on our faces, rather we say the text [of Tachanun] without falling on our faces. If one is praying in the courtyard of the Synagogue and the door to the Sanctuary is open, it is considered that one is in the presence of a Torah Scroll.
When praying in the house of a mourner, or in the house of the diseased (clarification needed) even though there is no mourner present, we do not say Tachanun all seven days of mourning - even in the afternoon service (Mincha) of the seventh day [when the mourners have risen from their state of mourning already]. Our custom is that [the mourners] do not say [Tachanun even] if they have returned to their [respective] houses. If a mourner is in the Synagogue, the congregation is not drawn after him, and they [still] say Tachanun, but the mourner [himself] does not say it.


After Tachanun [we] say the half-kaddish; on Mondays and Thursdays [we] say "God who is Merciful," standing.

Siman 23



Siman 24



Siman 25



Siman 26



Siman 27



Siman 28



Siman 29



Siman 30



Siman 31



Siman 32



Siman 33



Siman 34



Siman 35



Siman 36



Siman 37



Siman 38



Siman 39



Siman 40

One who wants to eat bread whose blessing is "hamotzi" must [ritually] wash his hands first.  If the bread is the size of an egg or larger, he blesses on the washing.  If it's smaller, he does not bless on the washing.

Siman 41



Siman 42



Siman 43



Siman 44



Siman 45



Siman 46



Siman 47



Siman 48



Siman 49



Siman 50



Siman 51



Siman 52



Siman 53



Siman 54



Siman 55



Siman 56



Siman 57



Siman 58



Siman 59



Siman 60



Siman 61



Siman 62



Siman 63



Siman 64



Siman 65



Siman 66



Siman 67



Siman 68



Siman 69



Siman 70



Siman 71



Siman 72



Siman 73



Siman 74



Siman 75



Siman 76



Siman 77




Women are also obligated in Kiddush. Therefore, they should listen carefully to Kiddush and answer "Amen", but not say "Baruch hu ubaruch shemo" (See above Siman 6 Seif 9). And a child, even if he is thirteen, if it is not known that he has grown two [pubic] hairs, he does not fulfill the woman's obligation, and therefore, the woman should do Kiddush by herself. If she does not know, she should say Kiddush along with the minor word by word. And even if the hears the Kiddush from her husband or another man, it is better that she say it word by word along the person making Kiddush (see Dagul MeRevava. And see Shulkhan Arukh HaTanya). (And if there are several men in one house, see above Siman 135 Se'if 6) (Rabbi Akiva Eiger).

Siman 78



Siman 79



Siman 80



Siman 81



Siman 82



Siman 83



Siman 84



Siman 85



Siman 86



Siman 87



Siman 88



Siman 89



Siman 90



Siman 91



Siman 92



Siman 93



Siman 94



Siman 95



Siman 96



Siman 97



Siman 98



Siman 99



Siman 100



Siman 101



Siman 102



Siman 103



Siman 104



Siman 105



Siman 106



Siman 107



Siman 108



Siman 109



Siman 110



Siman 111



Siman 112



Siman 113



Siman 114

A Jew who had leaven in his possession 