Mishnah Berurah
משנה ברורה
Feldheim edition 
Mishnah berurah Hebrew- English edition volume 1 morning conduct

Mishnah Berurah

Introduction



Introduction to the Laws of Shabbat







Siman 1

the dawn- the Shelah writes a revelation that one should join the day to the night with Torah study or prayer, both in the morning and in the evening. Immediately one awakens from his sleep and does not wish to sleep any more he should proceed to wash his hands, although he is remaining lying. He should certainly not walk four cubits without having washed his hands. He must be extremely careful about this. The holy Zohar is very far-reaching as regards the punishment associated with this, for by delaying the washing of one's hands one retains the spirit of uncleanness on himself. Nevertheless, God forbid that one should transgress any prohibition because one has not washed his hands. For example, one should not hold himself back from passing water because of it or take water which his fellow prepared for his own use, unless he is sure that he will be able to replace it with other water immediately. There are people who stumble over this. If the water happens to be far away and one does not have anyone to move it nearer to him, it is the practice of a few conscientious people to go towards the water in stages of less than four cubits at a time. However, the Sha'arey Teshuvah writes that this practice is unsound as it is preferable for one to go rapidly to the water to avoid retaining the evil spirit on his hands. There are authorities who maintain that for the purpose of this requirement we rule that the entire room is considered like an area in which is within four cubits of one, but one may only rely on this view in a time of pressing need. It may happen that when one rises during the night he does not have sufficient water to wash his hands three times, which is the proper quantity required for the removal of the unclean spirit. Even so, God forbid that he should be idle from Torah study until daybreak because of this. On the contrary, he should wash his hands a little 0r clean his hands with any object which is capable of cleaning, make the blessing and then study, in accordance with the ruling of the Talmud and the Poskim.        