Mishnah Berurah
משנה ברורה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Mishnah Berurah

Introduction



Introduction to the Laws of Shabbat







Siman 1

In order to serve his Creator - Because for this was man created, as the verse says "All who are called by My name, and whom I have created for My glory... " (Isaiah 43:7). And even if his Evil Inclination advises him in the winter and says 'How will you arise in the morning, since it is very cold?' or in the summer advises and says 'How will you arise from your bed, when you still have not slept to your satisfaction?' Overcome him and do not listen to him, and think to yourself: If I needed to arise to appear before a king of flesh and blood, how carefully and zealously would I arise and awaken in order to prepare myself for this service? All the more so and obviously, before the King of kings, the Holy One Blessed is He. 
The Dawn - The Shl"a wrote a secret: to connect the day and night with Torah and prayer, whether its morning or whether its evening. Immediately upon waking up from sleep if one doesn't plan to sleep [more], he should wash his hands, even if he does so while still lying down. And certainly, one shouldn't walk four cubits without having washed his hands.  And one must be very careful in this regard. And the holy Zohar emphasizes the great punishment for this, for leaving the spirit of impurity on oneself. In any case, one should not, God forbid, violate any other prohibition due to not having washed his hands; for example, to stop himself from urinating because of this, or to take water which his friend had prepared for himself, unless it is obvious to him that he will immediately be able to give him other [water] in exchange. And there are those who fail in this. And if it happens that the water is far and he doesn't have someone to bring it close to him, it is the custom of some of the observant ones (ba'alei ha'nefesh) to walk little by little [in increments] shorter than four cubits. The Sha'arei Teshuvah write about this -  that it's not [a] good [practice], for it's better to walk quickly, [in order] to not leave the spirit of evil on one's hands. There are those who say that regarding this, the entire house is like one's  four cubits, but we shouldn't rely on this unless in an extenuating circumstance. If, when one arises at night, he sees that he does not have enough water to wash his hands three times properly to rid the spirit of impurity -  nevertheless, he should not God forbid forgo his Torah study because of this until daylight, but rather he should wash his hands a little or clean his hands on whatever he has to wash, make a blessing, and learn, as per the law of the Talmud and the Poskim [commonly referring to Rabbinic discussions post-Talmud, particularly contemporary halachic discussions]. 
When the congregation prays - Meaning, even though the time for prayer won't pass (ie, he still has time to pray), nevertheless, it is a mitzvah to pray with the congregation. See further below at the end of se'if katan 9.
The Righteous - Meaning, he should constantly envision in his mind how he is standing before Hashem Blessed be He, because The Holy One's glory fills all the land. And it is written in the name of the Arizal, that he should constantly envision the Name YHV'H before his eyes with the vowelization of the word "Yir'ah" ("Fear"), and  this is the secret of "I shall set the Lord before me always" and this greatly benefits one's Fear of Heaven. There are those who were accustomed because of this, to have parchments with a Menorah drawn on it to place in their prayer books, and they write on it "I shall set the Lord..." Etc..., [spelled out] with the Four Letters and other Names, and this Menorah is called "I have set" ["Shiviti"]. And the purpose [of this] is so that it should be remembered not to speak in idle chatter during prayer -out of Fear of God. And it is written in the Gates of Repentance [Sha'arei Teshuvah] in the name of the Tevuas Shor, "It is proper to set out with force to abolish this custom[of writing this parchment of Divine Names] because in general they (the people) don't protect this parchment properly, and they "are spilled at the head of every street" (Lamentations 4:1), and also many times it (the parchment) comes to erasure of The [Divine] Name. And it seems that the large Menorahs which are drawn on parchment and are affixed in the Shul in front of the podium [of the Chazzan/Prayer Leader] under a surface of glass - this is not subject to the reasoning which was mentioned previously, and there is no issue with that" - end quote. [However,] those who affix [parchments] in [front of] the podium without a surface, there is [grounds] to protest against them, because due to the candles which are [customarily] affixed on the podium (hence being under the parchment melting the ink with the heat of the candle), after many times [of lighting these candles], it will lead to erasure of The [Divine] Name, Heaven Forbid.
Before men - Nevertheless, he should never fight with them, because the quality of brazenness is very despicable, and its not appropriate to use it at all, even in the service of the Lord blessed be His Name, because he then will acquire this attribute in his personality, to be brazen even in matters which are not in the service of Hashem (Beit Yosef).  See further in Biur Halacha.
Who mock him - And if he's an average person who is in the company of great men, he shouldn't be embarrassed to learn or to do the mitzvot. But if its possible for him to perform it not directly in their presence, its even better. However, if one in the presence of other average folk who would learn from him, then one could say that it would be better to do it in their presence, so that they should learn from him, to do like him. However, he should direct his heart [intention] for the sake of the Heaven, and not for his own glorification, God forbid. 
Also go modestly - Meaning to say, even when one is in the privacy of his own home, there too  he should be walking with the Lord his God, as [the Re'ma] concludes...
With alacrity - Not exactly, but rather he should wait a bit and not get up immediately, because it is damaging for the body (Tractate Gittin 70). It is good to say immediately upon rising "I give thanks to You living and everlasting King for You have restored my soul with mercy. Great is Your faithfulness." The word "mercy" should be said with a pause [after it], and "Great is your faithfulness" without a pause. And this is [taken] from the verse "Each morning refreshed...[Great is your faithfulness]" (Lamentations 3:23), that the Holy One Blessed be He upholds his faithfulness to return the souls which were deposited [by Him] in the morning. And there is no need to wash hands [before saying Modeh Ani], even if they are dirty, because in this wording there is no mention of any [Divine] Name or appellation. Nevertheless, it seems it is forbidden to learn Torah before washing hands, and even without that, it is forbidden [to learn] before [reciting] the blessing of the Torah.  See further above at the end of se'if katan 2. [And also] se'if 3.
It is fitting for everyne - The Kabbalists explained at length about the great virtue of getting up at midnight because it is very great. It is already [commonly found] printed in siddurim, how this is to be done according to the Arizal. Midnight is always exactly at the middle of the night in any place, even if the nights are long or short. It is 12 hours after midday. The time to cry for the Churban is more fitting to be just a little before midnight; and from midnight and on, one should study Torah; and at the end of the night one should ask for his needs. There are some who recite "Shomrim Laboker" at that point.  If it is close to sunrise, one should say the Psalms and skip the Lamentations, and then recite "Shomrim Laboker". And after the Tikun,  one should learn Mishnayos before anything else. If one is fortunate to know "Chochmat Emet" (ie. Kabbalah), this is a very favorable time. The later rabbinic authorities have an accepted  tradition that from "Shichvi" to "Kumi", meaning, from the weeks that they say "Shichvi" until Tisha B'av, where they say "Kumi", one does not need to get up in the night. Some people say from Tu B'av until the 15th of Iyar one should get up in the night. Those who conduct themselves based on Kabbalah hold that one must always awaken [to say Tikun Chatzot].  A group [of men] who join together to recite Tikun Chatzot collectively - we do not stop them, and just the opposite [is true] - "In the multitude of the people is the glory of the King" (Proverbs 14:28).  And even better is for them to recite the Tikun in the synagogue [itself], rather than reciting it in the room adjacent to it, for the synagogue has more sanctity, and they should also [try to] be from the first ten [men to arrive].  And one must be very very careful regarding idle chatter when they awake in the night.  And one who is not able to wake up before the morning light because he is of a weak nature, or because he knows that if does wake up at the latter part of the night he will [end up] sleeping during the prayer [services], it is better [for him] to sleep as much as he needs.  Nevertheless, he should be very careful to wake up one hour, or at least a half hour, before the calling of the attendant [to wake up everyone to come] to the synagogue, so that he will be able to prepare himself to pray with the congregation and with cleanliness.
To be anguished - But [learning] Torah and Prayer should be done with happiness.
The destruction of the Temple - The Shl"a wrote that at every meal, one should recite "Al naharot Bavel" ("By the Rivers of Babylon..." - Psalms 137:1).  And on Shabbat, and also on days that Tachanun is not said, one should say "Shir Hama'alot b'shuv Hashem..." ("A song of ascents. When the Lord returns..." - Psalms 126:1).  And the main thing is to know/understand what one is saying, and to have concentration.
Without concentration - But if the one saying a lot is also [able to say it] with concentration, then [certainly] it is better to say more.  And if the one saying a little has an extenuating circumstance and he is not able to say more, or if he estimates himself that if he says more, he will not be able to concentrate, and so he lessens his supplications but says them with concentration - he is considered before Hashem to be like one someone who has plenty of time and is able to lengthen his supplications with concentration.  And regarding this we learned: "One who brings a substantial [sacrifice] and one who brings a meager [sacrifice have equal merit], as long as he directs his heart towards Heaven".  The same thing applies to learning Torah, because everything is dependent before Hashem on whether one does everything in his power to do.  A person who is a master in Torah and is able to understand and learn, he may hold back from saying a lot of supplications and requests which are printed in the prayer books, and it would be better for him to learn Torah instead.  A person must establish for himself a time to learn Mussar (Jewish literature that provides virtue-based instruction for moral and spiritual character development) every day, whether a little or a lot, for "a person who is greater than his fellow, his evil inclination is greater than his [as well]".  And the antidote for the evil inclination is the words of rebuke of our sages. 
Passage of the Binding - Before the passages of the offerings.  One may say the passage of the Binding and the passage of the Manna even on Shabbat.  It's not enough to just read them, but one should contemplate what he's saying and recognize the wonders of Hashem.  And so too  what is written in the Talmud: "Anyone who recites: 'A Psalm of David' (Psalms 145) three times every day is assured of a place in the World-to-Come" (Berakhot 4b:17) - it is in the same vein.  And the reason for reciting all these is: [regarding] the passage of the Binding, it is in order to recall the merit of our forefathers every day, and in order to subdue one's evil inclination, just as Yitzchak [was willing to] give up his life; [regarding] the passage of the Manna, it is in order that one should believe that all his sustenance comes through [Hashem's] personal supervision, as it is written [regarding the Manna]: "the one who had taken more had no extra, and the one who had taken less, was not lacking" (Exodus 16:18) - to show that excessive effort [on a person's part, for the sake of his livelihood] is of no use.  And see in [Talmud] Yerushalmi, [Tractate] Berachot: "Anyone who recites the passage of the Manna, he is guaranteed that his sustenance will not be diminished."; [regarding] the passage of the Ten Commandments, it is in order that one should recall the revelation on Mount Sinai every day and strengthen his belief in Hashem; [regarding] the passages of the offerings, [it is based on] what is written in [Tractate] Menachot: "'This is the law of the sin offering' (Leviticus 6:18)... [this teaches that] anyone who engages in [studying] the law of the sin offering [is ascribed credit] as though he sacrificed a sin offering..." (Menachot 110a:13).
And peace-offerings - The same applies to the passage of the thanksgiving-offerings, for it too is in the category of peace-offerings.  And after [reciting the passages of] the burnt-offerings, peace-offerings, and thanksgiving-offerings, one should recite the passage of the libations, for there is no sacrifice [brought] without libations.  But sin-offerings and guilt-offerings do not require libations.
And sin-offerings - See in Magen Avraham, who wrote that if one knows that he is obligated to bring a sin-offering, he should recite the  passage of the sin-offerings first.  But based on the opinion of the rest of the rabbinic authorities, it does not seem so.
In congregation - Because of the apostates, that they will say: "There is no Torah except for this,  and especially nowadays".  Therefore, we also do not write it down in a book that's designated for the congregation.  There are opinions that say it is not prohibited to say in congregation, [and it's] only to establish it between blessings like [the blessings of] K'riyat Shema [that it's prohibited]; but before Baruch She'amar, it is permitted even in congregation.  But we hold that it is absolutely prohibited [to say] in congregation.  And [regarding] an individual, it's only [permitted] when not [said] as part of the [regular] prayers; but to establish it between blessings, even for an individual, it's prohibited [Olat Tamid and Artzot Hachaim]
By day - For the sacrifices were only offered by day.  But the passage of the basin and the passage of the removal of the ashes may be said before the day.  And if one does not have time, he may also say the passages of the sacrifices at night.  And [regarding] whether it needs to be said while standing, see in siman 48, Mishnah Berurah se'if katan 1.  It's written in the Sh'la, that on Shabbat and Yom Tov, one should not say the "Yehi Ratzon" ("May it be Your will..."), because voluntary sacrifices are not offered on those days; but [to recite] the passages [of the voluntary sacrifices], you don't lose out anything by saying them, it is like reading from the Torah.  Nevertheless, if he is a Torah scholar, it is better for him to involve himself in learning the passages [that relate to] that day.  One who is a mourner should not recite the passage of the sacrifices (because he is forbidden to learn Torah).
Offered voluntarily - But after [reciting] the passage of the sin-offering, he should not say it, since it is not brought voluntarily; unless he transgressed a sin that obligates him to bring a sin-offering.  And so too [regarding] the guilt-offering.  [Regarding] an uncertain guilt-offering, we maintain that it is not offered voluntarily.  The later rabbinic authorities wrote in the name of Rasha"l, that one should say the "Yehi Ratzon" even after [reciting the passages of] the sin and guilt offerings, but he should say it using words that convey an uncertainty, such as: "May it be Your will, that if I transgressed a sin that requires a sin-offering, that it (ie. my reading of the passages) should be considered as if I offered a sin-offering"; and if not, it should be like I just read from the Torah.  And one should say [a "Yehi Ratzon"] in a similar fashion after reciting the passage of the guilt-offering.  However, the Magen Avraham had great difficulty with this -  how can one say  "if I became obligated in a sin-offering"?  Behold, we maintain regarding a sin-offering that it requires one to have knowledge [of the sin] before he sins!(So how could he say "if"??)  Therefore, the Magen Avraham concludes that regarding the sin-offering, one should not say the "Yehi Ratzon" at all; but for the certain guilt-offering and the uncertain guilt-offering, one may say this conditional "Yehi Ratzon".  But if one's heart is beating (ie. he is nervous), that perhaps he transgressed a sin, and he had knowledge of the sin, but then he forgot, he may say the conditional "Yehi Ratzon" after the guilt-offering [passage].  [Shaarei Teshuva].
Along with the sacrifice passages - Like  nowadays that we say it after the passage of the daily-offering.
He shall slaughter it - Like it says in the Midrash, that anyone who says this verse, The Holy One Blessed Be He recalls the Binding of Yitzchak.

Siman 2

From a sitting position - For then he will certainly reveal his body, and a person must conduct himself with modesty and shame before the Holy One Blessed Be He; even when it is nighttime and he is in [the privacy of] his own room, behold, "the entire world is full of His Glory" (Isaiah 6:3), darkness and light are the same before Him.  And one must always be careful, for this same reason, unless there is no other way, from revealing one's body, even a little, whatever is normally always covered with clothing; but it is permitted to reveal one's  arm, up until his elbow, and one's neck, up until the breastbone; therefore, [regarding] socks, one should put them on and remove them under the sheets so as not to reveal his feet which are normally always covered in these countries, for no one walks barefoot, even in the summer.  And so too anything similar, unless there's no other way [to get undressed/dressed without revealing parts of the body that are normally covered].  And so too in a bathhouse where it's normal for people to walk around naked, and there's no other way (ie. you can't wash yourself with your clothes on), there's is no issue of immodesty; and similarly when one is washing in the river, the law is the same (ie. you can't wash yourself with clothes on), except that one should be careful to remove and put on one's clothing as close to the river as possible so as not to walk uncovered unnecessarily, and one does not even need to cover their genitals when descending into the river, and not only that, but one that does cover them up appears as if he is embarrassed about it (ie. about his bris milah) and as if he denies the Covenant of Avraham Avinu; however, when ascending from the river, where one is [potentially] now facing others, he should hunch over or place his hands over his genitals to cover them, as long as he does not [actually] touch them as will be explained at the end of siman 3.  It's brought in the Talmud - "The cloak of a Torah Scholar is one where no skin can be seen underneath" (ie. it covers the entire body).  But [nowadays] we are not careful with this because everyone goes out with pants [and socks] and the skin is not seen [anyways].
When he gets up - Meaning, when he gets up and goes out from under the cover of his sheets/blanket where he was lying naked when he removed his [night] shirt/tunic, now he will be covered immediately [when he inserts his head and arms into the day shirt/tunic under the sheets] because his shirt/tunic will fall over his whole body on it's own.  See further below in siman 239, se'if 2 regarding removing one's shirt/tunic.  One who places his clothing underneath his head will forget his learning, and perhaps if one places something else in between his head and his clothing, there is no problem.  Similarly, one should be careful not to put on two articles of clothing at once, because it causes forgetfulness.  One who reads the inscription on a gravestone or who gazes upon a corpse will forget his learning.  See further in Pri Megadim for things which restore a person's learning.
With his shirt/tunic - Even if it is under his clothing, and certainly regarding his other clothing.
Inside out - And people will see the ugly stitching and fasteners of the shirt and it will be disgraceful in the eyes of the people.  And if one was not careful and did not reverse it - if he is a Torah scholar, he must remove it and put it back on the right way so that he will not be in the category of those who, Heaven forbid, cause others to hate Hashem; and for all other people, it is not necessary.  But for prayers, even all other people must remove it and put it on the right way, for it is proper to wear honorable clothing, as is explained in siman 91.  It is proper that one should hold both ends of the garment in his right hand and then put on the right side first and then the left side and he should have in mind that everything is included in the right [side] and from right it comes to the left.  The Rambam wrote that the clothing of a Torah scholar must be pleasant and clean and  it's forbidden for there to be a stain or oily residue or a similar thing [on it]; and he shouldn't wear clothing of royalty that [will cause] everyone will stare at him, and not poor man's clothing which is degrading for the one wearing it, rather he should wear regular clothing which are pleasant.  See there (in the Rambam) further.
The right - For we find in the Torah that the right [side] is always more significant, [for example] regarding the thumb of the right hand and big toe of the right foot (Leviticus 14:14), and all other things, that the right precedes the left.
And fasten it - For regarding fastening we find that the Torah gives significance to the left, for [that's the side that] we fasten the hand tefillin to.  [Regarding] felt slippers, one does not need to precede with the left side when fastening.  A left handed person who dons his tefillin on his right arm, he should precede with the right [side] also when fastening [his shoes].
The right first - And even if one [currently] only has the left [shoe], he should wait until they bring him the right [one].  When one washes or annoints, the right takes precedence; and if he is annointing his whole body, the head takes precedence since it's [considered] the king over all the limbs [of the body].  See further in Darchei Moshe.
One takes off etc. - For this is the honor of the right.
In an upright posture - For it's as if he is pushing away the feet of the Shechina.  Therefore, the later rabbinic authorities wrote that it is forbidden [to walk upright] even less than 4 cubits.  And it's obvious that [this applies] even when one is standing in place and not walking anywhere.
One should not walk - Even in a house that has a ceiling, and certainly under the open sky, for all opinions agree that one needs to be careful.
4 cubits - The pious trait is to [not move without a yarmulke] even less than 4 cubits, and [to do so] even when sleeping at night. There are those who lean towards saying that [moving] even 4 cubits [without a yarmulke] isn't prohibited according to [Jewish] law except for [those who are] modest in their ways. However, the Ta"z has already written below in siman 8 that in our time it is entirely prohibited according to [Jewish] law to have one's head uncovered, even when sitting in his house - see there for the reason. And so too writes Mahar"i  Bruna. And Magen Avraham writes that even for minors it is correct to habituate them in covering their heads, in order to instill an awe of heaven, as it was brought, (Shabbat 156)  "Cover your head so that an awe of heaven will be upon you." And know also that regarding uncovered heads, it is enough to cover one's head with a hand, and similarly, if one is checking their head for lice, it is permitted to not cover one's head. And see further in Pri Megadim who wrote that for moving 4 cubits in the open air, covering one's head with a hand is not sufficient.
With one's head uncovered - And certainly it's forbidden make a blessing.  And the same applies to learning Torah with an uncovered head.  And for this (ie. making a blessing or learning Torah), it doesn't help to cover [the  head] with one's hand, because the hand and head are part of the same body and the body can't cover itself.  And there are those who rule leniently regarding this in an extenuating circumstance, for example at night when one wants to drink and he does't have a hat/covering on his head, it's enough for him to cover his head with his hand; but it's better to do like most people do - that they pull the sleeve of their shirt over their hand and then use that to cover their head, for that is certainly considered a head covering according to all opinions.  The Pri Megadim wrote that one should be careful when putting on his head tefillin, to not recite the blessing with an uncovered head.  A toupee made of hair, even those which have a cloth sewed underneath [the hairs], there are those who forbid it in order to  avoid the appearance of transgression, for people will say that that is his [actual] hair; and there are those who are lenient.
One should check if he needs to relieve himself - So that afterwards his body will be clean at the time that he is accepting the yoke of Heaven during k'riyat shema and prayers.  And one only needs to check [if he needs to relieve himself]; and if he checked himself and he doesn't need to relieve himself right now, that's called having a clean body according to halacha.  And far be it for one to delay because of this (ie. delaying because one feels he is not 100% sure if he needs to relieve himself) the time for k'riyat shema or even praying with the congregation.
Barefoot - Our sages have taught that a person should sell everything he owns in order to buy shoes for his feet.  In in the Arab countries where they normally walk barefoot, it is permitted.  [Eliah Rabba] It is written further in the name of the Sh'la, that if one is doing so (ie. is walking barefoot) because he is repenting for his sins, it is permitted; and that is what King David did, he walked barefoot.  

Siman 3

But nowadays etc. - Because we do not have the presumption of being God fearing such that angels would be escorting us and that we would ask of them to wait for us until we exit.
Until Sitting - And in the same way, he shouldn't get up while he is revealed.
And Should Not Go (Together) - And if one is  afraid [to go into the bathroom/outhouse  alone], the [other] one can put his hand on his head through the window, as long as he won't see his uncovering, as is seen below in Siman 8. But to enter there [while someone else is relieving themselves] is forbidden, even if it's his wife; but with a small child who doesn't have understanding, it's permitted to enter the bathroom [Artzos Hachaim].
And Should Not Speak - And if it's for a great need, it could be that it's allowed, as long as he isn't relieving himself at that moment. But while he is still relieving himself, even for a great need, it's forbidden. And if it's not possible to close/lock the door, and another man wants to come in, they should grunt to each other, but they shouldn't speak. Only women talk when they go to a specific bathroom that is in public, like a bathroom that was in the field, back in the day, or in the courtyard of the synagogue. In these countries, the Sages said that they should talk to each other in order for their voices to be heard from outside, so a man won't enclose himself there and be alone with them (Sanhedrin 19), and therefore from there, they (women) go in twos to the bathroom.
To rub - If one is not able to excrete, he should walk four amot and sit, then stand, then sit until he excretes, or he can distract his mind with other matters. And one should not excrete while standing.
A tefach - And not anymore because of modesty, but there should be two tefachim in front of him in case he ends up urinating while he is pushing himself to defecate, and one needs two tefachim because of the flow of urine which sprays far. The Ba''ch wrote that it is proper to be stringent ― that there should also only be one tefach in front of himself ― but many Acharonim do not agree with him. One should be careful there that he does not soil his clothes, his body, or his shoes.
Open - However, in a courtyard, any manner is permitted -  this is the opinion of the Beit Yosef and the Magen Avraham. However, the Taz agrees with our teacher Rabbi Yitzchak Abuhav, that in a courtyard, east-west is also forbidden in the center of the courtyard, for is he not exposed in that spot unless he gets close to one side by the walls. So also wrote the Drisha and other later authorities.
In which there are no partitions - However, if there are partitions there, and even only one partition to the west side, one should sit on the side of the partition, close to it (meaning, at least within four amot), with his back to the west toward the partition, and he should excrete there. Similarly, if the wall is on the east side, one should sit close to it with his back to the east. There are those who are strict regarding this because his frontal nakedness will face west and the Shechinah is in the west. In a place where it is possible, it is good to be strict. The Pri Megadim wrote that there is no minimum height for the partition, as long as one's  nakedness is not exposed — then it is permitted.
Or vice versa - There are those who say to not do the reverse. It is good to be careful with this.
However, east, etc. -  Because the Shechinah dwells in the west.  And even if he turns his face to the west it is forbidden since the east, which  is opposite the west, also has holiness.
From east etc. - Rather, one should arrange it that the head of the bed is facing north and its foot is to the south. In the responsa of Menachem Azariah he ruled according to what The Zohar wrote in Parshah Bamidbar that the head and foot of the bed should be facing to the east and west, but he concluded there that the head should be to the west, and so it is written in the Artzot Hachaim in the name of some Acharonim. Nevertheless, it is better to accustom oneself at the outset according to the Shulchan Aruch, because in the responsa of Binyan Shel Simcha, he wrote in the name of the Gr''a who said that the intention of The Zohar is also in accordance with the Gemara and not according to the interpretation of Rabbi Menachem Azariah above.
Even when one's wife is not etc. -  It is explained in the Artzot Hachaim that regarding this one need not be stringent except when lying down naked without screens around the bed.
Should not sit with his face etc. - This is the proper text (ie. the amendation of the text of the Shulchan Aruch to include the word"not").  [This is the opinion of] The Ta"z and other Achronim.
Rather he should face north etc. - The same applies if one's back is facing the holy (the temple mount), then it is permitted to urinate. The GR"A agrees that, even when from Tzofim (Mount Scopus) and beyond (ie. the temple mount is not visible), it is forbidden to urinate while facing that direction. It is forbidden to openly relieve oneself facing a synagogue or study hall, so as to not be included in the category of those for whom it says “[and, behold, … there were … men] with their buttocks towards the Temple of the Lord” (Ezekiel 8:16).  Similarly, one should not build a bathroom facing a synagogue or study hall so that the anus [of people] is not revealed opposite them. And if one builds a wall in the middle to divide between the walls of the bathroom and the synagogue, there is presumably no reason to be stringent.  See further in Artzos Hachaim. 
Relieve himself immediately - As his friend cannot see his nakedness (because he is behind the wall). Similarly in a courtyard, one should relieve himself behind one of the walls of the house. Even though his friend can hear the sound of him passing gas, this is of no concern,  for regarding hearing the sound of passing gas there is no transgression of immodesty, except that it's shameful and embarrassing for people. And someone who doesn't care, doesn't care (meaning it is permissible).
His nakedness -  meaning his revealed state - what he reveals of his skin in the front or the back; and even though he (his friend) sees his body (in the distance) and hears his defecation, it is permitted.
With his right hand - Because one ties tefillin with his right hand onto his left arm. There are additional reasons given in the Gemara, and it is proper to be careful not to wipe with the middle finger [of the left hand] because the strap [of the tefillin] is wrapped around it. The Achronim write that a left-handed person who does everything with their left hand should wipe with "his left", which is the right hand of most people. If he writes with his left hand but does everything else with his right or vice versa,  consult the Biur Halacha.
With earthenware - Even if it is smooth and doesn't tear the skin, for if it isn't smooth and has sharp pieces there is also danger that it may tear the anal sphincter.
Another person - However, if he himself already wiped with it, or it has dried out, or he wipes with a different part, then there is no concern.
Are not in the field - And witchcraft is uncommon, therefore it is permitted with earthenware,  as long as it is smooth as was mentioned above.
Something flammable etc. - It's possible that this is specifically referring to all other things [that are flammable], but regarding dry grass/leaves, even the Ram"a would agree that it's proper to be stringent, as they [tend to] cut the skin, as is seen below in siman 312 se'if 5,  see the Pri Megadim. Hagahot Rabbi Akiva Eiger writes in the same of the Sefer Chasidim that when one leaves the bathroom he should check the place where he sat to make sure it is not dirty because perhaps his friend will come suddenly or in the night and sit there.
Modestly at night - That is to say, that one should not expose himself [at night] more than he does during the day, and one should not expose himself [when in the bathroom] until he is sitting, and other matters similar to these. Because before Hashem, Blessed is He, darkness is like light. But one need not distance himself [from others].  If there is nobody there, one can defecate in the streets, as long as he is careful that he is not defecating where people walk, lest they become filthy because of him. However, if there is someone there, even a non-Jew, it is prohibited to defecate before them. All of this is regarding defecating, but to urinate is permitted, even during the day in front of many people, if he has no other place to go. This is even permitted in front of a woman, since there is danger if he holds himself back. A woman may not even urinate in front of a baby, since there exists an element of audacity in this. However, when she urinates off to the side where she is not directly in front of others, there is no prohibition.
Upon his legs - And they (ie. people) will say he is "k'rut shof'cha" (ie. a person with a gash on their member which causes spillage when urinating or ejaculating - Rashi on Deuteronomy 23:2:2) - for his urine does not flow in a stream, rather it dribbles out.  And a "k'rut shof'cha" cannot reproduce and people will say about his children, that they are not his.
Unless etc. - And if he does not have these [other] options [available to him], and he's also not able to sit there, he can utilize another option to avoid drops [of urine from falling onto his legs] - he can support his testicles in order to raise his member a bit, or by using a thick cloth.  And if some drops [ended up] falling on his legs, it's a mitzvah to wipe them off.
Downwards - And even if the organ is erect, it is permitted from the corona downwards.
Because [he will come to] bring forth - Meaning, that by touching his organ, he will come to an aroused state and illicit thoughts and [will eventually] come to this (ie. spilling seed in vain).  And [regarding] the severity of this sin, see in Even HaEzer 23.
He is married - For he has "bread in his basket" and his yezter is not so strong.  But if she is a niddah or if he is travelling [without his wife], then it is forbidden.  See further in Even HaEzer 23:4 - that even one who is married is not permitted to touch his organ at all except for when he needs to urinate.
One who is married - And if he's standing in a place where he's afraid he might fall, a married man does not need to be stringent at all [Artzot Hachaim].
The testicles - For one will not become aroused because of that.  And sometimes it is permitted to hold the organ to urinate, like when using a thick cloth which won't cause one to become aroused, but with one's shirt (ie. because it's a thinner material), it is forbidden.  There are those who disagree [and say] that even using a thick cloth [is forbidden] since there's no way to know the exact measurement [of thickness that would cause arousal].
To scratch it is not permitted - Because the scratching will cause arousal and he will easily come to spilling seed in vain.  See further in Chayei Adam who permits [scratching] when using a thick cloth.  It is permitted to scratch one's pubic hairs, as long as one does not touch his organ with his hand.  See further in Biur Halachah.
You shall not make yourselves detestable - And if he holds himself back from urinating, he transgresses "you shall not make yourselves detestable" (Leviticus 11:43) as well as "there will not be among you a sterile male" (Deuteronomy 7:14).  And one who holds himself back from passing gas does not transgress "you shall not make yourselves detestable".  Also, the transgression of "you shall not make yourselves detestable" is pushed off when it comes to the dignity of people.  For example, if a person holds back from relieving himself until he can find a private place, or similar.  One should be very careful to clean himself very well [after relieving himself], because feces [found] anywhere [on his body is forbidden] with any amount, like is written in siman 76, se'if 5.  And it's good to wash one's anus with water or spit.

Siman 4

One should wash his hands etc. - There are 2 reasons for this: The Ro"sh wrote that a person's hands are constantly in use and it's impossible that one did not touch "unclean" parts of his body (ie. parts of the body that require washing of the hands if they were touched) in the middle of the night [while sleeping] - therefore, the sages enacted that a blessing be said on this washing for [the sake of reciting] Shema and prayers [afterwards]; The Rashb"a wrote that since in the morning, after sleeping, we are like a new creation, as the verse states "Each morning refreshed, Your faithfulness is immense." (Lamentation 3:23),  [therefore] we must give thanks to Him, Blessed Be He, that He created us for His honor to serve Him and to bless His Name - and regarding that, the sages enacted to recite all the morning blessings that we say each morning; therefore, also regarding this (ie. washing one's hands in the morning), the sages enacted for the morning to sanctify ourselves with His sanctity and to wash our hands from a vessel, like a Kohen who sanctifies his hands from the basin before his service [in the Temple].  And regarding how to conduct ourselves with washing our hands, we act stringently utilizing both opinions, as will be seen later in this siman.  If one did not recite the blessing of על נטילת ידים before praying, he should not recite it after praying - [this is]  according to all opinions. [Chayei Adam].
Recite the blessing - Immediately after the washing, one should recite the blessing, and there is no need to wait to dry the hands, and the drying of the hands does not prevent [one from reciting the blessing].  There are those who are stringent to not recite the blessing until after drying their hands, for they hold that the "impure spirit" does not leave the hands until after the drying, and they hold that it's forbidden to recite a blessing when one's hands have an "impure spirit" on them.  But the opinion of the rabbinic authorities is not like that [Artzot Hachaim].  It's written in Seder Hayom that one should not touch their clothing until after they wash their hands, but in the Talmud, it does not seem that way [Magen Avraham].  See in Berakhot 51a:13 - "Do not take your cloak in the morning from the hand of your servant and wear it", because of destructive forces (ie. demons/angels of destruction), rather one should take it himself from wherever it is; even if the servant already washed his hands.  The Talmud (Shabbat 50b:11) says "A person must wash his face, his hands, and his feet every day for the sake of his Maker".  And in our countries, where we do not walk barefoot, there is no need to wash one's feet in the morning [Pri Megadim].
To also recite "Who created..." - The reason is because in the morning we are like a new creation and we need to give thanks to Him, and the blessings of "Elokei Neshama" ("My Lord, the soul [you have given me]...") and "Asher Yatzar" ("Who created [man]...") were established in regards to [Hashem's] forming our bodies.  There are other reasons given - see further in the later rabbinic authorities.  The Pri Megadim wrote that based on the reason of [us being] a new creation, if one was up all night, in which case he is not [considered] a new creation in the morning, he cannot recite the blessing of "Asher Yatzar" unless he relieved himself.  There are opinions that if one urinated in the middle of the night, he may rely on the "Asher Yatzar" [the he will recite] in the morning.  But this needs further analysis as far as what the halacha is, for there are many times that it happens that in the morning a person needs to urinate again, and the "Asher Yatzar" that he recites on the morning [urination] cannot count anymore for the nighttime [urination] - as is seen in Mishna Berurah 7:1.  One who G-d fearing will be stringent on himself and wash his hands and put on pants, or wear something else that will make a separation between his heart and his genitals, and recite the "Asher Yatzar" blessing.  But he should make sure to distance himself from the container of urine [at least] 4 cubits if it's in the same room as him.  But if the container was not designated for this (ie. to be used for urine), it's enough to just add a revi'it of water to the urine every time one urinates into it.
And even etc. - One who wants to remove all doubt should be careful to relieve himself after washing his hands three times, and when he exits the bathroom, he should wash his hands a second time and recite the "Asher Yatzar" blessing, and [by doing so will] fulfill his obligation according to all opinions.  Even better is to not even recite the blessing "Al Netilat Yadayim" until after the second washing that he does after exiting the bathroom - but only if he needed to relieve himself when he washed the first time, for then he certainly is not allowed to recite the blessing.  The Chayei Adam wrote that it's proper to wait to recite "Al Netilat Yadayim" until after one washes/cleans himself  and is ready to pray - see there further for his reasoning.  Afterwards, I found in the Maasei Rav, that that was the custom of the Gr"a - see further in Biur Halacha.
In siman 160 - This is referring to water whose appearance changed, or it was used for some other purpose, or salty water, or putrid water that a dog would not drink.  And therefore, it is fitting for [washing one's hands for] praying, because here it is only needed for cleaning [one's hands].
Should not recite the blessing - Meaning, [they should not recite the blessing of] "Al Netilat Yadayim", rather [they should recite] "Al Nekiyut Yadayim" ("On the cleansing of the hands").
Upon it - The later rabbinic authorities ruled that one may recite the blessing of "Al Netilat Yadayim".  See below in se'if 7 and in Mishnah Berurah se'if katan 16.
One should be careful - Because, besides for the reasons mentioned in se'if katan 1 for why one must wash their hands in order to pray, one must also wash their hands because of the evil spirit that rests on the hands.  But when one is washing only because of the evil spirit, they did not establish [that] a blessing [should be said] on that, therefore, we still need the the reasons mentioned above.
To pour on them - And ideally, one should wash up until the wrist.  If he doesn't have enough water, it's enough [to wash] up until his finger knuckles (ie. the knuckles that connect the fingers to the palm).  And one must spread out his palms like one who wants to accept something and he should raise his hands opposite his head.  It's also good to rinse one's  mouth [in the morning], but on a public fast day, one should not rinse his mouth.
Three times - Even if one poured a lot of water at one time, it doesn't help, because the evil spirit only goes away after 3 times - which means, one time on the right hand and then on the left hand [and then repeating this] 3 times alternating.  Maasei Rav wrote [that it should be done] 4 times - 3 times in order to remove the evil spirit, and the 4th time to remove the water [that's on his hands] that became impure.  One should warn the women that they should also be careful with washing their hands 3 times alternating, just like men; and also, since they prepare the food, [they need to be careful] so as not to make the food spiritually impure.  One should also make sure that the children wash their hands in the morning because they touch the food.  Regarding gentiles touching food without having washed their hands, there is no concern, for their [hands] are not susceptible to spiritual impurity.
Before washing - Since the evil spirit which rests on one's hands can cause damage to those body parts.
Nor to one's eyes - One should be careful to not even touch one's eyes from the outside if possible.
Even etc. - And prior to washing [one's hands], there are those who prohibit touching the anus even in passing.  And so too regarding one's genitals at the hole, even if he is married.  Similarly, regarding the site of bloodletting, because then the evil spirit is able to cause damage through every orifice in the body.
Spoils the beer - If one touched food before washing his hands, the food is not prohibited because of that.  But ideally, one should be very careful to not touch any food.  And if one did touch food, he should wash it three times.  Similarly, one should not (lit. "drink the smoke of tobacco") take a snuff of tobacco?/smoke a cigarette?/smoke a hookah? (not sure exactly what the intended meaning is, but in all three suggestions above, a person touches their hands/fingers to their nose or mouth) before washing their hands.
One does not need - Meaning, after the fact [if one washed with less than a revi'it], it does not prevent one from reciting the blessing, and one can recite "Al Netilat Yadayim".  But ideally, it is better to be insistent to have a revi'it, like it says in the next se'if, which is also referring to one using a revi'it, which is what the later rabbinic authorities wrote....
Does not prevent [one from fulfilling the mitzvah] - Meaning, after the fact, regarding reciting the blessing (ie. one washed without a utensil, or not through a person's force, etc.), he is [still] allowed to recite the blessing "Al Netilat Yadayim".  Or even from the outset [he may recite the blessing if it was] in a case where it was not possible otherwise.  But when possible, it is better to be insistent.
Not using a utensil etc. - Meaning, it's sufficient even to remove the evil spirit.  Therefore, if one does not have a whole (ie. undamaged) utensil, he may wash from a perforated utensil.  Similarly, [he may wash] from a pump (ie. a stream of water which is flowing from a pump), even though there is no force of man [at work] here, as is explained below in the laws of washing one's hands.  But, if one dipped their hands in water, it is not effective to [remove] the evil spirit, as will be seen below.
Ground - Even over splinters [of wood] is forbidden since the evil spirit will rest on them.
Vessel - And it's good to place two vessels by the head of one's bed, one full [of water] and the other empty [to be used for pouring the water into].
From them - Therefore, one should not place them before his animal [to drink from].
People - Because it's possible for them to be damaged by the evil spirit.  [Instead], it should be poured in a place that is sloped or in soft ground [where it will get absorbed].
And give it - In order that the right [side] which [represents] chessed (loving-kindness) should dominate over the left [side] which [represents] judgement/severity.  And a left handed person should go after the right of most people (ie. even though his right hand is his weaker hand, he should still pick up the utensil starting with his right hand, pass it to the left, and then wash the right hand first)....
One should not have his hands washed - Meaning, to have the water poured on his hands, but to bring him the water is permitted.
By someone who has not etc. - [But regarding] washing for a meal, it is permitted to have one's hands washed by someone who did not wash their hands.
For K'riat Shema and prayers - And one may recite the blessing "Al Netilat Yadayim" - for we learn [in the Talmud], regarding the wash basin [in the Temple], [the verse states] "And they shall wash <b>from it</b>" (Exodus 40:31), but not from within it (ie. dipping hands into it); but in general (ie. not regarding the Kohanim in the Temple), even [dipping] within it [is permitted].  But to remove the evil spirit, it requires specifically pouring 3 times, and dipping [one's hands] into a vessel, even 100 times, is only considered [like they were dipped] once, for immediately [after the first time] the water became impure and is considered to be like [water that was already] poured.  For this reason, [the Shulchan Aruch] was in doubt afterwards regarding [dipping into] 3 separate waters, because it's possible that you don't specifically need pouring 3 times in order to remove the evil spirit, maybe just washing them is enough; or perhaps you need to specifically pour water from a utensil onto your hands.  The Pri Megadim wrote that based on this, if one dipped their hands in the river 3 times, or in snow that's on the ground in 3 separate places, even then it would only work for prayers, and one could recite the blessing "Al Netilat Yadayim".  But there's a doubt whether it would suffice to remove the evil spirit, because maybe it requires pouring [water] from a utensil.  Artzot Hachaim and Levushei S'rad ruled that [dipping hands in] a river, or in snow, or in mikveh (ritual bath) water is sufficient to remove the evil spirit, even  if they do not have 40 sa'ah.  See further in Artzot Hachaim.
But not etc. - Therefore, one [who washed by dipping their hands in water] should see to it to wash a second time from a utensil, even after praying.
All night - If one slept through part of the night, everyone agrees that he must wash his hands in the morning the proper way.  This is referring to when he slept a deep sleep in his bed, and [he must wash his hands] because, generally speaking, hands are busy and it's certain that he touched an unclean part of his body [in his sleep].  But if he just took a nap, according to the Ro"sh, his status is like one who did not sleep at all.
To pray and remove - Meaning, regarding [washing for] praying there is an uncertainty if the reason for washing hands in the morning is like the Rashb"a [mentioned] above in Mishnah Berurah se'if katan 1, therefore, even though he is not considered a new creation right now [since he was up all night], [nevertheless] the sages did not make a distinction (ie. they established that one must wash in the morning, regardless of whether they slept or not) and he would need to wash.  Or maybe the main reason is like the Ro"sh [mentioned] there, and since he was up all night and he didn't touch any unclean parts [of his body], there is no need to wash.  And [regarding] removing the evil spirit, there is also an uncertainty if, in general, sleep causes the evil spirit [to come onto one's hands], and therefore, even if one slept during the day, the evil spirit rests there and one must wash their hands, and [accordingly], one who stayed up all night does not need to wash their hands.  Or [maybe] it's the nighttime which causes the evil spirit [to come], and therefore the law would be the opposite [of what was mentioned here].
And he should wash them - Meaning, 3 times because of the uncertainty [that exists].  And the same [applies] to the 2 se'ifim that follow this one.
Without reciting the blessing - There are some from the later rabbinic authorities who argue on the Rem"a's decision here, and they hold that one does need to recite the blessing; and there are those who agree with him.  All of this is [regarding a situation] when one did not relieve himself, but if one did relieve himself before praying, the later rabbinic authorities are in agreement that one must wash his hands and recite the blessing.  It is proper as well for one who was up all night, for example on Shavuot night, that he should relieve himself or urinate and wipe the drops [with his hands], for then he would be obligated to recite the blessing according to all opinions.  And he should recite "Al Netilat Yadayim" and [then] "Asher Yatzar".
After daylight comes - Because there are some opinions [who hold] that at dawn, the evil spirit returns to rest [on one's hands] a second time.
To remove etc. - Here he (ie. the Shulchan Aruch) did not mention "in order to pray" like he did in se'if 13, because certainly for prayers, in a situation like this, one would not need to wash another time.  And even if one went back to sleep a second time before dawn, in which case they would certainly need to wash again due to the evil spirit, nevertheless, he may not recite the blessing "Al Netilat Yadayim", even if it was a deep sleep - for we are concerned for the opinion of the Rashb"a who holds that the reason for this washing is because in the morning a person is a new creation, and it's only once [a day] that a person becomes a new creation, not two times; and so [in this scenario], in order to just remove the evil spirit, the sages did not enact [having to recite] a  blessing [a second time].
Without reciting the blessing - Here is seems  that even if the first time he washed (ie. before dawn) he did not recite the blessing "Al Netilat Yadayim", nevertheless, he should not recite it now (ie. after daylight comes in), for how can he say "and commanded us on the washing of the hands"?  Behold, he already fulfilled his obligation to wash for prayers according to the Ro"sh, as is explained in Beit Yosef, and Shaarei Teshuva wrote similarly above in se'if katan 4.  Nevertheless, the proper thing to do is to bring oneself to [a situation that will] obligate himself in the blessing - which is that he should relieve himself before praying and [therefore] obligate himself to recite the blessing "Al Netilat Yadayim"; as was seen above in se'if katan 4 in the name of the Chayei Adam.
There is an uncertainty - whether the nighttime causes the impure spirit or if the sleep causes it.  And this is specifically if one slept "60 breaths" [or more], but less than that, the evil spirit does not rest on one's hands, even at night.
60 breaths - Meaning, [60] continuous [breaths].  Instead, he would nap several times, [each one] less than "60 breaths", until mid-night, and from mid-night and on he would "strengthen himself like a lion"....
Only during the day - The later rabbinic authorities argue on this, for you only find that in the Gemara regarding the Amoraim, but King David himself was careful even at night.  And the practical difference of all this for us is that a pious individual should be stringent at least during the day.  And Shabbos is not included in this.  See below in siman 231, se'if 1, that if it's impossible for one to learn without an afternoon nap, he is permitted to sleep a little, but he should not overextend it - see there further.  See there as well, that his intention should not be for his personal benefit, but rather to serve Him, Blessed Be He.  See also in Machatzit Hashekel who wrote that sleeping during the day is dependent on the person and what is necessary for his service of Hashem....
Due to the saliva/mucus - Because one must mention the Great Name [of Hashem] with sanctity and purity [Beit Yosef].  And if he is of a sensitive nature and does not want to put water in his mouth because the water is not pure and clear, it does not prevent him from reciting the blessing [Levush].
Require one to wash their hands - To remove the "evil spirit" that rests [on the hands] through doing them (ie. the various activities that the Shulchan Aruch enumerates); therefore, one should rush to wash immediately.  The washing should be up to the wrist, or at least up until the knuckles [that are closest to the wrist].  But if one's hands were dirty from mud or plaster/dirt, which do not cause the "evil spirit", one need only clean the dirty area alone and that is sufficient.  Regarding [washing for] praying, it will be explained below in siman 92 - see further in the Biur Halacha that's there.
With water - Even though for praying and certainly for [learning] Torah, it is enough to just clean one's hands after any of those activities, as is seen below in se'if 22, which is referring to when one gets out of bed, and certainly when [doing any of] the other [activities] - nevertheless, in order to remove the "evil spirit", it requires water specifically.  See below in se'if katan 41.  But [washing] 3 times is only needed when getting out of bed.  There are some who are stringent regarding walking among corpses and having marital relations, that [washing] 3 times is also required.  Sefer Heichal Hakodesh is stringent regarding exiting the bathroom, [that it requires washing] 3 times.  Magen Avraham in siman 7 argued on his words.
One who exits a bathroom - Even if he did not relieve himself.  Similarly, [one who exits] a bathhouse, even if he did not wash there.  [The reason one still needs to wash when exiting those places is] because of the "evil spirit" which "dwells" in those places.
Their shoes - Since one touches their shoes when they remove them.  But if one did not touch them, there is no need to wash.  One who removes their shoes, or touches their feet, or washes/scratches their head [must wash their hands] not because of the "evil spirit", rather only because of cleanliness.  Therefore, one does not need to rush to wash their hands immediately.  As opposed to the other things [listed which are] because of the "evil spirit", as was seen above in se'if katan 38.
Among corpses - In the cemetery.  The Mahari"l wrote in siman 23 that one should wash before [entering a cemetery] to pray by the graves, and wash a second time upon returning to the courtyard of the cemetery, because evil spirits accompany those who leave.  There are those who also wash their face at that time.
A corpse - Even someone who entered a room that contained one corpse, or went to accompany [the body to the burial site], the custom is to wash.  The custom is to be particular to wash one's hands before entering another house/building [after leaving a funeral] - and the customs of our forefathers is like the Torah itself [Rem"a - Yoreh Deah 376].
His clothing - Even if one did not touch any lice, since he did not find any.
A louse - And regarding [if one touched] a flea, it's possible that it's enough to simply clean [one's hands, even without water].
With his hand - On the unclean places [of the body] which have beads of sweat.
Go out of his mind - See in Eliyah Rabah [who explains] that the intention here is that the person will be "enclothed" with a "spirit of foolishness", and because of that he can come, afterwards, to sin.  Similar to the sages statement that "A person does not come to sin unless a spirit of foolishness enters him".
Blood from his shoulders - It's possible that [if one used] a leech [known as a "feivkis"] [to blood-let] or a bleeding cup, that one must also wash their hands [after], and it's good to be stringent.
During prayers - The same applies when one is involved in learning Torah [see the Rem"a's gloss in siman 92, se'if 7].
Siman 92, se'if 6 - It's explained there that if one was in the middle of praying and remembered that he had touched a dirty place, it's enough to clean [his hands] with earth/dirt or to rub his hands on a wall, for what [else] can he do in the middle of praying?  However, if he is in the middle of reciting the Shema or Pesukei D'zimra, he must go and wash his hands [properly].
As well as siman 164 - There it's explained that if one touched [the calf, thigh, or part of the body that's normally covered] within his meal, he must wash his hands again properly.  But in regards to reciting the blessing "Al Netilat Yadayim", the conclusion of the majority of the rabbinic authorities is that one should not repeat the blessing.  See further in the Mishna Berurah over there.
"Crumb-like" particles of sweat - See further in Yoreh Deah siman 116, that one must be cautious regarding sweat, for all sweat is like poison, except for facial sweat.  A mnemonic for this is "By the sweat of your face you will eat bread" (Genesis 3:19).
And face - Similarly, one's neck up to his chest [Beit Yosef].  Machatzit Hashekel wrote that it depends on the custom of the place, if it's the way of people there to have those parts exposed.
Of the arms - Up until the joint called ("eilen boigen - elbow).  And if one [normally] goes barefoot, it's possible that that falls under the category of parts [of the body] that are [normally] exposed [Pri Megadim siman 92].
If one does not have etc. - But if he has water, he must wash even for the afternoon and evening prayers, even if he is certain that they are not dirty at all.  The washing should be without a blessing, because they (ie. the sages) only enacted reciting the blessing [after washing] in the morning, as is seen in siman 7 se'if 1.  If one has no water, there are opinions that the law is the same as here, that he should clean his hands with any material that cleans, lest any dirt or filth cling to his hands.  See below in siman 92 and 233 in Mishna Berurah.
Clean his hands - Even if they were certainly dirty, like after relieving himself, and he cleaned them [without water], that is also sufficient.  See further, below in siman 92, regarding how far one must go to find water.
With earth/dust - Or one may rub [his hands] on a dry cloth.  And you should know, that this cleaning, since it's instead of water, one must clean the entire hand, both the outside (ie. top of the hand) and the inside (ie. the palm) up until the wrist.  And after the fact, it's enough if one cleaned up until the top knuckles (ie. those closest to the palm), but not like what some people do, that they only clean the ends of the fingers.
Cleansing of the hands - There are some opinions that even regarding this (ie. cleaning one's hands without water) one should recite "Al Netilat Yadayim".  Nevertheless, all the later rabbinic authorities did not budge from the ruling of the Shulchan Aruch.
Before washing - For in general, hands, where one does not know if they are dirty [or not], are not invalid [in regards] to reciting a blessing, and certainly for learning Torah, for we make  blessings on fruits and are not required to wash [beforehand].
Naked - For then it is assumed that his hands are dirty because he [most likely] touched one of the orifices [of the body in his sleep].  And [regarding] our [night] clothing (ie. pajamas), where the neck hole is very open, even if one slept with that kind of clothing, it's assumed that his hands became dirty because it's common for [people] to scratch their body in a place where sweat occurs.  This is specifically if one slept a full sleep, but [regarding] a nap, it's not assumed that he touched [his body], and [therefore] his [hands] status is like [like that of] normal hands which are [considered] valid for learning Torah and reciting blessings, with the exception of praying [Shemona Esrei].
Cleans them - With stones/pebbles or anything that can be used to clean.  The same applies to [learning] Torah - it is forbidden [to learn] without cleaning them [first].  See in Pri Megadim who wrote that even if one has water, for [reciting] blessings and [learning] Torah, it is enough to simply clean [one's hands], and this is implied in Biurei Ha'Gra.  Water is only required in order to remove "the evil spirit" from one's hands.  And Shaarei Teshuva, in the name of the Zohar, wrote that one should not recite a blessing without [first] washing their hands, and it is proper to be stringent when one has water [available].  See below in siman 62, se'if katan 8 in the Mishnah Berurah.

Siman 5

The meaning of the words - like the Rabbis say (Berakhot 47) that one should not "throw" a blessing from his mouth, rather he should concentrate when saying it and make the blessing calmly. And this is the language used in the Sefer Chasidim siman (chapter) 46: When one washes his hands, or recites a blessing on a fruit or on [any of the] mitzvot which are constantly in the mouth of people (ie. which they are accustomed to say), he should direct his heart towards his Creator, Who does wondrous kindness to him, and gave him the fruit or bread to benefit from, and commanded him to perform the mitzvot. And he should not act like an individual who does things out of habit and lets words leave his mouth without any thought.   Regarding this Hashem becomes angry at his people and he sent to us in the hand of Isaiah and said (Isaiah 29:13) "Since this people draw near, and with their mouth and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me" And see further there (ie. in Sefer Chasidim) where he speaks at length about the great punishment regarding this.
The Name as it is pronounced - Adon-ai (א-ד-ו-נ-י) - Because The Honored and Awesome Name (י-ה-ו-ה) is forbidden to pronounce it as it is written; like the Sages stated (Mishnah Sanhedrin 10) "One who pronounces The Name [as it is written] with it's letters has no portion in the World to Come".  Rather, one must pronounce it as if the Name Adon-ai (א-ד-ו-נ-י) was written, and also [pronounce it] with the vowels of [the Name] Adon-ai (א-ד-ו-נ-י) -  meaning, the [letter] alef with [specifically] the [vowel] "chataf patach", and not with just a "patach"or just a "sh'va"; the dalet with a "cholem", and the nun with a "kamatz", and he should emphasize the yud so that it is well discerned; and only in his mind should one think about the Name (י-ה-ו-ה).  And the [proper] cantillation is "mil'rah".
That He Was etc. - Biur Ha"Gra wrote that based on bottom line of the halacha, one only needs to have in mind the meaning [of The Name] as it is pronounced (ie. Adon-ai (א-ד-ו-נ-י)), because we always go after the pronunciation, even though [The Name] as it is written (י-ה-ו-ה) has great secrets [contained in it]; except for [when reciting] Kriyat Shema, there one must also have in mind that He Was, etc. - see there further.  And in a place where the Name is written as Adon-ai (א-ד-ו-נ-י), everyone agrees that one only needs to have in mind that He is the Lord over all.  If one was speaking [to his friend] about the kindness that Hashem did for him -  and he started off by mentioning Hashem's Name and then wanted to continue speaking about what Hashem did for him, it is forbidden to interrupt him, for perhaps by doing so, he will not finish what he was saying and will have mentioned Hashem's Name in vain.  But if one wants to curse another person and he starts by mentioning Hashem's Name, then it is a mitzvah to interrupt him so that he should not finish what he was saying and will not come to sin. [... and brought in Chidushei R. Akivah Eiger]

Siman 6

Empty spaces - Meaning, organs with empty spaces.  And one should not say "chalalim" (lit. empty spaces/cavities) since, regarding an empty space, it is not appropriate [to call it a] creation (ie. an empty space is not something that is created).
If one of them were to close up etc. - This is also the textual version of the Rambam.  But our  version, and that of Rashi, the Rif, and the Rosh is that [the words] "if one of them were to open" comes first (before "if one of them were to close"). [The Gr"a].
Meaning: that regarding the holes [of the body]... [there is one hole, which is the mouth] etc. - Since his textual version [of the Asher Yatzar blessing] stated "...it would not be possible to remain alive even for one moment." - this poses a difficulty for him (ie. the Mechaber), for a person closes his mouth for many hours [at a time and yet still lives], and so  because of that he stated "Meaning etc." [in order to resolve the difficulty].  But our custom is to not say [the words] "even for one moment", as R"M wrote, and is also brought  by the Agudah, so too wrote the Magen Avraham, and so too is implied in Biur HaGra, and see further in the Ta"z.
It would not be possible - [The word] אי [is vowelized] with a tzeirei (".." - pronounced "aye") under the alef since that word comes from the word אין [which is spelled with a tzeirei under the alef and means "not"].  This is the opinion of the Be'er Heitev and the Pri Megadim.  Shaarei Teshuva says it should be vowelized with a chirik ("."), for here too the intention is that [the word אי with a chirik - pronounced "ee"] is similar [in meaning] to where it's written [in I Samuel 4:21] "אי כבוד" ("Ee-Chavod"), and Rashi comments there that the intention is that it's like אין כבוד (which means "there is no glory").
The healer (of the sickness) - The Ba"ch, Shel"a, and Mateh Moshe wrote that one should not say [the word] חולי ("of the sickness"), [rather he should] only [say] רופא כל בשר ("the healer of all flesh").  Ta"z wrote that both versions are correct, and Heaven forbid that we should remove one of them - see there further.
Something spiritual - In the Kavanot (Kabbalistic intentions) [of the Ari"zal], it is written that the soul is nourished from the spiritual part of the food, and the body is nourished from the physical part of the food.  And it's from this combined energy that the two (soul and body) are connected one with the other through the food [Magen Avraham.]
To wait - There is a tradition from R. Yehudah Chassid, that one who leaves his home to go to shul - before he prays, he should say the verse of Shema Yisroel, but he should have in mind to not fulfill his obligation of the positive commandment of reciting Shema, unless he is worried that the time for reciting the Shema will pass.  See further below at the end of siman 46, what we wrote in Mishnah Berurah there.
To make the blessing - This is specifically if one  is going immediately to shul.  But if he will be learning after he washes, and certainly if he interrupts with idle conversation, and then goes to shul and recites the "Al Netilat Yadayim"  blessing there - everyone agrees that he did not do the right thing, for there is a long interruption between the washing and the blessing, as will be seen below.  Therefore, those who recite Tehillim before reciting the "Al Netilat Yadayim"  blessing are not acting properly, for it is a long interruption.  The Levush wrote that for those who recite Tehillim, it's better that they recite it before davening - see there for his reason.
Do not have this practice - The conclusion of the Achronim is to conduct oneself like the Sefardim: ideally to not make an interruption between washing the hands and reciting the blessing of Al Netilat Yadayim, rather immediately upon washing the hands, one must recite the blessing.  However, if at the time one washed his hands, he felt the need to relieve himself, where [in that scenario] even learning Torah is forbidden, even if [it's not such a strong urge where] he could hold it in [the amount of time it takes to walk] a parsah, [nonetheless] he should not recite the blessing Al Netilat Yadayim until after he relieves himself, and then he should recite the blessing Al Netilat Yadayim and Asher Yatzar [Shaarei Teshuvah].  See below in siman 92, se'if 1 in the Haga'a (ie. the Ram"a) and in the Mishnah Berurah there.  See above in siman 4 in the Mishnah Berurah where we wrote in the name of the Chayei Adam: that ideally, it is better to wait to recite Al Netilat Yadayim until after one cleans himself (ie. after relieving himself) and is then ready to pray, for then he fulfills his obligation according to all opinions.  See in Biur Halacha there, where we wrote that it's good to recite all the remaining morning blessings after reciting Al Netilat Yadayim and Asher Yatzar, and that is the prescribed way that the Chayei Adam was referring to when he said that one fulfills their obligation according to all opinions.  See in Biur Halacha there, where [we wrote] that the Maasei Rav wrote similar to the Chayei Adam, but nevertheless, if one conducted themselves like the Shaarei Teshuvah, they have what to rely on....
Who recited it at home - See in Magen Avraham, Pri Megadim, and all the other Achronim who all agree that even the prayer leader who reciting the blessing at home should not repeat it in shul, because nowadays everyone is fluent [in praying] and everyone recites the blessing for themselves and they prefer to not fulfill their obligation with the prayer leaders recital.  Therefore, in those places where the custom is that the prayer leader says all the blessings for the congregation, like in our area where the custom is to do so on the Yamim Noraim (ie. Rosh Hashana/Yom Kippur) - where the prayer leader recites [the blessings] for the congregation, and even recites Al Netilat Yadayim, Asher Yatzar, and the blessings of the Torah - one should be careful to not recite them at home.  And if he (the prayer leader)  happened to recite them at home already, he should ask one of those who are listening [to his blessings], who did not already recite the blessings themselves, to have in mind to fulfill their obligation with his blessings.  However, the prayer leader must be very careful to make all the words of the blessings audible; unlike what's done in some places where the prayer leader only recites out loud the beginning and end of each blessing.  Since his (the prayer leader's) intention when reciting the blessings is to fulfill another's obligation, the listener must listen to every word of the blessing.
In these scenarios etc. - Meaning, that which the majority of people have the custom to recite Selichot (prayers of repentance) before morning  light during the Days of Repentance (from before Rosh Hashana until Yom Kippur), and there (in the Selichot prayers) they recite several verses [from the Torah], and then afterwards (ie. after the Selichot) they recite Al Netilat Yadayim and Birchat HaTorah.  Regarding Birchat HaTorah, we can offer somewhat of an answer [as to how people are allowed to recite verses from the Torah before having recited the Birchat HaTorah, by saying]  that those verses are only being said as part of the prayers, and they are not obligated in Birchat HaTorah according to some halachic authorities, as will be explained in siman 46 se'if 9 in the Ram"a; see there in Mishnah Berurah.  However, regarding Netilat Yadayim, where [those people] are interrupting [between washing their hands and reciting the blessing] with such a [long] interruption, it needs an analysis to settle the matter.  The Achronim agree that one should not do it that way; rather, one should recite the blessing at home immediately upon waking up [and washing his hands], and should not recite the Al Netilat Yadayim blessing again in shul; as was  explained in this siman in se'if 1.  Alternatively, when one wakes up he should not recite Al Netilat Yadayim; rather, after finishing the Selichot he should relieve himself or urinate, wash his hands, and then recite Al Netilat Yadayim and Asher Yatzar, and then pray; like we said above in the name of the Chayei Adam.
A blessing of thanks - And it is not a blessing that is connected to another (ie. it is not connected to the previous blessing), therefore one is permitted to recite [the blessings] in the morning upon waking up (ie. Al Netilat Yadayim and Asher Yatzar) until אלקי נשמה, and then in shul he starts with אלקי נשמה [Tur].  Nevertheless, one should do it the ideal way, [which is] to connect Elokai to Asher Yatzar.  See Biur HaGra in siman 46, where his opinion is also that אלקי נשמה should be connected to Asher Yatzar.  Therefore, one should be careful with this from the outset.  If one did not recite אלקי נשמה until [he realized] after praying Shemona Esrei, he should not recite it at any point after that, since he already said מחיה המתים, it's similar to [אלקי נשמה which speaks about] restoring souls [Pri Chadash].  Shaarei Teshuva questions this very much and concludes that nevertheless, if at the time that one recited מחיה מתים he had in mind to recite אלקי נשמה after Shemona Esrei, he is permitted to recite it afterwards - see there further for his reason.  So too is it implied in Pri Megadim siman 52.  And see what's written there in Biur Halacha.  [Regarding] the wording of the blessing, one should not say אתה יצרת בי, rather אתה יצרת אתה נפחת בי.
There are those who have a custom etc. - Their intent is in order to [help] each one meet their quota of 100 Amen's for the day.  See further in Shaarei Teshuva [who discusses] that there are many who question this.  And in Teshuvah M'Ahava [chelek 2, siman 212], he raises the point that for us who's custom it is to not fulfill our obligation with the prayer leader [morning] blessings, everyone agrees that it would be permitted to do so.  Pri Megadim wrote that it's proper nowadays that only the prayer leader recite [the blessings] out loud, see there further.  Therefore, each place should do according to what their custom is, for each one has what to rely on.
That they already fulfilled their obligation - From the Levush, it's implied that one cannot  fulfill other's obligation of the Morning Blessings with less than 10 men [present].  See in Pri Megadim who, at the conclusion of his words, leans towards saying that it's  specifically when [each of the listeners] are capable [of reciting the blessing on their own] that one cannot fulfill [other's obligation] with less than 10 men.  But when [the listeners are] not capable, then you don't need 10 men, even according to the Levush.

Siman 7

They recite etc. - Even if a long time passed after relieving themselves, they still need to recite the blessing.  If one did not recite Asher Yatzar before needing to urinate again - the opinion of the Pri Megadim is that before urinating, one should recite the Asher Yatzar blessing for the first urination.  But Shaarei Teshuva agrees with several Achronim that if one remembered after he started to feel an urge [to relieve himself], he should not recite the blessing.  See there further.
Asher Yatzar - Maharshal, in responsa siman 97,  wrote that someone who ate something that requires an after blessing and forgot [to recite it], and then urinated, then remembered it  before reciting the Asher Yatzar blessing - which of them takes precedence?  He replied that Asher Yatzar comes first since it's more frequent.  One who drinks a laxative, wherein he has in mind from the outset to empty his bowels completely - there is an opinion that he should only recite the blessing [once] after he has finished; there is another opinion that he should recite the blessing each time he goes.  The common practice is like the latter opinion.  However, if it is a heavy diarrhea, where he feels an urge immediately after the first time to go again, it is prohibited to recite the blessing then as is seen below in siman 92, [for in that scenario] even learning Torah is forbidden [Shaarei Teshuva].
Pray immediately - Even though we established in siman 233 se'if 2 that for the afternoon and evening prayers, even if one is not aware of any dirt [on his hands], he must wash his hands [before praying], and certainly [he must wash] after relieving himself, nevertheless he only  recites Al Netilat Yadayim in the morning.  See Artzot Hachaim who wrote that the opinion of the majority of Poskim is that if one defecated and afterwards wants to pray, he must recite Al Netilat Yadayim.  Nevertheless, a priori one should not veer from the ruling of the Shulchan Aruch.  See further in Maasei Rav.
Because he wiped with them - The drops of urine.  The same applies to when defecating, where he relieved himself and then wiped himself.
For [the sake of] cleanliness/hygiene etc. - If one does not have water to wash with, he still must recite the Asher Yatzar blessing.  Even if he wiped himself, it's implied above, at the end of siman 4 in Magen Avraham, se'if katan 28, that for reciting a blessing, it's enough to wipe one's hands on anything that can clean them.
Twice - Like we find regarding prayers - that if one erred and didn't daven shachris, he davens mincha twice.  But many of the Achronim argue on this ruling and they hold that prayers are different since they are in place of sacrifices, and [missed sacrifices] can made-up for; as opposed to Asher Yatzar, which is a blessing of thanksgiving, one can fulfill his obligation with one thanksgiving on many occurrences, like one who ate twice and diverted his mind between the 2 eating's, he recites Birchas Hamazon once over both of them.  And one should be lenient regarding a doubt [one has regarding] a blessing.  Ideally one should be careful to recite Asher Yatzar immediately after urinating since maybe he will need to urinate again afterwards.  The same applies to defecating.

Siman 8

Wrap in the ציצית - Immediately after washing hands in order that he shouldn't walk four cubits without ציצית.
Standing - That is to say, the wrapping and the blessing should both be done while standing. [Regarding] the wrapping, as it is written "for you,"... and we learn from here a gezeirah shava (a tradition of a known rule applying to a new case based upon an identical word or phrase in both cases) from Omer as it is also written "for you"... and in the case of Omer it's written: "from when you first put the sickle to the standing grain" and [the sages] expounded [the word בקמה (to the standing grain) to mean] "standing." And [regarding saying] the blessing [while standing], this is because all blessing on mitzvot should be done standing. And this is only l'chatchila (preferably), for after the fact [if it was not done standing] he has fulfilled his obligation for both (i.e. the wrapping and the blessing) in any position. Most of the Archronim agreed that preferably he should make the blessing before the wrapping, at the time that he's holding it in his hand and intends on wrapping it, for that is "immediately prior to doing it." And he shouldn't make the bracha while his טלית is still folded, for that is "prior to the prior".
With the head uncovered - Even though we make the blessing "to wrap," covering the body alone is wrapping, and this is essentially the act of wrapping. And travelers who put on the טלית when it's folded and drape it around their necks on their shoulders, they do not fulfill their obligation to wear ציצית this way. For in such a manner, all agree this is not wrapping. 
With the טלית - This covering humbles the heart of man and brings one to fear of Heaven. See the Taz, who opines that it's proper to not remove one's kippah from one's head during prayer, even though one's head is also covered with the טלית. The Bach writes that one must have one's טלית on one's head from the beginning of prayers until the end. At the least, one should stand wrapped for at least the time that it takes to walk four cubits. It's written in the Kavanos of the Arizal: He (i.e. the Arizal) would cover the טלית over the תפילין של ראש (head tefillin). See the end of Siman 27, that nevertheless, it should not be completely covered. At the time of wrapping, he [should] cover his head with the טלית until it (i.e. the front edge) reaches his mouth, and then he sends all four ציצית to the left side (i.e. behind him over his left shoulder) [and pause] for the time it takes to walk four cubits. And afterwards he undoes the wrapping until the תפילין של ראש appears slightly, as we mentioned previously. And then he should arrange each one of the ציצית in its place, as is mentioned in Se'if 4. And this is the wrapping that one fulfills his obligation according to everyone. And not like the custom of some people, that drape the טלית over themselves until their head is at the midpoint of the length of the טלית and then wrap it... for this is not called "wrapping".
Small, fringed garments (טלית קטן) - And these are [garments] that have a measurement where a child of 9 years can cover with it their head and the majority [of their body]...and [also where] someone above the age of 13 would not be embarrassed to go out, on an occasional basis, onto the street [while wearing it]. And [this is] as will be mentioned later in Siman 16... See there in Mishna Berurah.
They fulfill our obligation - For nowadays, all our clothing is worn for the purpose of clothing (i.e. covering ourselves up), and wrapping is not mentioned in the Torah.
Wrapped - In order to fulfill [the obligation] also according to those who hold that you specifically need wrapping. And it seems that those whose custom it is to not make a blessing at all on the טלית קטן, but rather exempt it with the blessing on the טלית גדול, they do not need at all to wrap in it.  And see further in Magen Avraham and in Biur HaGra.
And afterwards - For the main reason to be particular is at the time of wearing it.
ציציות - The custom is to make a "crown" from a piece of silk, as an indicator that those ציציות that are in front should always be in the front.  This is like our Sages said: "The plank (in the Mishkan) that merited [to be] in the North, was always in the North."  And in the writings of the Arizal, it is written that he (i.e. the Arizal) was not particular about this.
בציצית - [It should be vowelized] with a sh'va (":") under the "ב".
With the טלית - And the same law applies to תפילין and all blessings over מצוות.
As one - Meaning, each one is wrapping in their own טלית, but that the wrappings are all happening at the exact same time... as opposed to [if one wrapped] after [the amount of time of] "כדי דיבור" (i.e. saying a few words) [passed] from the blessing, it is considered an interruption, and [in that case] each one would have to make their own blessing.  And see later in Siman 206, Se'if 3.
And if they wanted - From this wording it sounds like it's better that each one makes their own blessing.  And the truth is the opposite, that ideally it is better that one should bless and exempt the others because of "with the multitude of the nation is the glory of the King".  And this is as [seen] later in Siman 298, Se'if 14.  However, we do not do this in practice nowadays.  And it's possible that [the reason] is because not everyone is an expert in having in mind to exempt themselves [with another's blessing] and to exempt others [with their own blessing].  And see [further] in Shaarei Teshuva.
One blesses - And exempts the others, and even if they are experts [at exempting themselves with another's blessing].  As long as the listener has in mind to be exempt and the speaker [has in mind] to exempt [the others].  And not only that, for even if the one making the blessing already fulfilled [the mitzvah] for himself, or if he's not [even] wrapping [himself] at all, he may exempt others with his blessing... for all of Israel are responsible one for the other.  However, in [regards to] this there are those that say that one cannot exempt another, except specifically someone who is not an expert. The Pri Megadim wrote: If several people bought new 4 cornered garments, and made ציצית for them, and they did not make a שהחיינו [blessing on it], they should bless when they first wrap in it as is explained in Siman 22... Even though one could make the blessing of להתעטף for others, but [regarding] the blessing of שהחיינו - each one makes their own blessing.
Answer Amen - Even though without this (meaning even in a regular case where one hears a blessing of another), one must answer Amen after every blessing [that they hear], nevertheless [regarding] this [person] that wants to fulfill [his obligation by hearing it from another] - the obligation [to answer Amen] is even greater... for he shows with this, in actuality, that he is having in mind to exempt himself with this (i.e. the other persons blessing).  However, after the fact, even if he did now answer Amen, he has fulfilled his obligation. And this is like [what is written] later in Siman 213, Se'if 2.
Rather wearing - And the blessing is להתעטף, for the [proper] text of the blessing is that, just like [the blessing of] לישב בסוכה.
And it should not be changed - This is [regarding] our טלית קטן, that we do not wrap in it.  But [regarding] a טלית קטן that one does wrap in, as is explained in Se'if 3, one may optimally make the blessing of להתעטף.  And after the fact, if one made the blessing להתעטף on any טלית קטן, or if one made the blessing על מצוַת ציצית on a טלית גדול, he has fulfilled his obligation.  And [you should] know, that one should not make the blessing on a טלית קטן until it has at least a length of three fourths of a cubit on each side... and the hole that's around the [person's] neck does not count towards the measurement.  And also that the majority of it should be open.  And people that are careful are accustomed [to wear a טלית קטן with a measurement of] a cubit in front of them and a cubit behind them.  And see in Mishna Berurah and Biur Halacha in Siman 16 what I wrote additionally there regarding this.
One from the other - Each string [should be] on it's own, that they shouldn't be stuck one to the other.  And if he is delayed in coming to shul, and on account of this (ie. his separating the strings) [it will cause him to] lose out on praying with the congregation, the Magen Avraham wrote that [in that case] one does not need to be particular about this.  And see [further] in the Biur Halacha. The Arizal wrote: [the word] ציצת is an acronym for <b>צ</b>דיק (a righteous person) <b>י</b>פריד (separates) <b>צ</b>יציותיו (his ציצת strings) <b>ת</b>מיד (always).
One should have in mind when wrapping - And this is besides (ie. in addition to) the intention that one needs to have in mind when wearing [the ציצית] to fulfill the מצוה of ציצית.  And the Ba"ch wrote that the same law applies to תפילין and סוכה: Even though by other מצוות he fulfills his obligation even if he did not have any intentions, except that he is doing this מצוה for the sake of Hashem that commanded [us] to do it... but these [3 מצוות] are different.  For regarding ציצית it is written "in order that you remember", and regarding תפילין [it is written] "in order that Hashem's Torah be in your mouth", and regarding סוכה [it is written] "in order that future generations may know".  Nevertheless, it seems that this is all [the] optimal [way] in order to fulfill the מצוה in it's [most] complete way.  But after the fact, even if he did not have in mind by all these [3 מצוות], to only [have in mind to] fulfill the positive commandment, he fulfills his obligation.  And afterwards I found in Pri Megadim in Siman 25 that he wrote similarily (And it's also inferred in Olat Tamid and in the Biur HaGra, that even by ציצית, having the intention is not a hindrance [to fulfilling one's obligation of the מצוה].
One should check - It's inferred from the words of the Ba"ch and Eliyah Rabbah that also on שבת one should check his טלית.  And see [further] in Siman 13 in the Biur Halacha [3].
The strings of the ציצית - One also needs to check them higher up at the place of the hole of the טלית (ie. the hole where the strings are inserted into the garment) until the knot... for there it is invalid even if one string was cut.  And see [further] in Biur Halacha [4].
In vain - Even though without this (ie. without checking the strings) there is a concern for the [following] prohibition: that he will wear a four cornered garment without ציצית... nevertheless, we establish that there is a presumption that it (ie. the garment) was valid; [But] only because of the stringency of [the prohibition of] "You shall not swear falsely [by the name of the LORD your God]" which exists on a blessing made in vain, they were stringent that one should check them.  According to this, one who is wearing multiple garments that have ציצית only needs to check one of them, since only one blessing is made over all of them.  However, the later authorities wrote that one needs to check them all:  Firstly, because we don't rely on a presumption in a place (ie. situation) where you are able to clarify [the matter]; And additionally, [in this case] it is an inferior presumption... for strings are easily severed.  Therefore, one must check [them] everyday in the morning when he wears them... and then, even when he removes them and takes his mind off of them... even though he is required to make a blessing on them when he wears them again... even so, he is not required to check them again for in a short span of time like this they are not normally severed and we can rely on the presumption.  And even in the morning... if by checking [his ציצית] he will miss out on praying with the congregation, or if he got called up to the Torah... he may wear his טלית without checking it.  And this is when he knows that the strings were intact the day before.  Nevertheless, it is proper for him to check them as much as possible.  And if he borrowed a טלית from someone else to go up to the Torah, [in which case] our custom is to not make a blessing on it (ie. we don't make a blessing on a טלית when getting called up to the Torah), he does not need to check it at all [and see further in Biur Halacha[5]].  And if he checked the טלית when he removed it and placed it in its pouch, he does not need to check it again tomorrow when he wraps in it.
He should touch his ציצית - Because [by doing]  this it's considered somewhat as if he just put it on at that moment.  And even though we establish by all מצוות that one needs to make the blessing immediately preceding it... here it is different, since he was not fitting for it.
And have it mind to exempt - And this is the custom nowadays, to make the blessing on the טלית גדול and have in mind to exempt with it the טלית קטן.  And this way is much better than what is practiced by some people ... that they make a blessing on the טלית קטן, and right after make the blessing on the טלית גדול... for they cause a blessing that is not needed.  And furthermore, even if they would wait a long time between the טלית קטן and the טלית גדול... there are many times that it (the טלית קטן) is not fitting to make a blessing on... [for example] that the majority of it was not opened up , or it was smaller than the [minimum] measurement which is explained later in Siman 16, or if he slept in it at night; As is [mentioned] later in Siman 16 in Mishnah Berurah.
Over his clothing - And in כתבים it is brought that a טלית קטן [should be worn] under his clothing.  And the Magen Avraham wrote, that in any case, the ציצית [strings] need to be outside, and not like those that tuck them into the corners.  However, the people that go/work amongst the non-Jews fulfill their obligation with that (ie. tucked in the corners).  Nevertheless, at the time of [making] the blessing, they should be exposed [for the amount of time it takes to walk] four cubits.
See them - Like it is written "And you shall see it and remember" etc.  And those people that put the ציצית into their pants, not only do they hide their eyes from (ie. ignore) what is written "And you shall see it and remember" etc... they also disgrace the mitzvah of השם יתברך, and they will have to make a reckoning over this.  And this that they say that [they must do that  because] they go amongst the non-Jews, for that it would be enough to tuck the ציצית into the corner.  And if they had some gift from a king of flesh and blood which had the name of the king engraved in it... how much would they adorn themselves in front of other people constantly?; How much more so by ציצית, which is an allusion to the name of the King of all Kings, the Holy One Blessed Be He.  And as is seen later in Siman 24, Se'if 5 - How honorable is the man who carries His Name on him!  And חז"ל said: "One who is careful with the מצוה of ציצית, he merits to see the Face of the שכינה".  And it is inferred from the verses, that they Jews that are remaining at the time [of redemption] will be found with this מצוה, as it is written: "And ten men from nations of every tongue will take hold of every Jew by a corner of his cloak" etc (Zechariah 9, 23).  And חז"ל said on this (Shabbos 32, 2): Anyone who is careful in performing the מצוה of ציצית merits that two thousand eight hundred servants will serve him [in the World-to-Come]".
All of them are obligated - Meaning to say, if he wore them all.  But if they are sitting in their drawer/chest - they are exempt... for we established that ציצית are an obligation on the person and not an obligation on the object... as is [written] later in Siman 19.
Makes an interruption between them - Meaning, a long interruption which is in the category of "removal of thought" (ie. taking ones mind off of it.  But [regarding] a short interruption, the Magen Avraham and the other later halachic authorities ruled later in Siman 206 that not speaking is not considered an interruption after the fact... even if he waited much longer than [the amount of time called] "כדי דיבור" (the amount of time it take to say "shalom alecha rebbi").  And [regarding] if he spoke between them... if his speaking was for the sake/purpose of the wearing [the ציצית]... for example, if he said: "Bring me a [ציצית] garment to wear" or [something] similar... then it's obvious that he does not need to go back and bless again.  But if [he spoke] not for the sake of the wearing, there are [varying] opinions amongst the halachic authorities.  The opinion of the Mechaber (Shulchan Aruch) later in Se'if 13 and the Magen Avraham and many of the later authorities [see the Shach - Yoreh Deah in Siman 19, Se'if Katan 7] are like the halachic authorities [that hold] that any speaking is in the category of interruption regarding this.  But there are some later authorities that rule that since there some that hold regarding this that one does not need to go back and bless, that it is  like one who spoke in the middle of a meal... that it's better that one not enter [into a situation] of a doubtful blessing (ie. there's a doubt if the blessing needs to be made again).  And the Pri Megadim concurs with this.  Therefore, every man should be careful to not speak (between the ציצית).  And if he did speak, he does not go back and bless again.  And certainly he should careful to not make a long interruption... for it is prohibited to cause [a situation where one will need to make] a blessing that is not necessary... And this is [as is seen] later in Siman 215.
He didn't have in mind - Meaning to say, that he didn't have in mind explicitly (that his blessing should count for all of them), just that he blessed in general.
It's as if an interruption was made - From the fact that he (the Mechaber) was not specific, it's inferred that he's referring to even [a case] where all the four cornered garments were placed in front of him at the time he made the blessing... and even there he would have to go back and bless again... for it proves that he usually only wears one (since he didn't have them all in mind)... and therefore without specifying, his blessing does not count for them all... for it is like he just decided [on a whim] (to wear more than one)... unless he had them in mind explicitly.  And the same rule applies if he made the blessing of "על מצוַת" on his טלית קטן, as is our practice, and immediately after took (wore) his טלית גדול... if he had in mind explicitly to exempt it with his "על מצוַת" [blessing], then he does not need to go back and bless;  But [if he made the blessing] in general (ie. without having in mind explicitly), he goes back and blesses again... for [when done] generally he only has the טלית קטן in mind when he makes the "על מצוַת" blessing.  Nevertheless, ideally one should be careful not to make a blessing on the טלית קטן if he plans to wear the טלית גדול right after, for he is causing an unnecessary blessing [to be made].  If one wore a טלית without checking it and found out [after] that it was invalid, or that the ציצית strings became invalid afterwards... and he wears another טלית... he needs to bless again... unless he had in mind explicitly at the time he made the blessing that it should cover everything else that he [might] wear afterwards.
If he removed - The later halachic authorities argue on this and are of opinion that removing it is not considered an interruption according to everyone.  And it's not similar to what the Mechaber (Shulchan Aruch) wrote in Se'if 14 that removing it is considered an interruption... for there (in that scenario) he did not have in mind at the time of making the blessing that he would remove it and then return to wear it again;  But here (in this scenario), he did have in mind at the time of making the blessing [that it would also be] on wearing the second [four cornered] garment.
He needs to make a blessing on it - Even if he immediately went to the synagogue and did not take his mind off [of the טלית קטן] at all in between.
Because walking - And the later halachic authorities agreed that the act of walking [itself] is not considered an interruption.  And nevertheless they wrote that one needs to make a blessing again on his טלית גדול, because there was a change of location.  According to this, the same law applies if when he left his house, he returned immediately to his house and wore his טלית גדול... there too he needs to make a blessing on it... even though he had in mind his טלית גדול when he made the blessing;  For it is like [those] things that don't require a blessing afterwards... [that by those things] a change of location is an interruption, as is written in Siman 178.  And see [further] in the Siman Kattan that's after this one.
Is considered an interruption - The Chayei Adam was concerned for the opinions of those who hold that a change of location is not an interruption in this [scenario].  Therefore he was stringent that one should not make a blessing, unless the synagogue was far from his house, or if he did not have it in mind when he made the blessing (on the טלית קטן), or if he took his mind off it (טלית קטן) in between [the wearing of each].
In his house - Even if he wore his טלית קטן in this room and his טלית גדול is in another room... for it's not [considered] changing locations [if it's] from one room to another... since he had this in mind (to wear the טלית גדול after)... as is seen later in Siman 273 at the end of Se'if 1.  And what he (the Mechaber) wrote regarding speaking (in between), that is even [if he spoke] one word.  And see what we wrote previously in Se'if Kattan 28 in the name of the later halachic authorities [as far as] the law.
He needs to make another blessing - Even if he still had on his טלית קטן, and even if immediately after, he wraps in it and he didn't change his location at all in between.  For the removal [of the טלית גדול] is itself an interruption.  And see previously in this Siman, Se'if Kattan 21 what we wrote there.
That we do not make a blessing - Even if when he took off the טלית גדול he did not have on his טלית קטן.  And this is how the later halachic authorities ruled.  And the reason of the "יש אומרים" (literally: "there are those who say" - meaning those with this opposing opinion) is: that since at the time of the removal [of the טלית גדול] he had mind to immediately wear it [again] and that's what he [in fact] did, the removal is not [considered] an interruption.  And even if he changed locations between... for example: if he removed it to enter the bathroom or anything similar, this change of location is not an interruption, since he returned and wore the same טלית.  And it's not similar to that which the halachic authorities agreed to in Siman 25 [in Se'if 12... and see there in the Mishnah Berurah]... that if one removed his תפילין in order to go to the bathroom, that's considered an interruption.  For there it's different, since a bathroom is [a place] that's forbidden to go to with תפילין, it's considered a complete interruption.  As opposed to טלית, which by law is not forbidden [to enter into a bathroom while wearing it], except that it's not proper to do so... therefore it's not an interruption by doing so.  And know, that if at the time of removing it he did not have in mind to wear it [again] immediately, [but rather] only after some time... even though afterwards he did [in fact] return and wrap in it immediately... [according] to everyone he is required to go back and make the blessing... even if still had on his טלית קטן; For immediately upon removing it, the מצוה has gone.  And it's the same law [regarding] the opposite: If at the time of removal he had in mind to wear it [again] immediately, and afterwards he delayed for some time and took his mind off of it... here too, [according] to everyone he is required to go back and make the blessing... even if he still had on his טלית קטן.
Specifically when it stays [on him] - The later halachic authorities ruled like this "יש אומרים" (literally: "there are those who say" - meaning those with this opposing opinion), even though we established that this other opinion is referring to a case where when he removed his טלית it was without any qualification (ie. he did not have in mind to wear it again)... therefore we say that if his טלית קטן remained on him - he did not remove his thoughts from the מצוה.  But if not - then most likely he did remove his thoughts from it.  But if he had in mind specifically to return and wear it again immediately, he does need to go back and make the blessing again when he wears it again immediately... even if he did not remain with his טלית קטן on.  And so too the opposite [is true] (ie. if he did not have in mind to wear it again)... that it wouldn't help to have the טלית קטן on... like we said above.  And it appears, that if he removed it in the middle of prayers, even without any qualification (to have in mind to wear it again) it's as if he removed it with the intention of wearing it again.  And similarly, if he folded it and placed it inside it's pouch, it's as if he removed it with the explicit intent to not wear it again 
Without his intention (ie. accidentally) - Even [though] according to what we rule that [in a case] where he removed his טלית with the intent to put it on again, he is not required to make the blessing [again]... in this [case] it's worse, for it fell off of him without his knowledge and [it's considered that] the מצוה has left.  And even if his טלית קטן remained on him, it doesn't help.
He needs to make a blessing - Even if he wore it immediately.  And if it fell off of him in the middle of the שמונה עשרה prayers, and other people placed it back on him - when he finished his שמונה עשרה prayer, he should touch his ציצית and make the blessing.
Even though most of it fell off - The Ta"z and Eliyah Rabba argue on this (against the Mechaber), and also the Gr"a leans towards the opinion of the Ta"z.  But according to everyone, if it fell off one's entire body... even though it remained in his hand, he needs to make a blessing on it... for the מצוה has left; Since the main מצוה of wrapping is [around] one's body.  If one made the blessing on the טלית, and it fell out of their hand before they wrapped in it and [then] they picked it up and wore it, there is no need to make the blessing again.  And [this is] even if the ציצית became invalid right then, and he had [other] ציצית [strings] available and fixed  them immediately... [in such a case] he does not need to make the blessing again; since he did not yet do his מצוה, he did not take his mind off of it [just like by תפילין [as seen] later in Siman 25 Se'if 12, see there in the Ta"z - Sei'f Kattan 12].  And someone who took a טלית to wrap in it and starting making the blessing... and before he could finish the blessing, it (the טלית) was taken from him... and his תפילין were in front of  him... he may complete the blessing as "אשר קדשנו במצוותיו וציוונו <b>להניח תפילין</b> ("Who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us to don תפילין")... and he fulfills his obligation with that  [Hilchot Ketanot Siman 153, and the Ohr Hachaim agreed with him as to what the actual law is. 
Needs to make a blessing - For we established that night is not the time for ציצית, and [therefore] it is an interruption.  And there are those who argue on this, since a daytime garment is obligated [to have ציצית on them] even [when worn] at night according to some halachic authorities... and as is seen later in Siman 18... and [we hold that when there is] a doubt regarding a blessing, we are lenient (and we don't make the blessing).  Nevertheless, it is proper to have in mind to exempt that [garment] with [the blessing that you make on] the טלית גדול.  And all of this is as long as he  didn't remove it (ie. the טלית that he slept in at night).  But if he removed it with the intent to not wear it again soon after, he needs to make a blessing afterwards when he wears it... [and this is] according to everyone.  Nevertheless, ideally it is not proper to do like this in order to become obligated in a blessing that according to all (authorities) [would be necessary]... because [it's] a blessing that's not needed according to those who exempt [ציצית at night].  One who sleeps during the day, an "afternoon nap"... and he removes his טלית קטן... there are opinions amongst the halachic authorities [that question] if this is in the category of "taking you mind off of".  Therefore, it is proper that at the very least he should cover himself with it (the טלית קטן) while he sleeps... and when he wears it afterwards he won't need to make the blessing according to all [opinions].
Should do - See in the Ta"z who wrote that this phrase of "[וכן [יעשה" (that the Rema wrote) is not exacting, because this is what he has to do by law... to touch [the טלית] in the morning when he makes the blessing on it.
The מצוה of ציצית - Because ציצית is an obligation on the person (as opposed to an obligation on the object), in regards to this - that if he covers [himself] in a [four cornered] garment, the  obligation applies to him.  See [later] in Siman 17.

Siman 9

Except for etc. - As was taught (Talmud - Menachot 39b) in the school of Rabbi Yishmael... that [since] we learn out from [the verse in the Torah regarding] leprosy that the verse explicitly mentioned linen and wool [when using the word "בגד/garment"]... [it may be derived that] so too, every place that's written [in the Torah the word] "בגד/garment", it's referring to wool or linen. 
Sheep - Or male rams.  But all other species such as camels' wool, goats' hair, silk, rabbits' wool, as well as hemp and all similar things... they are not in the category of wool and linen and are not obligated in ציצית except on a Rabbinic level.  And [regarding] the wool of an ewe born to a goat, the Beit Yosef wrote that her wool is also not considered wool and is only [considered to be] like the other species.  In any case, the same rule applies in regards to all of these [other species]... [that] if he made ציצית [strings out of one of them], it only discharges his obligation if [the garment that he attached it to] was of the same species.  [Regarding] sheeps' wool or linen that were mixed with other species... we go according to the majority.  If the majority is wool or linen, then it's obligated on a Torah level, and if not, [then it's obligated on] a Rabbinic level.  And this is specifically if he mixed and spun [the sheep's wool/linen and other species into threads], and [then] made from them a garment.  But if the warp was made from [sheeps'] wool or linen and the weft/woof was made from the other species, or vice versa, then it is only obligated, according to this opinion, on a Rabbinic level... even if the majority was [made] from sheeps' wool or linen... because the warp or weft/woof alone is not considered a garment.  And regarding which [species of] ציצית to make for it, see later in Se'if Kattan 13 and see in Biur Halacha.
Only on a rabbinic level - Even though you need to make a blessing on a מצוה which is on a rabbinic level too, nevertheless there are  practical differences in regards to several things.  1. It's more fitting to make a garment with which he can fulfill his obligation on a Torah level.  2. If his ציצית which were spun for the sake of the מצוה got mixed up with ones that were not [spun] for the sake of the מצוה and he has no other ציצית...  or if he has a doubt regarding the garment, if it's obligated in ציצית...   If it's [ציצית made from one of the other species which is only] on a rabbinic level, [then we say that when we have] a doubt [regarding a] rabbinic level [מצוה], we are lenient.  3. If he's sitting amongst others and one of his ציצית strings tore [and it happened] on a weekday... if [we say that ציצית made from one of the other species] is [only] a rabbinic level [מצוה], then we can say that for [the sake of] man's dignity it pushes off the rabbinic level [מצוה] and he is [then] not obligated to immediately remove his טלית.  See [further] in Siman 13 and [there are also] many other practical differences ... see in Pri Megadim.
And there are those that say etc. - They rule like Rava [in the Talmud - Menachot 39b]:  <i>For Rava raises a contradiction: It's written regarding ציצית: "[And they shall put on the fringe of] <b>the corner</b> [a sky-blue thread]" (Numbers 15:38), which implies that [the material used for the ציצית strings must be from] the same type [of material] as the corner.  Meaning that even if it's not from wool or linen, in any case the ציצית strings should be from the same material as the garment.  And it's written [in another place]: "You shall not wear cloth combining wool and linen" (Deuteronomy 22:11)... [and the verse immediately after that says] "you shall make for yourself twisted cords [upon the four corners of your covering]” (Deuteronomy 22:12) [which implies that the ציצית strings must be] from them. (ie. either wool or linen.)  How is this so? (ie. how do we resolve this contradiction?)  [ציצית strings made from] wool or linen exempt [any garment], whether from their same material or from a different material.  [ציצית strings made from] other materials exempt [only garments made from] the same material, but they do not exempt garments made from other materials</i>.  And the Rem"a leans towards/rules like this opinion since most of the later rabbinic authorities rule like Rava [to expound the words of the verses to be referring to] materials used for the corners... and learn from it that all materials used for garments are required on a Torah level to have ציצית strings and [that they should be] from the same material as the garment.
And this is the law - And there are those who say to be stringent upon oneself to be concerned for the first opinion... and he should make for himself a [four cornered] garment of wool in order to become obligated on a Torah level according to all [opinions].  And it is proper to make both his large טלית and his small טלית out of wool.
Of wool etc. - And the Ba'ch wrote that since there are some halachic authorities that are stringent in this, to not even make ציצית strings out of wool for other [types of] garments since it's not of the same material as is explained in the Beit Yosef.  Therefore one should only make a blessing on a wool טלית [when it has] wool ציצית strings.  And the common practice is to make wool ציצית strings for [garments of] all materials.  And in Eliyah Rabba, he wrote that one can be lenient in this... and so too is it implied in Ma'aseh Rav.
Nowadays - Meaning, that at the time that we had תכלת, when one had to affix four strings: two white strings and two תכלת strings (which is wool dyed with the blood of the חלזון [sea creature])... and he would fulfill through this the מצוה of ציצית properly... the Torah permitted us to affix the two white strings, whether of wool or linen... whether on a wool garment or on a linen garment.  And according to the other opinion that the Rem"a mentioned in Se'if 1: that all garment materials are obligated on a Torah level... even those [garments] were permitted to us [back] then on a Torah level [to have] ציצית of wool and linen together.  But nowadays where we don't have תכלת, it comes out that we cannot fulfill the מצוה in it's [most] complete way... [and therefore] it is not permitted to us [to wear a garment made of]  כלאים (mixed species).
Even [to put them on a garment made of] other materials - The reason [is because] there is wool that looks like silk, and [people] will come to affix linen ציצית strings to it thinking that it's silk... and it will be כלאים (a forbidden mixture).  And according to this, [regarding] other materials that are not silk... we can permit it.  And there are other reason given... see in Beit Yosef and the Ba"ch and Ta"z.  And based on their words, we should be stringent also with other materials.  But in an extreme circumstance, one can rely on the lenient opinion... as is written in Eliyah Rabbah.  And see further in Ma'aseh Rav that the Gr"a was also from those who were lenient regarding this.
Of other materials etc. - This law applies to both the opinion that [ציצית strings made of] other materials is a Torah level [מצוה] or a rabbinic level [מצוה].
Only with their kind [of material] - And if the warp [threads] were of one material and the weft/woof [threads] were of another material... it's obvious that this garment has no solution except with [ציצית strings made of] wool, for they [alone] exempt all garments... or with [ציצית strings made of] linen in an extreme circumstance as we mentioned previously.
For example, silk - And all this is specifically if the silk was spun and twisted for the sake of [the מצוה of] ציצית.  For without that, [it would] not [be permitted].
For a silk garment - And even if the bottom [of the garment] was stitched with wool or linen or a different material... we go after the top portion, for that is [what's considered] the main garment.  And as is seen later in Siman 10 in Magen Avraham, Se'if Kattan 5.
Does not exempt - And [regarding] a טלית whose warp [threads] are from the same material [as the ציצית strings] and the weft/woof [threads] are from wool, or vice versa... he should affix wool ציצית specifically, for they [alone] exempt all other materials... and [he should] not [use ציצית strings] from other materials... even if the majority [of the garment] was from other materials... for the warp or weft/woof alone is not considered a garment, as was mentioned previously in Se'if Kattan 1.  And even if you can't recognize the wool threads on their own... like if you mixed the wool threads a little bit into the [threads that are on the] warp and weft/woof , and you can't recognize their place, [meaning] where they are... even here it appears that it's better to make the ציצית  from wool strings... because there are those who say that they (ie. the wool threads that were mixed in) are considered to be threads and are not nullified [to the rest of the non-wool garment].  And it's even better to make the entire garment out of wool without any admixture at all from other materials... and with that he will be adorned above.  And a garment that is [made of] a mixture of cotton and linen... this garment has no way of fixing it, unless it's an extenuating circumstance [in which case] he should make for it ציצית strings of linen... as was mentioned previously at the end of Se'if Kattan 8.
There is an uncertainty - Since there isn't [a match of the ציצית material to] the material of the corner and also [regarding the verse] "you shall make for you twisted fringes" (Deuteronomy 22:12), they are not completely [fulfilling the obligation].  And see further in Artzot Hachaim who wrote that if one made 2 of the strings from the same material [as the garment] and 2 strings from wool, it's good... see there for his reasoning.
From the [same] color as the טלית - Because of [the precept of] "This is my God and I will glorify Him" (Exodus 15:2).  And there are those who say the reason is because of the requirement that [the material used for the ציצית strings must be from] the same type [of material] as the corner (Menachot 39b).
Even for colored garments - Nevertheless, it is fitting for [one who is] particular to specifically make the four corners or the small טלית white in order to fulfill all [opinions] when he makes the ציצית strings white... and also because it is written "His garment is white like snow" (Daniel 7:9).  And [regarding] what [we find] that the edge of the garment is like [the color of] תכלת on our טליתות, [this does not pose a problem since it's] after the main [portion] of the garment [that] we go after (and the colored portion here is not the main part of the garment).
Out of linen - For the rabbis ruled [this way] since then he would be required to make linen ציצית strings for it and there is a concern that he might also make תכלת [colored] strings (which must be from wool) for it and that would be a prohibition of a forbidden mixture when he wears it at night, for then is not the time of the fulfillment of the מצוה.  And even though nowadays we don't have תכלת, we hold that nevertheless the ruling [regarding linen] is not nullified.  And many rabbinic authorities permitted this, for they held that the main ruling was only that [people should] not affix תכלת strings [onto a linen טלית] in order that they don't come to [have] a forbidden mixture... but [the ruling was] not on linen strings.  And also nowadays  where we don't have תכלת, that ruling is not applicable at all.  And because of this, the Rem"a wrote that if it's not possible [to do it] in another way, one may rely on them (ie. on those that permit it).
A טלית of linen - And certainly it's permitted to make a טלית out of other materials and ציצית strings of linen when he has no other [types of]  ציצית strings so that he should not [completely] nullify the מצוה.
And ציצית strings of linen - And he may rely on those who permit [it] also [in regards to] the blessing.  And it's obvious that if he has a טלית גדול of wool, he should bless on it and have in mind to exempt this (ie. the טלית קטן).  And the Magen Avraham wrote: "and it appears to me  that he should make corners of leather and affix on them ציצית strings of wool."  And the later rabbinic authorities have doubts regarding this.

Siman 10

That does not have etc. - Whether at the beginning of it's being made or whether he cut [away] afterwards one corner and made it rounded.
Is exempt - It's explained in the verse... as it's written: "On the four corners of your garment" (Deuteronomy 22:12).  And it's expounded in the Sifri as: "Four and not three".  And [regarding] more than four, it's included from [the words] "which you cover yourself" (Deuteronomy 22:12).  And the opposite cannot be said (ie. to expound the verse to mean "four and not five")... for included in five is four, but in three is not included four.  And it's not necessarily five [corners], [rather] the same law applies to six and seven [corners].
Requires - And there are those that exempt it.  Therefore, one should not make [a טלית] with five [corners] from the outset.  And the Pri Megadim wrote that according to the ones who exempt it, the small טלית that we wear that has a hole for the neck, nevertheless, the majority of [the garment] is closed.  However, if it happened that the majority of it was open, he should make a "collar"... like when the tailors make it a bit rounded.
On four - And if he made five (ie. if he affixed five sets of ציצית strings), he transgresses [the prohibition of] "Do not add" (Deuteronomy 13:1).  And if he cut off one of them (ie. one of the sets of ציצית strings after he affixed five), it is valid, as long as it leaves over the four distant corners with ציצית, as [will be explained] ahead.
That are the furthest from each other - For it makes sense to make/affix them on those [corners] that are more recognizable than the others.  And there are those who say that this is a Torah level [issue]... and [so] one should be stringent if possible.  But if one already made/affixed it on the closer corner, and it's not possible to fix it... for example, if the time for prayers is upon him (and if fixes it now, the time for prayer will pass and he will lose out on that מצוה), he may rely on the lenient opinion and make the blessing [on it].
One on a diagonal - The same law applies if he cut two corners on a diagonal and it made [the garment have] six [corners].
A five-cornered [garment] - And similarly, if it originally had three [corners] and he cut one corner into two, it becomes a four cornered [garment] and is required to have ציצית... and the cut needs to be big and recognizable.  And see in Pri Megadim who wrote that it is specifically if he cut away a bit of the garment until, through that [action], it appears [in] that part [of the garment] to have two corners (then it's considered as two corners).  But if he didn't cut [away] anything (ie. he didn't remove any fabric), [rather he] only [cut] a slit with the knife [which] cut [through] the corner until that part  separated into two... it's not made through this [action] a four [cornered garment] until the majority [of the garment] is opened.  And as is [seen] later in Se'if 7.
It is not exempt - For if he doesn't want the corners, [let him] cut them and throw them [away]... rather, certainly in the end he will remove the stitching.  Therefore, it's considered as if he already removed the stitching and [so] it is obligated in ציצית.  And for this reason, he may affix the ציצית now, on the fold, even [in the area of the garment close to the edge] lower than [the measurement of] the knuckle of the thumb [to the end of the nail], [as long as] if,  when he removes [the stitching] it will be higher than [the measurement of] the knuckle of the thumb [to the end of the nail].  And all of this is when he folded and stitched it [in a] rounded [way], but if he folded and stitched it squared... since now too it has a corner, the opinion of the Levush and the Magen Avraham is that he is permitted to affix ציצית there on the fold, even though it is more than three fingers [distance] from the edge of the [real] corner, [but] since he stitched it, it's permitted.  And [this is] like [what's written] in Se'if 6 [regarding affixing ציצית on] the fold of the טלית... that [there, the Shulchan Aruch says that] the stitching is valid (ie. the fold becomes the new edge of the garment).  And many argue on this and they hold that also in this [case], the stitching is not sufficient [to make the fold be considered as the new edge]... and [they say] it's different, what's written there in Se'if 6, for that is referring to where he folded the entire edge and that's the normal way of [making] a garment.  As opposed to this [case] where he only folded a bit of the garment.
Made of cloth etc. - For it is written "with which you cover yourself" (Deuteronomy 22:12), and a man only covers himself with the main part of the garment.  Therefore, we go after that [part].  And even if the garment portion was completely round and there are no corners... except that it had attached to it, corners of leather... it is obligated [to have ציצית], for it's after the main portion of the garment that we go after/consider.
With corners made of leather - And the same law applies if the majority of the טלית was [made of] cloth and the remainder was of leather, it is obligated [to have ציצית].
And it's corners were of cloth - And the same law applies if only the majority of the טלית was of leather... even if in the minority [portion] of the garment there is the [proper halachic] measurements for a טלית [which would require ציצית], [nevertheless] it is exempt [from ציצית] since the main portion of the garment is not of cloth, we don't refer to it [as being] "on the corners of their garments" (Numbers 15:38).  And leather is exempt even on a Rabbinic level for it is not at all under the category of garment/cloth.  And it's also the [same] law in [the case of] a טלית [with two layers] whose bottom [layer] (ie. the inner lining) is stitched with leather... it is obligated [to have ציצית].  But if the top [layer of the garment] was of leather, it is exempt because the bottom [layer] is [considered] secondary to the upper [layer] which is the main part of the garment. 
Three corners - Even if it originally had four corners with ציצית and afterwards one corner was cut and was rounded... even if that same corner was fixed afterwards... nevertheless, those three ציצית were nullified... as is shown later in Siman 15, Se'if 3.  And one would be required to undo all the knots and then retie them.
Three ציצית - Not necessarily that he made three ציצית (ie. that he attached ציצית to each of the three corners) which made the majority [of the garment] in an invalid way... meaning, before it it became a four [cornered garment]... but even if he only tied one knot [to one of the corners] with it's sections (ie. the multiple sections that you tie for ציצית) and afterwards completed the four corners (ie. made into a four cornered garment), there too that knot is invalid and it would be required to undo it and then retie it.
Because of "you shall make" - Meaning to say, [that since] it says "You shall make tassels on the four corners etc." (Deuteronomy 22:12), it implies that the corners should be [numbered]  four before the ציצית are made/affixed... [and] not that the ציצית be made/affixed before [you have the right number of] corners which would be "You shall make, <b>and not from that which is [already] made</b>" and would be invalid.  Therefore, you would need to untie them and then go back and retie them [once you have the right number of corners].  And it's specifically the first three ציצית that were made in an invalid way (ie. when you only had three corners) [that need to be retied], but [regarding] the ציצית that was made on the fourth corner... there is no need to untie it since it was made in a valid way (because by then the garment had four corners)... and the invalidation of the first ones does not invalidate it.
It is folded - Because if it unfolds, the ציצית will be found in the middle [of the garment].  And we require that the ציצית be on the corner.
On the extremities - If he folded it because the garment is very long, [ie.] two times his height, where he can't wear it unless he folds it... there are halachic authorities that exempt it completely from ציצית since it's not called a garment.  And the Ta"z and the Pri Megadim conclude that he should affix ציצית on the extreme corners (ie. the original corners at the end of the unfolded garment) and not make a blessing on it.
Even on one side - See in Biur Halachah.
Are required - to affix [ציצית] on the folded corners.  For as long as it's folded and it doesn't open up, it's called a טלית garment as it is, folded.
One should not make a blessing - All the later halachic authorities wondered about this: What is fixed/accomplished by him not making the blessing?  There is still [the issue] that maybe [the law] is like the Mechaber and the requirement is to affix [the ציצית] on the extremities [of the garment] (ie. the far corners of the unfolded garment)... and how can one  wear this [folded] garment?  Behold, [a garment with] more than four ציצית is prohibited according to everyone (Meaning, that by affixing ציצית on the folds, you are causing there to be ציצית in additional places besides the real four corners) [See in Pri Megadim].  And they conclude by ruling that one should be careful optimally to not make a folded טלית at all unless it was stitched [together]... even with stitches [that are] spaced apart... because once he stitched it, it's not likely to open up again.  And then, whether it's a square טלית [that he folded and stitched] or a טלית that started out too long [which he folded and stitched], he affixes ציצית on the folds and makes a blessing.
The first - It's possible he (the Mechaber) meant specifically [that he should cut the first one].  But if he cut the second one, it's invalid since he already nullified the first one. (ie. now he's left with a garment with only three valid ציצית). 
In any way - Meaning, whether he intended to nullify or he intended to add, and whether he cut the first or he cut the second.
And this is the prevalent opinion - And this is how the later halachic authorities ruled.
The first ones - He (the Rem"a) chose [the word] "the first ones" because he is referring to what the Shulchan Aruch wrote in the beginning: "he cuts the first ones".  And because of this he wrote "and before he cut the first ones".  But in truth, according to the Ro"sh, who we rule like, certainly if he cut the second ones, it is valid... as is brought in the Beit Yosef.
Exempt - Even if there is, in minority that's open, the [minimum halachic] measurement for a טלית.  And if he made ציצית on it and afterwards it opened up [to be] the majority, it is invalid because of  "You shall make, and not from that which is [already] made"...  as was [seen] previously in Se'if 5.  And one would need to untie and then retie them.
If the majority is open, it is obligated - This is specifically the majority of the whole garment.   And not like the way that the tailors make a טלית קטן, where they sew it up on the sides and leave over holes [on each side] where one puts his hands through... and they sew it below the hole and leave the majority open, and they measure it only from under the [hole for the] hands/arms.  And this is a complete error, for then it is not called a four cornered [garment].  And it's close to [a situation] where the person blessing is making a blessing in vain.  And in any case, it is no better than a garment with [exactly] half [the sides] open, which is obligated in ציצית, but is forbidden to bless on it and is forbidden to go out with it on Shabbos.  So instead, one needs to measure even from what's above the [holes for the] hands, and the hole is considered also as if it's closed.  And see [further] in Biur Halacha.
And it's obligated in ציצית - But one should not make a blessing on it.
On Shabbat - Because maybe it is exempt [from ציצית] and the ציצית are [then] like a carried object... as in seen below in Siman 13.  And see further in Magen Avraham who wrote that even to [walk in] a karmelit (ie. an area that is not considered a pubic domain or a private domain) is forbidden, for we don't make an uncertain  Rabbinic level [situation] from the outset (ie. optimally/intentionally, we don't put ourselves in a situation where we will violate a Rabbinic level law which has an uncertainty to it).  And many of the later halachic authorities agree/side with the Olat Tamid who is lenient regarding this.
"Astringah" - It is something which connects the ends  of the garment, one to another.
To make it closed - Therefore, one should not make clasps on his טלית קטן lower than halfway down for that would be considered as closed.  And this is if the heads of the clasps were bent over a lot towards the other side so that you're not able to undo them except through a physical action... for then it is considered completely attached in regards to kelayim (forbidden mixtures of certain materials) and in regards to ציצית.  But without that (ie. if the clasps were loose), it is not considered an attachment because of that.
Appears to the eye (ie. how it looks to others) - And one who always goes with his טלית קטן under his clothes, and even when he walks in public, it is hidden [under his clothes]... we can say that מַרְאִית הָעַיִן does not apply there [Chiddushei R. Akiva Eiger]
Square - Because rounded is not called/considered a corner.
Since it's main purpose - It was made from the outset only for the purpose of covering the head.
And not the covering of the head - And regarding the "crown" that we make for the טלית, it's not because it's main function is to cover the head, but rather it's because it serves as an identifier so that the upper ציצית shouldn't get switched to be on the bottom.  And see previously in Siman 8 - Se'if Kattan 9, where I wrote that the Ari"zal was not particular about this, and so too is the decision of the Eliyah  Rabbah - to be lenient if it tore above or similar.
Exempt - Even though that piece [of garment] was a cubit or two cubits in measurement, and it was large enough to cover the head and majority of a child... even so, it is exempt.  And see further in Biur Halacha.
Even though they have etc. - The reason [can be found] by looking in the Beit Yosef.
Since they are not etc. - Behold, the Beit Yosef wrote that one can ask regarding our clothing that has two corners close to the neck and two corners close to the ground... why do we not affix ציצית to them?  And he answered on this a few answers and the Darchei Moshe (ie. the Rem"a) rejected them and said his own reason for the custom [of not affixing ציצית to our clothing as described above], [namely] that since the mitzvah of ציצית is optimally to have two in front and two in back and our clothing has all four corners in front and it's impossible to wear them any other way, [therefore] they are not obligated in ציצית.  And this is what he (i.e the Rem"a) [meant when he] said "since their corners are not fashioned in a manner etc.".  And [regarding] the garment that's called "Rek", which has attached to it above, a piece of garment which is squared off and [folded over so that it's] resting on the shoulders from behind which is called "coll'nar" (ie. collar)... it  is obvious that it is exempt because on the upper portion [of the "Rek"] there are no corners except for the corners of the collar which are resting slightly behind.  And these are not corners since the two corners from behind are not aligned opposite the corners that are in front.  Until here are the words of the Darchei Moshe.  And the Magen Avraham wrote that since this ruling is weak in the hands of the Geonim (lit. Genius's) and they could not find the proper reason [because even on the reason of the Darchei Moshe one can cast doubt like the Pri Megadim wrote].  Therefore, one who is a "Yirei Shamayim" (G-d fearing person) should make one of the corners rounded, like the Beit Yosef wrote in the name of the "Zekeinim" (Elders).  And this is the opinion of the Pri Megadim and other later halachic authorities.  And especially in our times, regarding those new [types of] garments that are designed to be open from behind [this is the garment called  "Kapotteh"], and is often found that the majority of it is open... according to the Darchei Moshe, it is obligated in ציצית since the two [corners] from behind are aligned opposite the two corners in front.  Therefore, one who wants to exempt himself (so as not to enter into a questionable halachic situation) is required to make at least one of the four corners rounded, and then it is exempt from ציצית.  And this is like what's written earlier in [Shulchan Aruch Siman 10]  Se'if 9.  And see further there in Biur Halacha.  And even better would be to round off another two corners in order that it remains with only three, because now it has six. (this is referring to the Kapotteh which is like a long frock coat with a large slit in the back from the bottom-up (that takes up the majority).  So there are four corners along the bottom - two in front and two in back.  And then there are the two corners up top)
Two behind them - From this wording [of the Rem"a] stems an error [made] by some people who fold up a portion of their טלית so much until it's thin (ie. they scrunch/fold up the back till it's bunched up a lot and is thin) and does not cover [the body] at all except for the neck.  And their intention is that the two ציצית be behind them... literally on their shoulders (and therefore directly opposite the ציצית in the front which are high up and close to the shoulders).  And this is not ideal, for if so, there is no covering for the body, rather only a covering for the head.  And a better way is like the practice  of the Tugarmim (ie. people from Turkey?) where the [טלית is resting on the shoulders with 2 ציצית in front and 2 in back and the] hand/arm is separating in between half of the טלית in such a way that from both sides (ie. the person's right and left side) one of the ציצית is in front and a portion is behind.  Because [regarding] the sides, what's in front and in back are also called his front and his back.  And therefore it's sufficient that the separation is coming about through his arm/hand.

Siman 11

The strings - The wording of the Rambam is "One who finds ציצית strings in the marketplace/street,  even if they are cut [to the right size] and spun, they are invalid since people will work to make strings that look like ציצית... and if so, then maybe they were not made for the sake of [the mitzvah of] ציצית.  And the Maggid Mishneh argues on this and also the Kessef Mishneh wrote that the Rambam in a responsum retracted [his opinion] on this afterwards... Up until here are the words of the Magen Avraham.  And the Gr"a in his commentary in Siman 301 wrote that the law follows the Rambam in what he wrote originally... see there further.
Spun for the sake of [the mitzvah of] ציצית - And this is [based on] words from the Torah, as it's written "You shall make tassels" (Deuteronomy 22:12) [which is interpreted to mean] for the sake of [fulfilling] your obligation.
To be lenient regarding combing - For that which is written "You shall make" (Deuteronomy 22:12), means from the [point of] spinning [the wool] and on, for that is the main part of the making of the ציצית strings.  And see in the Prisha in the name of the Maharal from Prague who agrees that optimally one should be stringent that the combing should be for the sake of [the mitzvah of] ציצית.
Should say - Explicitly [and] not [just have it] in his mind.  And even after the fact (ie. if he spun them without stating out loud that he is doing it for the sake of the mitzvah), it requires further analysis if having it mind was effective.  And see further in Siman 32, Se'if 9 and 19 and in Chiddushei Rabbi Akivah Eiger there.
At the start of - And it's enough even for another day (ie. stating it once explicitly at the start of the spinning counts for the spinning he will do on subsequent days), for most likely the latter [spinning] will be with that same intention (of doing it for the sake of the mitzvah)... for anyone who does something, he does it [based] on the original doing (ie. it's a continuation)... unless he explicitly said afterwards that he's doing it NOT for the sake of the mitzvah.
The spinning - And if he spun a little and afterwards said [out loud that he's doing it for the sake of the mitzvah], it doesn't count for what he spun already, for it is doubtful if we say that the end [action] is a proof on [what happened at] the beginning.  And if at the beginning he had in mind that he's doing it for the sake of the mitzvah, but didn't say it out loud explicitly [and then spun some, and then said out loud that he's doing it for the sake of the mitzvah], it seems to me that we can lean towards being lenient regarding this because it is a "s'feik s'feika" (ie. a double doubt... Doubt #1 - does just having it in mind count?  Doubt #2 - if you said it out loud explicitly after you already spun a little, does it count? ).
Say to the woman - Meaning, at the beginning of the spinning only.  And similarly, if the woman herself says that she spun it for the sake of the mitzvah of ציצית it counts, and she is believed on what she said.  As opposed to a non-Jew or a deaf-mute, insane person, or child who are not believed.  A habitual sinner [who sins] due to his appetite (i.e. he succumbs to his temptations) who doesn't inconvenience himself to make ציצית for his own  garment is allowed to spin [for others] and is believed when he says he spun it for the sake if the mitzvah... and certainly if he transgresses other sins only due to his appetite/temptation.  But a habitual sinner [who transgresses] due to spite/insolence is a heretic regarding the whole Torah and certainly only does it for his own sake according to everyone.
A non-Jew - And the spinning of a deaf-mute, insane person, or child [as well]... [Regarding] whether it's effective when an adult Jew stands by them and teaches them to do it for the sake of the mitzvah, look in Siman 460 in the Beit Yosef, where there is an argument regarding  this.  And look in Biur Halacha where we explained the outcomes of the later halachic authorities regarding this.
Stands by him - Look in Biur Halacha where we wrote that it's specifically if the spinning was not done for such a long time, but if the spinning lasted a long time then it seems that even according to the Rosh it's no good that which the [the Jew] taught the non-Jew at the beginning of the spinning to do it for the sake of the mitvah.  And certainly if he stopped [in the middle of] the spinning and afterwards, at another time, starting to spin again... for sure everyone agrees that [the non-Jew] was doing it for his own sake and it is invalid.
Invalid - He holds that the non-Jew does it for his own sake and does not listen to that which  the Jew commands him to do it for the sake of the mitzvah.
According to the Rosh they are valid - And in an extenuating circumstance, when there is no Jew around to spin it for the sake of the mitzvah, one can rely on this.  But without that, one cannot.  Because in the Biur Hagr"a, he wrote that the opinion of Tosefot and the Mordechi is also like the Rambam.
And it is our custom that [the Jew] should assist etc. - And this is all according to the Rosh, but according to the Rambam, none of this helps.  And see in the later rabbinic authorities who concluded that this custom (ie. that the Jew assists a little) is the ideal way to do it, but after the fact [if the non-Jew did it all], it is valid, even if the [Jew] did not help at all according to the Rosh... since the Jew is standing over him and instructing him to do it for the sake of the mitzvah.  And if the Jew is not standing over him to command him such, then his assisting is not effective according to everyone, for we hold  that helping/assisting [in something] is not  considered like you actually did anything.
And it requires interweaving - This is referring to the ציצית strings only and not referring to the non-Jew spinning (ie. it's a new topic).  For there (by the interweaving), it wouldn't be valid    according to the ones who hold that it's invalid  if a non-Jew spun it not for the sake if the mitzvah, even if it was interwoven afterwards by a Jew for the sake of the mitzvah. (ie. once the spinning was done in an invalid way, doing the interweaving in a valid way doesn't help at all).
Interweaving - Meaning, that [the threads] should be folded over after the spinning [process] into two and [then] interwoven (ie. those two threads are now spun together to make it one single, thicker thread).  And if each thread was folded over into eight and  interwoven as well, there is nothing [wrong with that].  And the reason for the interweaving is that it taught in the Sifri: [The verse says] "...and they shall make for themselves fringes..." (Numbers 15:38).  I hear from this that they should make fringes as they are (ie. with just one thread).  So the verse tells you "...let them attach a cord of blue to the fringe at each corner." (Numbers 15:38), with spinning and interweaving [meaning, like [it was done in] the Mishkan (Tabernacle) which was interwoven... Or [another interpretation] is that a cord/wick  is [something that by definition is] interwoven].  Now I have no [scriptural proof for the requirement of spinning and interweaving] except for blue [fringes], how [do we know that the same thing  applies to] white fringes?  [Because] the Torah says "affix/place" by blue [threads] and "affix/place" by white [threads]... What [is true by] blue [threads], [that they have to be] spun and interwoven, so too [is true by] white [threads], that they have to be spun and interwoven.  And see further in Biur Halacha.
For the sake of the mitzvah - Because from the spinning [process] and on, it's all in the category of "making" where it's established that it requires [being made] for the sake of the mitzvah.  And the Magen Avraham wrote that even after the fact it prevents [one from fulfilling their obligation] if they were not interwoven for the sake of the mitzvah.  And so is it understood from the Biur Hagr"a.  And there are those that are lenient [if it was made] after the fact even without interweaving [at all].  And see further in Biur Halacha where we explained that one should not rely on this.  But if the interweaving was done without specification (ie. without specifically doing it for the sake of the mitzvah), one can be lenient after the fact, since the spinning was done for the sake of the mitzvah, and anyone who does something, he does it [based] on the original doing (ie. it's a continuation of his original intent).
And became sixteen - Meaning that all eight strings unraveled, and [the Shulchan Aruch] taught the greater [halachic] novelty (ie. that even if all 8 strings unraveled but were left with enough to tie a bow, it is still valid).  But the same law applies if 2 strings unraveled and became 4 strings, it's also required to have left over enough to tie a bow, because if not then it's  invalid for it's as if it is missing 2 [whole] strings from his ציצית (ie. if 2 strings unravel to less than the amount to tie a bow, -which is then as if there is no string there - then it's possible that both of those strings belonged to the same original long string that was inserted into the hole and now you are left with only 3 of the original long strings having the proper length), which makes it invalid unless he was careful at the time of tying his ציצית strings that [the same] 4 strings always stayed on the same side (ie. because then you know for sure that the 2 strings that unraveled don't belong to the same original long string, as long as they both unraveled from the same group of 4 strings).  And this is as will be seen later at the beginning of Siman 12.
Enough to tie a bow - And even though there are those who hold that it is invalid [in a case] where all [the strings] were cut, even if there was left over enough [on each string] to tie a bow, as is written in Siman 12... nevertheless, by interweaving (ie. in a case where the interweaving unraveled) we rely on the first opinion, for the law is in accordance with him, as he (ie. the Shulchan Aruch) concluded there (in Siman 12) [see in Magen Avraham and Pri Megadim].  And you should also know that the Shulchan Aruch is referring specifically to where each string was interwoven into two (ie. after the raw wool is spun into threads -called "t'viah" - each thread is then doubled over and spun/interwoven -called "sh'zira" - to make a thicker string).  But if the string was doubled over [again] and interwoven into four or [doubled over again after that to make] eight, as is found nowadays, and then it unraveled into sixteen (ie. each of the 8 ציצית strings unraveled and you now have 16 strings), [then] even if there's not [a section of string] left over [that's long enough] to tie a bow, it is valid.  Because at the very least, each string is still interwoven into two.  And regarding [the question of whether this is a transgression of] "do not add", see further in Biur Halacha.
It is good to tie - And there are those who say the opposite, that it is better not to tie [the ends].  And it is better to be stringent [and not tie the ends] if they are interwoven well, for then it is not common for it to unravel [Magen Avraham in Se'if Katan 23 and Pri Megadim... see there]
Four thumb-widths - And the measurement of a thumb-breadth is always that of an average person.  And we measure it from the top joint  [of the thumb] at the place where it's thickest in the middle [see in Shaarei Teshuva].  And see in Magen Avraham [here], and in the Sha"ch in Siman 272 (Yoreh Deah), who bring in the name of the Rambam, that the measurement of a thumb-width is like the width of 7 barley kernels, one next to the other [when they are placed] tightly [next to each other], which is [the same as] the height of two barley kernels [placed end to end] with [a bit of] space [in between].
And that is the custom - And this is the opinion of the Levush.  And if so, it's not proper what the sellers do, that they are stingy with the measurement of the length [of the strings] and it's close to [causing people to] make a blessing in vain.  Because even though on a Torah level it's enough [for the strings to be] any length, [nevertheless] on a Rabbinic level they need to be twelve thumb-widths from the [first] knot, not including what's sitting on the corner of the garment (ie. the portion of string from the corner hole to the first knot).  And [the sellers] should be warned regarding this [Pri Megadim].  And see further in Biur Halacha.
Measurement - The R"i was accustomed to make them longer so that if they tore [off] a little, there would still be left over the [proper] measurement.
Should be - And if one of the strings is not long enough to wrap all [wrappings and knots], he should wrap a few wraps from one string and a few wraps from another string.  Because during the time of [when we had] Techeilet (blue dyed strings), they would make a few wraps using the techeilet [strings] and a few wraps using the white [stings].  And one needs to see to it that it's left over on each string, a length of twelve thumb-widths after the wrappings and knots, like the Rem"a wrote.  And even that long string, after the wrappings, should have left over twelve thumb-widths.
The tassel - It's called a tassel [based] on [what it will be in] the future, for it [only] becomes a tassel after it was wrapped around [by one of the strings].  And this is what the Rem"a wrote afterwards "this is the smooth part etc", meaning to say, that initially it [the bunch of strings] is smooth without any bundled/knotted or woven [parts], and through this [longer] string it becomes a tassel.  Yad Ephraim
After they are tied - And because of the knot that they make on the tassel, it shortens [the strings].  And [so] it requires an additional thumb, meaning thirteen thumb-widths, not including what is resting on the garment (ie. the portion of string from the hole to the knot closest to the hole).  And even after the fact (ie. if one unknowingly ended up with string lengths that are too short), it prevents [one from fulfilling the mitzvah].  And the people are lenient regarding this, and it is proper to protest against it.
We do not make - And even after the fact, it is invalid [Ta"z and Pri Megadim].
That the weaver leaves over - One should not ask [the following question]: That even without this, there is something [that makes it] invalid, for the threads were not spun for the sake of [the mitzvah of] ציצית (ie. the Shulchan Aruch said the reason is because of disgracing the mitzvah, but even without that, we're talking about threads taken from a loom which is used to make a garment, not ציצית strings... so obviously the threads left over on the loom were not made for the sake of the mitzvah).  We can answer that we are referring to even where initially the threads were spun for the sake of the [the mitzvah of] ציצית, and afterwards he wove a garment from them, and even in this case they are invalid because of disgracing the mitzvah [Ta"z].  And in Sefer Hamaor, he wrote [that] the reason is because there's a requirement that [the material/fibers used for the ציצית strings that hang off] the corner, be the same material as [what's used for the actual garment of] the corner.  And [here] these materials are not fit to make from them a garment since they are the remnants of wool and a garment cannot be made from their [small] quantity... Until here are his words (of the Sefer Hamaor).  And if so, any type of wool which is subpar, of which a garment cannot be made from it, is invalid for making ציצית strings [Magen Avraham].
For themselves, from their own - This is obvious, for similarly, if one bought ציצית on credit, and the seller comes around and demands his money, and this one (ie. the buyer) does not want to pay him... according to halacha, the ציצית does not belong to him, as is seen in Choshen Mishpat Siman 190, see there further... and all similar cases [as well].  Therefore, [here in our case of stolen wool], he does fulfill his obligation with these ציצית.  And see further in Biur Halacha.
And specifically etc. - And then, even if the owners despaired [later of ever getting it back], [the ציצית] are invalid, for [the fact that the owner] despaired does not acquire [it for someone else]. And even if the strings were not interwoven, and he (the thief) interwove them... nevertheless, this is not considered a [significant] change [to be considered a valid acquirement], for it did not change the name [of the item] by doing that [Pri Megadim].
Where he stole the strings etc. - See in Magen Avraham Se'if Kattan 10.  And according to what he wrote [there], this gloss [from the Rem"a] argues on the Mechaber (ie. Shulchan Aruch), for he (the Mechaber) holds that the verse [in the Torah of "v'asu lahem"] includes even if he made the strings from stolen wool (ie. when the Torah says it has to be made from what belongs to them - "lahem, she'lahem" - it's including even the wool before you made the strings).
It is valid - The Ta"z explains that Rem"a is referring to where [you know that] there is also  despair [on the part of the original owner of ever getting his stolen item back], and [so] he acquired it through despair and a change in the name [of the object], because originally it was [called] "wool" and now it's [called] "string".  But the Magen Avraham wrote that because the Rem"a was ambiguous, it seems that he holds that even before despair it's valid, for he acquired it through a [physical] change [brought about] by an action.  And so too is it understood from the words of the Gr"a in his explanation, that the reason is because of a [physical] change [brought about] by an action... see there further.  And if he stole strings and sold them to someone else before [he knew] there was despair [by the original owner], the second owner does not fulfill his obligation with these ציצית, for a change in the location [of the object] without despair, does not acquire [the object], and [therefore] it's not called "they shall make for themselves" (ie. "lahem, she'lahem" - make for themselves, from what belongs to them) [Pri Megadim].  And [regarding] if after it came into the second one's hands, the original owner despaired, see in Choshen Mishpat, Siman 353 Se'if 3, for there are varying opinions regarding this.  And if [the original owners] despaired and afterwards they were sold [to a someone else], the second one acquired the ציצית, and even regarding making a blessing, it seems from the Magen Avraham in Siman 649, Se'if Kattan 2, that he could make a a blessing on it and it's not [considered] a mitzvah that came about through a sin, since he did not steal it.  And this is how the Machatzit Hashekel ruled.  However, the Pri Megadim over there, in the name of the Levush, is stringent regarding this.  And so too, the Ta"z in Siman 25 and the Gr"a there, are stringent regarding this.
To make them - Meaning, to affix these ציצית on his garment, since it is a מצוה that came about through a sin.  And see further in Biur Halacha.
Siman 649 - For he ruled there that one may not bless on it.  And see further in Shaarei Teshuva and Biur Halacha.
Borrowed strings - Meaning, every [time you have the] word שאלה ("borrowed"), it's understood to mean that the exact item [that was borrowed] will be returned.  But the word הלואה ("a loan") [means that] it was given to be spent.  And these borrowed strings, obviously they were given as a loan, and [so] we can say about it [that it's] "from what belongs to them".
And it's considered his - But if he lent them (the threads) to him with the intent that he will return them to him [exactly] as they were [when he lent them], he should not bless on them.  For we can say that he lent them to him to be used for some other purpose.  But if he lent him properly made ציצית strings like those that we use which are spun and cut, [then] it's permitted to affix them to his טלית garment and to bless on it, for certainly they were given to him as a gift on condition to be returned.  And this is as was written in Siman 14 regarding a טלית [Magen Avraham].
It's wool etc. - Even though an item that was worshiped is only forbidden [to be used] for a  sacrificial offering, but for a normal (ie. non-holy) use it is permitted, nevertheless, it is forbidden [to be used] for the mitzvah of ציצית because since it is for an elevated (holy) purpose, it is [considered] disgusting to [Hashem] above, since it (ie. the wool) was not changed so much, for it retains it's appearance and you can see that it's wool.  As opposed to [the case] where one worshiped planted flax, which is like a tree, and now that you made it into threads, it's original appearance changed and is gone.
Is invalid - See in Siman 586 in Magen Avraham Se'if Katan 6, where he concludes that according to the Mechaber (ie. Shulchan Aruch) there, this invalidation is only optimally, because it is disgusting [to Hashem].  But after the fact [if one used it for ציצית], he fulfilled his obligation.  And so too wrote the Gr"a in this Siman... ?
For ציצית - The Olat Tamid wrote that the wool that was on the animal at the time of being worshiped is forbidden, and certainly whatever grew afterwards.  And in the Sefer Bnei Chayei, he wrote the opposite, that whatever grew after it was worshiped is permitted [and in the Be'er Heitev he wrote that the Ta"z also holds like that later in Siman 649, Se'if Katan 5.  And see further there in Eliyah Rabbah and Pri Megadim]....
Planted - But flax that was uprooted is forbidden even for normal (ie. non-holy use) use, like the laws of idol worship and its' sacrifices.  And it doesn't help by changing [it's form], since whatever you make from it is [considered] like it.
He makes a hole - The Beit Yosef wrote that even though there are some who say that you should make two holes like [the form of] a tzeirei (ie. the vowel that looks like ".."), and insert the ציצית in them (ie. into one of the holes) and [then] remove them (ie. from the other hole) out to one side, we do not observe that.  And one who wants to be stringent on himself [to do like that] or similar, is not [considered to be] from the "stringent ones", rather from the "puzzled/confused ones", for it it appears as haughtiness... till here are his (the Beit Yosef) words.  And the Ba"ch wrote that [regarding] a tallit katan, one should make two holes because there it does not appear as haughtiness since it's not seen by all.  And so too is written in the Kavanot, that the Ari"zal did this [However in Birkei Yosef, he wrote that R. Shmuel Vital testified that his father, R. Chaim Vital, did not do this].  And this custom has become widespread in the land of Poland.  However, in the land of Hungary and Germany, this is not the custom.  And "each river and its unique course" (ie. each place follows its custom).
In it's length - See below in Mishna Berura, Siman Kattan 52 what we wrote there.
Not above three - For [higher than that] is not called "the corner of the garment", rather it's [just] "the garment".  And the Torah wrote "...on the corners of their garments..." (Numbers 15:38).  And see in Beit Yosef, where he wrote that three finger-widths exactly, it is permitted to distance it [that much] and to make the hole right after that point.  And many of the halachic authorities argue on this and they hold that since [by doing it that way] you have three finger-widths, [therefore] anything past that is called "a garment" and not "a corner".  Therefore, one should be careful to make/start the hole within three finger-widths.  The Magen Avraham wrote that if one made the hole above three [finger-widths from the edge], even though when they tied the [first] knot it made the strings that were on the garment (ie. since the hole is past 3 finger-widths, it's called being on the garment and not on the corner) shorter and it bunched up the [fabric of the]  corner and [so now] the hole is less than three [finger-widths from the edge], it is invalid, because in any case, the corner has a measurement [that's considered to be part] of "the garment" [and not "the corner"].  And similarly, if one made the hole above the length of an "agudal" (i.e from the knuckle of the thumb until the end of its fingernail), and because of the [first] knot it bunched up the garment to the point that [now] there is less than the length of an "agudal", it is valid since you have in any case the [proper] measurement from the corner.
Meaning, the thumbs - See above in Siman Katan 19. And see in Artzot Hachaim who concludes that ideally it's better to measure the three finger-widths using the middle, ring, and pinky [fingers] which are close one to another.  And see further in Biur Halacha.
For that is not called "a corner" - And this prevents [one from fulfilling the mitzvah], even after the fact.  And even if [he made the hole too high and then] afterwards he made the ציצית (ie. tied the knots and windings), and even if he made just one set of windings, he [realized and then] cut the hole [downward] so that the strings hang lower [in the proper area of the corner], even in such a case it is invalid because of "You shall make, and not from that which is [already] made".  And the same applies in the opposite [case], where he affixed the ציצית [in the hole when the hole was] within [the length of] an "agudal" (i.e from the knuckle of the thumb until the end of its fingernail) [from the edge of the garment], and [after he realized] he cut upwards into the garment and pulled up the strings [so that they are now] higher than an "agudal" [from the edge] and then sewed below that point or affixed a patch on the corner [to hold it in place], this is also "You shall make, and not from that which is [already] made".  A wool טלית which had ציצית affixed to it according to halacha, and then they found among the tassels of silk that were made on the edge of the טלית (ie. they would do this for adornment), threads of linen (which constitutes shatnez - a forbidden mixture of fabrics), and they had to remove the silk tassels from the טלית... [in such a case] it is proper to be stringent and untie the ציצית strings and then go back and tie them.
And not below etc. - And this prevents [one from fulfilling the mitzvah], even after the fact.  And it seems to me that the place of the hole should also be above this measurement (ie. not only should it not be below the "agudal" measurement, but it shouldn't be exactly at that point either).  And perhaps this also prevents [one from fulfilling the mitzvah], even after the fact.  And see further in Biur Halacha.
From the measurement etc. - It's obvious that this is also measured [based] on an average man's [thumb].
Until the fingernail - The place where it is even with the flesh. (ie. the place where the nail is still attached to and touching the skin)
Straight - Meaning, that from the edge of the garment we measure in a straight [perpendicular] line, the three fingers.  And similarly the measurement of the thumb knuckle, whether it's the length or the width (ie. whether it's the measurement of the length of the thumb from the knuckle to the end of the nail, or if it's the measurement of a thumb-width), as is see below at the end of Siman 10.  And we don't measure the measurements at an angle because the angle lessens the measurement by around two-fifths [Beit Yosef].
And came out etc. - And the same applies if the hole tore to the point where because of that it was no longer left with the proper measurement [from the edge of the garment].  And even if this happened right after you made the first set of windings with the [the next] knot (ie. since that's the minimum that needs to be done for it to be considered a tassel on a Torah level), as will be seen coming up.
From the strings of the woof - And consequently, it shortened the length of the garment because of that.  And according to what will be explained coming up, the same applies if the garment was shortened on it's width.
At the time - [Because] the verse states "...and they shall make for themselves ציצית on the corners of their garments" (Numbers 15:38), [we learn out that] the Torah was only particular that at the time of making the ציצית it should be on the corner, but not afterwards.  And this is specifically those ציצית that were fixed in the proper way [and then ended up closer to the edge].  But if he wants to affix  different ציצית strings [in that hole which is now too close to the edge], which is a new "making", it is invalid until he stitches it up first, as is  below in Siman 14, see there further.
Less than the [proper] measurement - Even though after the fact it is valid, nevertheless, it's good to do this in order that others shouldn't see it and say that it's invalid, because not everyone learns/knows the laws.
There are those who say that within etc. - Because they hold that the main [thing] that we call a "corner" is in regards to the lower edge [that's along] the width of the garment, and not [edge that's along] the length of the garment.  The width of the garment is referring to the  [direction] when it is worn on the person, [along] his height from his head to his feet.  And the length of the garment is referring to the  [direction] when he wraps in it, for the way of wrapping is with the length. (ie. you take from the sections of the garment that extend along the horizontal length of the garment and use that to wrap)
There is no [minimum] measurement - Meaning below... that one can make [the hole] even less than the [measurement of the length of the thumb from the] knuckle [to the end of the nail].  But [to make the hole] higher than 3 finger-widths is invalid [Beit Yosef].
Which is called "oorilyzah" - This is [referring to] what [it's called when] they leave over a bit of the threads from the warp without [weaving into it threads from] the woof.  And then at the ends [of those warp threads], they weave [some threads from the woof].  (ie. there would be threads sticking out from the sides of the tallit - similar to what we have today on our tallit, but instead of tying knots at the ends of those, they would leave a space and then weave some threads along the outermost edge to secure them all).  And there are those who write that this is what we call in our language "kreikus".  And there's no difference whether those fringes (ie. those threads from the warp with no woof thread woven in) are along the length of the garment or the width.
Was wide - [Meaning] that is was more than length of the thumb from the] knuckle [to the end of the nail].  For otherwise, without that [minimum length] it would be invalid as we mentioned above.
Three finger-widths - Meaning that one should not distance the hole from the edge of the fringe threads and further [towards the middle of the garment], more than three finger-widths.
Without the fringes - And if the fringes were two or three fingers wide, he should cut some of it [off].  And similarly, if the threads of the woof are sticking out without [the threads of] the warp [interwoven into them at all], or the [threads of the] warp without [the threads of] the woof [interwoven into them at all], there is a doubt if they count towards the measurement.  And therefore, he should cut them (ie. the fringes that stick out) off at the corners.  And therefore, the edges of our טלית which we call "sh'liak" (ie. hem), which do not have threads woven on [both] the warp and woof (ie. there are threads sticking out), one should cut them off before affixing ציצית strings on the corners.
Four [which are] doubled - For it says in the Talmud, "גדיל" (fringe) is two, "גדילים" (fringes) is four.  Meaning, if it said [in the Torah] "גדיל", it would be understood to mean two, for [it's not considered] a fringe with less than two.  Now that it says "גדילים", it's understood to mean four.  And during the time that we had t'cheilet (ie. blue-dyed strings), they would make two out of t'cheilet [strings] and two of white [strings].  And nowadays we use white [strings] in place of t'cheilet and we make the four long strings out of white.
Which are eight - After you placed them into the garment [via the hole] and folded them over.  Like it says [in the verse] "פתיל" (ie. wick) (Numbers 15:38), [which means that you should make it] like a wick which is folded over.
It is invalid - Because he transgressed on [the prohibition of] "Do not add".  And the Gr"a in his commentary agreed that the law is like the opinion of the Itur which is brought in the Beit Yosef, who holds that there is no [prohibition] of "Do not add" here.  And this that the Talmud says it's invalid [when done] like this, that's  specifically when one added [a string] from a different species to the [other] strings [for example strings of cannabis or cotton wool].  But [if one added another string] from the same species, they permit it, even optimally, to add as much as he wants.  And see in Artzot Hachaim, where he brings a few more from the great early rabbinic authorities who hold the same way.  And therefore, we conclude that if he already made them [with extra strings] and it's impossible for him to fix them, he may wear them.  But as soon as he is able to fix them, he must fix them.  But [regarding] lessening from [the number of] the strings, everyone agrees that it is invalid, as is seen in Beit Yosef.
One should cut - Meaning to say, that ideally one should cut them before inserting them into [the hole of] the corner [Magen Avraham and Biur HaGr"a].  And one should cut them with their teeth and not with a knife.
One must be careful - Meaning to say, that if one transgressed and did not cut them before inserting them [into the hole], nevertheless, they should be careful now before the windings.  And see in the Ta"z.
One set of windings - Even of [just] three windings.
And tied etc. - Meaning, [in general] if one  made a set of windings and also a knot after the wound section, even one knot, he has fulfilled his obligation on a Torah level, even if he didn't make the knot that's closest to the corner.  And therefore, [in our case where he did all that before he cut the ends of the strings] it is [considered a transgression of] "You shall make, and not from that which is [already] made".  But if he didn't make the knot after the wound section, even if he made the first knot that's before the wound section, [it's considered like] he didn't yet complete the making of the ציצית, because without the knot [the comes after the wound section], the wound section can't remain [in place] at all and [so] you don't have a גדיל/tassel here [which is a requirement].  And therefore, you could cut the strings [in that case].  And there are those who are stringent, and [so] ideally it is proper to heed their opinion.  And know, that this that he (ie. the Mechaber) wrote "one knot", he means to say from the five knots that we are accustomed to make.  But [a knot that's referred to here,] it is one that is [tied] two times, one on top of the other, as is mentioned below, for without that it's not called a knot since it's not permanent.
For the windings - Meaning, for the number of windings.  And also [regarding] the number of sets of windings (ie. the sections between the knots) and knots, [having more than what the Mechaber described] does not prevent [one from fulfilling the mitzvah] according to halacha, except that it's the best way to do the mitzvah, because the five knots are a hint that through it one will remember the five books of the Torah; and the doubling of the five knots which adds up to ten is a hint to the ten sefirot of the Holy One Blessed Be He, as is seen below in Siman 24.  And [regarding] the reason for the sets of windings, see in Beit Yosef.
As long as etc. - And [regarding] what is written in se'if 13 - that if you wound even one section -  I will explain the root of the matter: Because Chazal agreed that ציצית require a גדיל/tassel, which means that it's a requirement, like it says in the verse "you shall make for yourself גדילים (tassels)", and also it needs to have individual strings, like it says [in the verse] "by the hairs of my head" (Ezekiel 8:3).  However, on a Torah level, there is no measurement regarding the length of the tassel, rather even if one only wound three windings and tied a knot above that, that too is a law to Moshe from on Sinai [that] one fulfills with it the name "גדיל/tassel".  And with that [alone] one already completes the mitzvah on a Torah level.  And this the reason of the words (ie. opinion) of the Shulchan Aruch there.  And on this one may rely on Erev Shabbos before nightfall when he doesn't have enough time to make [his ציצית] properly (ie. with the full number of knots and winded sections) and [so] it's permitted to go out [while wearing it] on Shabbos and to make the blessing on it. (And [it would be] even better if he also makes the first knot that's before the first set of windings like we are accustomed to do, in order to fulfill [the mitvah] also in accordance with some of the rabbinic authorities who hold that it's regarding that [first] knot that Chazal were referring to which is on a Torah level).  And all of this is on a Torah level, but on a Rabbinic level, one must make a third [of the total length of the ציצית] - the גדיל/tassel, and two thirds - the פתיל/loose spun threads.  And since the length of the strings is twelve thumb-widths, as we mentioned above in se'if 4, one should make four thumb-widths - as the גדיל/tassel, which are the windings, and leave over eight thumb-widths of separate strings, for that is the beauty of the ציצית.  And therefore, if one made [only] one set of windings on Erev Shabbos before nightfall, he must complete it immediately after Shabbos.  Because if not, he is transgressing on the words of the Rabbis.  And there are those who stumble regarding this.
The width of etc. - This is optimally.  But after the fact, even if he winded up the majority of it, it is valid, because nevertheless, we still have here a [portion of] פתיל/loose spun threads.  But if he winded up the entire thing, it is invalid.
Four thumb-widths - [Together] with the knots.  And in R'aya M'hemna it's written that between each knot it should be a thumb-width.  The Rosh wrote that all the sections of windings should be equal [in length] because that is the beauty of the ציצית.  And therefore, in the first section, one  should make the windings distant  from each other.  And afterwards, each [subsequent] section should be closer together [Magen Avraham].
And two-thirds hangings strings - See Biur Maharsh"al on the Sma"g.  And everyone agrees that it does not prevent [one from fulfilling the mitzvah] after the fact, as we mentioned above.
And in the second [section], nine - And in the Kavanos [of the Ari"zal] it's written that in the second section, eight.  And this is the consensus of the later rabbinic authorities, that seven and eight is [alluding to] the Name of י"ה (whose numerical value is 15 = 7+8).  And afterwards [in the third section] eleven, and together [with the 15 it alludes to] the Name of הוי"ה (15+11=26.  And afterwards [in the fourth section] thirteen, which is the numerical value of [the word] אחד/One.  And [altogether] this is ה' אחד (Hashem is One).  And the ציצית of R. Shlomo Molcho, the first section had ten windings and afterwards five etc., like the Name הוי"ה [Magen Avraham].  And see further in Levush and Eliya Rabba regarding the windings.
At the end of each string - See above in se'if katan 18 what we wrote there.  It is good to make the strings average [thickness], not thick and not thin, because of "This is my G-d and I will glorify Him" [Eliyah Rabba].
Along the length of the טלית - See above in se'if katan 52 [regarding] what is "the length" and see [also] in Biur Halacha.
Because it needs to be etc. - Meaning, whether at the time of affixing [the ציצית] or afterwards if they fell down to the bottom [edge of the טלית], one should return them [to their proper position].  And all of this is optimally, but after the fact there is no [need to be concerned that they were not] particular about this (ie. they still fulfilled the mitzvah).  Nevertheless, one should be very careful that the ציצית should not hang diagonally from the corner because this is the custom of the Karaites who do it that way.  And if they are hanging [diagonally], it is a mitzvah to return them to their place.
Any [additional] material - For it's required that the ציצית are resting [directly] on the corner and not on something [else] which is resting on the corner.
And there are those who permit this - Because they are only doing this (ie. adding extra material around the hole) to strengthen the garment so that it shouldn't tear, and it is subordinate to the garment.  And even if [one used] leather, it is permitted.  And this is the position of the rabbinic authorities.

Siman 12

And there remained - Meaning, on each of the [torn] strings there remained enough to make a loop, which is called "shleif", around all the [other] severed strings together.  And if not all of them tore, it's sufficient if there was left over [on each of the torn ones] enough to make a loop around the severed strings alone, and not on all the strings.
It is valid - And if he removed the ציצית (ie. you undid all the knots and windings), it is forbidden to affix them to another טלית, for that is [considered] like [he is affixing the ציצית] initially (ie. you need to have the proper measurement of all the strings when you initially affix the ציצית, and here where the ציצית tore and you want to affix them to a different טלית, they don't have the proper initial measurement anymore).  And even if only one strings tore.  And [now, after it tore], it does not have a length of twelve thumb-widths.
For it tore completely - Meaning to say, that on both ends there is not enough to make a loop [around the other strings and therefore], it is invalid, even if the remaining strings were whole.  And if there remained on both ends enough to make a loop by combining (ie. each end did not have enough to make a loop, but the combined length of both ends was enough), it is questionable if that is sufficient.  And it seems from the Eliyah Rabba and from the Derech Hachaim that one should be stringent regarding this.  And even if there is a doubt if the two ends are from two strings or from one, in which case we have a double doubt: maybe they are from two [different] strings, and maybe [the lengths] can be combined, nevertheless, one should be stringent since ציצית are common (ie. it's easy to find/buy another pair of ציצית, so better to just do that).  And the Artzot Hachaim is lenient in a case like this.  And it seems that if there remains on one of the ends enough to make a loop around [just] one string, for sure one can rely on that.
It is invalid - See below in se'if 3.  And everyone agrees that if one string tore at it's root, meaning the place where it attaches to the corner, that it is invalid.  And the Ta"z wrote "therefore it is fitting for every G-d fearing person, that he should look, at the time that he checks [his ציצית strings before he makes the blessing and wraps in it], also at the beginning of the ציצית strings where they emerge, meaning the place where they are attached to the corner, if there is a tear there.
Two ends - And there is not left over on either one of them enough to loop around the other strings.  But if one of them has enough to make a loop around the other strings, it is valid.
Maybe it tore etc. - Meaning to say, even if the two torn ends are from one side (ie. when viewing the ציצית strings coming out from the final knot, they are separated, 4 on one side and 4 on the other), nevertheless, it's possible that both of them are from the same [original] string, since he was not careful at the time of making [the ציצית to ensure that the four strings on each side always stayed together].
Two ends etc. - And the same applies if all the ends tore from one side, and from the four ends on the second side there is only left on each one enough to make a loop [around the other strings], it would also be valid, because it is only invalid, according to this opinion, if the same string tore on both ends.  And [regarding] what the Mechaber (ie. Shulchan Aruch) wrote - "that behold, there is [left] on the second end more than [what's needed] to make a loop [around the other strings]" - this is not an exact thing (ie. when he says there is "more than").  A question: ציצית strings that tore and he went and tied them [back together], if it's effective - the fact that they were made whole through his tying.  The later rabbinic authorities concluded that the law is like this: if from the outset, before he made the ציצית from the strings, they tore and he tied them with a permanent knot, and afterwards made them into ציצית, it is valid because the knot was a total attachment (ie. tying a torn string back together with a permanent knot is considered one string now).  And similarly, [if it tore] after [the ציצית] were made in a valid way, meaning if one end tore after the ציצית were affixed to the garment, even if there isn't left enough to make a loop [around the other strings], tying it now works.  And even if the second end of that same string tears afterwards, it would be valid, since when he tied it, the ציצית were valid.  But if the strings became shortened in a way that invalidates the ציצית because of that, for example: if both ends tore and there wasn't left enough to make a loop [around the other strings], or if the string tore by the hole, it doesn't help to retie it for that falls under the category of "You shall make it, but not from that which is already made" though an invalidation.  And certainly if the string was shorter than it's [required] length from the outset, at the time of making the ציצית, for sure it doesn't help to go back and tie it (ie. to tie an additional length of string to the short one) after the windings and the knot of the first section [of the ציצית], for that is literally "You shall make it, but not from that which is already made".  And this is as was seen previously in Siman 11, Se'if 13 regarding cutting the ends of the strings.
And according to Rabbeinu Tam etc. - His reason [is] that two of the strings which are four (ie. since they are folded over after inserting them through the hole), we put in place of the techeilet [strings] (which we don't have anymore).  And [the other] two strings we put in place of the white [strings].  [Therefore] it needs to at least have one [of those two] type[s] be complete.
If he was not careful - This is a difficulty (ie. a question) - For behold, it's a certainty [that the ציצית would be invalid when three ends were severed] if he was careful [to make sure the same four ends were on one side at the time of tying the ציצית, since that means that three of the main strings are now too short], like the Rem"a wrote in his gloss after [the words of the Mechaber].  And we can answer that he (the Mechaber) chose [the words] "[if] he was not careful" because of the end [portion of this se'if]; for he ends [with the words] "but if only two of the ends were severed, it is valid as long as it has [left over enough] to make a loop [around the other strings]" - and that is specifically without being careful.  But if he was careful, [then] if two ends were severed from the same side, it is valid, even if there isn't left over enough to make a loop [around the other strings], for there is left over on each one of those, the [entire] other end.  But if two ends were severed from each side, and there is not left on each one enough to make a loop [around the other strings], it is invalid, because maybe it was from one string.
It is valid as long as it has enough to make a loop [around the other strings] - Meaning, even if it had the measurement of "enough to loop [around the other strings]" only on one of them.  And this is like we saw above in sei'f katan 5.
And the law is etc. - It's obvious that it is permitted to make a blessing on them, like we explained in Biur Halacha.
It is valid - For they are [in fact] long enough to make a loop [around the other strings], except that due to their thickness he is not able to loop them.
One may rely on the R"i - And it is permitted to wear that garment.  And above in se'if 1, where he (ie. the Mechaber) wrote that "whenever possible, it is better to be concerned for the opinion of Rabbeinu Tam", that means when it's possible to easily find another pair of ציצית, but one is not required to [make an effort to] go searching after them if they're not right by him or if searching for another pair would cause him to miss praying with a congregation.  And here [in se'if 3] he (the Mechaber) wrote "where it is not possible", meaning in a situation where it's not possible to find ציצית at all, on can rely on [the opinion] of the R"i.  Nevertheless, one should not make a blessing on them and it is forbidden to go out on Shabbos with them to a public domain.  And similarly, it can be permitted in an extenuating circumstance also when a bit of the tassel (ie. the winded up and knotted section above the loose strings) itself became severed [Responsum of ?? - see there].  And you should know that all of this [that has been discussed] is not referring to when the string tore at the place of [where it's inserted into] the hole, for [if it tore] there, even according to the R"i, it is invalid on a Torah level.  And it's obvious that when the ציצית become invalid, one must take them off [of his body]. And it's not enough to just stand in one's place and to not walk four cubits because the law of four cubits (ie. there is a Rabbinic level law that one should not walk four cubits without ציצית on, but standing in place without ציצית would not violate that) is only applicable when you're walking without ציצית [at all] (But here where you're wearing invalid ציצית, which is forbidden to do on a Torah level, it's not good enough to just stand in place because even that is forbidden).  One should also not fix the ציצית while the טלית is still on him, rather he should remove it and then fix it.

Siman 13

One to another - For all of them [together] are one mitzvah, and if even one ציצית is missing (ie. missing completely, or is invalid), it's as if you didn't affix any at all and you nullified completely the positive commandment of ציצית.
To a public domain - And to [wear invalid ציצית on Shabbos in] a karmelit (an area that is not a private domain and not a public domain, but conceptually somewhere in between) is forbidden on a rabbinic level.  And the same applies to all other invalidations.  For example: if the majority of the garment was closed up, or if the ציצית were made/affixed not in the right place - [such as] higher than three finger-widths [from the edge of the garment], or lower than [length of the] thumb from the knuckle to the tip [from the edge of the garment], and all similar cases - or if the four corners (ie. the length and width of the garment itself) was less than the measurement described in siman 16, see there.  In all those [cases], it is forbidden to go out [while wearing] them [on Shabbos], even to a karmelit on a rabbinic level.  And [regarding] a garment which is open exactly halfway (ie. a tallit katan where the sides under the arms were stitched up so that it was exactly half-open and half-closed  (if measured from the top, by the shoulder, to the bottom)), see above in Siman 10 in Mishnah Berurah se'if katan 27.
Is obligated to bring a sin offering - For it is [considered like] carrying due to the remaining ציצית, and they are not nullified to the garment (ie. they are not considered to be part of the garment itself) because the ציצית strings are significant/valuable and [therefore] are not nullified.  And even if those [remaining] ציצית are also invalid, nevertheless, as long as they have some valid strings on them, his mind is on them (ie. he will want to use them at some point) and they are [therefore] significant and are not nullified, unless all the four [original] strings were severed and they didn't have enough left over to make a loop [around the other strings], for then it is considered as nullified to the garment.  Therefore, if he realizes this (ie. he realizes that all the strings are invalid) on Shabbos as he is walking in the public domain, he is not required to remove the tallit.
It is permitted to go out - Even at night (ie. Friday night), which is not the time [for the fulfillment of the mitzvah] of ציצית, because it is [considered] a beautification of the garment.  And even [regarding] a טלית made from other materials, even according to those rabbinic authorities above in siman 9 - se'if 1, [who hold] that the obligation [of those other materials] is only on a rabbinic level, nevertheless [they agree] that it is a beautification of the garment since in any case they (ie. those טליתות) are obligated [in ציצית] based on a certainty (ie. we can say with certainty that they are obligated in ציצית, even if it's only on a rabbinic level).  And it's not similar to a garment that is [exactly] half open and half closed (ie. a tallit katan where the sides under the arms were stitched up so that it was exactly half-open and half-closed  (if measured from the top, by the shoulder, to the bottom)), which the Shulchan Aruch ruled above in siman 10 - se'if 7, that one may not go out with it on Shabbos, for there the obligation [to affix ציצית on it] is only because of a doubt (ie. it's doubtful whether that half-stitched up garment requires ציצית or not). [Pri Megadim and Orchot Hachaim, who disagree with the Shev Yaakov.  Afterwards I found that also the Olat Tamid wrote like them].
Blue-dyed [strings] - For behold, it is established that the blue-dyed [strings] and the white [strings] do not prevent one from the other (ie. they don't prevent the mitzvah from being fulfilled due to the absence of either the blue or white strings - assuming you still have the correct number of strings).  For it is written "...and you shall see it" (ie. the word אותו is singular) (Numbers 15:39) - which is understood to mean on each one (ie. the mitzvah of "you shall see it" applies to each one -blue or white- separately, so you can fulfill the mitzvah with either one)....
On his shoulders - [For then] it is not a decoration, rather it is [like] a carried load, because that is not the way it is worn during the week.  However, if it covers the majority of his body, that is sufficient.  And see below in siman 301 -se'if 30, what we will write there regarding this.
Before he leaves with it - Since he checked it in the morning (ie. Shabbos morning) when he was making the blessing upon wearing it and found them to be intact, it's not common for it to become severed in such a short time, even if he took it off in the meantime [Magen Avraham].  And it's evident from this that also on Shabbos one must check his ציצית.  And the Ba"ch wrote like this explicitly in siman 8, but  people are not careful with this.  And see [further] in Biur Halacha....
On Shabbos - And if he knew from yesterday [that his טלית was invalid] and he forgot to put on [valid] ציצית, it seems that there too we do not penalize him.  And a proof [for this] is from [what's written] below in siman 355, se'if 3, in the Rem"a where "...if they forgot and did not make an eiruv...", see there further [from the Chidushei R. Akiva Eiger].
When he was in a karmelit - That is a place where the prohibition to carry [things] is only on a rabbinic level.  And therefore, it is not necessary [for him] to remove [his טלית] because human dignity overrides a rabbinic level prohibition.  And even though ציצית is a Torah level mitzvah, and a Torah level mitzvah does not get overridden because of human dignity, nevertheless, it is still permitted, because the Torah did not say "Don't wear a garment without ציצית" (ie. in a negative term), rather it's a positive commandment to affix ציצית on it (the garment).  And since [here] he can't affix [a valid] ציצית on Shabbos, he's not transgressing a positive commandment, and he's only [violating] a rabbinic level prohibition.  And therefore, he is permitted [to carry it in a karmelit] because of human dignity and he is not required to remove the טלית.  But [to carry] in a public domain, which is a Torah level [prohibition], he is required to remove it, whether it's a large טלית (that we use for prayers) or a small טלית (that we wear under our clothing throughout the day), and even if he will be left naked (ie. shirtless) by doing that, because human dignity does not override a Torah level prohibition like this in any situation.  And below in the [section dealing with the] Laws of Shabbos, G-d willing, we will explain that there is a dispute if nowadays we have a public domain or not.  And it appears, that if the tassel (ie. the winded up and knotted part of the ציצית) was intact, and the invalidation was only on the loose strings [that are hanging down past the last knot], we can join with the opinion of the R"i above who permits it (ie. the R"i holds that you measure the minimum length of string needed, if they were severed, from the tassel part.  So if the tassel part was intact, then the ציצית are still valid), and one would not be required to remove it immediately, rather he should hurry to go to his home [and remove it there]....
Invalid - Meaning, whether one corner [of the garment itself] became severed and now it only has three [corners], or whether the [entire] ציצית   from one corner was severed alone.  And even if it was already invalid when he left his house, since at the time that he wore it, he was not aware of it, we do not penalize him, for human dignity is paramount.  And even [in regards to] our large טלית that we are not accustomed to wear all day, except for during prayers for the sake of the mitzvah, and [therefore] there is no shame by removing it (ie. he won't be left shirtless), there also there is no requirement to remove it.  For the sages did not distinguish between one טלית and another (ie. small vs. large).  And R. Akiva Eiger in his Novellae questions this.
That's under his clothes - And it wouldn't be obvious [to other people] afterwards (when he removed it) that he's walking without a tallit katan.  Nevertheless, the [act of] removing it [in public] is an even bigger shame.
One of the ציצית - Meaning, whether he came to the synagogue and wants to wear his טלית, and before he put it on he found the ציצית to be invalid and he's embarrassed to sit in public without a טלית; it's permitted for him to wear it without a blessing.  Or whether he noticed, while already wearing it, that the ציצית became severed; there too he does not need to remove it [Birchei Yosef and Artzot Hachaim and the other later rabbinic authorities].  And see further in the later rabbinic authorities who agreed that it all depends on the man who is wearing it - if he will be embarrassed, he may wear it without a blessing, but if he won't be embarrassed, there is no permission due to human dignity.
That he is able to wear it - And [this is referring to] specifically if he found out today (ie. on Shabbos).  But if he knew from Friday evening  (before Shabbos) that the ציצית were invalid, then it is forbidden for him to wear it on Shabbos because he should have fixed it yesterday.  But if he forgot, then he can be lenient [Chiddushei R. Akiva Eiger].
Because of human dignity - And [this is] specifically if he's not able to borrow a טלית in the synagogue.
And [this is] specifically on Shabbos - Meaning, since on Shabbos it's only a rabbinic level prohibition [to wear a garment without ציצית] as we mentioned above.  But during the week, he is transgressing a Torah level prohibition at every moment [that he's wearing it] of "get up and make for yourself ציצית".  And a Torah level prohibition, even just a prohibition of "sit and don't do" like this, where he is [passively] preventing himself from performing the mitzvah, is not overridden because of human dignity, unless it's a very big embarrassment [for him].  Therefore, it is forbidden for him to wear the טלית גדול when he sees that it has no ציצית, because to sit [in public] without a טלית, according to the Rem"a, is only minor embarrassment.  And similarly, if he became aware when out in public while wearing a טלית גדול that one of the ציצית was severed, he would also [in that case] need to remove it immediately, because nowadays, removing a טלית גדול in the marketplace/street is also only a minor embarrassment.  However, if he became aware in the synagogue, after he was already wearing the טלית, that one of the ציצית was invalid, many of the later rabbinic authorities are lenient [to say] that he is not required to remove it immediately, because they hold that since he's amongst many people in the synagogue, removing it would be the biggest embarrassment.  Instead, he should hurry home or to the room before the synagogue, and remove it there.  And the Chayei Adam is stringent regarding this and he holds that removing a טלית גדול is only a minor embarrassment, because even when it's not a case like this, it's the way of people to always remove their טלית amongst others in the synagogue.  Afterwards, I found in the Pri Megadim, in the beginning of the Laws of ציצית, that he also holds like the Chayei Adam.  Therefore, it is proper to follow the suggestion of the Artzot Hachaim: that he should disown it, for then he is exempt from making ציצית for it.  And when he gets home, he then reclaims it [as his own].
Is forbidden - See in Magen Avraham where he concludes that this that the Rem"a is stringent [regarding] during the week, is not referring to what he wrote at the beginning "Even [regarding] a טלית קטן...", because [regarding] a טלית קטן, if it became known to him that the ציצית were invalid, which would be a big embarrassment for him to remove it from under his clothing, whether he's in the synagogue or in public, he is not required to remove them, for [we say] that where there is a big embarrassment, human dignity overrides even a Torah level prohibition which has [an element of]  "sit and don't do"(ie. he is passively transgressing).  But he [still] needs to hurry home or to the room before the synagogue and remove it there, even if he's involved in a mitzvah in the synagogue, since it's a Torah level prohibition.  But on Shabbos, he does not need to hurry out of the synagogue as long as he's still busy with the mitzvah.  And if one sees that his friend's ציצית are severed, he shouldn't tell him until he gets home, meaning, he should call him over to his house and then tell him to remove it.  the Magen Avraham wrote further that if there are no ציצית in the city, the law during the week is the same as on Shabbos.  And the same applies regarding a טלית that requires ציצית only on a Rabbinic level, for example: a borrowed טלית after 30 days [have passed], it's law is the same during the week as on Shabbos.

Siman 14

Made - Meaning, that [if] he affixed them to a garment, it is invalid, and even if a Jew is standing over him and teaches him how to make it for the sake of the mitzvah.  For if a non-Jew spun or interwove in this way (ie. with a Jew standing over him and teaching him to do it for the sake of the mitzvah), it is valid according to the Ro"sh, like we wrote above in siman 11, se'if 2.  And [this that we say that if a non-Jew made it, it is invalid, is] specifically if he inserted [the strings] into the [hole in the] corner, or if he made the first set of windings or the first knot.  But if the first set of windings and knot were made by a Jew and the non-Jew finished the rest of the windings and knots, which are only an [addtional] mitzvah, then it is valid.
To require men - And even if [a man] was standing over them (ie. a woman) [while she was making it], it wouldn't help, since the verse says "[speak to] the Children (literally: Sons) of Israel [and say to them:] And you shall make [ציצית]", it is inferred to also exclude daughters of Israel.
To make them - Specifically affixing them to the garment, but the spinning and interweaving is permitted to be done by women.
And it is proper to do so etc. - And similarly, it is fitting and proper that optimally, affixing the ציצית into the garment of an adult should not be done by a child under 13 years.  But if the child  is 13 years and 1 day, even though he did not produce 2 [pubic] hairs, even optimally there is no need to be stringent.  And the Orchot Hachaim is lenient [to allow it to be done] even optimally by a child.  And all this is specifically when an adult is standing by the child to teach him how to do it for the sake [of the mitzvah], but without that, even if the child already affixed them to the garment, one would be required to remove the strings and then re-affix them.
Optimally - But after the fact (if it was done by a woman), it is [still] permitted.  And even if [a man] was not standing over her, she is trusted to say that she affixed them for the sake [of the mitzvah] of ציצית.
Without intention - Meaning, that he made the upper (ie. first) knot, which is a Torah level mitzvah, without intention.  But if he tied the upper knot and one winded section with intent, even though he made the other knots and winded sections afterwards not for the sake of the mitzvah, [then] even when there are other  ציצית available, we can deem [this one] as fit.
On the Rambam who deems it as fit - Even if he did the inserting [of the strings into the hole] and also the knots and winded sections without intent.  For he holds that even though it's required that the strings be spun for the sake of the mitzvah, nevertheless, the inserting does not have to be [done] for the sake of the mitzvah.  And he derives it from [the fact that] the verse says "...[speak to] the Children of Israel..." (Numbers 15:38), which excludes non-Jews; we conclude from it that [if it was made by] a Jew without intent, it is valid.  And don't ask: [Why not] remove [the strings] from the garment and then go back and put them on with intent, for the sake of the mitzvah?  We can answer that we are referring to when it is close to Shabbos and there is no time to remove and re-tie them.  Or [we can answer that we're talking about a case] where one of the ends [of one of the strings] became severed, and if he would remove it, it would be forbidden to go back and put in on the garment, as we mentioned above in Siman 12.
One should not make the blessing on it - Even if only the inserting of the strings into the [hole in the] corner was done not for the sake of the mitzvah, and certainly [the same applies] if he made the top (ie. first) knot not for the sake of the mitzvah.  For Rashi, the Rosh, and Tosefot all hold that on a Torah level the affixing [of the ציצית onto the garment via the holes] also requires [intent to do it] for the sake of the mitzvah.  And the verse that excludes a gentile is needed [to teach us] that [even in the case of] a Jew standing over the gentile and teaching him to do it for the sake of the mitzvah [is invalid].  Therefore, one must be careful optimally, before affixing [the ציצית] to the garment to say out loud, explicitly, that he is affixing all these ציצית [strings] for the sake of the [mitzvah of] ציצית.  And [this is] like what we wrote above in siman 11 regarding the spinning and interweaving, and see further in Biur Halacha.
He is exempt - And one who affixes ציצית to it and makes the blessing on it does not lose out, just like women who are allowed to make a blessing on a time-bound mitzvah even though they are exempt from it.  And therefore, he may go out with it on Shabbos to a public domain, for it is [considered] a beautification of the garment.
On a rabbinic level - And you can make a blessing on it.  And a renter is similar to a borrower (Olat Tamid who proves this from Tosefot in Menachot 44a [the section] beginning with the word "Tallit" etc).  And in the Itur I found that he wrote that he is in doubt regarding a renter....
He makes the blessing on it - And there are those who are stringent and hold that he should not make the blessing unless [the owner] gave it to him explicitly as a present with the condition that it be returned [after].  However, the majority of the later rabbinic authorities agree with the ruling of the Shulchan Aruch.  And the reason is [that the owner] had in mind when he lent it to him that he (ie. the borrower) would make the blessing on it, and since it's impossible for him to make the blessing on it unless it belongs to him, it's [considered] as if he (ie. the owner) gave it to him as a present on condition that it be returned [after].  But optimally, it is certainly better to ask the owner to give it to him as a present on condition that it be returned [after], but [not doing so] does not prevent one [from making the blessing].  And [this is] specifically if he borrowed a טלית that's designated for the mitzvah [of ציצית], but if it's [just] a garment that's meant for wearing and only due to the majority of it being open (ie. like a tallit kattan where the slits under the arms are open) did they make ציצית for it, and it wasn't made for the mitzvah of ציצית, or if he borrowed a טלית to go up to the Torah (ie. he received an aliyah) or to lead the prayers for the congregation or [if he's a Cohen] to give the Priestly blessings (ie. "duchan") which [in all those cases] is only [worn] for the honor, we don't make the blessing on it; because maybe his (ie. the owner's) intention was to lend it only to be worn, and not to transfer ownership to him.  And there are those who argue on this and they hold that in all circumstances we make the blessing.  Therefore, it's written in Derech Chaim, that its better that he (the borrower) should have in mind that he is not acquiring it in order that he shouldn't have to make the blessing on it according to all opinions; except for a טלית that he borrowed during prayers in order to fulfill his obligation.  And all of this is in regards to a טלית that belongs to an individual.  But regarding communal טליתות, like those found in our synagogues, all opinions agree that one needs to make a blessing on them, even if he is only wearing it in order to lead the prayers for the congregation or to go up to the Torah (ie. for an aliyah), because [when it comes to] a communal טלית, the intent when they originally bought it is that anyone who wears it, it should be his [in order to fulfill the mitzvah], just like by an etrog.  And see further what we wrote in Biur Halacha in the name of the Shaarei Efraim.
Immediately - See in Siman 658 Se'if 5 (Orach Chaim 658, 5) regarding a Lulav and in Pri Megadim there.  And from there we can also learn regarding our matter (ie. borrowing a טלית) that one needs to return it to the owner in a timely fashion, which is: if the owner fulfilled his obligation [with the טלית] today, he (the borrower) should, at the latest, return it the following day before the prayer service so that the owner will have [again] it to fulfill his obligation.  But if he did not return it to him, and the owner does not have another טלית to use, it would seem that the "gift" (ie. this that the owner gave it to the borrower as a gift on condition that it be returned) was nullified retroactively and it not called "your garment" [anymore] [and even though he (the owner) still has a טלית קטן on, nevertheless, it makes sense that he did not have that in mind when he gave his טלית to the borrower], and this is not like what the sefer Netiv Chaim wrote.  It's also explained over there (by Lulav), that after he (the borrower) fulfilled his obligation, he must return it to the owner as a gift in order to transfer ownership [back] to the owner, because it became his (the borrower), and it's obvious that the same thing applies here (to טלית).  It seems obvious to me that if the טלית or one of the ציצית got ruined when it was by the borrower, even though it was an accident and [when] he returns it, it's not in the same condition as when he borrowed it, he does not fulfill his obligation in the mitzvah (since there was a stipulation that it was a "gift on condition that it be returned", and the borrower here is not fulfilling the stipulation because he's returning something different than what he borrowed).  See further in Siman 658 Se'if 4 and in Chiddushei R. Akiva Eiger there....
His friend's טלית - Meaning, without his knowledge, for a person is happy for his money/belongings to be used for a mitzvah specifically on a temporary basis, but [to use his items] on a permanent basis is forbidden.  And even [to use it] on a temporary basis is only [when it's being used] in the same  place [where it was found], but to remove it from his (the owner's) house [and take it] to the synagogue or the opposite, that is forbidden because it's possible that he's particular about it (ie. that it shouldn't be moved), and it would [therefore] be stealing.  And see further in Pri Megadim who wrote that in any case, it is proper to be careful when the owner is with him [to ask him] to borrow it and not rely on the assumption in a case where one can easily clarify [the matter].  And certainly if he knows that the owner is particular.
And to recite the blessing on it - See in Magen Avraham, and see in Derech Chaim who wrote that it's better to have in mind to not acquire it and to not make the blessing on it.
He folds it - On it's original folds.  And on Shabbos, he should fold it, but not on it's original folds.  And the Magen Avraham is lenient regarding Shabbos, to not have to fold it at all.
Without his knowledge - Even just on a temporary basis.  For we are concerned that maybe he will [end up] reading it a lot until it ends up tearing due to the frequent usage.  And [nowadays] people are accustomed, when they find a siddur or a machzor in shul, to take it in order to pray from it.  And I don't know how this is allowed, for how is a siddur different from seforim? [Pri Megadim]
Partners - And a טלית of a partnership between a Gentile and a Jew or a man and a woman is obligated in ציצית, but one should not make the blessing on it.  Artzot Hachaim, [who holds] not like Damasek Eliezer; see there further.
Obligated - And we're talking [here] about where one friend (ie. one of the partners) wants his friend (ie. a non-partner) to wear the טלית, and it has no ציצית, [in such a case] he is obligated to make ציצית for it.  But [regarding] partners, where [the טלית already] has ציצית on it, and one [of the partners] is adamant that the other not wear it; even if the טלית has enough [material] to divide it where each half would have the measurement of a [valid] טלית, even so, if he wears it through robbery and blesses on it, he transgresses [the prohibition of] "You shall not take the name of the Lord your God in vain" (Exodus 20:7) because one of the halves, which has 2 ציצית on it, is not his; and certainly [this applies] if [the טלית] did not yet have ציצית on it [Pri Megadim].  And [therefore], according to this, [regarding] a טלית that was left over to an inheritor [and his brothers] from his father, and the other brothers are adamant [that he not wear it], he should be careful to not make the blessing on it until they [all] come to a compromise.

Siman 15

And place them etc. - Even from a new טלית to a new טלית.  And certainly from an old טלית, it's permitted to untie and place them on a new טלית that he wants to wear in order to fulfill the mitzvah.  And even [to transfer ציצית] from a טלית גדול to a טלית קטן [is permitted], for they are equal.  But one should not untie ציצית from the  טלית of an adult and place them on a טלית of a minor, because [the latter's] obligation is only on a rabbinic level.  And the Pri Megadim is in doubt whether it would be permitted [to take] ציצית from a wool טלית and place them on a טלית made from other materials according to the rabbinic authorities above in Orach Chaim 9:1; for other materials [besides wool] are only [obligated in ציצית] on a rabbinic level.  And the Artzot Hachaim is lenient with this.
Another טלית - See in Pri Megadim who wrote that if he has another pair of ציצית that he is able to get, it is proper to be stringent to not untie the ציצית, unless it is done in the manner described in se'if katan 4.
On another garment, that is not allowed - Because there is a prohibition [in doing so], that he disgraces a טלית that's used for a mitzvah for no reason, unless the טלית is worn out, then it would be permitted to untie its' ציצית under any circumstance: [such as] if he wants to sell it to a gentile, or to make from the טלית another garment that doesn't have 4 corners, [in all those cases] it is permitted to take it [off].  But if he wants to sell the טלית to a Jew, it is forbidden to take [off] the ציצית, even if the other Jew can place [his own] ציצית [on it] himself, even here [in such a case] it is forbidden.  And it is permitted to remove the ציצית and put in it's place nicer ones due to [it being an] enhancement of the mitzvah.  Or if they (ie. the ציצית) were old and he removes them in order to put new ones.  Or if one string  severed and there was only left on it enough to loop around the other strings, even though the ציצית are still valid, nevertheless it is still permitted to remove it and place another whole  [string] in it's place.  And know further, that when the ציצית are whole and fitting to be placed in another garment [as opposed to if they only had enough to loop around the other strings], there are some from the later rabbinic authorities who wrote that one should be careful to undo the knots and their windings, and not to sever or tear them in order to not ruin them.  And the sages already said "One should not pour out his well water when others are in need of it".  And the Chayei Adam wrote that when it seems to a person that it will require great effort to untie them, [in such a case] it is  permitted to sever them, and it doesn't [violate the prohibition] of "Do not destroy" since he is not doing it [simply] for the purpose of destroying.  See there further.
One who is obligated - Even if he is only obligated on a rabbinic level.
One may not - See in Magen Avraham se'if katan 3, and it seems from his words that this [that the Shulchan Aruch says that one may not take a corner with ציצית on it and sew it onto another garment because of "on the corners of their garments"] is specifically [referring to] a corner which does not have enough [material]  to wrap oneself in it (But if it did have enough to wrap oneself in it, it would be permitted).  And even though the gemara prohibited [sewing a corner with ציצית on it onto another garment] even if it's a cubit by a cubit, that too is because it still doesn't have enough to wrap oneself in it.  But if the piece [of garment] had enough to wrap oneself in it, it is permitted to combine it with another garment, even with it's ציצית [still attached to it].  But the Ta"z in se'if katan 3 argues on this and prohibits it.  And so too is it  implied in the Levush and Derech Hachaim.
With the ציצית [still attached] - But without ציצית, it is permitted to attach it [to another garment] if it's at least 3 finger-widths by 3 finger-widths, and then afterwards one can affix ציצית on it.  And from the rest of the garment, it's not necessary to untie [the other ציצית] at all.  And this is specifically if prior to attaching the corner, the garment [it's being attached to, which is missing a corner] is also obligated [in ציצית]; for example, it's corner was not torn off in a rounded off way.  But if it was torn off in a rounded off way and it became a three cornered garment which is exempt from ציצית, it's required to untie all the ציצית and to re-affix them after it's made into a 4 cornered garment.  For if not, then it's [a transgression of] "Make it, and not from what is [already] made".
Onto another garment - But if he wants to [re]attach the corner [back] onto the garment that it tore from, even if it tore off completely and it's not attached even slightly, he does not need to untie the ציצית [first], and it [would] not [be] invalidated because of "Make it, and not from that which is [already] made" since it's original "making" on this garment was valid.  And all this is as long as the garment did not become a 3 cornered garment when it tore (ie. when the corner tore off, it happened in such a way that the garment now has only 3 corners), as was seen above in se'if katan 6;  and also specifically if the corner [that tore off] is at least 3 finger-widths by 3 finger-widths, as is seen nearby in se'if 4.  All of this is according to the Shulchan Aruch and the Magen Avraham in se'if katan 3.  But the Ta"z in se'if katan 3 rules that there is no difference if the attaching [of the detached corner] is to a different garment, or to this [garment that it tore from] itself; it's all under the same category of  "Make it, and not from that which is [already] made", and one should be stringent [regarding this] and so did the Derech Hachaim rule.
And in each part etc. - But if each part did not have enough to wrap in (ie. it wasn't large enough to be obligated in ציצית) - like you would find by our tallit katan, that if it split into 2, it would not have the [required] measurement to wrap in - [then] it's nullified from them immediately the mitzvah of ציצית.  And if afterwards he wants to re-attach one part to the other, or to another piece [of garment], he needs to first untie all the ציצית.  And if one part has the [required] measurement to wrap in, and one part does not, it is only required to untie [the ציצית] from the part that does not have [the required measurement]; and afterwards affix [the ציצית] onto it from scratch after the two [garment] parts are joined together.
There is no concern for etc. - Because [regarding] the ציצית that remained [on each half], they are not considered invalid since they (ie. the garments halves that the ציצית are affixed to) have the required measurement to wrap in.  Therefore, if he wants, he may join to that half, a piece of another garment, and  make/tie ציצית on the new corners (ie. the 2 corners from the newly adjoined piece of garment).  And certainly he may make a complete טלית from [either of] the halves [that ripped from the original טלית], meaning that he can make/tie ציצית on the new corners (ie. the new corners that it now has after it ripped in half).  And if he wants to re-attach the two halves that separated on from the other, there are those who say that he has to first untie the ציצית from one of the halves, and then sew [the two halves], and after he sews them he should affix the ציצית onto it; because if he does not [first] untie them, it's in the category of "Make it, and not from that which is [already] made".  But the majority of the later rabbinic authorities are lenient and hold that this is not in the category of "Make it, and not from that which is [already] made", but nevertheless it is good to be stringent optimally.
Within 3 fingerbreadths - But above 3 fingerbreadths, everyone agrees that one may sew it.  Because according to Rashi's explanation: behold, that area is not the place for attaching ציצית, as was seen above in siman 11; and we are not concerned that he will take the thread [he used to sew it] and use it as one of the ציצית strings.  And according to Rav Amram Gaon's explanation: it has the status of a garment.  And even if this corner tore off completely from the garment together with its ציצית, even so, it is permitted to re-attach the corner and the ציצית are valid.  The Ta"z argues on this and rules that one must untie the ציצית strings from the corner [before re-attaching it], and then tie them from scratch after sewing [the corner back on].  And one should be stringent [like the Ta"z], as was seen above in se'if katan 7.
With wool thread - Rather, [we sew] with other materials, and everyone knows that [ציצית made from] other materials do not exempt [a wool טלית from it's obligation].  Therefore, one will not come to combine that thread [with 7 other strings to make it count as one of the ציצית strings].  And the same applies: that we may be lenient also with other materials if he sewed with a different material.
Because when it tears etc. - The same applies if initially, at the time of making the garment, one sewed a piece of cloth less than 3 [fingerbreadths] to the edge of the garment, whether on the length or the width, and attached ציצית to that piece [of cloth], it is invalid according to him (ie. Rav Amram), for it is considered to be detached even though he sewed it to the garment.  And if one attaches ציצית above that sewed on cloth, the ציצית would be more than 3 fingerbreadths away from the edge of the garment and [would be] invalid.  Therefore, one should see to it to sew a 3 x 3 piece of cloth under the [existing] corner.  See further below in se'if katan 16.
And if one made etc. - Meaning, even if one made new ציצית on that torn corner after it was sewed on to the טלית - even then it would not exempt the טלית [from needing ציצית], for the sewing is not considered an attachment in this case, and it's considered as if it's still detached - if from the beginning the corner tore completely from the garment.
[...there remained] any part at all [attached to the טלית, it is valid - Meaning, even the ציצית that were on it when it tore [are valid].  And there are those who are stringent regarding this, and they hold that the old ציצית are invalid and one must re-affix them after [the corner] was sewed.  See further in Biur Halacha.
There are those who say that according to Rax Amram etc. - They hold that sewing is considered an attachment, and only the ציצית that were on it (ie. the corner) at the time that it was sewed are invalid because of "You shall make it, but not from that which is already made".  And see in the Ta"z who argues on the Shulchan Aruch and who wrote that everyone agrees that if after it [ie. the corner) was sewed, one affixed ציצית on it, that it is valid.  And so too wrote the Ba"ch, Shiurei Knesset Hagedolah, and the Gr"a; and the Orchot Hachaim agreed.  But nevertheless, in order to fulfill the first opinion, one should sew a piece of cloth that's larger than 3x3 [fingerbreadths] underneath the corner [that was sewed].
Complies with all opinions - Therefore, the custom is to sew onto every corner of the טלית, a piece of cloth that is fully 3x3 [fingerbreadths], because it is common in some garments  - that even if they are new, there is a stitching within 3 [fingerbreadths from the edge], and this is an invalidation according to Rav Amram based on the first opinion, as was seen above in se'if katan 12.
Where it's possible - And where it's not possible, we hold that the reasoning of Rav Amram is the proper one and also that sewing is considered an attachment.
From the hole - This is referring to when it was not sewed up [after it tore], and it is coming to inform us that [this applies] even though there did not remain the full [measurement of the length of the thumb from the] knuckle [to the end of the nail from the place of the tear to the edge of the garment]; and it is similar to what was written above in siman 11, se'if 10, that it is only required to have that measurement at the time of making/affixing [the ציצית onto the garment].  And if one wants to sew up the tear -  then, if the garment is of wool, he may sew it up with threads of any other material, and he does not need to untie to the ציצית from the corner and then re-tie them a second time after he sewed it since the corner was not invalid; and if the garment is of other materials, it is forbidden to sew it with threads of the same material according to Rashi, for perhaps he will leave over some of those threads to be used as ציצית strings.  And even if there are already ציצית there, it makes no difference.  Rather, he should use threads of another material.  And it is better to not sew with white threads, rather to only use colored threads, for nowadays we only make our ציצית white and therefore we would not be concerned that he might leave over from the sewing threads to be used as ציצית strings.
It is valid according to all opinions - For according to Rashi, since the garment is wool, there is no concern that he will leave over from threads of other materials to be used as ציצית strings.  And according to Rav Amram, since there remained a little bit [of the garment untorn], it did not lose it's status of being a garment, as was mentioned above in the previous se'if.  And certainly, according to the "some say" in the previous se'if, it is valid here, since the affixing of the ציצית happened after the sewing.
One should not sew it - Meaning, with [threads] of that same material.  But from another material, one may be lenient.  And [it would be]  even better with colored thread as was mentioned above in se'if katan 18.
And if it tore etc. - Meaning, that it tore completely from the hole until the edge.  Therefore, it is questionable; for even if the garment was wool and one sew's it with threads of other materials - that according to Rashi it is certainly permitted to do so; nevertheless, it is possible that according to Rav Amram it is invalid, because since none of the garment remained untorn [from the place of the tear till the edge], behold it was explained in the previous se'if that according to the first opinion, it's considered as if the corner was completely severed, and sewing it back up won't help, even if he wants to affix ציצית onto it afterwards.  And it's possible that our case here is better, since the corner is whole from both sides, and it only tore in the middle, and that is the Shulchan Aruch's doubt.  And see in the Ta"z who argues on this and rules that there is no doubt here, for everyone agrees that if you affixed ציצית after sewing it, that it is valid.  Nevertheless, it is better to see to it that before sewing it, one places a piece of cloth that's 3x3 [fingerbreadths] under the corner and [therefore] will fulfill all opinions.  And if that's not possible, one may be lenient like the Ta"z.  For even without that, we wrote in se'if katan 15 that the opinion of the later rabbinic authorities is that sewing is considered an attachment and it works even when the corner tore completely from it's place.
Made from silk - For if it was made from wool, we already explained that there is no concern at all and it is permitted to sew even below 3 [fingerbreadths].
With a silk thread - The same applies if the טלית was from another material and the thread was specifically from the same material.  But if the thread was from a different material, one may be lenient; for certainly one may not take that thread and use it for ציצית, because [ציצית strings] can only exempt [a טלית if they are] of the same material.
White - Because if it's colored we are also not concerned at all that he might take it (ie. the colored thread) to be used as ציצית for we do not have the custom of using colored ציצית, as was written in siman 9, se'if 5.
Below 3 [fingerbreadths] etc. - For there is the place of the ציצית; but when the sewing is above 3 [fingerbreadths] or below the [measurement of the length of the thumb from the] knuckle [to the end of the nail from the edge of the טלית], there is no concern that one will use the sewing threads as ציצית, as was written in siman 11.  And around the hole [where the ציצית are inserted], it is forbidden to sew with white thread; and [regarding] our טליתות, which are made from wool, one does not need to be particular at all as was mentioned previously.
In any place - Meaning, if it tore and there was left over any amount [that was untorn up until the edge], or anything similar as was explained above in se'if 5.

Siman 16

Of a child etc. - This is a child that is 9 years old.  In the Responsum of the Rem"a, siman 110, he questions how do people go out with a four cornered garment (ie. their טלית קטן) that is smaller than this.  And the essence/summary of his words are that it is permitted to go out with them [for it is] better than to go the whole day without ציצית [at all].  And in Darchei Moshe, siman 9, he wrote that the people should be taught that they should recite the blessing in the morning on their טלית גדול and [have in mind] to exempt their טלית קטן and then they may go out with it all day.  But nevertheless, if it's possible for a person to make it (ie. the טלית קטן) large enough so that it's the [minimum]  measurement, "how good and how pleasant it is" - Until here are his words (ie. from the Darchei Moshe).  And one should make the [material that passes over the] shoulders wide so that it's recognizable and be considered a garment and not [just] straps.
And then it is obligated in ציצית - [for] an adult who wears it; which excludes if it did not have the measurement [that covers] the head and the majority of a child's body, then everyone agrees that it is exempt [from needing ציצית], even if the adult goes out with it occasionally to the market.  But if it's common among the people of that place that the men go out regularly to the market [wearing a small garment as mentioned above] and they are not embarrassed by it, it's seems from the words of the Ba"ch that it would be obligated in ציצית.  See further in Biur Halacha.
When the adult - [Meaning at least] 13 years old.
To the market - Or to the doorway of his house [facing] the street.  But if the adult is embarrassed to go out [wearing it] even occasionally to the market, it is not considered a covering, even if he wears it in his house.  And there are those who argue on this and hold that you only need [to fulfill the condition of] it [being large enough] to cover the head and majority of the body of a minor.  And the later rabbinic authorities agree that one should be stringent to not make a blessing on a טלית קטן, even if it's large enough to cover the head and majority of the body of a minor, if the adult would be embarrassed to go out with it occasionally to the market; for even though he would go out [like that], his intention is rendered irrelevant by the opinions of all other men.  And regarding the measurement of "[enough to cover] his (ie. a child's) head and the majority of his body", it is written in Pri Ha'aretz in the name of Derech Chochma that the measurement is 3/4 of a cubit for it's length,  and 1/2 a cubit for it's width.  And the Machtzit Hashekel and Artzot Hachaim wrote on this that there is no basis for this in the Talmud, and specifically regarding the 1/2 a cubit width that he mentioned.  And the custom of men of [proper] action is to be particular that there should be a cubit in the front and a cubit in the back, and the neck hole does not count for that measurement.  And with a טלית קטן like that, one will not have any doubts and is able to recite the blessing on it.  Nevertheless, one should not go less than 3/4 of a cubit for the length on each side, for otherwise there will be a concern for a blessing made in vain; for the later rabbinic authorities wrote that they measured and found that the measurement of "the head and the majority of the body of a child" is 1.5 cubits; and see further in Biur Halacha.  And the custom of the Ashkenazim (ie. those Jews in Germany) who take a small piece of cloth, one in the front and one in the back, and they sew straps onto them [so that the straps rest on their shoulders], and they affix ציצית to them - they do not at all fulfill their obligation of ציצית with them; and besides the fact that they negate the commandment of ציצית, they are making a blessing in vain every day and are violating the commandment of "Do not take Hashem's Name in vain", and it is also forbidden for them to walk out with them on Shabbat, as was explained in siman 10 and 13 - see there further.  Nevertheless, those who do make it like that should not make a blessing on it, rather they should make the blessing in the morning on their טלית גדול, and with that they may go out with [the טלית קטן] all day since they nevertheless had the intention with this in order to not negate the commandment of ציצית all day.  But anyone who is G-d fearing should not rely on this at all, rather they should make [it out of] a real [complete] garment, each place according to their custom.  And in some places, they have a custom that the garment which is called "kamizel" or "vest", it is open in the back and they place ציצית on it's 4 corners - fortunate are they, however they must be careful to make sure that the majority of it is open.  And similarly, [regarding] the טלית קטן that they make in our country, they should be careful regarding this (ie. the majority should be open).  And see further, above in siman 10, se'if 7 and 8, what we wrote there.  The Ari"zal wrote [regarding] a טלית קטן, that it is better that it should not have sleeves.  If one wore a טלית and it folded/bunched up a bit, as is common when wearing clothes, and after it folded it did not have the measurement of "the head and the majority of the body of a child": it's written in the Responsum of the Beit Yosef - siman 106, that since it's able to be unfolded, it's considered to be unfolded, even though it is not yet unfolded, and it therefore has the correct measurement; see there.  And see as well in Bnei Chaya.  A טלית that has [the measurement of] "the head and the majority of the body of a child", but by sewing it, it does not have that measurement [anymore]: it is exempt from ציצית.  See there in siman 66.  And so too wrote the Leket Hakemach.

Siman 17

Obligated in ציצית - It's obvious that he may make the blessing on them as well, but he should check them first by feeling them with his hands or he should ask someone else to check them for him.
A nighttime garment - Logic would dictate that [the verse] is coming to include the garment of a blind man and to exclude a nighttime garment since a blind man's garment can nevertheless still be seen by others.  But a nighttime garment cannot be seen by others.
Time dependent - For behold, nighttime is not the time for ציצית.  And every positive מצוה which is time-dependent, women are exempt from them, even on a rabbinic level; for the entire Torah is juxtaposed to תפילין, as it is written regarding [תפילין] "that the Torah of the Lord may be in your mouth” (Exodus 13:9)", and just like women are exempt from תפילין, for it is juxtaposed to learning Torah as it is written "And you shall teach them to your sons" (Deuteronomy 6:7), and [it did]  not [say] your daughters, so too they are exempt from all positive מצוות which are time-dependent.  And [regarding] slaves, we derive it from a verbal analogy [between the phrase:] “To her” (Leviticus 19:20), [written with regard to a designated maidservant, and the phrase:] “To her” (Deuteronomy 24:3), [written with regard] to a [divorced] woman, [to teach us] that every מצוה that a woman is exempt from, a slave is exempt as well
And to say the blessing on it - For even someone who is not commanded [to do something] and he [still] does it has a reward; and it's  applicable to say "and he commanded us" ("us" here being used in a more general way to include all of Israel) since the men were commanded, so [therefore] they (ie. the women) also have a reward [when they do it].
It is not a commandment on the person - With this he answers why women make a blessing on a lulav which is also a positive commandment which is time-dependent; and he answers that it's different over there (ie. by ציצית) because it's not an obligation on the person.  For even a man does not have a Torah level obligation to buy a four cornered garment; rather, if he is does wrap[in a four cornered garment], he is obligated to make ציצית for it.  As opposed to [the מצוה of] lulav - that for a person it is an obligation on the person which is a obligation on the body.  And you should know, that we rule regarding ציצית, that it is an obligation on the person and it is not an obligation on the person, and both [cases] we rule leniently.  [When we say it's an] obligation on the person [and it's ruled] leniently - it's to exclude an obligation on the item (ie. the garment); for as long as he's not wearing the garment, even though it has 4 corners, it is exempt from ציצית.  [And when we say it's] not an obligation on the person [and it's ruled] leniently - [it means] that he's not obligated to buy himself a [4 cornered] garment in order to obligate it in ציצית; just that if he has a garment with 4 corners and he wears it, then it's obligated in ציצית.  See further in siman 19.
Are obligated [in the commandment of ציצית] out of doubt - For a doubt regarding a Torah level mitzvah is ruled strictly, and that is what the Beit Yosef wrote.  And it's implied from this, that something whose obligation is only on a rabbinic level, like a borrowed טלית after 30 days - as appeared above in siman 14; or a garment whose obligation is only due to a doubt, like a garment which is half open and half closed (ie. the stitching on the sides under the arms) - as appeared above in siman 1, se'if 7; they (ie a tumtum and androgynous) are permitted to go out with them without ציצית.  See further in Pri Megadim who wrote similar to this.  And perhaps one should be stringent regarding this because of the way it appears [to other people] (ie. other people will see and think they are transgressing), as is mentioned there in siman 8.
Without a blessing - Since the main obligation is only due to a doubt, [therefore] regarding the blessing, which is [only] on a rabbinic level, we rule leniently.  And see below in siman 67 in the Mishna Berura where we will write there, G-d willing, some of the general rules from the poskim (halachic authorities) regarding this.
Male and female genitals - And it is also a doubt here whether he is a male or female.  And see further in Artzot Hachaim who brings a proof from several places that we rule this way -  that he (ie. the androgynous) is considered a doubt, and not like the opinion that he is a species unto himself. 
Purchase ציצית for him - Meaning, he must take a 4 cornered garment and affix ציצית to it in order to educate [his child] in מצות.  And [regarding] the measurement of his טלית, the Pri Megadim wrote in siman 16, and in Derech Hachaim, that it is enough to cover [the child's] head and the majority of his body.  And we measure it according to the child himself who will be wearing it, whether he is big or small, and if [the garment] has this measurement, then the father must affix ציצית to it and make the blessing with him (ie. his son).  And if it does not have that measurement, then they should not make the blessing on it.
To educate him - All this only applies when he has not yet reached the age of thirteen, but from the age of thirteen onwards, he is obligated to fulfill the mitzvah of ציצית just like an adult. And that which is written in the Drashos Mahari"l, in the laws of marriage, that it is the practice for grown youths not to wrap themselves with ציצית  until they have married women, and they ascribe this to the implication of the verses which states "You should make for yourself tassels", and close to this verse it is written,"If a man takes a wife" - this is a surprising statement, [for it is unthinkable] that as long as he has not yet married a woman, he should sit idly neglecting the mitzvah of ציצית.

Siman 18

According to the Rambam etc. - Nevertheless, it is permitted to go out in a public domain on Friday night with a טלית and ציצית and it is not considered carrying, because they (ie. the ציצית) are the beauty of the garment and are its adornments.
Ruled leniently - This is specifically regarding the blessing, but it is forbidden to wear a nighttime garment during the day without ציצית and similarly, a daytime garment [may not be worn] at night [without ציצית] because of this  doubt (ie. the machloket Rambam/Rosh).  Nevertheless, it seems that a prayer leader who wears a טלית at night [to lead the evening prayers] does not need to inspect the ציצית, for in this case we can certainly rely on the assumption that it had previously (ie. that the ציצית were valid).
And it is also designated for daytime - The meaning of "also for daytime use" is: even if it's [a garment that's] designated for nighttime use, and certainly [one designated] for daytime use alone.
The evening prayers - And on a public fast day, when we wear a טלית during the afternoon prayers, one should remove the טלית when they get up to ברכו since nowadays we only wear a טלית to fulfill the mitzvah of ציצית, and if it were to remain on him, it would appear as if he holds that nighttime is the time of ציצית.  Nevertheless, the prayer leader who leads the communal prayers - if he is not wearing an outer garment (ie. a jacket), which is disrespectful to the congregation, it is obvious that he should not remove his טלית.
And on night of Yom Kippur - Anyone who leads the communal prayer must don [a טלית].  And Lechem Chamudot wrote that even one who recites the Mourner's Kaddish must don [a טלית] out of respect for the congregation, but he should not make the blessing on it.
Wrap/wear - To be likened to the angels who are wrapped in white.  Therefore, they (the men) should not remove [their טלית] at night until after the evening prayers of the end of Yom Kippur.
While it is still day - But if one delayed in donning [their טלית] until it was nighttime, they should not make the blessing anymore, because maybe the law follows the Rambam.  And it seems from the Magen Avraham in se'if katan 4 that even during twilight it is permitted to recite the blessing up until nightfall.  And his reason is that regarding ציצית it (ie. the verse) does not say "day", [rather] it just says "and you shall look upon it" - it's inferred to mean "as long as we can see it".  The author of Derech Hachaim ruled this way as well.  And I saw that the Mateh Efraim is stringent regarding this.  However, if one is in doubt about this, whether twilight arrived yet, it seems that one may certainly make the blessing [on their טלית], for even without that, the opinion of Tosefot and the Rosh are that a daytime garment is obligated [in ציצית] at night (and so according to them, you would be obligated to make a blessing at night).  And the Gr"a in his commentary also leans towards this opinion.  See there further.
ציצית to them - Since their main use is at night and [therefore] it's called a "nighttime garment".  But according to this, it would only be exempt [from ציצית] according to the Rosh; but according to the Rambam [who holds] that a nighttime garment is obligated [in ציצית] during the day, it (ie. the bedsheet/blanket) would be obligated.  And there are those who say another reason to exempt it: it's because the Torah only obligated [a garment] that's worn as clothing or that one wraps [himself] in it, but not something that one covers himself with.  And there are those who argue on this and hold that even if one spreads out a 4 cornered  garment underneath himself, and certainly if he covers himself with [a 4 cornered garment].  Therefore, the Magen Avraham decided that one should make one of the corners rounded and [therefore] would fulfill all opinions.  But it's inferred from his words that one only needs to be stringent regarding this with a wool bedsheet/blanket, but not with one of flax or some other material.  And regarding the reasoning for this, see in Pri Megadim....
Can tell the difference etc. - And this is the time of "when [if] one would see a friend who he is somewhat acquainted with from a distance of 4 cubits, he would recognize him", which is mentioned below in siman 58 regarding K'riat Shema (Beit Yosef [stating] in siman 58 in the name of the Rosh that it is all one  measurement (ie. blue/white and recognizing friend).  See further in Biur HaGr"a on this topic).
And this is our practice - See in Biur HaGra who ruled like the opinion of the Shulchan Aruch.  And Pri Megadim wrote [that] if the there is a time constraint, one who is lenient and puts on his טלית starting from dawn, we do not protest it;  but nevertheless, ideally it is certainly very proper to wait to make the blessing until the time of when [there's enough light that] one can tell the difference between the תכלת and the white, and this seems to be the opinion of the Eliah Raba.  And after the fact, it seems that even if one made the blessing before dawn he should not repeat it [after משיכיר], because maybe the law is like the Ro"sh [who holds] that a daytime garment [worn] at night is obligated [in ציצית and would therefore require a blessing].
He should touch it - ["It"], meaning the ציצית.

Siman 19

And not an obligation on the garment - See previously in [in Mishah Berurah] Siman 17, Se'if Katan 5 what I wrote there.
Exempt from Tzitzit - Even though it says "and they shall make for themselves Tzitzit on the corners of their garments", nevertheless, from the fact that it says in another place "You shall make tassels on the four corners of your  garment 'with which you cover yourself'", it is implied to mean specifically when you are covering yourself with it.
On the making of the Tzitzit - Meaning to say "at the time that he attaches them [the Tzitzit] on the garment".  Rather, afterwards, when he wraps in it he makes the blessing of "to wrap".  And if [the Tzitzit] became detached after he wore it, he is required to remove it [the Tallit] and make Tzitzit for it and to make the blessing when he wears it again... even if he will wear it immediately [after fixing it].
Only on his wearing of it - And the same law applies to Mezuzah.  For we establish that the requirement is on the one who lives [in the house].  [And therefore] one should only recite the blessing on the Mezuzah when he enters to live in the house, immediately/right away.  For then it is exactly similar to the [law of] wrapping [in the Tallit]...
It is exempt - The Achronim established that specifically according to the Rosh it is exempt [from Tzitzit] [as was written] previously in Siman 18 "a garment that is designated/used for nighttime, even if he wore it during the day [is exempt]".  And [so] here too [in our case of shrouds], it is similar to the case of a nighttime garment since a dead person is exempt from mitzvot.  But according to the Rambam who obligates a nighttime garment during the day, here too [by the case of shrouds] it is obligated.  Therefore, for us (ie. the way we should conduct ourselves in this scenario), we should make Tzitzit for it, but not make the blessing on it.  Garment merchants that wear [four cornered garments] with the intention to display to the buyers the garments size (ie. how it fits) are exempt [from attaching Tzitzit to the garment].  And if they wear it in order to avoid paying taxes on it, it's possible that it would be obligated in Tzitzit, like it is regarding Kelayim.

Siman 20

From a Jew - Even if he does not know him... to know if he is a kosher and trustworthy person.  Nonetheless, we assume that a regular Jew has a presumed status of being kosher and certainly spun and wove and affixed the Tzitzit for the sake of the mitzvah (ie, with the proper intentions)... Unless [you know for a fact] that he is suspect [Bach].  And [for] the laws of suspicions, look in Yoreh Deah - Siman 119.
Or from a non-Jewish merchant - Even if he is not presumed to be a buyer (ie. for resale) of garments, but is only presumed to be a buyer of other merchandise.  Nonetheless, he is believed.  For if he would be found to be a liar in one thing, he would not be trusted in regards to other things.
From a trustworthy Jew - See in the Levush that it's obvious that the merchant does not have to say that he bought it from a trustworthy [Jew].  For even from a regular (ie. any) Jew it would be permitted just like a case of a Jew buying from another Jew.  And this is also the understanding of the other Achronim.  And it's possible that the Rem"a also holds like this and the word "Ne'eman" (trustworthy) is referring to the merchant [to tell us] that he is trusted in what he said.  And the Rem"a added this word to teach us the logic that specifically on his words we can rely on and we believe him, for he would not harm himself to lie [and lose business].  As opposed to [buying from] a regular non-Jew (ie. not a merchant), it would not harm him by doing this [ie. lying].
For he would not do bad to himself - See in the Magen Avraham who wrote that specifically in regards to a garment with it's Tzitzit [already attached to it] do we rely on this logic and we trust him, for it is not the way of a non-Jew to place Tzitzit  on their garments.  But to buy the Tzitzit strings is not permitted even from a non-Jewish merchant since maybe the spinning and weaving was not done with the proper intentions.  And this is the ruling of the Taz and ???.  And there are those that are lenient in this.  See in Or Hachaim and Yeshuot Yaakov that agreed when the occupation on the merchant is to buy Tzitzit strings from a Jew and to [then] sell them, it would then be permissible [to buy] from the merchant.
It is invalid - Since maybe he himself placed the Tzitzit on the garment.  And certainly it is not permitted to buy the Tzitzit strings from him since maybe he did not spin them with the proper intentions.  And if so, it is obvious that even if he [the Jew] wants to remove them (the Tzitzit) from the garment and re-attach them, it is not permitted [Magen Avraham and other Achronim, not like the Taz].  If one found a Tallit with Tzitzit on them in the marketplace, it is kosher.  And it is not permitted to send Tzitzit... even cut and spun, with a non-Jew, unless it has two seals. 
To a non-Jew - Even if he is a merchant.  For he too is suspected of murder and [sexual] immorality.  And this that we said earlier in [Siman 20] Se'if 1 "there's a presumtion that he bought it from a Jew etc.", that's referring to when a Jew went ahead (ie. transgressed) and sold it to him (ie. to the non-Jew).
Maybe he will accompany - And another reason [for not selling to a non-Jew] is brought in Gemarah: Because of a harlot.  And Rashi explains there that he [the non-Jew] will give to a harlot as payment and she will say that a Jew gave it to her.  And therefore, certainly it is forbidden to sell to a non-Jewish woman for this reason.  And see in the Chayei Adam who wrote that the reason of "maybe he will accompany" does not apply nowadays for the non-Jews are not suspected of murder.  But for the reason of the "harlot", we are still concerned.
For a short time (ie. temporarily) - But if he removed the Tzitzit, even though the holes [where the Tzitzit used to be]  remain, it is permitted to even sell the Tallit [garment] to a non-Jew.

Siman 21

The strings of the Tzitzit - And the same law applies to all objects used for a Mitzvah,like  Sukkah, Lulav, Shofar, and all similar things after they have stopped they're use and the mitzvah no longer applies.
That became detached - Or if he [purposefully] removed them from the garment.  And the same rule applies before he attached them to the garment.  For just by virtue of the strings being ready/prepared [to attach to the garment, but not yet actually attached] is not considered [of importance].
To the garbage - But it is forbidden to use them in an unfitting/improper manner.  For the Tzitzit are no less than the Tallit [whose laws are mentioned] below in 21:2.
Attached to the Tallit - Even if he is not currently wearing the Tallit and even if it's evening, since it's fitting  to be worn and to fulfill with the Tzitzit the Mitzvah of wearing Tzitzit.  And similarly a Shofar, even after Rosh Hashana, and similarly an old  Lulav... if they are fitting to be used for the Mitzvah the following year, then it is forbidden to use them for other purposes because of "degrading the Mitzvah".  And see [further] in Biur Halachah.
To use them for another purpose - And with Tzitzit, it would not suffice to make a condition saying "I am not separating myself from them [to allow them to be used for the mitzvah] like in [Shulchan Aruch] Siman 638, Se'if 2 (regarding Sukkah decorations), since it is a "degrading of the Mitzvah" of Tzitzit.  For it is obvious that he is using the Tzitzit to fulfill the Mitzvah, for he makes the blessing over them "...to wrap".
One should not treat them - And similarly with the schach of the Sukkah and a Lulav and a Shofar... once they have stopped their use for the mitzvah, we do not throw them in the garbage or anything similar which would not be an honor to the mitzvah that has passed.  And the Pri Megadim wrote that it is proper to not even use the walls of the Sukkah for an unfitting use.
To throw them - Meaning to say, with one's hands it's forbidden to throw them in the garbage.  However, if by the fact that he did not put them in genizah (ie. a repository for sacred items) they got thrown away on their own... for that we are not concerned.
To place them in genizah (ie. a repository for sacred items) - The Maharil wrote that one can place the Tzitzit inside a [sacred] book as a bookmark or to use them for any other type of mitzvah... for since he it was used for one mitzvah, let it be used for another.
That wore out - See in Pri Megadim who wrote that [regarding] a garment used for the mitzvah [of Tzitzit] whose Tzitzit strings became detached, one should not make pants out of them... for that falls under the category of "unfitting use".  And even from a Tallit Kattan it is forbidden.
And he is not permitted etc. - That is the proper text [Or Hachaim and so too is it implied from the Gra].
To wipe/clean etc. - Meaning to say, even to wipe the mud/dirt from his feet [So too is it proven from the Ran in chapter 13 in mesechet Shabbat]
Unfitting - But if it's not unfitting then it is permitted. [Regarding a Tallit whose] Tzitzit strings are still attached... if it's permitted to use the Tallit for a use that's not unfitting, the opinion of the Olat Tamid(?) is that it is allowed.  For it's specifically the Tzitzit strings that the Mechaber (ie. the Shulchan Aruch) forbids in Se'if 1 (of chapter 21).  But according to the Taz, it is forbidden.  And so too the Pri Megadim agrees and wrote that a Tallit that's designated for prayer use, we are strict with it just like with the Tzitzit strings.  But [regarding] a Tallit Kattan, it's obvious that it's allowed to be used for anything that's not unfitting... even when the Tzitzit strings are still attached.  For it's a common clothing [item] and he is [even] allowed to sleep in them at night as will be mentioned soon.
He can throw them away - Meaning to say, in the garbage.  And even [according to] the other opinions that were mentioned previously that forbid the Tzitzit strings themselves, it's inferred that they would agree here.
To the bathroom - And [this is] specifically with the Tallit Kattan that one wears throughout the day.  But the Tallitot that are designated to be used for prayer services, it is not proper to enter with them into the bathroom.  However, to urinate with them is permitted.  Similarly, those who go on Yom Kippur to [the bathroom] to defecate and are wearing a Kittel, they need to remove the Kittel since that garment is designated to only be used for prayers.
To not sleep - And in the writings of the Arizal it is written based on the mystical teaching [Kabbalah] that one should sleep at night while wearing a Tallit Kattan.
To a non-Jewish cleaner to clean - ...the Tallit with the Tzitzit [attached], rather he should remove the Tzitzit strings and then afterwards they may be washed [by the non-Jew].
To sleep in them - And so too, to give them to a non-Jewish cleaner.  However, there are those that are stringent regarding this and do it like was mentioned previously (ie. remove the strings first).
Shouldn't drag - Some explain [that] the reason is because of "degrading the Mitzvah".  And additionally, because [doing so] makes them prone to becoming invalid (ie. the strings can tear etc.).  Therefore, one should raise them and tuck them into their belt.

Siman 22

Buys a Tallit etc. - Don't ask [the following question]: Regarding other new vessels/garments, one needs to make the blessing [of שהחיינו] at the time of buying  it, so why [here] did he write "and makes Tzitzit strings for it"? (ie. he says to say the שהחיינו only after affixing the strings).  For one can say/answer that that is specifically when one buys a garment that is ready to be worn "as is" [in which case] one would make the blessing immediately.  But if one buys a garment/cloth to make from it clothing, then one does not make the blessing even after he finished making it [but instead makes it] at the time that he wears it (for the first time).  For [the blessing of שהחיינו] needs a designated time... either when you buy it or when you wear it.  And here, it's not fitting to be worn right away for one needs to place the Tzitzit on it.  Therefore, he is not able to bless on it at the time of acquiring it.  And in order to also to fulfill the opinion of those who hold that one needs to make the שהחיינו blessing on the "doing" of the mitzvah for the first time, one should make the blessing at the time of attaching the Tzitzit and not wait until they wear it.
Because it is not any less [important] etc. - But one does not make the שהחיינו  on the [actual] mitzvah [itself] since it's something that does not come from time to time (ie. periodically... like shofar or lulav etc.).  According to this, if one made Tzitzit on a garment that he already had, even if [that garment] never had Tzitzit on it, he does not need to bless שהחיינו.  And the same law applies if one made תפילין for himself, he does not bless שהחיינו.  And see [further] in the Be'er Halacha.
At the time he wears - First [he makes] the bracha of להתעטף and afterwards שהחיינו [Pri Megadim and Derech Hachaim]

Siman 23

"Mocking the poor" - For it appears as if he is shaming [the dead], for they are not able to fulfill the Mitzvot.
That were needed for them - For [back] then the custom was that their clothing were [all] made with four corners.
Covered up - For example, if he hid (ie. tucked in) the ציצית of his Tallit Gadol under the edges of his garment.  And for the same reason, also the Tallit Kattan that he wears underneath, it does not have the [prohibition] of "mocking the poor" since it's covered up... unless he is walking without his outermost garment [in which case] that too would be prohibited until he hides/tucks them under his garment.  [And from the Pri Megadim it seems that one should be strict with a Tallit Gadol even if it's covered up since it's designated [to be used only] for prayers.  However, in the Beit Yosef it does not seem that way.  And in Derech Hachaim(?) [he was] closed/silent (ie. he did not comment on this point) and [simply] wrote that if it's covered then it is permitted].
By doing this - For even though they tie one to the other, it does not nullify the מצוה of ציצית by doing so.  For it is not [considered] a permanent knot since he has in mind to remove the know once he exits the cemetery.  And this is similar to what he (ie. the Shulchan Aruch) wrote in Siman 10, Se'if 3.  And furthermore, according to their logic that they hold that the ציצית are nullified by tying them... if that is true, then they are wearing a garment without ציצית.
Or a grave - And even [regarding] a grave of a child one should be stringent because of "mocking the poor".  For maybe the [soul of this child] is the soul of a great man.  But [regarding] a woman's grave, who even in her lifetime was exempt [from ציצית], there is no [concern for] "mocking the poor".
The same law applies [to him] as one entering a cemetery - See later in Siman 45 in Mishnah Berurah.
In a place that has the practice etc. - And the אחרונים (ie. later commentators) agree that even in a place that does not have the practice to remove [the ציצית from the garment of the dead], there too there is [a concern for] "mocking the poor" since the dead are exempt from doing מצות.
"Mocking the poor" - This is if the ציצית are exposed as [was explained] previously.

Siman 24

In order to remember etc. - An example of this is like a man that wants to warn/remind his friend about something, so he ties a knot around him so that he should remember (Tur).
Over his garments - See previously in Siman 8 in Mishna Berurah what was written there.
At the time of prayer (ie. Shemona Esrei) - And Kriyat Shema.  And see [what's written] in the Zohar - Parshat שלח לך, that one who reads Kriyat Shema without Tzitzit testifies a false testimony on themselves.  For he reads the Parsha of ציצית, but he does not fulfill [what's written in] the verse.  The Chayei Adam writes "It is not good what many people do... that they pray while on their way without wearing a טלית גדול.  And in most cases, the טלית קטן [that they are wearing] was not made properly with all the [Halachic] details that would make it fitting to make the blessing on.  And also, they sleep in it at night...".  And see [what was written]  previously in Siman 8, Se'if 16 in Mishnah Berurah.
With your left hand - It is written in the writings of the Arizal that [one should] hold them (the Tzitzit strings) between the ring and pinky fingers.  And when you get to the Parsha of ציצית, take them also in your right hand and gaze at them.  And they should remain in your hands until you reach [the words] "נאמנים ונחמדים לעד"... at which point you kiss the Tzitzit and release them from your hands.
On your heart - For the heart is on the left [side].  And this מצוה saves a person from sin as it is written "And you shall not stray [after you heart] etc."... "in order that you shall remember etc."... "and you shall be holy".  And [from the fact that] all the other מצות don't have this protective power to save a person from the evil inclination, [that's what makes] ציצית superior.  And as is demonstrated in the story [mentioned in] מנחות (daf 44a) [that starts with the words] "מעשה באדם אחד" etc.
While you say the blessing - As it says "And you shall see it and remember".  Seeing leads to remembering and remembering leads to doing.
Over your eyes - It's found in the name of the earlier commentators that all who pass the ציצית over their eyes when they read the parsha of ציצית is guaranteed that they won't come to be blind.  A blind person should hold the ציצית in his hands while saying Kriyat Shema even though it says "and you shall see them (ie. the ציצית)", since there is the ability to see among other people.  But to pass them over his eyes, he should not do, for it appears as if he is laughing and mocking [the מצוה].
To the Havayot - Meaning the Sephirot which are connected and united one with the other.
One who is careful with the מצוה of ציצית - It is a מצוה to make a fine טלית garment and fine ציצית [strings].  And the same thing applies to all the מצות... one must do them with an adornment as much as possible... as it is written "This is my God and I will glorify Him" [which the Sages interpreted anveihu (glorify) homiletically as linguistically related to noi (beauty), and interpreted the verse as] "Beautify yourself before Him in mitzvot".  But it is forbidden to embroider verses from the Torah onto the טלית.  Nevertheless, if it was already embroidered, it is permissible to bless on it.  And even on a tablecloth, we do not teach that it is permissible a priori to embroider verses from the Torah on it.

Siman 25

After one put on etc. - Even if the tallis is only Rabbinically obligated [to have tzitzis on it], for example a borrowed tallis after 30 days, as was seen above in siman 14.  Anything similar to that, one must give it priority over the tefillin [Artzot Hachaim].
One should put on his tefillin - One who cannot afford to buy [both] tzitzis and tefillin, the Achronim conclude that tefillin takes precedence, since tzitzis is only a mitzvah if one has a four cornered garment, [whereas] tefillin is an obligation [no matter what], and one who does not put on tefillin is in the category of "sinners of Israel [who sin] with their body", as is seen below in siman 37.  Certainly, regarding buying  higher quality tefillin or a more beautiful tallis, the tefillin takes precedence, according to all opinions, and many err in this.  One who cannot afford to buy tefillin or tzitzis is not obligated to go around collecting money in order to [get funds] to buy it.  However, one who is able to afford it, but relies instead on borrowing it from others after they fulfilled their obligation, the Ba"ch wrote that their punishment is great.
So that they won't encounter them first - Meaning, even if they don't [actually] hold it in their hand, but [rather] just by reaching out one's hand they are in front of him first, one may not pass over them and will have to put them on first.  All of this is only if he is planning on wearing the tefillin now, but if is not wanting to put them on until later, then this [prohibition of] passing over mitzvos does not apply.
Will have to put them on - It's obvious to me that if one is praying at home and wants to put on his tallis and tefillin, and the tefillin are in the same room as him, but the tallis is in another room, he must put on the tefillin first in order to not [transgress] "passing over mitzvos" since the tefillin are before him first, even if he did not pick them up [see Yoma 33b "And when he enters the Sanctuary etc."]
Before the tallis - If one transgressed and put down the tefillin and picked up the tallis, it is now forbidden for him to put it down and then pick up the tefillin.
But does not have tzitzis - Even if he is not walking around with a four cornered garment, and certainly according to our common practice where everyone is careful regarding wearing a tallis katan.
He does not have to wait - Because we don't delay doing a mitzvah.  Even though one can argue that he'll be able to perform the mitzvah in the most optimal way later (ie. if he waits till he has tzitzis, he'll be able to put everything on in the proper order), [nevertheless] a mitzvah that can be done now is more beloved.  Also, when a frequent practice and an infrequent practice clash, we hold that the frequent practice takes precedence [over the infrequent practice] - but if the frequent practice is not in front of me right now, there is no need to wait. ...
At home - So that he should leave his home with tzitzis and tefillin on, as is brought in the Beit Yosef and Darchei Moshe in the name of the Zohar - see there further as it is a great matter.  But if one knows that he will [have to] pass by filthy places or that there are gentiles on the road, he should [instead] put them on in the courtyard of the shul.  If that's not possible, then he should put them on at home and cover it with his hat or his hand.  See further in the Achronim who wrote that for one who wakes up before daylight and goes to shul, this warning of the Zohar does not apply, since it's not yet the time of the obligation [of tefillin]. Nevertheless, once daylight starts, it's better to go out the the courtyard of the shul and put them on there and then enter the shul.
And there he should put on - Even though his tallis gadol came to his hand before he put on his tefillin, he does need to put it on at home since he does not plan to wear it there.
To wrap - But in a place where there are gentiles in the street, he should put on [his tallis gadol] in te courtyard of the shul if possible.
Recite the blessing on it - Meaning the blessing of "להתעטף" ("to wrap"), and one should have in mind that this blessing should cover his tallis katan as well, as was seen above in siman 8 se'if 10 - see there further in Mishna Berurah se'if katan 24.
Then he would etc. - In order that the praise and thanks he gives when reciting this blessing should also refer to the tefillin which are called "glory", as it is written (Ezekiel 24:17) "Put on your פאר (turban/glory)" - and this is referring to tefillin which are the glory of Israel, as it's written (Deuteronomy 28:10) "And all the peoples of the earth will see ... and they will fear you." - and they (the Chachamim) expound that this refers to the head tefillin.
And recite that blessing etc. - Artzot Hachaim wrote "I have not seen anyone do it this way, rather they don tefillin before [all] the morning blessings or after them, each person according to their tradition.  But I did see that some are particular to touch their arm tefillin and head tefillin at the time that they recite this blessing"....
During the Shema and Amidah - Meaning, at the very least during Shema and the Amidah, as can be seen below in siman 37 se'if 2.  It says in the Gemara (Berakhot 14b:24) "Anyone who recites Shema without tefillin - it's as if he gives false testimony on himself", Heaven forbid.  Tosofos explains that this is because the person says (Deuteronomy 6:8) "And you shall tie them as a sign [on your arm]...", but [here] he is not tying it.  And even though, after the fact, one still fulfilled their obligation of reciting Shema, nevertheless, on the other hand he is sinning since he is presenting as if he does not want to fulfill the will of Hashem, and that is the false testimony that he gives on himself.  See in [sefer] Levush for another explanation.  Sefer Chareidim wrote "...that from this we can learn that when one says (Deuteronomy 6:5) "And you shall love Hashem...", he should see to it to enter love for Hashem into his heart, so that he shouldn't be like one speaking falsehood, Heaven forbid.  You should know that they (Chazal) only said this (ie. reciting Shema without tefillin) regarding one who purposely does not put on his tefillin, for he is too lazy to put them on before reciting Shema.  But one who [simply] does not have tefillin [at that moment], or is on the road and because of the cold he is not able to put them on, or any similar scenarios, certainly [in those cases] one should not delay reciting Shema in it's proper time because of that - Levush, siman 58, I quoted his words there."
One should have in mind, when putting them on - The Ba"ch, in siman 8, wrote a reason for this - since it says (Exodus 13:9) "And it shall be to you as a sign on your arm ... so that Hashem's teachings will be in your mouth, for with a strong hand Hashem brought you out...", it teaches us that the main mitzvah and fulfillment of it is dependent on one's thoughts - that one should have this in mind at the time he is fulfilling the mitzvah.  Pri Megadim wrote that, nevertheless, after the fact, even if one only had in mind that he is [putting on his tefillin] for the sake of the mitzvah, he has fulfilled his obligation.
To place these four passages - Because of this, there are those who have the custom of reading the four passages after putting on their tefillin.  Meaning, [only] - (Exodus 13:1) "Sanctify [to Me all the first-born]...", (Exodus 13:11) "It shall be, when Hashem brings you [to the land]...", because "Shema" and "Vehaya im shamoa", even if you don't read it here, everyone reads it [later] during recitation of Shema.  And [after putting on] Rabbeinu Tam tefillin, one should recite all four passages.  And this is a nice custom [Artzos Hachaim]....
First - Because it says [first] "And you shall tie etc." and afterwards [it says] "And they shall be as totafot etc."
And should recite the blessing - Meaning, before tightening it, as seen below.
Tefillin - The [letter] "lamed" is [pronounced] with a "dagesh".
On the mitzvah of - [The word "mitzvat" is pronounced] with a "patach" under the "vav" since it's a singular word, and one should not pronounce it with a "cholem" which would make the word plural - for this blessing was only instituted for the head tefillin, as will be explained in siman 26 [as most of the achronim agree that the halacha here is not like the Ta"z].
It is good to recite - Due to the concern of possibly reciting a blessing in vain, as is written here in siman 206.  But not that it's a complete doubt, for if that were the case, how could one recite the blessing [altogether] due to the possibility of reciting a blessing in vain and then relying on saying "Baruch Shem K'vod...".  Rather, we Ashkenazim hold that the halacha here is like Rabbeinu Tam, but just as an added precaution, in order to remove even the slightest doubt, we have the custom to say "Baruch Shem K'vod...".  One must be very careful to only say "Baruch Shem..." after tightening the head tefillin properly on his head, because if he doesn't do that it will be considered an interruption between reciting the blessing and putting it on, and that will certainly be a blessing in vain and one would have to go back and recite the blessing again.  Many people stumble regarding this.
Touched etc. - [This is] specifically if one touched it, but if one put on the head tefillin first or discovered that the arm tefillin slipped from it's [correct] place [on his arm], then one does not need to remove the head tefillin, because what happened happened, but one should quickly put on the arm tefillin in it's proper place.  There are those who disagree with this.  See further in Biur Halacha.
Skip - Since the verse says explicitly that the arm tefillin comes first - because first it says "And you shall tie etc." and afterwards [it says] "And they shall be as totafot etc." - therefore, we don't pay attention to [the fact that] the mitzvah was skipped.  As opposed to what was written above in se'if 1 regarding tzitzit and tefillin.
"l' - HUH - knee - ach" with a kamatz - Because, [pronounced that way], it means "placing/resting", as it's written (Ezekiel 44:30) "that he may cause a blessing (l'hunee'ach) to rest/be placed upon your house".  It should not be pronounced with a patach, which [would make the word] mean "leaving", as it's written (Genesis 42:33) "(hanichu) leave one of your brothers with me". [Achronim]
After he places it etc. - Because before that, ideally, it's not a fitting time to recite the blessing, for it's "prior to the prior" (ie. it's a step removed from being recited right before tightening it on the bicep), and one must precede the blessing to the mitzvah as much as possible.
Before he tightens it - But after the fact (ie. if one did not recite the blessing right before tightening it), one may recite the blessing even after [tightening it], because it (ie. tefillin) is a mitzvah that extends throughout the day.
Before tightening it - Because the tightening [of the head tefillin] is it's tying (ie. it's the equivalent of the tying of the arm tefillin).  One must also be careful to recite the blessing after they are resting on this head (but before tightening them down), not like those who recite the blessing while they are still in their hands, because then it's [considered] "prior to the prior" (ie. it's a step removed from being recited right before the proper time).  Also, while reciting the blessing on the head tefillin, one should make sure that his head is covered with his tallis, he shouldn't recite the blessing with an exposed head.
It is forbidden to make an interruption - Even if speaking for the sake of a mitzvah, like replying "hello" back to one's rebbi or anything similar, because he is causing [himself] to have to recite a blessing that is not needed.  Even those who put on tefillin on Chol Hamoed without a blessing, or those who put on Rabbeinu Tam tefillin after they take off their Rashi tefillin, or if one took off his tefillin and had in mind to put them back on after - which the Rem"a paskened in siman 12 that one does not need to recite a blessing again when he puts them back on, [nevertheless] even in [all] those cases it is a transgression to make an interruption in between them.  Because from the outset, they must be joined together and without delay, as it's written (Exodus 13:9) "It shall be to you as a sign on your hand, and for a reminder between your eyes" - ["Vehaya"/"It shall be" is expounded to mean] that there should be one "being" for the two of them (ie. they are treated as one unit).
With speaking - Even in Hebrew.  A priori, it's forbidden to even make a silent interruption, [like] if one waits a long time unnecessarily, even if he did not take his mind off [of the tefillin].  Even to signal with one's eyes or gesture with one's finger between the arm tefillin and the head tefillin, one should be careful not to do this ideally.  [Regarding] if one put on his arm tefillin in one room/house and the head tefillin in another room/house, and he was intending to do this - see above in siman 8 se'if 13 and in Mishnah Berurah over there regarding  a [similar scenario with a] tallit, and the same applies here.
And if he made in interruption - Even unintentionally.
And for us [Ashkenazim] that have the custom etc. - Because the reason we recite two blessings on tefillin and don't rely on [reciting] just the blessing "l'haniach/to place" is because we hold that this is the way they (chazal) instituted the blessings: When you start to put them on, they instituted that one should recite "l'haniach", and it should also count towards the head tefillin; and when one puts on the head tefillin and tightens it, he recites "al mitzvas" because that is the conclusion of the mitzvah.  Therefore, accordingly, if one spoke and took his mind off of the tefillin, he must go back and also recite "l'haniach" on the head tefillin. [Ro"sh].
He must go back and recite - It's proper for one to handle the arm tefillin to move it from it's place and [then move it back to it's place and] tighten it, and that way the blessing "l'haniach" will also refer to the arm tefillin, and it's considered as if he just put on the arm tefillin and head tefillin one after the other.  If he recited the blessing without handling [the arm tefillin], he should handle it after the blessing.  See what we wrote in Biur Halacha in the name of R. Akiva Eiger.
If one spoke - Even if he spoke between reciting the blessing "l'haniach" and tying his arm tefillin, the law here still applies.
He does not [have to go back and recite] etc. - But a priori, it is forbidden to speak in between reciting the blessing "l'haniach" until after putting on the head tefillin, even for things that are needed for the sake of the tefillin, unless it is impossible otherwise.  However, on Chol Hamoed, when we don't recite the blessings on the tefillin, it's possible that we can be lenient, a priori, [to speak in between] for things that are needed for the sake of the tefillin.
He should not stop - Even to answer Amen on this particular blessing - for example, to answer Amen on the tefillin blessing that his friend is reciting is forbidden, unless his friend is having in mind to fulfill his obligation with this blessing [Teshuvat D"ash and R. Akivah Eiger in his chiddushim, that are not like the Pri Megadim, see there further].
To answer with them - If one did stop and answer "Amen Yehei Shemei Rabbah", or Kedusha, or Barchu, or if he responded Amen to  any blessing that he heard, he must go back and recite the blessing again.  See further in Bir Halacha.  On Chol Hamoed or if one is putting on Rabbeinu Tam tefillin, or something similar where he is not putting on tefillin with a blessing, one may be lenient and answer "Amen Yehei Shemei Rabbah", or Kedusha, or Barchu, or Amen [to other blessings].  However, afterwards, he should move his arm tefillin from it's place before he puts on his head tefillin so that it should be one "unit" for both of them.
Remain quiet and listen - Because being silent is like answering in regards to fulfilling one's obligation [of answering "Amen Yehei Shemei Rabbah", or Kedusha, or Barchu, or Amen [to other blessings], but it is not considered an interruption [between the arm and head tefillin].
Before winding - The reason is that since the blessing "l'haniach" is going on the head tefillin as well, as seen above in se'if katan 31, and certainly according to the Mechaber [as seen] above in se'if 5 where he holds that one makes only one blessing [on both the arm and head tefillin], therefore one should minimize the interruption in between [them] as much as possible.  And [since] the winding [of the strap] around the arm is not mandated, it's better to delay it until after putting on the head tefillin.  In Sefer Kavanos of the Ari"zal, it's written that he (the Ari"zal) would make the 7 windings around the arm first [before putting on the head tefillin],[but not the 3 windings around the finger], because he held that, a priori, the windings are also part of the mitzvah and therefore it is not an interruption.  This is the prevalent practice.  See in Teshuvas Mishkenos Yaakov, siman 28 - his opinion is also like our practice, to first wind around the arm [but according to him, it's] in order to secure it there, for otherwise it would not stay in place and is not called "keshira" (fastening), see there further.  In Sefer Maamar Mordechai it's written that if one heard Kaddish or Kedusha after reciting the blessing on the arm tefillin, and if he were to make the 7 windings he wouldn't have enough time to put on the head tefillin and then answer [the Kaddish or Kedusha], he should put on the head tefillin before making the windings, if he is able to secure the arm tefillin enough so that it won't move from it's place.
It's forbidden etc. - Meaning, even if one wanted to remove the head tefillin and hand tefillin both at the same time from the bag, for then he is not "passing over a mitzvah", even so one must be careful since there is a kabbalistic reason not to, as it's written in the Beit Yosef.  And certainly to put down the hand tefillin and then remove the head tefillin is forbidden.
Placed - Meaning, that it's secured well on the arm, and then it would be permitted [to take out the head tefillin] even before making the seven windings.  If another person is able to take out and adjust the head tefillin for him while the other one is putting on his hand tefillin - the Pri Megadim is stringent [and does not allow it] and the Artzos Hachaim is lenient [and permits it].  See there futher.
Should not unwrap - Meaning, even if while he is unravelling the head tefillin, he doesn't put the hand tefillin down, even in such a scenario, when he puts down the head tefillin afterwards (ie. after unravelling it) in order to put on the hand tefillin, that constitutes "passing over a mitzvah" (ie. he is passing over the head tefillin).
Both standing - See in Magen Avraham who attempts to make a compromise [by saying] that putting on the hand tefillin should be done while seated, but the blessing should recited [first] while standing.  But Eliyah Rabba in the name of Rasha"l in Responsa, siman 98, wrote that who is there greater than R. Shimshon of Kinon, who after learning all of Kabbalah would still pray like a young child, for one who cannot understand its' secrets properly will come to "uproot saplings" - therefore, the blessing and putting on of the tefillin should both be done standing.  Biur HaGra demonstrates that even according to the Zohar it is permitted to put the hand tefillin on while standing.  Therefore, one should not deviate from the [accepted] practice.  Knesset HaGedolim wrote in K'lalei Haposkim that anywhere that the Kabbalah and Zohar are in disagreement with the Gemara and poskim, one should follow the Gemara and poskim.  However, if the [opinion according to the] Kabbalah is more stringent, then one should be also be stringent.  If [a halacha] is not mentioned in the Gemara and poskim, even though it's mentioned in Kabbalah, we can't force people to adopt that practice.  A halacha which does not have an opposing view mentioned in the Gemara and poskim, one should follow the Kabbalah.  Also, when there is an argument between the poskim, the [opinion mentioned in] Kabbalah should be the decisor.
Each time - Even if, when he took them off, his intent was to put them back on right after, and even if he didn't move from his place in between.  The Rem"a argues on this.  If, at the time he recited the blessing, his intent was to remove them and then put them back on - it's clear from the Magen Avraham above in siman 8 se'if katan 16 that everyone agrees that you would not have to repeat the blessing.
If they moved - The Shel"a wrote that the reason why nowadays we don't recite a blessing if the tefillin moved from their place is because at the time one is praying, he most likely did not take his mind off of them, and it's similar to one who removed his tefillin with the intent to put them back on, which the Rem"a ruled that one does not repeat the blessing.  Therefore, those who occasionally wear tefillin up until midday , if they moved from their place, it is proper for them to repeat the blessing.  The Chayei Adam wrote that even if one's tefillin moved in the middle of their prayer and they repeated the blessing, there's no loss (ie. there's no negative consequence).  Nevertheless, it seems that reducing the [number of questionable] blessings is better.
From their place - Specifically the entire tefillin or the majority of it [moved from it's place], but if only a minority of it moved, even though one must return it to it's proper place, [nevertheless] he does not need to repeat the blessing [Ta"z in siman 8, se'if 15.  See there in Pri Megadim].
He must recite the blessing - Since they moved from their place, it's like they were move completely.
One should not recite the blessing - Since he moved them with the intent to replace them immediately.  As opposed to when they moved on their own, we say that as soon they moved, the mitzvah "left", and that's why the Rem"a did not comment on what the Mechaber wrote there [in the previous part of this se'if].  You should know that the same applies if one removed his tefillin completely with the intent to put them back on right away - on that too the יש אומרים argues [and says one should not recite the blessing again], even if they moved to a different place in between.  The Achronim ruled like this.  If one didn't intend to put them back on immediately, but rather after some time - even if he ended up putting them back on right away; Or if one intended to put them back on immediately, but then it got delayed and he got distracted - All agree that he must recite the blessing again.  Similarly, if one removed them in order to go the bathroom, even if he intended to put them back on right after, all agree that he must recite the blessing again since he is forbidden to enter the bathroom with them and they are pushed aside (ie. the mitzvah of tefillin gets interrupted since you have no choice but to take them off), as is written in siman 65.  Chayei Adam wrote that the same applies when one removes his tefillin due to a need to pass gas, since it's forbidden to pass gas with them on, [therefore] once must recite the blessing again.
The arm tefillin - The same applies to the head tefillin.
He did not take his mind off [of the tefillin] - Even if he spoke in between regarding the matter [of the tefillin], it's not [considered] an interruption after the fact, as seen below in siman 167 se'if 6.  See above in siman 8, in Mishnah Berurah se'if katan 28.
To recite the blessing - Since the mitzvah of putting on the tefillin did not yet occur, it comes out that the blessing did not yet take effect on any mitzvah, and the making of the [new] knot is not an interruption since it has to do with the mitzvah, therefore the blessing takes effect on the second donning.  From this we can learn, that one who has tefillin in his hand that does not have a knot, and he recited the blessing and then formed a knot and put it on, after the fact, the blessing that he recited counted since the making of the knot was not an interruption.  It's implied from the words of the Shulchan Aruch (ie. where he said that if the knot became severed at the <i>beginning</i> of the tightening, and you had to make a new knot, that you don't repeat the blessing) that if, <i>after</i> one tightened the tefillin on their arm, the knot came undone, he would have to  repeat the blessing because the mitzvah action itself was already completed and it's similar to [the case] when the tefillin moved from their place, where one would need to recite the blessing again after they returned them back to their place, as seen above.  The Achronim disagree on this and wrote that since the blessing of "lehaniach" that he recited before putting on the hand tefillin counted towards the head tefillin as well, as seen above, therefore, as long as he did not yet put on the head tefillin, he is still involved with the mitzvah's that are associated with that blessing that he recited [which lasts] until he puts on the head tefillin as well.  Therefore, just like in the case where the knot of the hand tefillin came undone before putting on the head tefillin, the Shulchan Aruch ruled that one does not need to repeat the blessing, the same applies here if the knot became severed, that one would not need to repeat the blessing.  If the knot of the head tefillin or hand tefillin severed after one already put on the head tefillin and tightened it down [on his head], one would need to repeat the blessing.  If there's no one around who knows how to fix the [severed] knot and he would need to borrow someone else's tefillin, no matter what, he would need to repeat the blessing, for it's similar to what's in siman 206, se'if 6.
Became loosened - [ie.] the knot.  The same applies if they moved from their place.  This that [the Shulchan Aruch] wrote "If one put on the head tefillin...", it means that one tightened it down [on his head], for that is the main [part] of [fulfilling] the mitzvah of putting on [tefillin] as was mentioned above.
He should tighten it and recite the blessing [again] - Because it's similar to when it moves from it's place.  Similarly, if one's head tefillin became loosened after he tightened it, he would need to repeat the blessing when he goes to tighten it [once again] on his head.  Based on what we said above in the name of the Shela, one would never repeat the blessing if the tefillin became loosened during prayers.
Borrowed tefillin - Even if they were borrowed without the owners knowledge, it's permitted, for a person is happy to perform a mitzvah through his property.  As long as [the borrower] winds then up afterwards as they were originally and he shouldn't move them from their original spot, just like regarding a tallis, as seen above in siman 14.
Stolen ones - For it's considered a mitzvah that came through a transgression.  And even after the owner despaired [of ever recovering it], and even after the fact, [the one who used it] did not fulfill the mitzvah of tefillin.  However, if one sold the tefillin after the owner despaired, the opinion of the Magen Avraham in siman 449 and the ??? above in siman 11, is that the second one (ie. the buyer) is allowed to recite the blessing on them, because for him the despair was effective and there was a change in possession [of the stolen item].  However, the Ta"z and the Gr"a in this siman wrote explicitly that it's forbidden to recite a blessing [on them] no matter what.  But regarding whether one can fulfill the mitzvah with them, it's seems from the Gr"a that one would fulfill the mitzvah with them.  But regarding the blessing, it's forbidden because of [that which is written: “The robber who recites a blessing [blasphemes the Lord]” (Psalms 10:3).  For through his acquiring it, the stolen item went out from the possesion of the owner.  However, one who acquires it from the second one (ie. from the buyer), it seems that he would be able to recite the blessing on them, that is what I found written in Damasek Eliezer above in siman 11, see there further. 
The widespread custom - There are those who don't keep the tefillin on for more than what's obligated because one needs [be careful to wear tefillin with] a clean body.  All this is according to each person, if he doesn't have a clean body and is nervous that he might pass gas, he should remove them immediately.  See further in siman 37, se'if 2.  Because of this, the majority of people do not wear them all day long.  It's written in the name of the Ariz"al, that he would not remove his tefillin until after "Al kein nekaveh lach" (ie. after Aleinu).  On a day where there is a Bris Milah [taking place in shul], it's proper to not remove one's tefillin until after the bris, since milah is an "os" (ie. a sign/covenant) and tefillin are an "os".
The three Kedushot - This is a publishers error, and in truth it should say "the three Kaddishim and four Kedushot" - because "Barchu et Hashem" is considered the first, since it's an expression of sanctity, the Kedusha of "Safa berurah" is the second, [then comes] the Kedusha in the Amidah, and then the Kedusha of "Uva Letzion".  The three Kaddishim are the Half Kaddish recited before Barchu, the Half Kaddish after Shemoneh Esrei, and the Full Kaddish after "Uva Letzion".  Nevertheless, it seems from the Pre Megadim and other Achronim that in places where the custom is to recite Kaddish Yatom every day after Aleinu, it's better to not remove one's tefillin until after the Kaddish Yatom.  Those who fold their tallit and [wind up] their tefillin and put them away in their pouch while Kaddish Yatom is being said are not acting properly, for one should have utmost concentration while answering "Amen Yehei Sh'mei Rabba", as is explained below in siman 56 in the Tur and Shulchan Aruch.  "Amen Yehei Sh'mei Rabba" is on an ever higher level than Kedusha as is explained there in Magen Avraham se'if katan 1.  And it's certainly not any worse than all other rabbinic level blessings which one is forbidden from doing anything insignificant while reciting the blessing, as is explained below in siman 191 in Magen Avraham se'if katan 2.
Until after the Sefer Torah is returned - An allusion to this [is found in the verse]: (Micah 2:13) "and their king passes on before them" [ie. the Sefer Torah], "and the Lord at the head of them" [ie. the tefillin].  (Beit Yosef).
To the Heichal - And those who do remove their tefillin before that point should be careful to not remove their head tefillin in front of the Sefer Torah so that they shouldn't expose their head before it, rather they should turn to the side.  And regarding the hand tefillin, where there is no [concern of] being exposed, or if the head tefillin was under one's tallit gadol, it would be permitted [Pri Megadim].
Mussaf - After they return the Sefer Torah to the Heichal.  And in our lands where we return it immediately after the reading, one should remove their tefillin after the Kaddish that's before Mussaf.  Eliyahu Rabba wrote that on Rosh Chodesh, one should remove them after "Uva Letzion", before one says "Yehi ratzon milfanecha... shenishmor chukecha", and they shouldn't wait till after Kaddish to remove them so that there shouldn't be an interruption between Kaddish and the [Mussaf] prayer.
The same  applies to Chol Hamoed - The Achronim wrote that since there's an opinion to not wear tefillin at all on Chol Hamoed, as seen below in siman 31, one should quickly remove them before Hallel, and the shaliach tzibur should remove his after Hallel.  On Chol Hamoed Sukkos, when there's extra time while they're waiting for an esrog to be brought, even the shaliach tzibur should remove them before Hallel.  On Rosh Chodesh, those who wear tefillin all day should put them back on after Mussaf, and they do not need to repeat the blessing if they had in mind to put them back on at the time they removed them, as per the ruling of the Rem"a above in se'if 12.  But on Chol Hamoed they should not put them back on at all until the evening.  Those who wear Rabbeinu Tam tefillin should not put them on at all on Chol Hamoed, and on Rosh Chodesh they may put them on after the shaliach tzibur finishes Mussaf, or they can remove the Rashi tefillin before "Uva Letzion" and then wear the Rabbeinu Tam while saying "Uva Letzion". [Pri Megadim]
Kedushat Keter - Meaning, where we say "Nekadesh" in Mussaf, some places say "Keter yitnu lecha", therefore it wouldn't be proper to have the "crown of tefillin" on oneself, even during the silent [Mussaf] prayer.  Obviously, if one forgot and started praying with them on, they should not remove them in the middle [of his prayers] since it's only a custom  [to remove them before].
Everywhere - The Taz wrote that one who's custom is to not remove them before Mussaf, we don't complain against him since we don't say  "Keter yitnu lecha".  I heard about one of the great leaders of the generation who did not remove them before Mussaf.  However, one who prays with a congregation should certainly not change from the custom of that congregation.

Siman 26

Some unforeseen circumstance - For example, if he has a wound/injury on his head or arm, or he needs to leave and his ride will not wait for him to put on both, he should just put on the one that he is able to.  Which one is preferable to put on?  One opinion is that it's better to put on the head tefillin since it's sanctity is greater.  Another opinion is that he should put on the hand tefillin so as not to change from the order that's written in the Torah (ie. the hand tefillin are mentioned first in the passuk - Deuteronomy 6:8).  When does this apply?  When he is able to put on the other tefilla while on the road.  But if he won't be able put the other one on later, he should put the hand and head tefillin on before he leaves his house, because the chachamim did not permit one to skip the mitzvah of tefillin due to being late.
And for us who  have the custom etc. - As was explained in siman 25, in Mishnah Berurah se'if katan 32, see there further.
He should only recite the blessing "...to place" - See Pri Megadim who quotes other poskim who hold that even on the hand tefillin alone one should recite both blessings.  However, the Achronim agree that on the hand tefillin alone one should only recite the blessing "...to place", since, even putting that aside, many Rishonim hold that even when putting on both tefillin, one should only recite one blessing.  If one put both on but did not recite the blessings, where the halacha is that one should [still] recite the blessings [after the fact] as long as he still has them on - if he recited the blessing on the head tefillin first and then afterwards on the hand tefillin, he does not go back and repeat the blessings [in the right order].  But a priori, even if he put on the hand tefillin but did not recite the blessing on it [beforehand], he should still recite it before putting on the head tefillin.

Siman 27

Left - Since it's written [in Exodus 13:16] "[It shall be as a sign] 'al yadcha' (upon your hand)" with an [extra letter] "hei", [the chachamim] explained it as "yad keiha" (ie. the weak hand), meaning the left hand which is weak.  They also derived it from [the fact that] it's written (Deuteronomy 6:8) "ukshartam" (you shall bind them), and [right after it says] (Deuteronomy 6:9) "uchtavtam" (you shall write them), that just like writing is done with the right hand, since that's what [most] people do, so too binding [the tefillin] should be done with the right.  And since the binding is done with the right hand, automatically the placing of them will be on the left.  If one placed it on his right arm, even after the fact he did not fulfill his obligation [opinion of the Achronim].
On the bicep - This is the place [on the arm] called "kiboret" in the words of Chazal.  [Not putting it on in the correct spot] is a disqualifying factor, as is derived in the gemara from a verse in the Torah.
The kovdo - Known as the "elinboigen" (ie. elbow).

Siman 28

 Every time - Meaning, every time one is reminded of them (the Tefilin) he must touch them, as through doing so he will constantly be reminded of them, and will thus not come to taking his mind off [of the Tefilin] , and also in order to fix them, and make  sure that they do not move out of place 
In order  that he should not take his mind off [of the Tefilin]- during prayer however, one does not need to touch them
The one (Tefilin) for the  hand - because the one for the hand is closer for him to reach, and one must not pass over a Mitzvah
First - and then afterwards [he should touch] the one for the head. And if when touching the one for the head, he realized that it slipped out of place, as well as the one for the hand, he must first return the one for the hand to its proper place, based on the fact that the verse states the command of donning the Tefilin of the hand before stating the command of donning the one for the head 
He must first remove - only after he removes the three rings around the finger 
While standing - the same thing applies to when one removes the rings off of the fingers. And according to our custom, that we stand while putting on the hand-Tefilin as well, we must stand while removing them as well. And there were also some sages who would remove the head- Tefilin with their left hand, as it is the weaker hand, in order to show that it is difficult for them to part from it. And if one is left handed, and does all of his activities with his left hand, he should then take it off with his right hand, in order that he should not remove them quickly. 
And on top of it [he should place] the hand-Tefilin - the Ba”ch, as well as the Ta”z write that this implies that he should make a long but narrow bag, and place them (the Tefilin) one on top of the other. The Magen Avraham however writes that it is better to place the Tefilin side by side, and this is the general custom. And this that the author [of the Shulchan Aruch] writes that the hand-Tefilin should be placed “above” - what he means to say is that it should be placed slightly higher [than the head-Tefilin], and the “Shulchan Shlomo” writes that one should place the hand-Tefilin on the right side of the bag for this reason. Also, there are those who have the custom of making two separate bags - one for the head-Tefilim, and one for the hand- Tefilin. However it is still better to place the hand-Tefilin slightly above, in order that he should find it first (before the head-Tefilin), as according to the Ta”z, the rule of not passing over an article of a Mitzvah applies even when inside a bag. Now for those who have the custom of having two separate bags for each of the Tefilin, it would be advisable for them to mark which bag contains which one of the Tefilin, in order that he should not take out the head- Tefilin first, and also because the head-Tefilin possesses a stronger level of sanctity, and by doing so (by marking each bag) it will be easier for him to be careful not to [accidentally] place the hand-Tefilin in it (the bag for  the head-Tefilin) [which would be problematic] unless he made [the bags] on condition [that he would be able to place the hand-Tefilin in the bag used for the head-Tefilin
First - and he will not be forced to pass over an article of a Mitzvah, and it is advisable to be careful not to take off the hand- Tefilin until he places the head-Tefilin in the bag, in order that he should not accidentally place the hand- Tefilin in the bag first.
And when he removes them - when one wraps up his Tefilin, he should not wrap the straps on top of the boxes, but rather on top the side edge called the “Titura”, and there are those who have the custom of wrapping them [on each side] to resemble wings, in order to signify the wings of a dove. And when wrapping  up the Tefilin, one should hold the boxes in his hand, and wrap the strap around it, not [the other way around -] by holding the strap in is hand, and twisting the box into it. Also, it is forbidden to make the bag used for the Tefilin out of the forbidden mixture (wool and linen), just as it is forbidden to do so with the clothe used to cover the holy scrolls.

Siman 29

One should not recite a blessing - this ruling comes to rule out what is taught (Niddah 51b), that in the Land of Israel, they would recite the blessing: “[Blessed are you…] who sanctified us with his commandments, and commanded us to guard his laws”, upon taking off their Tefilin for the night, being that they were of the opinion that nighttime is not the time for wearing Tefilin (even biblically), and they derive this from what it says in the verse: “And you shall guard this law in its proper time, from day to day” (Exodus 13:10) - and not at night -  however according to us, there is no reason to recite a blessing upon removing the Tefilin for the night, being that we explain that verse to be referring to a different law, and it is therefore permissible to keep the Tefilin on at night (if he had them on before nightfall, and did not remove them afterwards) only it is forbidden to put them on once night begins, because the Rabbis decreed not to put them on at night, in order that he should not fall asleep, and pass gas while wearing them
Twilight - meaning, although we hold that Shabbat and the festivals are not times that Tefilin is to be worn, and if one were to put them on then, for the sake of fulfilling the Mitzvah,  he would be transgressing the prohibition of “do not add [on to the commandments]״, nevertheless, being that if one were to put them on without the intention of fulfilling the Mitzvah, he would not be transgressing a biblical prohibition, only according to some, it is was decreed by the Rabbis not to do so, in order that one should not come to walk with them on in a public domain on Shabbat, and therefore no blessing is to be made upon removing the Tefilin, being that there is no Mitzvah to remove the Tefilin per se, and it is done only because of the rabbinic decree mentioned above.

Siman 30



Siman 31



Siman 32



Siman 33



Siman 34



Siman 35



Siman 36












‘To put tagin’--Even in a sefer Torah, and definitely for tefillin and mezuzot. And these tagin are three little tagin, thin like a hair’s-breadth, straight up on these letters, one rightwards, one leftwards, and one upwards. There are those who say that all three are to be upwards, and this is the custom. Each tag is made like a thin line, in the custom of these lands, but it is better to make each of them in the form of a zayin, but very small and thin. 
‘Shatnez getz’--This also applies to bent [medial] tzaddi and straight [final] nun. If the scribe adds extra tagin, beyond those of the letters shatnez getz and beyond those described by the Tur and the Levush, which scribes are accustomed to make, it does not invalidate [the document], provided that they are joined to the letter. If they are not joined to the letter, they should be erased; even from the letters of the Divine Name. Lehathila, it is not correct to add tagin of one’s own invention that are not already done by scribes. The tagging of shatnez getz is thus: on shin, on the third head of the letter; on ayin, tet, and tzaddi on the left head; and attached in the middle, not at the end. The ahronim wrote, according to a responsum of the Rem`a, that one should take care that the tagin are separated from each other, so that they look like zayin and not like shin or ayin and thereby be invalidated. It is also necessary that the tagin touch the body of the letter, and if they do not, they are pasul, for even though a letter without tagin is valid according to the Shulhan Arukh, he has nonetheless damaged [the document] because he has added an extra little letter between the lines. See the Yad Ephraim, who writes that you may not thereafter extend them to the letter, but you must erase them and write them afresh; only if we know that an expert wrote them properly and afterwards they became detatched, and then one may make them kosher by extending them to the letter. And the Levushei Sarad wrote that the Rem`a held that it was not damaged on account of being surrounded by parchment [hakafat gevil], which is only a consideration initially, and accordingly if they became detached after they were written, they are kosher without any repair. Taking this into account, if they were not touching when initially written, they are valid, but one ought to repair them. See the Magen Avraham in 32:27 on hakafat gevil; I incline to the view of the Rem`a. In any case, ideally one would be stringent like the Yad Ephraim, and see also the Peri Megadim. 
‘They had a custom to put tagin’—In tefillin, other letters than shatnez getz [have tagin], and these are described by the Tur in the name of the Shimmusha Rabba, and in the name of the Rambam. These tagin are bigger, although they are still thin so that they do not invalidate the letter; particularly, one must be very careful about the tagin on the vav and on the yud, because it is very easy to change the letter thereby. 
‘Did not void’—The Bah holds that this invalidates. The Gra, in his commentary, harmonises all the views, and brings many authorities who are stringent about it. Accordingly, it is correct to take this in to account and to fix them after the fact. And such fixing is valid even for tefillin and mezuzah, and does not count as writing out of order, because the letter has its correct form even without tagin (source: ahronim). Know also that the Shulhan Aruhkh is dealing with a case when the top of the letter was made properly, just without tagin; if the head was made rounded, we learn from the Beit Yosef that we cannot be lenient even bedeavad, because of the ruling of the Re’em. This requires investigation, as it would seem from the Rambam that we may be lenient in all cases. [See the Beur haGra, who says that the Rambam is not talking about tefillin at all,only about mezuzah, and not about the topic of rounded heads or extending detached tagin after the fact, just about actual tagin and just initially.] It is written in ‘Igeret haTiyul’ that ‘Shatnez’ is the letters שטן and עז, who are two powerful antagonists, and this is the esoteric reason for the shatnez getz tagin, since גץ is also an antagonist; the tagin on those letters are a sword and a spear, to prevail against them. 

Siman 37



Siman 38



Siman 39



Siman 40



Siman 41



Siman 42



Siman 43



Siman 44



Siman 45



Siman 46

When one awakes—All are required to say all these blessings as it is forbidden for one to benefit from this world without reciting a blessing. To derive benefit from this world without a blessing, it as though he desecrated sacred property……

Siman 47



Siman 48



Siman 49



Siman 50



Siman 51



Siman 52



Siman 53

The chazzan...: in order that he should be able to say Kaddish immediately and so as not to interrupt between by rising up to stand in front of the ark. But in section 51:6 in the gloss of the Rama, it's evident that even someone who prays alone also needs to stand while saying Yishtabach and look in Eliyahu Raba who answers that an individual stands for Yishtabach by virtue of custom, whereas the chazzan stands for Yistabach for virtue of law and similar the Gra and the Taz write that people of stature should stand while saying Yishtabach both on Shabbat and weekdays and even while praying alone. During the recital of all 15 praises in Yishtabach from "song and praise" until "from now" one should be very careful not to interrupt, and one he does pause will receive great punishment, but one isn't required to say them in one breath. [Chaye Adam in the name of the Gra and similar wrote the Griya and the same is implied from the Zohar in Parshat Terumah and not like the Shlah]

Siman 54



Siman 55



Siman 56



Siman 57

1.) Out loud in order that the nation will hear and recite baruch hashem hamevorach leolam vaed
2.) And if one does not hear from the chazzan when he said barchu and he only heard the congregation responding he may respond with them, but if he hears the chazzan only repeating afterwards baruch hashem hamevorach leolam vaed, he should not recite it with him rather he should just recite amen. 

Siman 58

1.) And the brachos of krias shema before shema also should not be said before this time. 

Siman 59



Siman 60



Siman 61








































(40) There are those whose custom is... - With regard to whether one can fulfill their obligation by way of someone else who intends to fulfill their obligation, see the Magen Avraham and the Pri Megadim. And most of the decisors hold that one can fulfill their obligation in this way. And it is better than just saying it in your head. For saying it in your head is not the same as actually saying it. But this is not the case with hearing which is actually like saying. And the Olat Tamid wrote that this is specifically someone who understands the language and even if it is said in Hebrew, the listener still needs to understand. See ch. 193 sect. 1 and in Sha'arei Knesset HaGedolah he brings in the name of the Birkat Avraham that this is specifically an individual who fulfills the obligation of an individual. But the individual who fulfills the obligation of the masses or an individual who who fulfills the obligation of another two in the blessing after meals, even if they don't understand Hebrew, their obligation is fulfilled.

Siman 62



Siman 63



Siman 64



Siman 65



Siman 66



Siman 67



Siman 68



Siman 69



Siman 70



Siman 71



Siman 72



Siman 73



Siman 74



Siman 75



Siman 76



Siman 77



Siman 78



Siman 79



Siman 80



Siman 81



Siman 82



Siman 83



Siman 84



Siman 85



Siman 86



Siman 87



Siman 88







In our countries the custom is that it is permitted (for women) to say blessings and pray, nevertheless they shouldn't look at the torah scroll when they are lifting it up (Hagbah) for the congregation to see. It is also written that they (women) shouldn't go into a cemetery until they immerse (In a mikvah)

Siman 89


לפתח

Siman 90



Siman 91










Is not considered etc. -- For the head and the hand are of one body and a body cannot cover itself. And Joel Sirkis (BḤ) has written that some have the practice of covering their hand with their sleeve and then covering their head with it, and that this is well-considered covered.

Siman 92



Siman 93



Siman 94



Siman 95



Siman 96



Siman 97



Siman 98





(5) In a time that is distracting - like his mind is not focused because of pain, angriness, or because of his trip. 

Siman 99



Siman 100



Siman 101



Siman 102

















But on their sides - And the Zohar Chayey Sarah forbids even on their sides within 4 cubits.

Davening behind him - And if he isn’t right behind him but rather father to the sides, it seems that it is allowed according to the Eliya Rabbah that we mentioned previously.

Siman 103



Siman 104



Siman 105



Siman 106



Siman 107



Siman 108



Siman 109



Siman 110



Siman 111



Siman 112



Siman 113











.It should not look like he is trying to bow more than required
When he says Baruch, he should bend from his knees and when he says "atah" he should bow with his spine. When he says Modim, he should bow his head and his body all at once and stay down until the name of Hashem and then stand up


It looks like he is bowing to idols

Siman 114



Siman 115



Siman 116



Siman 117



Siman 118



Siman 119



Siman 120



Siman 121



Siman 122



Siman 123



Siman 124



Siman 125



Siman 126



Siman 127



Siman 128



Siman 129



Siman 130



Siman 131




































From Rosh Chodesh until after Shavuos. There are places that omit Tachnun for six days after Shavuot, because the sacrifices of Shavuos have seven days of Tashlumin - compensate.

Siman 132










(10) The mourner's (literally, orphan's) kaddish after aleinu: As behold, we always need to say kaddish after  saying verses (from the Bible). And in aleinu (the concluding prayer), there are also verses, such that we need to say kaddish after it. However, we have the practice with this kaddish to leave if for an orphan whose mother or father have died. This is because there are young orphans, and even older ones, that are unable to be the prayer leader and to say kaddish (during the prayers) and barkhu (the call to prayer) for their father or mother. (As if they were able to pray in front of the lectern, that is better than the saying of kaddish.) And the great benefit to the dead when one has a son who is saying kaddish and barkhu, especially within the first year, is already known from the story of Rabbi Akiva. That is why they decreed and established this kaddish which does not require anything else from the orphans, whether young or old. And at the end of this section, I have transcribed all the laws of kaddish in brief in the Biur Halacha (132:1), and it shall be called by the name, Maamar Kaddishin (the Essay of Kaddish).

Siman 133



Siman 134



Siman 135

(1) On Monday And On Thursday - At the Morning Service and even, non-ideally, all day is [reading the Torah] obligatory. Nevertheless, it is ideal to perform the Mitzvot earlier




(6) One Sabbath - And if they [the congregation] missed multiple sabbaths, there are those who say that they don't read on the upcoming sabbath every single missed reading just the most recent reading, and there are those who say that the congregation needs to complete all the missed sections, and from the sefer BEIUR HaGR”A, it is implied that he [the Vilna Gaon] holds like the first opinion.
(7) The Recitation Of The Torah Portion etc... - And if there were two Torah Portions joined together that sabbath, which was missed, it is the opinion of the Ra"M MINTZ that they don't complete them at all because we don't ever find that we read 3 portions on the same sabbath, and, also, to read just one of those [two] portions, we also can't say because there is no correction for half, and the same is [true in the vice versa situation] where the double reading is for the upcoming sabbath [and the missed single portion was for the prior week] from the same reason as appears to me, and the HAGAHAS MINHAGIM argues on this with whom the ELIYAH RABBAH concurs, that really one needs to complete what was missed from the prior sabbath, and so leans the opinion of the sefer, MAGEIN GIBORIM. There are those who say that if [the congregation] missed the Torah portion of Vayechi [which is at the end of the Book of Genesis] one doesn't read it with the portion of Shemot because when one reads two portions they need to be [physically] juxtaposed [in the scroll] from the end of one portion to the beginning of the next, and this isn't correctly done with two Pentateuchal Books, and, similarly, this would also be the case by Pekudei and Vayikrah and the like, and there are those who dispute this and hold that really one completes both. And it is written in the SHULCHAN ATZEI SHITTIM that if one acts as such [reads both], don't protest them. It is written in the sefer, SHAAREI EFRAIM that if the reading was missed in one synagogue and the majority of the congregation heard it in another synagogue, there is no need to complete the [missed] reading, but if the majority of the congregation hasn't heard it at all even though that there are two other synagogues, which read it there properly, nevertheless those synagogues in which a majority of congregants didn't hear the reading, need to complete the reading

Siman 136



Siman 137



Siman 138



Siman 139



Siman 140



Siman 141




<b>unless he is a heavy-set person...</b> The same applies if one is ill or very old, such that is is difficult for them to stand without support. But they should be careful to only lean a little, and not to lean so much that they would fall if the thing they lean upon were to be removed. And if it is not possible for them to lean in this way and they require assistance to support themselves, this too is permitted. Only one should not rest upon the cloth that is over table as it is a holiness-adjacent object, rather, upon the table itself. 

Siman 142



Siman 143



Siman 144



Siman 145



Siman 146



Siman 147



Siman 148



Siman 149



Siman 150





Higher than all the houses of the city- As it says "elevate the House of G-d".  There are places that are not careful with this.  The achronim write that the reason for this is since there are many houses of idolatry that are taller than the synagogue so there is no distinction to the synagogue.  In any case, it is fitting, ideally, to be careful with this, and where ever it is possible because the gemara is very strict about this.


One corner of the synagogue- Meaning to say, that one corner of one of the walls of the synagogue is taller.  Specifically the roof of the upper floor, but not with a metal pole which doesn't help at all with this.
Can't just leave- Meaning to say, if you build a personal wall facing your friend's window, the law is that you need to leave 4 cubits space so you don't block is window, and that is enough, but a synagogue, that needs a lot of light, the hazaka of the window that was there before requires you to leave even more space.  It is not clear how much more, but in any case 8 cubits is surely enough.  See the Pri Megadim who is unsure regarding the courtyard or the women's section if those only need 4 cubits.  It seems to me that you don't need to add more, because even by the main law the Mehaber is not clear...
In that city- Therefore, in our countries, that we pray and bow eastward (that is, because we live west of Israel), we need to make the entrance of the synagogue in the West in order that we bow from the door towards the holy arc.  The Magein Avraham writes that if the door is on some other side, then the synagogue gets destroyed, then some people want to rebuild it properly [with the door on the West], other people can't protest even if they are the majority and even if it will disrupt the order of the yeshiva.

Siman 151






To eat and drink- the same law applies to sleeping, that it is permitted (for torah scholars), but to make it a shortcut, or enter to avoid the heat during summer or the rain in winter and all the things mentioned before, and all the more so to scoff or joke around or chatter idley, those are forbidden, that aren't Torah scholars also warned about respecting the holy?
From difficulty- that is, it's a difficult situation that Torah scholars need to eat there.  The Magein Avraham writes that for people who learn there all the time, it is always a "difficult situation," because if they would need to go out to eat and drink at home, for sure they would not learn as much.  But if they are not learning in the synagogue or yeshiva, it is forbidden to eat and drink there, and many achronim agree on this.




Afterwards call him- meaning to say, but don't call (your friend) before you learn Torah because it will seem like the Torah you said was secondary.
In order to walk- that is, that you delay the amount of time it would take to walk two doorways, that is 8 handsbreadths.

Don't sleep etc. - We are dealing with normal people, but for Torah scholars, we have already explained that it is permitted.

For the needs of the synagogue- for instance someone who guards it or something like that.




With a long knife- because a synagogue, which is dedicated for prayer, lengthens a man's life while a blade shortens a mans life.  See the Eliya Rabah who holds that you needn't be stringent unless the blade is revealed. 

to spit in it- as long as it's not the time of praying the shemon esrei.  Be careful to not spit in front of your friend who will be disgusted by it.  The Arizal was careful not to spit.
Rub it out with your foot- on shabbos, when it is forbidden to rub the ground, you should stand on it with your shoe until it gets smooshed.
Reeds- or straw and sand.


Pull them etc.- meaning it is permissible to pull them out as long as you leave them in their place and don't remove them.
So they will see etc.- according to this, if they destroy a synagogue in one place and build it in another place, and they don't plan to re-build it in the first location, this rule doesn't apply.  Rather you should make a fence around the area so people won't come to disgrace it.  And if it's a situation where it is permitted to sell it- sell it.
At the time of building- but afterwards, stipulating a condition won't help.
Made a condition- inferring specifically if you stipulated the condition explicitly, but unspecified, we don't say it was made on condition - Magein Avraham, not like the Maasas Binyamin.  The Eliya Rabah opines to rule like the Maasas Binyamin to be lenient with this.





Any condition- According to the opinion of the Magein Avraham above, even in Israel the condition helps for other uses besides frivolity.
Regular Use etc.- From this language, it infers that occasional sleeping is ok, because occasional sleeping is not disrespectful.
It is unclear- if we compare the floor above the sanctuary as if it's not sanctified or since a synagogue and study hall are called miniature Temples, we consider it like above the arc.  Based on what the Sharei Tchuva writes in the name of the Tchuvas Peir Hadur, you could be lenient in a place not above the arc, meaning to say that the arc that houses the sefer Torah, you should be careful not to use the area above it.

Siman 152



Siman 153



Siman 154










<b>a chair upon which they put a Torah scroll...</b> This is the table that stands on the <i>bimah</i> and upon which a cover is placed, and upon that cover is placed a Torah scroll. Even though the table is only a secondary ritual object, nevertheless it is considered a holiness-adjacent object because of the fact that a Torah scroll is sometimes placed upon it without a cover.

Siman 155



Siman 156



Siman 157



Siman 158

The rabbis required us to wash netilat yadayim for two reasons. 1. To be in a good habit for terumah. When the laws of ritual purity were relevant, kohanim had to wash their hands before they ate terumah, since we're not always aware what our hands touched, and maybe they touched something impure, and then they'll make the terumah impure. We want the kohanim to stay in this habit, even though nowadays they're all impure and therefore they don't eat terumah, so that when the Beit haMikdash is rebuilt speedily in our days, they'll keep the terumah they eat pure. Those who are not kohanim must wash before they eat bread to reinforce the kohanim in this habit. 2. For cleanliness and holiness. The rabbis found a hint to this in the verse "make yourselves holy and be holy." 
To eat bread etc.- as opposed to fruit.  Because most truma was bread, as it says "the first of your grains," and the way to eat grain is by making it into bread, so the decree is only when it is made into bread.

Wash hands- two hands with a vessel, and even if you only want to eat with one hand, we are concerned you'll touch it with the other hand.  When you wash your hands, it's best to wash your right first so the left serves the right.

Bless "al netilas yedaim"- that is, "asher kidishanu b'mitzvosav vitzivanu al netilas yedaim" and it is relevent to say "and you commanded us" even though this is rabbinic because Hashem commanded us to listen to the Rabbis, as it says "by the word of Torah that they teach you, do not deviate"

Not fixed- but, if you fix a meal on them, you would need to wash and bless like on bread "hamotzi" and bircas hamazon.  The size of fixing a meal will be explained later.  If you start to eat them as a snack, and afterwards you keep eating them like a fixed meal, you need to then wash and bless "hamotzi" as will be explained later.
Less than an eggs volume etc- because regarding tumah, less than an egg doesn't acquire tumah according to the Torah and is not contaminated by hands, therefore we could say that they didn't make a decree for washing in that situation.  Alternatively, since we bench after even eating just an olive's volume, it would also be relevant for washing. Therefore, you should wash your hands and not make a blessing since the lack of blessing doesn't prevent the washing from being effective.  You should know that if the food is an eggs worth (even without the shell), all would agree you need to wash with a blessing.
Less than an olive- Even less than an olive's volume we consider like less than an eggs volume and you should wash without a blessing.  Letchatchila, you should be stringent for this...
(11) Item of food, etc. – that even vegetables and fruit and meat. And even though on fruit we do not rule that it require “netilas yadayim.” In that case the fruits themselves do not become impure by contact with the hands.  For hands are a sheini (second) level of impurity and a sheini cannot make chullin (nonsacred food) a shlishi (third level). *** This is not the case when (these items) are dipped in liquid. The liquid that is on the item is touched by the hands is made impure to the level of a rishon (first level).  *** So, it was ruled that you should wash the hands, so that they do not make impure the liquid via the hands and then the food also becomes impure by the now tameh (impure) liquid.
That were dipped- fruits and vegetables that were dunked in water to clean them are considered dipped in [one of the 7] liquid[s].  Things that aren't usually dipped or contacted by liquids don't require hand washing since the Sages didn't decree on unusual cases.  One who dips his hand in his beverage and sucks it off does not need to wash his hands first because the Sages didn't decree on beverages.






(19) Even if his hands will not touch (the wet part of the food) - A decree in case one comes to touch the wet part of the food.
(2) Without a Blessing- Because there are some rishonim who hold that the sages only decreed washing your hands for foods that touch the 7 liquids in the times when we kept the laws of spiritual purity. Now-a-days, since we are all contaminated from the dead, we don't make a blessing because we don't make questionable blessings.  The Magein Avrahahm brings in the name of the Lechem Hamudos that people are accustomed to not wash.  They have what to rely on (e.g. the rishonim we just mentioned), but many achronim are very strict and say that the law is like the majority of rishonim who require washing even now-a-days.  See the Bior HaGra who is very strict to even require a blessing on this.  Therefore, even though we don't say a blessing, you shouldn't be so lenient as to eat without washing.  This washing requires all the laws of washing like bread.  However, less than an olive's volume, it is clear that you needn't wash at all on since even with bread many achronim are lenient on this.

is a fool-  Since he makes it seem to himself as if he is very careful in mitzvos regarding something that is unnecessary since it was never decreed that one wash for fruit [that weren't dipped in the 7 liquids].  You shouldn't even wash without a blessing if you have in mind that it is a mitzvah.



Law like fruit- The achronim agree that cooked dishes that you don't usually touch, rather you eat them with a spoon, don't require washing, even if you sometimes happen to touch them in the spoon.  And that is the custom.  However, things that you eat with your hands out of a vessel, you still have to wash for.  Fruit that are cooked in water: there is a debate if they require hand washing, so you should eat them with a spoon if there is moisture still on them.  Cooked vegetables [like cucumbers], you should certainly be strict to wash if they are not dried first.  The Derech HaChaim writes that sweet cherries that you put in cocktails doesn't require hand washing because the liquor is "sweat of the grain" which is like fruit juice.  Even if the liquor is mixed with water, the water is just a minority so you still don't need to wash.  According to his words, if water is the majority, [like with grenadine] you would need to wash.  If the cherry is less than an olive's volume though, you can be lenient as we mentioned above.
drinking- Because you won't transgress touching it with your hand since beverages are in vessels.  Therefore, there was no decree to wash on beverages.  Therefore, even if you happen to touch a beverage, for example it spills from your kid onto your hand and you drink it, you don't need to wash your hands for this because there is no decree on beverages.

that he not eat- for instance, his hands were dirty so he washed his hands [for cleanliness] and didn't plan to eat then, but then later he decided to eat and he hadn't lost track of his hands in the interim: all the more so the first washing doesn't help because it wasn't for spiritual cleansing at all.

He didn't take his mind off- if he did take his mind off of the washing, everyone agrees that he will need a second washing with a blessing and the first blessing didn't work at all.
without a blessing- many poskim hold that washing for normal food works even without intending to wash for food as long as you didn't loose focus on your hands from the time of washing.  Therefore, you can wash without a blessing because perhaps he fulfilled his obligation with the first washing and he shouldn't bless even if he is going to wash just before the eating with the proper intent.

(34) Bamidbar-In the desert- And this is also the reason that because it will be dangerous if he goes to search for water, (and he takes for granted that a desert is a dangerous place.)
(35) and there is no water- Even if he knows if he travels a kilometer he will reach water, we don't obligate him.
(36) exempt from washing- In any case you should cover your hand with a napkin.
the amount of a reviis- that is one reviis [total] for two hands.  But later, I mention the words of the achronim that write that you shouldn't use less than a reviis for each hand, because if you use less you have to be careful about many things that we aren't experts in now.
(38) Full hand of good- In any case, ideally it is better to not do it for this reason because then you are doing for the sake of reward.  Rather, you should do it to honor Hashem and the reward will come to you anyways.  Someone who is careful with this and doesn't become rich, it is because his other deeds are hindering him.
(39) before the action- immediately before the action.
(40) Sometimes the hands are not clean - For instance, when coming from the bathroom or touching covered parts of the body, that it is not appropriate to recite a bracha before washing hands.  And because of this we have the custom that by all handwashing to recite after the washing.
(41) second water- The Beis Yosef brings this in the name of Rabeinu Yerucham who writes that this was the custom of his rabbis.  The Shibolei Haleket brings in the name of Rabeinu Meir that the custom is to bless after the washing and before the drying, and that is how people are accustomed.


(44) Recite the bracha afterwards - The main reason for reciting the blessing afterwards is because the hands are dirty.  And therefore, even if you have already completely dried your hands, you are still able to recite the blessing... 
(45) contaminated bread- The Beis Yosef writes that this is because the first water poured is tumeh from your hands.  Even though the second pouring of water is to purify that, letchatchila you still need to remove the first water entirely by drying.  The Rashal writes that the main drying is for cleanliness that the water left on your hands is a bit gross.  Rashi also infers that.  The Magein Avraham writes in the name of the Tashbitz that you shouldn't dry your hands with your shirt because it causes forgetfulness.  The Pri Megadim is unsure if this is just your shirt or all clothing.
(46) without drying- So it is brought in the Tosefta.  The Beis Yosef writes that the reason is that when you dunk your hands in a mikvah, there is no impure water at all so you don't need to dry it off.  We can learn from this that if you pour a full reviis on to both hands or onto each hand (since we hold that water is pure) you would not need to wash your hands.  But the Rashal disagrees because he holds the main drying is for cleanliness, so it's irrelevant how much you pour.  Dunking in a mikvah is exempt from drying because it is similar to the Torah level bodily purification that doesn't require drying, so the Sages didn't decree drying for that.  The Bach and other achronim agree with him. The Magein Avraham writes that someone who is bothered that their hands are still dirty after dunking them in a mikvah would need to dry them. 

Siman 159
























(24) Is permissible to use - That is, remove the finger and the water comes out from below. *** The achronim wrote that one should not wash his hands out of the vessel (called giskan or kankan) (i.e. a water pitcher), through the spout (the “breast” or “teat” of the pitcher) [which means when it is made like a half circle, i.e. a spout] and only when the vessel’s spout is higher than its mouth. Since the vessel only holds the liquid up to its lip, it is not considered a vessel above the lip (and the spout would not be considered part of a kli). But if the lip is level with the vessel’s mouth, it is permissible to take from the spout. *** If the spout of the vessel is lower than the mouth of the vessel, one should only take water from the spout and not from the mouth of the vessel. This is because the vessel only holds water up to its spout and there is no vessel above it. Some are lenient about this. ***All this is specifically when the spout is like a half-circle, but if the spout is like a cylinder or a tube (which is called shofarot, i.e. a liquid container with a nozzle), even though it protrudes above the mouth of the vessel, nevertheless it is permissible to wash even through the spout, and some forbid taking water through the spout of this type of utensil.







































(64) With each pouring and pouring (of water) - We do not consider this (water) as part of a person’s own efforts but only the first pouring. Therefore, one must return (the plug or close the faucet) and remove (the water) with each pouring. *** The later authorities wrote that one who washes with a utensil that is fixed with iron i.e. a metal faucet (called a “tarnegol” or what is called a “קראן” (tap), [perhaps something that “calls” the water]) must close and open it multiple times for each hand because it is a thin (stream of water) that is not sufficient in the first pouring to wash the hand properly.





(70) Considered like a monkey – As explained above that there are those who invalidate it because a small child does not have any understanding. And in the explanation of the Gra there is no need to be strict about this.  And it is not similar to a monkey from which we do not allow to wash our hands because it is not a person and there is no human effort here.  Unlike in this case where even though the child has no or limited understanding, he is not any worse than a fool.














(85) Initially - But after the fact or in a time of need (i.e. no other options available) you can be lenient (Chayei Adam) and also the opinion of the Biur Halacha.
(86) That it crawls - Rainwater does not purify if it is crawling (moving) water but only when collected.




(91) And water that continues to flow (via pipes from the original water source) - This means to say, even if it was all non-rainwater (drawn or pumped), as long as the water continued to move along/through the ground to another place, it is permissible in this regard (see Seif/Paragraph 7)





(97) Some say, etc. - The achronim agreed with the author (of the Shulchan Aruch) that one recites “על נטילת ידים”. *** And only if the water is invalid for washing and only valid (for immersion) does one recite the blessing "על טבילת ידים" (as explained in Siman 160, Seif 9, blessing "al netilas yadayim.")


Siman 160


(2) Whether from (within) itself - Like water that stood in a vessel for a long time until it turned green due to the hot air. And here the author of the Tur used this language. But the Rambam did not mention disqualification except when it changed due to another matter. And so have the later authorities (the Achronim) proven and agreed that it is permissible when it changed due to itself.
(3) Or from something that fell into it - Such as ink and other types of dyes and colors, even if the color material is not diluted in it but by mixing it changes the appearance. *** And it is also the law that if it changes due to smoke and nothing else (from within itself), it is kosher. *** Indeed, what has changed by dust and clay that has been mixed into it is not considered a change in appearance (as in section 9) (Shulchan Aruch HaRav).  Because the way water grows (i.e. its normal appearance) is to be mixed with dust and clay. (And) also eventually the impurities normally settle (cooked according to their way) (Pri Megadim) (Compare to Siman 9).
(4) Or from its location - whether the water changed while standing on the ground or whether when they drew water with a vessel and the water changed due to the vessel. *** And know that water is disqualified by a change of appearance (בשינוי מראה), but only when you wash the hands with this water from a kli/vessel. But immersing the hands in a measure of a 40 se’ah, it is not disqualified by a change of appearance. It is like immersion of the body, which is not disqualified by a change of appearance unless a substance that imparts color falls into it (i.e. a dye) and dissolves in it or a liquid, such as red wine or fruit juice or the like falls into it, (Yoreh Deah 201:25-26), and in a spring it is not disqualified by a change of appearance at all, as explained there.

(6) Work - When a person does something in the water that he needs (e.g., chilling wine).  (Based on the Rambam,) since the standing water is intended to be poured out (i.e. discarded), it is disqualified for washing netilas yadayim (even if it is still clear).

(8) Even if he intended - since he at least intended to soak his bread in water. *** But if he did not intend at all to soak it and it fell into the water by itself, the water is permitted. because it was not poured (intended to be discarded) (and this is the rule if a vessel fell into the water unintentionally). *** If a garment fell into the water and was removed from there, the water is not disqualified since he did not intend (to soak it) as with the bread that unintentionally fell into the water). But the water that is squeezed out of the garment is disqualified [Achronim].
(9) If wine was cooled, etc. - that is considered working since the it was cooled by the use of the water. *** If the wine was cold and poured into the water only to cool it down from the heat of the day, it is permitted. *** The same rule applies if live fish were put into the water so that they would not die. All this is not considered work since the water does not act upon them but merely preserves them. Even if the fish later died, the water is not invalidated.




(14) Immerse his hands, etc. - Hand washing alone is not considered work. And the water is not made disgusting by immersing the (otherwise clean) hands, so it is not like water that is now intended to be discarded.  And even if the hands were not clean, the water does not become impure by touching them, as stated in seif/paragraph 11. (Magen Avraham)



(18) The baker rinsed - Those who knead dough with clean hands that are not dirty are considered like one who is removing impurities from the above-mentioned utensils [Beit Yosef]. And because the dough is not considered working with the water. [and it is possible that it can be removed even without rinsing, (i.e., the dough is stuck to the hands, but one is not kneading it with the water)]. The Taz disagrees with this ruling and proves that Rambam considers this definite work since he washes his hands from the dough. Rashal ruled similarly and other later authorities agreed.


(21) Some say that water is disqualified. - We compare the water of the heifer’s sin offering to the water that is disqualified if drunk by an animal, bird or wild beast (except for a dove). *** Some explain that this is because of using the water.  For when they lift their heads, drool from their mouths comes from the water they were drinking.  And this is considered working with the water they used for drinking. And they disqualified all the water in this mixture.
(22) But their words do not seem correct - Only in the case of the Parah Adumah (Red Heifer) is the water disqualified if it was worked by any amount.  All the Rishonim explain that there is no concern of using the water in this situation even by Parah Adumah.  And there are other reasons why this does not apply in this case.  *** And besides that, regarding netilas yadayim, this (small amount of drooled water) does not disqualify because of this.  Because the small amount of contaminated or drooled water is nullified in the larger mixture.  As previously mentioned, (that this is the halacha in regard to other liquids.)
(23) Rather whether these animals or … it is permitted - And the Achronim distinguished, divided, this matter, that when dealing with chickens and also other animals and birds, the (drinking) water is permitted (for netilas yadayim), according to the opinion of the author.  But the drink of a dog and pig is disqualified because of disgust.  The water is disgusting from drinking, and it is intended to be poured out and discarded.  The Chaiya Adam wrote that in times of need one could rely on the opinion of the author to permit even these. *** If a snake drank from the water, we do not use it to wash our hands. Water that was exposed (left overnight) is not a concern nowadays that perhaps a snake drank from it, as they are not common. And even one who is careful about this for drinking purposes should not be stringent about it for ritual washing. *** Disqualified water that was mixed with acceptable water is nullified when it is in the minority and the acceptable water is whole or in the majority, even when using as little as a reviis of water, (i.e., if the majority of this water is clean, then the other water is nullified,) if the water did not change its appearance (Achronim).



(27) From them - And there are those who are strict (about washing their hands with water) that their hand withdraws from it (i.e. it is too hot to handle.)  Others write that if there are no other water sources, there is no need to be strict about this. The main thing is according to the Shulchan Aruch. *** And in lukewarm water, there is no prohibition at all for everyone. *** Even if they were hot from the beginning and then cooled down and became lukewarm, it is also permissible. *** Therefore, even if there are no other water sources except for hot water that the hand cannot handle, it is permissible for everyone to wait a little until it cools down somewhat so that the hand does not get burned and it will be permissible for everyone.










(38) Salt water – Sea water if it was boiled and it returns to being fit for dog drinking and fit for netilas yadayim (Magen Avraham and the Radbaz). And immerse the hands in it (the sea) is always permissible, like all saltwater.



















(58) If the ice is crushed (i.e. melted) etc. - But if not (melted), one does not wash the hands with a vessel. But one may immerse the hands in the snow if there is enough snow for the volume of a mikveh (40 se’ah), it is permissible in times of need, when there is no melted water.  40 se'ahs connected together, one can immerse one's hands in it. Nevertheless, it seems that it must be at least enough to cover his hands to the point they are hidden (i.e. completely covered).

Siman 161

(1) Must be careful - It is necessary to provide a brief introduction: As regarding the immersion of the body (in a mikvah) that should be careful not to have any interposition, that there should be no substance adhering to the body at the time of immersion. If there is, then that place is not considered suitable for immersion. If there is any chatzitzah, then immersion is not valid. *** And even though Biblically it is not considered a chatzitzah unless the interposition is on most of the body, Rabbinically it is forbidden even if the interposition was on a minority (&lt;50%) of the body.  It is a decree whether it is on the majority of the body or not. *** But, the Chachamim did not forbid unless it is the way of (most) people to usually care about if it stays that way, regardless that now at the time of immersion the individual does not care about it (i.e.  it bothers you enough that you eventually want to remove it.) *** Something that is not usually cared about is not a barrier unless it covers most of the body.  Then it is forbidden by rabbinic law even if something that is not usually cared about sticks (to the body). *** Regarding netilas yadayim (hand washing) even though it is a Rabbinic decree, any Rabbinic decree that is similar to a Torah decree is considered as if it were a Torah decree. Therefore, if there is a chatzitza (barrier) on most of the hand, meaning on most of the place where the water touches when washing hands, it is forbidden even if people do not care about it. However, if there is only a chatzitza on a minority of the hand, it is not forbidden. *** Nevertheless, the custom is to be careful about this.  *** And now we will explain the words of the Shulchan Aruch: one should be careful to remove anything that is stuck to the hands before washing that people are usually concerned about removing. *** If one washed his hands and afterwards found something was stuck to them, whether it covered a minority or majority of his hand(s), it should be considered a leniency that it is permissible after the fact. However, ideally one should check before washing to see if there is anything that is a chatzitzah.



(5) On his flesh - Even though it is explained later in 162:2 that one does not need to wash at all at the place of the bandage.  The reason is that since he cannot wash in that place, it is like his finger was cut off and he only needs to wash the rest of his hand.  There is not stated (the fact is) that he has an injury, and we are not concerned that he will remove the bandage and he will touch his flesh to the food since it will be painful to him. *** But now it is stated (the fact is) that he has no wound, only a feeling in the place of washing, and he has no pain in his washing and can remove the bandage whenever he wants. Therefore, one has to be concerned that he will remove the bandage during the meal and touch his (impure hands) flesh to the food. Therefore, it is necessary to remove the bandage. And to wash his hands, if he washes when the bandage is on his hand, it will be a chatzitzah.

(7) But (a small amount that one is not concerned about is not a problem) etc. - This law applies to the beginning of the section, which is actually the law of a chatzitzah. For if it is found that there is anything interposing on a minority of the hand and one does not care, there is no concern; ***And according to the opinion of  the Tur (that even those that the author mentioned earlier) regarding the things (on the body or hands) in which it is the way for most people to be concerned or bothered by, but nevertheless if the individual is not concerned, it is not considered a chatzitzah. *** But the opinion of the Magen Avraham and other Achronim (in all those that the author mentioned), we do not follow them (the individual who happens to not be bothered) when for the most part the majority of people (are bothered by the presence of the interposition).


(10) But if he was particular – Meaning, although most people are not bothered, since he is bothered, we follow him and consider this a chatzitzah. Nevertheless, it seems that this is only with clay (i.e. mud that forms) or dry mud. But with wet mud or dirt under the nail that does not stick so much, one should not be strict, especially if all day he does not care except when it comes to washing.



(14) Dry ink is an interposition.  Wet ink is not. – This means to say: Ink that is wet is not considered an interposition for the reason that the water soaks or washes (off the ink) and the water used for netilas yadayim reaches (touches) the body.  This is also the rule for paints or dyes that are like ink that only if they have substance.  If there is no substance in it but only the appearance of a color in general, there is no concern of chatzitzah. ** And whoever writes frequently, even if there is dry ink on his fingers, is not an interposition because there is no way for him to be careful about it.




(19) At the time (when doing work) - And the Achronim conclude that only a woman who is accustomed to be concerned to remove the ring during work (that is, during kneading) (i.e. should be careful to remove it at the time of netilas yadayim). But a man who is not accustomed to be concerned to remove it during work, because it is not his custom to do the kneading, he does not need to remove it at the time of washing even if it is not loose.  Except if it has a precious stone, for also a man will be concerned to remove it at the time of washing so that it does not become dirty in the water.  Then it is appropriate to say he removes his ring because it is a chatzitzah.

Siman 162





















(21) (Pour) a reviis at once – the reason, (pouring) the reviis at one time is as if they made it like a mikvah and the waters are also pure, and the water is also pure.  And therefore there is no need for a second (pouring of) water. And when he had dirt and an interposition, then he had to pour a little of the reviis to remove the dirt, and the reviis was not left intact. So necessarily (against his will) he will need two washing. *** And know that some say, yesh om’rim, that the proper law you always need to wash with water twice. And if he only has a riviis, he will pour out of it two times, and even if he takes (i.e., washes) with a reviis both hands at one time or alternating on each hand a reviis (of water), he requires additionally a second (wash) of water. ***And the Chayei Adam writes that this is the proper custom. To take/wash with a reviis of water on each hand and then repeat a second time. ***And this procedure is only if at the outset he has enough water for mayim achronim (mayim mezumanim). But if it is a burden to follow this, it appears to me that this is not necessary for most authorities are lenient with this. And the conclusion of the m’chaver (of the Shulchan Aruch) that when pouring a reviis all at once, a second taking of water is not necessary.  And this is the opinion of other achronim. 








(30) Then it is pure - There are achronim who wrote that only after the fact there is no need to return and wash again. But initially one must wash the entire hand at once.  and not only one (continuous) pouring, but even in two pourings, as long as he does not delay at all between pourings.  It will be considered one pouring. *** When taking water from the faucet (with a pipe that is called a “keren”/tap or an “andil”/a type of tap or faucet similar to a tarnegol) whose mouth is narrow and needs to be opened and closed with each pouring so that the water comes out with the force of the person, (as mentioned above in Siman 159:9), nevertheless, for such a short time it is not considered an interruption. Nevertheless, if he has another utensil, it is better not to take from such a utensil (from the faucet).








































(71) Or he should pour a riviis/a quarter-log all at once, so that they will not become impure- That is to say:  Even if the water returns later, there is no concern about this. The Achronim wrote that this advice is better than the first method.  Because it is not possible to be careful and pour very close to the bandage and the water will not touch the bandage. The latter also wrote that it is good to wrap the bandage after washing when eating with a white and clean rag to cover the dirty areas of the bandage. *** The Achronim wrote that if the bandage fell off during the meal, it is necessary to wash netilas yadayim again, as is the law with bandages (as explained below in Siman 163 that this is permissible] so that if the bandage was removed, it is forbidden to eat it (the bread/food).

Siman 163



(3) In front of him a long distance - .... And the Chayei Adam and other achronim agree that one who is in his home also is not required to trouble himself to look for water only for less than a mil (up to a mil) as when you have to go back on the road that you are traveling. And he is not required to wait (or search to the time to walk) up to 4 mil. (Pri Megadim and Derech HaChaim)

(5) With a cloth - or in something.  And in the Biur Halacha that according to the opinion of the author (Shulchan Aruch) holds that you must wrap both hands, even if you are going to eat with only one hand because you might touch the (uncovered) other hand. However, according to reasoning of the Re’ma, there is reason to be lenient in this. And this needs further analysis.


(8) Does not have to wash his hands – Even if he is touching the food, our sages did not decree regarding washing the hands except for the person eating.
(9) And even though (the other is putting it into his mouth) – The sages did not distinguish, i.e. they had one standard, between whether he touched it or did not touch it, (the one eating has to wash) (The Levush).

Siman 164









(9) Or covered places on a person - In other covered places of the body (i.e. simply covered by clothing) where there is sweat.  But in regard to exposed places such as the face and the exposed places in his arms, there is no need to be meticulous (as explained in Siman 4 and see there in the M"B regarding the laws that are relevant to our matter.)
(10) Or he touches or scratches his hair – But if one does not scratch or rub but only touch one’s hair, there is no need for washing the hands, even if you combed it (i.e. your hair) with them (i.e. your hands).

(12) One must go back and wash his hands – And all the more so if he actually touched one of the sweaty places (i.e. genitalia or other covered areas of the body) or defecated or urinated and rubbed his hands as in Siman 170:1
(13) And recite the blessing for hand washing – The Maharshal disagrees and holds that one does not need to recite the blessing because of touching sweat during the meal.  And even if one has to go relieve himself during the meal, he also holds that one does not recite a blessing again. The exception is if he got up and left in the middle of the meal. *** And there are many Achronim who discuss whether to practice like him.  And according to the Bais Halevi that if he defecates or touches the anal area or he wipes himself, he needs to wash again and recite “al netilas yadayim.”  But if he touches other covered areas or if he urinated and wiped himself, it is proper that he was again but without reciting a blessing.


Siman 165

(1) One who needs to relieve himself – The Shelah writes (for Kabbalistic reasons) each person should check himself (i.e. to determine if he needs to relieve himself) before washing his hands, as written in Sefer Seder Hayom.
(2) He should wash his hands twice - If one washes their hands and then recites the blessing of “asher yatzar” and then recites the blessing of “al netilas yadayim,” there is an interruption between the washing and the blessing. If one first recites the blessing of “al netilas yadayim” and then recites the blessing of “asher yatzar,” there is an interruption between the blessing of “netilas yadayim” and the blessing of “hamotzi.” And to wait to recite “asher yatzar” until after he recites “hamotzi” is also not correct, because the obligation (to recite “asher yatzar) falls on him immediately after he has finished his needs, and not after everything else. *** The Achronim wrote that one should be careful not to wash a complete washing the first time and use only a little (water, less than a reviis) for cleanliness.  For if not, he will purify his hands with the first washing, and it will not be appropriate to was again for “netilas yadayim.” As it appears to me in Siman 158:7. *** And know that there are many poskim who hold that “asher yatzar’ is not an interruption between the blessing of “netilas yadayim” and “hamotzi” because everything is for the purpose of purifying the hands and it is like a fence for the Torah in Siman 167. *** Therefore, if after the fact he washed (i.e. a complete washing, e.g., with a reviis of water) for the first act for netilas yadayim in order to eat, he should first recite “al netilas yadayim” and afterwards “asher yatzar” for he has opinions to rely on (to recite in this manner.) ***And the prospective rule is that if it is difficult to wash twice because there is not enough water or similar reasons (i.e. accidentally did a complete washing the first time), then he should wash once, recite the blessing “al netilas yadayim: and afterwards (immediately) recite “asher yatzar.” *** And writes the Magen Avraham, if one has to go to the bathroom in the middle of the meal, everyone agrees that he washes one time, and then recites “al netilas yadayim: and afterwards “asher yatzar, since he does not have to recite “hamotzi”, as discussed in Siman 198. And we have written on this subject later on in the Mishna Berurah in 164:2.

Siman 166

(1) That one does not have to careful - That what is said in Shas, the Gemara, Berachos 51, to juxtapose the netilas yadayim to the meal. (that) One should not occupy oneself between them with business matters or (unrelated) actions that distract his attention.  (He should avoid) a lot of conversation that brings him to the point of distraction (even if they involve words of d’vrei Torah). *** But if sits quietly and does nothing meanwhile between them (the brachas of “al netilas yadayim” and “hamotzi”) even if it is a long time (i.e. enough time to walk about 40 feet), or, even if he talks or whispers a little, since the table is set before him and he intends to eat immediately, it is not considered a loss of train of thought, (i.e. a loss of focus or distraction).
(2) And some say you should be careful - Even when he is alone.  And even more so, he should not talk between washing and hamotzi, even talking a little bit or talking words of d’vrei Torah for one has to be concerned about an interruption/hefsek. And he has to watch himself.  (However) for things that are needed for the meal, it is permitted to interrupt for any reason (e.g., asking to pass the salt so one can dip the bread after hamotzi).



(6) Accidental Interruption - and not a casual juxtaposition.  And if so, the author of the Shulchan Aruch says that it is better to be careful to juxtapose washing with the meal. And to be careful not to linger between them like this. And the primary law is that this is the preferential way of performing the mitzvah.  After the fact, even if there was a long gap or an interruption, he does not have to go back and wash as long as he was not distracted (i.e., loss his concentration) and he was careful to guard his hands (from becoming dirty or impure).

Siman 167
























































































(88) The one who breaks the bread gives - but he should not throw the piece of “hamotzi” bread on the table in front of the guests, even if the food is not disgusting by throwing it, as will be explained in Siman 171. And also, since it is the piece/slice of the “hamotzi” bread, it is considered a disgrace (biziyon) to the commandment.

Siman 168























(23) B’kisnin (pastries) – In the next paragraph, I explain what this is. Even though with ordinary bread one recites the blessing of “hamotzi” on it for any amount and with a kezayis one recites “birkas hamazon,” these (pastries, b’kisnin) are different because people do not usually have a meal on them and only eat them a little as a snack (i.e. “on the go”). Therefore, their blessing is only “mezonos” and afterwards one recites “al hamichya.” *** However, if one eats an amount that is considered a meal (קבע סעודה), then one recites “hamotzi” and “birkas hamazon” because according to all opinions this is considered bread.
(24) Others would usually use to establish (a meal) - The achronim (Magen Avraham) wrote that if one ate alone, he must eat a shiur that would regularly satiate others (either 4 eggs or what is common for a meal). If he ate it with meat or other things that are combined with the bread, he must eat a shiur that would regularly satiate others when the bread and other ingredients are eaten together. This is so even if he is eating alone, and he was satiated with it (with a smaller amount) even though others would not be satiated with it alone.  *** However, if others eat the pas with other things and were satisfied with it, we do not say his own mindset is irrelevant, (בטלה דעתו).  If he is satisfied, he has to recites the bracha of “hamotzi” and “birkas hamazon.” ... *** And here regarding eruvim techumin in Siman 378, it is stated that the measure of a meal is three or four eggs (the opinion of the Mach’tzis Ha’shekel). And other Achronim write that the same applies here regarding the measure for establishing a meal. *** However, other Achronim (Magen Avraham, the GRiZ, and the Chayei Adam) and the Gra disagree and hold that one should not recite “hamotzi” and “birkas hamazon” unless one eats an amount that is considered a meal, such as that is eaten for breakfast and dinner, and so writes the Beis Yosef in the name of the Shibbolei Leket.  And I found in (Ha) Eshkol that it is proven that he holds this way and is more inclined to the language of the Shulchan Aruch. *** Nevertheless, preferentially it is better to be concerned for the opinion of those who are stringent not to eat four eggs, especially if it is something about which there is reason to be uncertain regarding its status, such as pas habah b’kisnin (i.e. pastries), even though it is explained in Seif 7 that we are lenient about this. *** Anyway, one should certainly be concerned about the stringent opinions mentioned above.
(25) Hamotzi and Birkas Hamazon – and also “netilas yadayim” as if it was definitely bread, as explained above in Siman 158:1
(26) he should recite birkas hamazon - Since he has completed the portion required for a fixed meal, but hamotzi is not required to recite a blessing over what he intended to eat. This is because what is placed before him is not sufficient when he changed his intention afterwards to eat a portion large enough for a regular meal. But it is considered (i.e. it combines) as part of what he has already eaten. *** If there is indeed an amount (pas b’kisnin) required for a full meal in what has not yet been eaten (still in front of him and he changes his intention to eat more food), he must wash his hands and recite the blessing over bread and Grace after Meals.
(27) that one fills with – That is to say, even if it is kneaded from the beginning with water like other breads, since the entire dough is filled with these grains and even though the filling is a main ingredient. Nevertheless, since it is an important type of grain and not nullified, one recites the “mezonos” on it and exempts everything, as stated in Shulchan Aruch 168:2-3. *** But if he does not eat the dough and only the fruits inside, he recites the blessing that belongs to the fruits. *** The Taz wrote that if the fruits were taken and only the dough was eaten, he still recites the blessing “mezonos” and not “hamotzi” because it is ruled to be pas b’kisnin since it was baked with fruit filling.  And it is not customary to have a meal on such bread.





(33) A lot of spices or honey - That is to say (i.e. according to the Re’ma), that as long the spices are mixed into it (i.e. the dough) so that the taste of the spices will be more noticeable than the taste of the flour. The same applies to honey, oil, and milk. We require that most of the mixture be made up of these ingredients and only a minority be water, so that the taste will be very noticeable. Then, they are considered the primary ingredient, and the taste of the dough is secondary. *** The same applies to the first illustration in the Shulchan Aruch, (the pocket bread that is filled with these ingredients), which states that we fill them so much that the filling is very noticeable.



(37) And it is called nivlash (liquidly softer dough) - And achronim write that this is what is called in Russian nalsilka (thick “fritters” or blintzes). Mix flour with a lot of water in a pot or cauldron and pour it over vegetable leaves and bake it in the oven with the leaves (and this is the rule when baking on a pan without oil) And specifically for those that are very thin and soft, but if they are not so thin and soft, it is explained in Siman 14 that the law is to say Hamotzi over it (Magen Avraham).



(41) Not because of the meal- meaning, if one did not eat them to satisfy his hunger but only for dessert and sweetness, [but if he did eat them to satisfy his hunger, even if he only had a small amount, they are considered (part of the) meal and do not require a separate blessing].











(53) If it has (an olive-size portion) – Not only all (of the crumbs), even if there is an olive-size portion in one piece, one recites the blessing of Hamotzi and Grace after Meals. And anyway (intrinsically), one can eat the other small pieces as well.



(57) (if there is not a kezayis) one only recites the blessing (of borei me'nei mezonos) - Know that with all the things mentioned in this section and the following sections, even if one had a fixed regular meal with them and ate enough to be satiated, he recites “borei me’nei mezonos” and afterwards recites “al hamichya” because it is not considered bread at all, but rather like a type of food cooked in or from a pot (i.e. like a stew or porridge)

















(75) But our custom is to be lenient - The Magen Avraham writes that this is only when one is not eating to satiety. For his obligation to recite “birkas hamazon” is only a Rabbinic decree. Therefore, we follow the first opinion to be lenient.  But when one eats to satiety, when the obligation to bentch is Biblical, one has to recite “birkas hamazon” because of a doubt (ספק דאורייתא לחומרא). And this is the opinion also of the Gra. *** And this is at a time of kneading a thick dough when his intention was to bake bread.  But afterwards he went and made it into a doughnut (i.e. he changed his mind). *** But when one’s initial intention was to cook and fry it, even if one ate to satiety, one does not recite “birkas hamazon” but only “al hamichya.”


(78) After baking - the language is not so accurate. And its meaning is after cooking in a pot or frying in a pan. Many recent authorities agree that this is only if there is an olive-size portion (of bread).  For if there was not an olive-size portion that was nullified by cooking or frying, it is completely nullified for the purpose of the blessing of “hamotzi”, and you may see further in paragraph/seif 10.

(80) Pas’t’dah (knishes) and kreplach (pocket dough) – In explanation, these are filled with meat, as written at the end of this Siman by the glosses of the Re’ma.  If they are filled with fruit they are considered pas habah b’kisnin. And as written in seif 7, preferentially one recites “mezonos” when one is not making a meal on them, even when they are baked in an oven. And all of this is according to the Re’ma. *** However, the Taz disagrees and holds that bread filled with meat or fish or types of cheese are also considered pas habah b’kisnin. And it goes without saying that this is when the intention was not to eat a regular meal. In that case, one always recites “borei minei mezonos” and afterwards “al hamichya”, and at the end of the Siman the halacha is explained regarding this.





(86) One should say the blessing of Hamotzi over it - even if he did not make it his meal on it as the Magen Avraham is quoted earlier in seif 8.  Actually, if they were not very thick, they would be included in the category of pas b’kisnin (pocket breads). See what we wrote there.







(94) The blessing for it is the hamotzi - This is even true if one did not intend to eat it as a fixed meal and it is not similar to a pas b’kisnin, i.e. pocket bread (which means bread filled with fruits and spices that is explained in seif 7).  One does not recite hamotzi over it if one did not intend to eat a meal with it, because it is different there since they are only made for dessert and sweetening. On the other hand, pas’t’dah (doughs or pies with filling) that are filled with meat are usually eaten when hungry and until satiated.  It is like eating a piece of bread and meat together. *** It seems obvious, that if they are only made of small cakes (or waffles) and mixed with meat crumbs and it is clear that they are made only for dessert after the meal.  Its law is exactly like a pastry mixed with fruits and other sweets that one does not recite the hamotzi over it if one did not intend to eat a meal with it. And know that bread baked in egg water is what is called kichelach (cookies). *** The Magen Avraham is content that this is pas b’kisnin.  The Derech Hachaim and the Griz decided that this was pas b’kisnin. And also, the Magen Giborim.  And this is the custom. (I also found afterwards that this is the opinion also of the Gra). *** Regardless, The Magen Giborim writes that those who are God fearing should not eat it unless all the kneading is with egg (water) and no water is mixed with it at all. *** And it seems that if it is thin and dry, one should not be stringent even if water is mixed with it.

Siman 169









(9) (it is forbidden to) Give to him – The explanation, regarding the waiter, we are concerned that because of his anxiety or preoccupation will forget to wash his hands.  But the other (the one being fed), we are not concerned about this, unless we see that he wants to eat without washing.  And there are some who are strict with this. But when he is giving food for charitable reasons, it is certainly acceptable to be lenient, as prior discussion of the Re’ma in seif 2.

Siman 170



Siman 171




(4) No - and if he does it for healing, it is permitted even if he is disgusted by it, as explained above in Siman 388, Seif 20. Even without healing, if it is something that is necessary for a person and the way of the world is to do this need with food, it is also permitted. For this reason, they sprinkle the ground with wine (for the aroma), smear the body with wine and oil (to soften the skin), as explained in the Gemara in several places. It is forbidden to injure olives to wash hands with water coming out of them (since they are strong and remove dirt) because the olives are made disgusting by this action and there is a loss of food (Gemara)


(7) (If it is) Full, etc. - But when it is not full, it is permissible to lean it (the bowl or pot) even though he uses bread.  For a person can use bread for his needs, as we have said, and the same is true that it is permissible to cover a vessel with it [Tur].

(9) And do not throw bread - And it is explained in the Bais Yosef and Shaarei Poskim (other authorities) that bread is considered more significant than other foods, and it is forbidden to throw it even if it does not become disgusting through throwing. For example, if one throws it on a clean place, it is a disgrace (zilzul) to the bread.

(11) For example, nuts etc. - which are hard and do not crumble. And it speaks of when he threw them in a clean place, because otherwise it is forbidden even with nuts, as will be explained in seif (paragraph) 4. When we see food lying on the ground, it is forbidden to go and leave them there, but one must pick them up, unless in a place where there is reason to suspect witchcraft, such as a whole loaf (Eruvin 64). It is stated in the Gemara (Taanis 20) that Rav Huna holds: that human food should not be fed to an animal (and the same applies to birds). However, in the Elyah Rabbah it is doubtful whether the halacha follows Rav Huna in this matter, and see in the Machzis Hashekel who argues that if he has nothing else to feed, everyone agrees that human food is permissible, and perhaps for this reason people are accustomed to allow feeding birds bread.



(15) In place of a spoon - because a person can use his bread as he needs where it does not disgust (or ruin), and here it does not disgust this person since he himself ate the daisa (porridge) with it.
(16) And he should eat it etc. - because for another person it is disgusting, and there could be a loss of food.
(17) Those who are meticulous etc. - who are concerned about using a wooden utensil/spoon with food because it is a disgrace (bizui), therefore they eat a little bit of the bread [with the daisa (porridge) each time they put it in their mouths], so that appears as if he wrapped the (daisa in) bread.

(19) We draw wine through pipes/straws - which is done as a good sign, for their peace and goodness, and it speaks of a wooden tube that is not disgusting.
(20) And it is received - because otherwise there is a concern of loss of food.
(21) It makes them disgusting - Even though nuts have a shell and the food inside does not become disgusting, nevertheless during the rainy season when there is mud and dirt, they become dirty and disgusting to pick up and there is a loss of food. There are places where they have the custom today to throw dates in front of the groom on Shabbat before his wedding when they call him up for Maftir. And what they are doing is not appropriate/nice because they are soft and become disgusting through this.

Siman 172



Siman 173



Siman 174








... In Ashkenaz countries where wine is not drunk during the meal, even on Shabbos, the beracha on wine in kiddush does not exempt the wine that one drinks during the meal, unless one had in mind that he would drink wine. (M.B. 8)






























(39) ...But the Magen Avraham writes that in the middle of the meal it does not require a bracha because then it comes to arouse the appetite for food and is also considered because of the meal (And the same applies to fruits that come to continue the appetite for food, such as pickled lemons or salty olives or salty cucumbers and the like, and it is not similar to other fruits that are inside the meal that require a blessing.) ...The Chayei Adam wrote that if one drinks coffee after finishing his meal, it is only to digest the food and is not similar to other drinks, and therefore one must recite the bracha rishona (shehakol); (and) it is not necessary.  (and) it is correct to recite first on a little sugar to exempt the coffee.  And all this is relevant only to the matter of weekdays, but on Shabbat and Yom Tov in the morning none of this is relevant for surely he has already sanctified over the cup (of wine). (What more can you want from him?) If he sanctified over the wine, does it not exempt all the drinks [and in the manner explained above in paragraph 3] and if he sanctified over beer and the like, he does he not bless “shehakol” and thus also exempt (a bracha for additional drinks with) this.
(40) Even if they recline together - This means, not like we say usually (in 167:1) that if they recline together one person exempts everyone else, and it is better because of “In the multitude of people is the king’s glory”, but in a blessing in the middle of a meal they should not do so.




Which means to say that a blessing amidst a meal when one is blessing and covering everyone else's blessing, one shouldn't say "With the permission of my masters [since this language isn't asking permission to bless], rather "Pay attention, my masters" that they should stop eating and pay attention to listen to the blessing and be covered by it, as was mentioned.
Which means to say that one covers his fellow's blessing, such as with kiddush, havdallah, and other similar circumstances. But with a wedding, a bri milah where we are not accustomed to say "Pay attention" at all is because it is only in a situation where one needs to ask permission that we say over wine "Pay attention" in a place of volition, but at a wedding or a bris milah, where we are not asking permission, there is no need to say "Pay attention" at all.

Siman 175


(2) Hatov v’Hameitiv “He who is good and does good” - and blesses it with the Name and Kingdom, which is an acknowledgment of the abundance of wine that has come to him (and the scribes have also written a reason for this formula: Because it is known that man needs to reduce worldly pleasures, and wine brings joy and can lead to lightheadedness. Therefore, they arranged this formula of Hatov v’Hameitiv, for it is known that the Hatov v’Hameitiv in the Birkas Hamazon was instituted for the slain of Beitar who were (finally) given burial.  And through this he will remember the day of death and not be drawn after the wine much. *** Specifically on wine during the meal (or if they were sitting to drink without eating and then brought them another wine, as will be explained below in Seif 5 in the Re’ma).  *** But on a cup (of wine) for the Birkas Hamazon, there is no need to recite the blessing Hatov v’Hameitiv even if it is another type of wine, for he has already said Hatov v’Hameitiv in the Birkas Hamazon (Magen Avraham). *** On Pesach night, preferentially it is better not to drink another type of wine during the meal so as not to have to bless it with Hatov v’Hameitiv, and it will appear somewhat like adding to the cups (i.e., the four cups of wine).  But if he is thirsty and desires to drink from it, he can recite Hatov v’Hameitiv (Achronim).
(3) Even though he does not have any more, etc. - See in the Magen Avraham in the name of the Poskim that have opinions on this, and therefore they decided for the law that if they have from the first and brought the second in order to taste a different wine from the first, they bless on it Hatov v’Hameitiv. But if they do not have at all from the first, then they did not bring it (the second wine) because of a (desire for a) change but because the first was finished, they do not bless on it (Hatov v’Hameitiv) because there is not much increase of goodness in this.
(4) And it is not only if they bring them new wine – meaning, that it was brought to them (only) now into the house.  But it is also the law that if they initially had two wines in the house and intended to drink them, but the second (better) wine was not placed before him on the table at the time of reciting “borei pri hagafen” (i.e., the bracha was recited on the more inferior wine), and as below (Levush). *** And the opinion of the Lechem Chamudos is that when they are in his house at the time of blessing “borei pri hagafen”  and he intends to drink them, it is considered as if they were placed before him on the table already, and he does not need to recite “hatov v’hameitiv.” And when in doubt (regarding reciting a) blessing, one is lenient.
(5) When the two wines were not before him together - or if he passed (over the superior wine) and blessed the inferior wine first, he must bless “hatov v’hameitiv” on the second (superior) wine.

(7) If he does not know that it is inferior - but if he knows that it is even slightly inferior, he should not bless it even if it is of a different kind (i.e., variety of wine) (Achronim).


(10) Or one new, etc. - Specifically, from new to old, but from old to new, not necessarily, unless he knows that the new one is as good as the old.()


(13) More than the red - Nevertheless, if he drank the white (wine) first and then they brought him red (wine), he blesses it with the blessing of “hatov v’hameitiv” if he knows that the red is more excellent.  But in general (this is) not (the case). Since the white (wine) is healthier for the body and the red (wine) is considered as inferior to it (i.e., the white wine).
(14) On the good, etc. - And if he is uncertain which (wine) is good and which is bad, he is allowed to initially bless “borei pri hagafen” on one and recite “hatov v’hameitiv” on the other, even if they were initially brought before him together.*** And this is according to the law, but it is good to be careful when he has a doubt about which is good, that initially he will remove one (wine) from the table and then recite “borei pri hagafen” on the (remaining) one and afterwards recite “hatov” the second (wine) and thus fulfill all the concerns.*** It is written in Eliyahu Rabah, that if he wants to recite blessing on several (many) wines, he should at least remove them from the table at the time of the bracha rishona, and afterwards when he drinks even several wines, he blesses each one with “hatov (v’hameitiv).”
(15) With him - and drinks from that wine. But if he does not drink except for himself alone or only his friend drinks alone, they do not bless it with the blessing of Hatov v’Hameitiv.*** Also, it is necessary that his friend has a partnership in that wine, but if he is just a guest in general that the homeowner gave him to drink, he cannot say the blessing of Hatov v’Hameitiv.*** The Magen Avraham wrote that even the homeowner cannot say this blessing in this way, unless the homeowner placed the pitcher (bottle) on the table for anyone who wants to drink.  (Then) it is considered as a partnership and even the guest can bless; *** And his wife and children, since he needs to support them, it is as if they have a share in it. *** Also, it is necessary that they drink together in a group and not one in this room and one in that room. *** Several later authorities also agreed that one should not bless with the blessing of ‘Hatov v’Hameitiv’ unless both drank from both wines. But if both drank only from the first wine and from the second wine only one drank or vice versa, one should not bless. *** The Achronim wrote that with the blessing of Hatov v’Hameitiv one can bless after the fact even if he already drank and remembered when the wine was in his mouth.  He can swallow it and bless afterwards. But if he remembered after he already drank, it is not advisable to bless. *** However, when there is still wine in the pitcher (bottle) for everyone, he can bless because it is similar to someone who forgot to bless Hamotzi and remembered before finishing the meal (Pri Megadim).

Siman 176



Siman 177

(1) Eaten with the bread – and porridge, even if it is thick and he does not dip the bread in it, and it is eaten for its own sake. Since it comes as the made satiating course of the meal and it is secondary to the bread.  And this is the rule for all types of cooked food that are usually brought to the formal meal (eaten with bread) (Rosh).


(4) For example, figs, etc. - And also, any food that comes only for dessert and not to satisfy hunger.  Even if the fruits were before him when he recited the blessing hamotzi, and even if they are cooked (i.e. the fruit dish is meant to be a part of the meal and to satiate), even so the bread does exempt them because they are not related to the bread.  Even if the fruit is cooked with meat, many Achronim require a blessing on them because the fruit is not made secondary to the meat.  *** This is not like the opinion of the Chayei Adam who writes that the fruit is considered secondary because of the meat. *** However, in the book Yad HaKetana I found that he also sided with saying not to bless, but wrote another reason for this, that when the fruit is cooked with meat or with fat and honey and made into a dish [which is called apple tzimmes (apple compote) or Beren (” from the berries”) in German]. *** It seems that their main purpose is to come for food and for the (main) meal, and not just for dessert, but as a cooked dish like other dishes made from bread and vegetables that do not need to be blessed for this reason. *** And he (the Chayei Adam) concludes that to avoid doubt, when one wants to eat tzimmes/compote from cooked fruits, he should first take a fresh fruit and bless it to exempt this, and if he does not have fresh fruit, he should eat and conclude the meal by eating bread (see there). *** And this does not include what is brought from a few cooked fruits for dessert (called compote) because it does not come for food at all, only for dessert, and requires a blessing.
(5) And all kinds of fruits - likewise, lettuce, squash, fresh cucumbers or radishes and onions also need to be blessed. However, if one eats lettuce or radishes and onions and the like with meat, they become secondary to the meat and the meat to the bread [Pri Megadim]


(8) If he ate the fruits (with bread) at the beginning of his meal – That is to say, if the beginning of eating these fruits was with bread and also his intention is to eat them with bread afterwards, even if he ate them in the middle (of the meal) without bread, he does not need to bless them because since he ate them at the beginning and end with bread, they are considered as things that come because of the meal within the meal and do not require a blessing. *** But all this is only when they were brought to wrap the bread with them and not for dessert, because if they were brought only for dessert, even if he ate some bread with them at first and last, (it does not help and) what he eats without bread needs a blessing. *** And it also does not apply when the main part of his meal was on these fruits (i.e. to satiate), then he does not need to eat also at the end with bread, since he started eating with bread, he no longer blesses them even when he eats them separately afterwards (later in the meal).

(10) (even if he ate them in between without bread) They do not require a (separate) blessing - And the Achronim wrote that it is proper to be careful initially when fruits are brought before him during the meal wrapped in bread, that he should bless them first (the fruit separately) before eating them with the bread and eat a little of them at first (by themselves). *** And afterwards he can eat either with bread or without bread.  (Because) there are some of the early authorities who hold that even if he eats at the beginning and end with bread, if he eats in the middle without bread, he needs to bless (separately on the fruit). *** And if he did not bless at first, it is permissible to eat, but he should see to eat also at the end with bread. *** However, if the main part of his meal was initially on the fruits, then even if he ate afterwards without bread, he does not need to make a blessing (on the fruit dish), as explained in Seif 3. ***If he had pas’t’dah (fruit filling between sheets of dough) that are full of fruit, he does not have to recite a blessing on the fruit as they are secondary to the flour. See above in section 168 in the Mishnah Berurah.









(20) Their way is to come, (i.e. be eaten with). - That is, and also eat them with bread, since he is from another house, he certainly did not have them in mind at all, they are not exempted by the blessing of the bread.
(21) (his attention) is on everything (i.e. every food item) from to him for the meal *** And this is when they brought him things (items of food) that came because of the meal. And as mentioned above in Seif 1, if they brought him fruit, it would not help even if he had in mind at the time of the reciting hamotzi that he could eat them afterwards without a blessing [even with his own fruit] unless he wrapped them in bread. ***** A summary of the laws of fruit brought (to the table) in the middle of the meal: **** a.  If you eat with bread, it is obvious that you do not need a blessing at all, because it (the fruit) becomes secondary to the bread, even if you did not have this in mind explicitly at the time of the blessing hamotzi. *** b.  And if you eat without bread, it is obvious that you need a blessing before them, even if they are cooked, because they are not due to the meal, but only for dessert. *** c.	But if you want to eat some fruit with bread and some without bread, there are different opinions on this. Therefore, it is customary to first eat a little without bread and bless them, and then you can eat the rest of the fruit with or without bread. *** d. This is when you set your meal to wrap the bread with other things. When you set your meal to wrap the bread with fruit, since you ate fruit with bread at first, you can eat fruit at the end of the meal without bread and without a (separate) blessing.

Siman 178

Introduction to Siman 178 What Things Are considered an Interruption to the Meal.  *** Since this section has many details, I will precede it with a brief introduction to make it easier for the reader: In the matter of changing places (i.e. starting to eat and going to another place and wanting to eat there or wanting to return to his original place and eat there) it is said that one needs to go back and bless. *** There are three things that need to be explained: ***A) What is changing places whether from house to house or from room to room. *** B) In which things (i.e. types of food) is the law of changing places relevant. *** C) If he changed his place (while eating), what is his law in this (regarding bracha achrona for the food one already ate and whether a bracha rishona for the food about to be eaten exempts from having to recite a bracha achrona on the earlier food) and we will return to explain one by one.


(3) To another house - and the same goes for another room, it is also considered a change of place, unless he initially intended to change to another room, as will be explained later in the gloss
(4) Or he was eating, etc. (regarding fruit or beverages) - We learn from this, that even if he did not stop his meal at all, but his friend called him to speak with him in general and he went out to meet him at the entrance of his house and returned, it is considered as changing from one house to another.

(6) He needs to bless, etc. - By leaving his place, his meal is considered completely interrupted, and what he eats afterwards is like another meal. Therefore, he blesses retroactively for the food he has eaten with the birkas hamazon and the hamotzi on what he will now eat.





(12) In one house - this means under one roof, even from room to room or from house to attic, even if he does not see his place. And the same if he sees his original place where he ate, even through a window and even part of his place is also effective as long as he did not originally intend it (to move to another place). *** This only applies to moving from room to room within the same house. But when moving from one house to another, even if they are adjacent, there is doubt among the achronim whether one can be lenient by (being able to) see the place. Know, that according to what is explained later in the Re’ma, we follow the authorities who do not recite a blessing due to a change of place when involved (standing) in the middle of a meal of bread. There is no practical difference for all these distinctions that we mentioned regarding a change of place.  Only for the purpose of sitting down to eat fruit and other drinks, which are subject to the law of changing place.







(20) Therefore, he blesses, etc. - This means, that if he did not recite a bracha achrona before leaving, he blesses now when he returns, as in the case of bread above in Seif 1.





(26) And there are those who disagree, etc. - There are two opinions on the first opinion: One, is that they do not require a blessing retroactively (i.e. a bracha achrona) at all due to a change of place, and only a blessing initially (i.e. a bracha rishona) before eating again, as it is considered only as a distraction and not as if the first meal was completely completed. Therefore, the bracha achrona applies to both of them. *** And also, one opinion is that even this need for a bracha rishona is only when standing at a meal of fruits or drinks, since immediately upon leaving his house, his meal was interrupted (if he did not leave some friends there and even if he only went to do his small needs, i.e. go to urinate). *** But with bread and grain types that need to be blessed again in their place, the meal was not interrupted by leaving and does not even need a bracha rishona, and it is as if he did not change his place at all, if he was not distracted from eating more, and as will be explained later.

(28) And ate things (that require a blessing in their place) - It is written in the Magen Avraham, Siman 210 that specifically when one eats an olive’s volume/a kezayis. If one eats less than a kezayis of bread before leaving, the law is like fruit, meaning that one does not need a bracha achrona. Therefore, immediately upon leaving outside, one needs to say a bracha rishona even if one returns to their place. Therefore, one must be careful initially not to leave their place, even from room to room (when one cannot see their place), before eating a kezayis.


(31) There is no difference between (returning to the place where he already ate and finishing his meal in another place.) - This refers to eating things that require a blessing in their place and not leaving some friends. It is implied that even when finishing his meal in another place, he does not need to bless, because he eats based on the first meal. But when eating things that do not require a blessing in their place, such as fruits, etc. (or drinking beverages), even if he left some friends, it only helps when they return to their group for their first meal, but to eat or drink in another place, they need a blessing initially (Magen Avraham and Shulchan Aruch).

(33) Preferentially one will not leave - .... But preferentially, it is his duty to bless in the place where he ate before he left, unless he intended at the time of the hamotzi to have in mind to also eat there (i.e. the second location), then both are considered his place and it is even permissible initially, and even from house to house.  His thought benefits (defines) his intent. And so they are accustomed when they go to a wedding feast that they intend from the beginning to eat there.
(34) From his place - in the Tosafos and Rosh it is implied that one should not be stringent in this matter except when going out for the purpose of tarrying (i.e. away a long time), then we are concerned about the above, but when going out for the purpose of returning immediately it is permitted.







(42) Travelers - it is permissible for them to walk and eat, even if they cannot see their original place due to the distance of the road or because trees interrupt (their view). This is because they did not initially intend to eat in the place where they blessed, but only to walk and eat. Therefore, they are not considered to be uprooting themselves from their place. If they intended (i.e. if they stopped) to eat their meal in a place where they recited “hamotzi” and decided to finish their meal along their journey, as long as they can see their original place, it is permissible for them to eat because it is considered one place. However, if they cannot see their original place due to the distance of the road or because trees interrupt their view, it is considered a change of place, and they must bless again (a bracha rishona) for fruits and also for bread, even according to the opinion above.  In any event, initially, it is preferred that they should not uproot themselves from their place without a blessing/a bracha achrona, as explained there. *** But if initially he thought to eat a little in his place and the rest to eat on the way, it helps (that intention), even with the interruption of trees. *** Only from house to house, his intention does not help when eating fruits. *** However, if he started eating at home and went on the road, it is like from house to house (a change in location) and his intention does not help with fruits (or coffee/drinks), and he needs to go back and bless, and his intention (to eat outside or another house) helps for bread (and other mezonos) even l’chatchila, (but not for fruit.)


(45) (bread) alone - The achronim wrote that one should initially be strict to (return to) bless in their place even with the seven species. And also in terms of changing the place, one does not need to bless all seven species like bread if he changes his place, according to what was decided in Siman 2 in the gloss. And the opinion of the Gra in his explanation, that the middle opinion is the main one for the law, and according to this, the fruits of the seven species are similar to ordinary fruits that are relevant to them changing places for everyone.


(48) Light sleep - even if he slept for about an hour, since he unintentional slept, it is not considered an interruption and he does not need to bless hamotzi (but the Pri Megadim requires al netilas yadayim, i.e. washing the hands, and without a blessing). *** And if he slept on his bed in a fixed sleep, it is considered an interruption because this is removal and distraction of the mind according to every opinion.

Siman 179




(4) Drinking - If they are only gathered for drinking and they say: “come and bless the bracha achrona,” it is also considered a distraction of the mind and it is forbidden to drink again without a blessing.

Siman 180










(10) It is difficult for the poor - specifically to trample on them because it is a great disgrace (bizui). But when they are thrown into the water, even if they are dissolved (lost) by this, there is no concern since it is less than a kezayis. And there are those who are stringent when there are many crumbs, and they combine to a kezayis.

Siman 181



Siman 182



Siman 183



Siman 184

















(17) As long as he is not hungry - because afterwards that meal is already nullified, and he lost the (opportunity to recite the) birkas hamazon. *** And if he wants to eat again now, the opinion of the Magen Avraham is that he should repeat and bless hamotzi even if he did not distract his mind yet, because since the food was digested, he also lost the bracha rishona. *** But many achronim disagree with him and hold that the bracha rishona was not lost as long as he did not distract his mind in the meantime.


(20) If one is not sure, etc. - And all this is when one has eaten all he needs from the bread or from the fruit. But if he ate a little and wants to eat more, but he did not have more than this, it is very difficult to estimate the measurement, for as long as he is not hungry, since he would immediately have an appetite again, but he did not have it. *** Many achronim wrote that we estimate in this case up to the time it takes to walk four mil (which is 72 minutes), and up to this measurement one is obligated to bless, for certainly even a small meal was not digested in such a small measurement. ***And there are some of the achronim who side with the opinion that if one ate a small meal and waited before reciting birkas hamazon s and does not know how to estimate if the food was digested, even if it is within the measurement of four mil, he should eat at least another kezayis of bread and then recite birkas hamazon. ***And on that bread which he eats he does not need to bless hamotzi again if he did not distract his mind from eating more. ***And in any case, if he does not have bread, one should rely on the first reasoning and recite birkas hamazon up to the measurement of four mil (72 minutes), as mentioned above. And see in Biur Halacha.

Siman 185



Siman 186



Siman 187



Siman 188



Siman 189



Siman 190








(8) After drinking, etc. - And if he intends to drink more, he should not bless afterwards, but only at the end after finishing his drinking, and specifically when he intends to drink immediately, because otherwise there is a concern that it may be digested, since the digestion of drinking is not a very large measure. See above in Siman 184, Seif 5, subsection 41 and see in the Biur Halacha.

Siman 191



Siman 192




"... and in His goodness are our lives. Blessed are You, God, our God, King of the universe, etc." - This implies that one does not say "Blessed is He, and Blessed is His name." But there are authorities who wrote to say "Blessed is He, and Blessed is His name," and so is the practice. And see in the Magen Avraham and in other Acharonim, that even so, this does not apply to an individual, and also with three, one should not say it; only the one blessing, and not the two who are invited with him.

Siman 193



Siman 194



Siman 195



Siman 196



Siman 197



Siman 198



Siman 199



Siman 200



Siman 201













"To begin first" - in the reading of the Torah [i.e. receive first aliyah], and to bless <i>hamotzi</i> and the blessing after the meal first, and so too to make <i>kiddush</i> first, because of "And you shall make him sacred" (Vayikra 21:8) - in every thing in which there is sanctity. And the <i>poskim</i> wrote that within the principle of his beginning to read the Torah first, there is also the idea that he should be the first of the speakers in every gathering of people, and should <i>darshen</i> first. And this is the ruling in sitting/<i>yeshiva</i>: he should speak first, and see the Magen Avraham 201:4 who advocates that since it's learnt from "And you shall make him sacred", it's a Biblical obligation (and the verse is not merely a support). And in any case, if the kohen wishes to allot honour to another, it's permissible -- except in a case of reading from the Torah, in which case he is unable to forgive his own honour, and see above in Siman 138 in the Mishna Brurah section 109, we say in the Gemara that the kohen takes the first and nicest portion [and it means to say that a yisrael needs to give the kohen the first and nicest portion of any of the guests present]. And this is specifically in a case of friends reclining together to eat or in a case of charity. But when the kohen wishes to make a business partnership with their friend who is a Yisrael, is it not that we say all the more so in the Gemara, "all who set their eye on the nicest portion will never see a sign of blessing"? This needs contemplation, why we are not worried now about making the kohen first with regards all these things [and the Magen Avraham, see there, advocates for finding a little reason to this custom, and in any case from the outset one should certainly be concerned for this]. It's good to also make the levi before a yisrael, if they're equal in wisdom, regarding the blessing after the meal and over the bread, and so too with giving charity that they precede him in reading, so too before a yisrael. 

Siman 202



Siman 203



Siman 204



Siman 205



Siman 206



Siman 207



Siman 208



Siman 209



Siman 210

(1) Eating - All foods combine to form a kezayis for blessing them with a bracha achrona that is appropriate for them: if from the seven species, al hamichya is recited, if not from the seven species, borei nefashos is recited. *** If one ate half a kezayis from the seven species and another half a kezayis from something else, one recites borei nefashos. *** And this is the rule when eating half a kezayis of bread and half a kezayis of something that is blessed with borei nefashos, one recites the bracha achrona of borei nefashos. *** And all drinks combine to form a reviis. *** Eating and drinking (meaning eating less than a kezayis and drinking less than a reviis) does not combine even for the purpose of reciting borei nefashos. *** Broth made from vegetables combines to form a kezayis, for all food enhancers (a drink that comes to sweeten food) is food, and the same goes for bread soaked in a drink or wine or sauce. *** But if the bread was eaten with the sauce without dipping, it does not combine. *** However, if the sauce of the dish was made from things that are blessed like the dish (and is explained in Siman 205), it is possible that the sauce combines with the dish. and this needs further investigation (Chayei Adam). *** If someone eats a kezayis and takes a long time to eat it, if from the beginning of the meal until the end of the meal there is more than the time it takes to eat a half-loaf of bread, it is not combined. (And for the measurement of a half-loaf of bread, see later in Siman 212 that there are opinions whether it is 3 eggs or 4 eggs, and here it seems that even only for the time it takes to eat 3 eggs, the measurement of a kezayis, even for bread for the purpose of Birkas Hamazon, is only rabbinic and so it seems from the Chayei Adam).*** The Pri Megadim writes that this is only for the determining the measurement of a kezayis. But regarding the amount of bread for the purpose of satiety, which is an obligation from the Torah, one is obligated even if he ate a little, since in any case we read ‘and you shall be satiated’ in it. *** If there was a puffed bread (sufganim/doughnuts) that swelled until its air pockets were not felt, one who eats a kezayis of it as it is does not bless, because in truth he did not eat a kezayis. And also if there was a kezayis and it shrank and diminished in its size, we do not bless after it unless it expanded [Achronim]. *** Regarding drinking a reviis, if one drank and paused briefly and then drank again until he completed a reviis, there are those who say that it is not combined, and there are those who say that it is combined if he did not pause from the beginning of the drinking until the end of the drinking for more than the time it takes to eat a half-loaf [later in Siman 212, Seif 10]. *** And the Gra agreed there in his explanation that the law is like this second opinion. *** And behold, regarding drinking tea and coffee, which is usually drunk hot and difficult to drink without a break like other drinks, but (it is drunk) little by little.  There is a great dispute among the poskim whether one needs to recite a bracha achrona for the first opinion mentioned above. The Machzis Hashekel and in Chayei Adam side with not reciting a bracha (achrona), and so it is written in Derech Hachaim and so is the universal custom. *** Practitioners (i.e. drinkers of tea or coffee) have the custom that at the end of their drinking, they leave a reviis’ worth to cool down a bit so that they can drink a reviis without interruption and recite a bracha achrona. It is good to do so in order to fulfill all opinions, especially according to the opinion of the Gra mentioned above, who ruled in favor of the second opinion that the measurement is the time it takes to eat a half-loaf for the purpose of combining even with drinking. It is certainly correct to do so. *** If one ate less than the required amount and went outside and immediately returned, he certainly needs to bless again initially, even with bread. It is necessary to examine if he returned and ate less than the required amount within the time it takes to eat a half-loaf if it is combined.  Perhaps since he went outside it is considered as if his mind was distracted. And see in the Magen Avraham who argues that it is combined.

Siman 211











(10) The type that is usually, etc. - And it is implied from the words of the poskim that one should behave so that he blesses the bracha on the item that is usually dear to him and tastes a little of it.  And afterwards, he eats the item that he desires to eat now.  And after finishing eating the second item, he returns to eat the first type.

Siman 212



Siman 213



Siman 214



Siman 215



Siman 216



Siman 217



Siman 218



Siman 219



Siman 220

And his soul is distressed about it - that is, even if it has no bad substance.
They should make it good - even when [the dreamer] fasts. And it's good to make it good in Shacharit, because eager ones put a mitzvah first - even so, they shouldn't say to the dreamer, "Go, eat in joy..." if not, when the dreamer isn't fasting (Pri Megadim) and when they recall the dream in their thoughts when it's being made good.
In the presence of three - it's a mitzvah to be one of the three to make the dream good, since it restores [the dreamer's] soul with this, and even on Shabbat it's possible to make a dream good.
"It will be good" - seven times, to make it a decree. This language needs to be said by the answerers three times, and some say to say it seven times. And at the end of the good-making, they should say to the dreamer "Go, and eat your bread in joy and drink with a glad heart..." (Kohelet 9:7). One who dreams a dream which is harsh on their fellow should fast [Sefer Chaim, section 644, see there that its reason is that it happens sometimes a fear about the dream itself, but in a dream one only sees an image of the thing].
Good - pregnant and nursing people, one shouldn't teach them to fast, rather they should only redeem with money (Pri Megadim).
A fast - but specifically when one repents with it, since the fast works like a sacrifice to exonerate; just as a sacrifice is ineffective without repentance, as it says "The sacrifice of wicked ones is an abomination" (Proverbs 15:8), so too the fast of a dream... (Sefer Chaim).
Like a flame to chaff - and in any case it's not obligatory to fast, and rather is optional.

Siman 221



Siman 222



Siman 223



Siman 224



Siman 225


(2) After thirty days - from the first sighting. And if he received a letter from him or if [other] people informed him of his welfare, there are [different] opinions among the later scholars (<i>achronim</i>); and [so we invoke the principle,] 'one should be lenient [with] blessings [about which there are a] doubt.'
(3) He says, "Who has kept me alive, etc." - And all of these blessings are with the Name and His kingship; and even the blessing of, "Who resuscitates the dead" (Magen Giborim and many other later scholars, not like the responsa of Pri Megadim). 















'once it is ripe' - That is too say, that it should be completely ready and good to eat. See above in sif kattan 12. The later authorities wrote in the name of the Yerushalmi that it is a mitzva to eat a little from each new fruit throughout the year. The reason for this is in order to demonstrate that the Holy One's creation is precious to you.

Siman 226



Siman 227



Siman 228



Siman 229

1) One who sees a rainbow, etc.- And it isn’t appropriate to tell one’s friend that there is a rainbow because of spreading bad rumors (that the world deserves to be destroyed but for God’s mercy).
2) Says, etc.- And from here we learn that if one sees it another time, even within thirty days, one should go back and bless again and it is not like all those blessings that it was established for us that it was enough to say them once in a month, because here the rainbow that one blesses upon has passed and gone away and it is similar to the blessings on thunder.
3) Who is faithful- In the Rambam and the Tur the formulation is “And who is faithful”
4) To His covenant- That is to say that God will not remove us (from the world) even though the wicked are many. And God would have fulfilled God’s word even if there were not the covenant because God said through speech that there would never be another flood to destroy the earth, it is clear that it will be fulfilled from His speech.
5) And it is forbidden to look upon it further- And one who looks upon it too much, his eyes will get dark (Chagiga 16), rather he should look at it and bless.

Siman 230



Siman 231








Even to speak words of wisdom: And all the more so, if his speaking is about buying and selling must his intention be for the sake of a commandment. That is, that he have with what to support himself so that he not come to theft. And even if he is very wealthy, such that he has enough to support himself and the members of his household all the days of his life, it is also sometimes conceivable that his efforts to increase his business dealings are the matter of a commandment. For example, if his intention is to give much charity and communal aid as a result of this. Or if his intention is to bring businesses under his control to find work for poor Jews, so that they be hired to give them a livelihood. For all of this is in the category of charity and is greater than it, as Rambam writes and is brought down in Yoreh Deah 251, see there. For one who strengthens the hand of a Jew who has become impoverished and gives him work in order that he earn a wage and not need to beg from people, thereby fulfills the positive commandment of, <i>and his hand falters beside you, then shall you support him</i> (Leviticus 25:35).


Siman 232



Siman 233



Siman 234



Siman 235



Siman 236



Siman 237



Siman 238



Siman 239



Siman 240



Siman 241



Siman 242

The essence of the mitzvah of delight in Shabbat is explained to us by the prophets, as it says: “and you shall call the Sabbath a delight,” and there are authorities who believe that the essence is from the Torah, for Shabbat is part of the times that are called holyas it says “and on the seventh day there shall be a Shabbos of complete rest, a holy occasion” (Leviticus 23:3), and the words "a holy occasion" are explained in the Sifra that it is to sanctify it and honor with clean clothing and enjoy it with the pleasure of eating and drinking. And our rabbis spoke highly of the importance of this mitzvah (in Shabbat 118), and they said that anyone who delights in the Shabbat, is given an inheritance with no bounds, is saved from oppression of the nations, and merits wealth through this. See there for several more statements in this regard. And behold, regarding the parameters of this commandment, there are three applicable statements of our Sages of Blessed Memory: 1) That which they said that a person must delight in it through large fish, heads of garlic, and cooked beets, for those were esteemed dishes in their days. And similarly in every location, one should delight in Shabbat according to the custom, with food and drink that is considered delight for them. And since in general, most people get their delight from meat and wine and sweets, therefore it is brought in Chapter 250, Section 2 that one should have a lot of meat and wine and sweets according to one’s abilities. 2) That which the Sages said that a person fulfills the commandment of delighting in the Shabbat even through a small thing that he does for the honor of Shabbat, and even kasa d'hars'na (which are small fish fried in their own oils [a relatively inexpensive way of enhancing the Shabbat meal beyond the absolute basics]). 3) That which Rabbi Akiva said, "Make your Shabbat like a weekday rather than be dependent on the charity of others." And the differences between these statements can be understood in the following manner: Someone who has the means is required to honor the Shabbat according to his ability, while someone in dire straits - namely, that he only has enough food for two meals for this Shabbat - in regard to him Rabbi Akiva said, "Make your Shabbat like a weekday rather than be dependent on the charity of others." This person would not be obligated to have the Third Meal nor the kasa d'hars'na (fried fish). But if someone does have enough money to buy food for three meals and a bit more, he is obligated to spend that money for Shabbat in order to fulfill the three meals and the fried fish. Likewise, for someone who has nothing at all and is entirely dependent on charity, the charity directors are required to give him at least enough for three meals and fried fish. (And for a distinguished individual who has become impoverished, he must be provided for in accordance with the dignity to which he is accustomed, as is clarified in Yoreh Deah, Chapter 253). And we don't say in this regard, "Make your Shabbat like a weekday rather than be dependent on charity," for we only say this about someone who still does not need to take charity. However,  for someone who has already arrived at this condition where he he must reach out his hand and take charity, we give him everything as mentioned. (And in places where the charity directors  are accustomed to disburse to the poor only two meals and not the Third Meal, they are not behaving properly, and at the very least they must beware of this during the summer time [when the days are long]). And for this the Shulchan Aruch comes to say that if he has some small means for himself, he must exert himself to honor and delight in the Shabbat properly since it is possible for him and he has the means to spend on this. And it is not sufficient merely to spend enough money for fried fish [if he can manage to spend more]. And to this end the Shulchan Aruch concludes that a person should be frugal during the rest of the week so that he will have the remaining means to honor the Shabbat. And see the Ta"Z, Tosafot Shabbat, and other late halachic decisors who wrote that even someone who is in dire straits who is legally exempt from having to partake of the Third Meal and fried fish should nevertheless strive to at least be in the middle category, namely through fulfilling the three meals and fried fish.
(2) To honor the Shabbat - It is good to be careful to not have less than two dishes (for a meal). It is also good to eat fish in each meal of the three meal, if fish is not unpleasant to you according to your nature or as long as you don't hate fish, since Shabbat is given for pleasure and not for suffering, as we say above in Siman 288. If the fish-sellers raise the price, it is appropriate to make a reparative legal decree (Takanah) that people should not buy fish for some number of shabbatot until they reduce the price to what it was before. Behold, in the Be'er Heitev, he brings that this takanah should only be made if the prices are hiked up by more than 1/3 of what it was before. But, Eliyah Rabbah and the P'ri Megadim wrote that even a price-hike of less that a third of the value is grounds for issuing a takanah for the sake of poor people. Further, it is written there that we have no concern in this case about nullifying the mitzvah of Oneg Shabbos, since we can bring pleasure with other foods. If the rabbis made a decree forbidding eating fish for several shabbatot, but one bought fish beforehand, it is permitted to eat them.

Siman 243



Siman 244



Siman 245



Siman 246



Siman 247



Siman 248



Siman 249



Siman 250



Siman 251



Siman 252







































To put perfume- Incense and other types of spices are placed on a fire and that smokes the clothes so that the smell dissipates(throughout the clothing)...
And even if the perfume etc. - And all the more so when the perfume rests on the ground is this permitted

Siman 253

1. Behold, because this Siman is "very fruitful", and so that the reader's eyes will not be confused by it, I said to copy half a shekel's number as a small opening to it from its fundamental principles so that the reader can understand it. Know that there is a matter of Shehiyah and a matter of returning to the fire. There was a case where one would place a cooked dish on the stove on Shabbat, not through insulation, and leave it standing on the stove, and on Shabbat, he would take it from the stove. And the Chazarah case is when one leaves them (the dishes) on the stove on Friday, and on Shabbat, he takes them from the stove, and he wants to return them again on the stove [this is the main principle of returning (chazarah) according to the majority of authorities, but there is another aspect of returning when one takes them from a heat source close to dusk and returns them, as explained in Section 2 with the commentary]. Chananiah and the Rabbis disagree. Chananiah holds that if the dish has already been cooked to the extent of being edible, it is considered half-cooked [and according to some, one-third cooked]. It is permissible to leave it on the stove, even if it is not covered by coals and is not wrapped [meaning that the coals are covered with ash]. And the sages hold that it is prohibited if it is not covered and wrapped unless it has cooked completely and shrunk, and it is harmful to him. And at the beginning of the chapter on stove [Shabbat 36a], we learned: A stove that one ignited, etc., with coals and wood, he should not place [the pot] until he rakes or places the ash. And the Gemara asks: Is this necessary? It was taught in a Mishnah: Rabbi Eliezer says: He should not place [the pot] unless he rakes and places the ash. And this Mishnah is consistent with the opinion of the sages who disagree with Chananiah. Or perhaps Rabbi Eliezer says: He should not return [the pot], but if it was permitted even if it is not raked and covered, it is consistent with the opinion of Chananiah. And this question remains unresolved. Rif and Rambam follow Chachamim that even shehiya is prohibited unless the coals were removed or covered with ash. Tosafos follows Chanaya’s opinion that once the food has reached k’ma’achal ben drosai the food may be left on the flame even though the coals were not removed or covered with ash. The first opinion cited by Shulchan Aruch represents Rif and Rambam’s position whereas the second opinion is that of Rashi and Tosafos. This is what we explained briefly. Now, we will proceed to elucidate the words of the Shulchan Aruch, with God's help.
2. (1) There is also room inside the oven to place a pot and the pot may remain there if the food will shrivel and the shriveling will be detrimental to the food. Rather, because he wants to convey the prohibition in the case of shrinkage, and it is beneficial for him even if it is only inferred from his words.
3. (2) These fuels make coal and there is a concern that he will stoke the coals.
4. (3) That is olive press residue. And some say the same applies to sesame press residue, as they are also included in the category of ash mentioned in the Mishnah, as will be explained later in Chapter 247, Section 3, regarding insulation. 
5. (4) Or with wood - similarly, charcoal and large animal bones

Siman 254



Siman 255



Siman 256



Siman 257





כשמשהה בהטמנה זו על שבת ואינו מסלק קודם חשיכה:

Siman 258



Siman 259



Siman 260

Mitzvah etc. - Because of the honor of Shabbos. Nevertheless, it is not completely obligatory. If you do wash yourself, you receive reward, If you don't, there is no punishment. Be very careful that the mitzvah of bathing (for Shabbos) shouldn't lead to a concern of violating Shabbos. And with our many sins, many fail in this in the winter days when the days are short that they wait until right before dark. And even if you complete your washing permissibly, also be careful of a prohibition because at times you will comb your hair afterwards, which is a Torah violation of Shabbos. It is also common that after finishing all the activities (of bathing) one squeezes out the towel from the water that it was holding which would be included in the prohibition of M'chabeis (laundering). It is proper for all who fear god with their hearts, to warn the nation not to do this and then you will have the merit of the community. And their is a principle that if the nation does a sin you could've stopped, you also receive punishment. However, if you stop the nation from doing this, you are also rewarded. If you don't stop the people in your house, you get the sin of the people in your house. If you don't stop the people in your city, you get the sin of your city.
To wash - This mitzvah of washing also applies to women. And in winter days and short days in which you don't have time. Wash your face and hands. And even for men, if they don't have time.
All of your body - With hot water.
And legs - And now, it's not the custom to be careful with this. And in their countries they would walk barefoot and wash their feet in water because of the dirt and dust.
On Erev Shabbos - This also applies for Holidays. On Thursday, it's not considered in honor of Shabbos. If you can't wash on Erev Shabbos, it's better to wash as close to Shabbos as possible.

Siman 261



Siman 262



Siman 263






And to add -- and there are some whose practice is to light seven lamps corresponding to the seven days of the week, and there are others who light ten corresponding to the Ten Commandments, and all of them need not be on the table.




















27 After the lighting- The reasoning is that when she blesses, it is as if she has explicitly accepted Shabbat, and it is presently forbidden to light. And given this, on Yom Tov when this is not relevant, according to all opinions she should bless and then afterwards light. And it is the opinion of the Magen Avraham that we do not act differently from the norm, but many Acharonim reason as I wrote earlier. 

Siman 264



Siman 265



Siman 266



Siman 267



Siman 268



Siman 269



Siman 270



Siman 271



Siman 272










(10) Regarding white wine, etc. - For everyone, it is a mitzvah to initially seek red wine, but if one does not have red or it is not of good quality, according to this opinion, it is permissible to initially sanctify on white.

Siman 273



Siman 274



Siman 275



Siman 276



Siman 277



Siman 278



Siman 279



Siman 280



Siman 281



Siman 282



Siman 283



Siman 284



Siman 285



Siman 286



Siman 287



Siman 288



Siman 289



Siman 290



Siman 291



















less than one loaf - for on the sixth day the manna fell for each person, an amount of two omers, and from each omer they made two loaves - behold this is four loves from two omers. One was eaten Friday before Shabbat, one was eaten Friday night, one was eaten in the morning, and one whole loaf remained for the third meal. 

Siman 292



Siman 293



Siman 294



Siman 295



Siman 296





(5) The reason for the pouring - and the achronim agreed that one should not pour at all during the blessing.  But when mixing (i.e. diluting the thick wine in the cup), one should pour it full on all its sides so that it pours (i.e. overflows) onto the ground. And also, this should be reduced in the part that is poured because of the (concern of) loss (i.e. wasting) of liquids.

Siman 297

"there is no need to go back over it" - (i.e. one does not need to repeat havdallah if they had no besamim when Shabbat ended) because we only bless/smell the spices in order to return the soul, because it aches at the departure of Shabbat. The Acharonim wrote that even one who suffers on Shabbat needs to bless the spices at the end of Shabbat, including after Yom Kippur that falls on Shabbat, even though it's not necessary to bless (the spices) at the end of (a non- Shabbat) Yom Kippur. 

Siman 298



Siman 299



Siman 300



Siman 301



Siman 302



Siman 303



Siman 304



Siman 305



Siman 306



Siman 307

...As for the issue of reading newspapers...may authorities forbid it, since they contain information about mundane business matters.

Siman 308

Before we begin this section, let us offer a brief introduction. The restriction to move items on Shabbat, as outlined by the Sages and Maimonides at the end of chapter 24. This is their approach: The Sages forbade the moving of certain items on Shabbat as you would during the weekday. For what reason did they create this restriction? They said that just as the Prophets said our journeys on Shabbat should not be like the weekday, and our conversations on Shabbat should not be like those on the weekday, as it says, "daber davar." How much more so should our use of utensils on Shabbat not be like we use them during the week, so that Shabbat be a distinct day for us, so that we won't organize our pots and pans, nor will we carry them from home to home. We also want to be careful not to spend Shabbat cleaning our homes. 

Siman 309



Siman 310



Siman 311


That is, they should be placed on or near it, and they should be carried together, and thereby the carrying will not be so recognizable even though the body is muzktzeh since they are being carried together. We only allow things to be moved with this mechanism, of a loaf or baby since it involves desecration of the dead, but not by other categories of muktzeh such as a rock or similar, like we write in seif 5

Siman 312



Siman 313



Siman 314



Siman 315





























He should not order them... -- because this is similar to the construction of an ohel when he sets up the top [barrel] which acts as a roof on top of walls; similarly, just as [in the case of] an ohel one needs the air underneath, so too here the air between the barrels is necessary, as it (the wine) would grow mouldy without the air between them [Aharonim].

Siman 316



Siman 317



Siman 318


When there is a dispute whether something is prohibited, b’dieved it is not prohibited since the restriction is only Rabbinic in the first place and we adopt a lenient approach regarding doubtful matters that are Rabbinic. 

Siman 319



Siman 320






















"To squeeze lemons" - This is the fruit that we call in our language <i>'Zitrone'</i>. And this applies even for its juice, since the usual practice is to squeeze it to give taste to other foods, and it is therefore in the category of all other permitted fruit, as we saw in paragraph 1. Even if the usual practice is to squeeze these lemons into water in which <i>'Zucker'</i> has been placed, in order to have pleasure when drinking - in any case, most people are lenient and permit this on Shabbat. Perhaps the reason is because only fruit squeezed out by itself into an empty dish is forbidden, but here the custom us to add it to something else. And in our days,when the practice in some places is to fill up barrels for hundreds of people to drink together with their <i>'Puns'</i>, we need to seriously consider whether this is allowed on Shabbat, since maybe this more like berries and pomegranates... therefore, one should be careful to first squeeze them onto the <i>'Zucker'</i>, and then it is more like adding taste to food...

Siman 321



Siman 322



Siman 323



Siman 324



Siman 325



Siman 326



Siman 327



Siman 328



Siman 329



Siman 330



Siman 331



Siman 332



Siman 333



Siman 334



Siman 335



Siman 336



Siman 337







(6) To sweep the house: As he moves dirt from its place. It is also [because] he evens out the holes [in the floor] while he is brooming, since the holes in the house become filled with the dirt, and that is [considered] building. And that is even though he does not have the intention to even out holes — it is nevertheless forbidden, as it is an inevitable consequence [<i>pesik reisha</i>]. And some say that we are concerned lest, as a result of his preoccupation with brooming and tidying up the floor, he will forget and even out the holes on purpose.

Siman 338



Siman 339



Siman 340


































There are places where seawater is directed into pools, and the sun evaporates it, leaving behind salt.

Siman 341



Siman 342



Siman 343



Siman 344



Siman 345



Siman 346



Siman 347



Siman 348



Siman 349



Siman 350



Siman 351



Siman 352



Siman 353



Siman 354



Siman 355



Siman 356



Siman 357



Siman 358



Siman 359



Siman 360



Siman 361



Siman 362



Siman 363



Siman 364



Siman 365



Siman 366



Siman 367



Siman 368



Siman 369



Siman 370



Siman 371



Siman 372



Siman 373



Siman 374



Siman 375



Siman 376



Siman 377



Siman 378



Siman 379



Siman 380



Siman 381



Siman 382



Siman 383



Siman 384



Siman 385



Siman 386



Siman 387



Siman 388



Siman 389



Siman 390



Siman 391



Siman 392



Siman 393



Siman 394



Siman 395



Siman 396



Siman 397



Siman 398



Siman 399



Siman 400



Siman 401



Siman 402



Siman 403



Siman 404



Siman 405



Siman 406



Siman 407



Siman 408



Siman 409



Siman 410



Siman 411



Siman 412



Siman 413



Siman 414



Siman 415



Siman 416



Siman 417



Siman 418



Siman 419



Siman 420



Siman 421



Siman 422



Siman 423



Siman 424



Siman 425



Siman 426

<b>The one who sees</b> - and women are exempt from sanctifying the moon, since this is a positive commandment caused by time. And although women are accustomed to do all positive commandments caused by time and make a blessing over them, in any case they don't  need to do this mitzvah, since they caused a blemish in the moon. And a blind person is obligated in sanctification of the moon, since this blessing was established about the renewal of the world, and they also benefit since others see and lead them on the path, and this is like "yotzeir hame'orot" [first blessing before the morning Shema], so wrote the acharonim. And see the Biur Halacha. And a minor, when they are educable, we educated them about it [so written in the name of רי"ע, and seems that this is only Rabbeinu Tam, in chapter עיי"ן, but for Rashi there it's not obvious, and is similar to saying Shema; see there - and it's possible that his intent was also that it's good to practice this way ab initio, like is decided there in the Shulchan Aruch about saying Shema, see there].
<b>Only at night</b> - excluding at dusk, when the moon is partially visible but it's still daytime.
<b>And we benefit from its light</b> - that is, at the time that its shining is visible over the earth. If the moon is covered with clouds, if the cloud is thin and weak so that the moon is seen from within it and it's possible to benefit from the moon, bless, and if the cloud is thick, do not bless. And if one begins to bless and then the moon is covered by clouds, finish the blessing, except in the case where one estimates that the moon will be covered by cloud in the middle of one's blessing, for in this case one shouldn't begin the blessing. And see Biur Halacha, and this is the ruling of there is a screen dividing one and the moon - the ruling is this too, like clouds, that if the screen is translucent so that one benefits from the moonlight through it, and it's possible to see things in the light of the moon, one can bless over it, and if the screen is thick and one does not benefit from the moonlight, do not bless over it, for that would be a blessing in vain, and see what we write at the end of the siman.
We do not bless, etc - this is the best fulfilment of the mitzvah, and when one concludes בהג"ה [?] and it's written in the Maggid Meisharim sefer that this sign should be in your hand for the month, that you should bless the blessing of the moon on motza'ei Shabbat, you will find success. And when it is covered and hidden and you are unable to bless it, that month will not be successful, God forbid.
<b>Only on motza'ei Shabbat</b> - this is also the case for motza'ei Yom Tov.
<b>But if it's after that</b> - he means to say that motza'ei Shabbat night is the 11th night [since the molad], one should not wait, lest it be covered in clouds for four nights, since after that etc, and according to that which is written in saif 3 in the note of the Rema, one needs to canclulate if there will remain five more nights until half of day 29 hour 12 chalak 793 since the molad. 
<b>Nice clothes</b> - we are now not accustomed to be particular about this.
<b>Before Tisha b'Av</b> - since we exist in a state of mourning.
<b>Before Yom Kippur</b> - for here too we are terrified of the strength of the Judgment and do not exist in a state of joy; see the Biur Halacha.
<b>But not on motza'ei etc</b> - that we don't exist in a state of joy, and we bless on the days that are after it instead. And it's explained in the D"M [?] that if Tisha b'Av falls on a Thursday, one should wait until motza'ei Shabbat which is the 12th day of the month.
<b>Or other fasts</b> - such as, if one doesn't sanctify in Tevet until the fast, one cannot sanctify after the fast, but should wait until the next night which is the 11th of Tevet. And in any case if it happened in Adar that one did not sanctify until Ta'anit Esther, the Taz wrote that one can sanctify after the fast, since the time would otherwise run out. And behold, all of this is according to the opinion of the Rema, but the opinion of the acharonim in all of this was that we sanctify even on motza'ei Tisha b'Av, and all the more so with any other fast. Rather they wrote that one must break one's fast beforehand, and on Motza'ei Yom Kippur since we are joyful to go out in freedom, we sanctify even before breaking the fast. And on motza'ei Tisha b'Av one needs to be careful not to sanctify barefoot. And regarding the matter of when a mourner should sanctify: the belief of the Magen Avraham is that if they will completed their mourning before the tenth of the month, they should wait and sanctify on the night of the tenth. But if their mourning is completed on the 14th of the month, they should not wait for the night of the 11th - it's better to sanctify the moon in the midst of mourning. And the belief of the Ba'al Sha'arei Efrayim is that one should wait to sanctify until completing their mourning; they should wait, unless this would cause them to miss the time entirely, in which case they are able to sanctify whilst in mourning, and can go outside to sanctify, and see the Biur Halacha.
<b>That Yom Tov fell on</b> - and all the more so that we don't sanctify it on Shabbat night, and many reasons were stated about this according to the Kabbalah. And in any case, if one didn't sanctify until Shabbat and Yom Tov, and the time would pass, it's certainly permitted to sanctify even on Shabbat and Yom Tov, even alone, and that is also the view of the poskim.
<b>And looks... and says...</b> - It's written in the Shiurei Knesset haGedolah that this means to say, it appears that before completing the whole order he hangs his eyes on it, and so is the general custom, but hear from the name of the Sefer Charedim which was extremely strict about this to prevent gazing at the moon, and only permitted gazing at it before the bracha itself was completed. The Magen Avraham in the name of the Shlah was even stricter, that even during the bracha one should not gaze at it, rather look at it once when they want to bless and after that should not look at it.
<b>And dance, etc</b> - the acharonim wrote that one should be very careful not to bend one's knees to dance, in order not to seem like one is bowing to the moon. Rather, one should lean on ones toe's and dance (i.e. jump?).
<b>And backwards: "like a stone"</b> - and the Magen Avraham wrote in the name of the Mateh Moshe that some say the entire pasuk, until "You have acquired", and then again backwards.
<b>And should say to one's friend, etc</b> As if to say, since one first said "should fall, etc", one should say to one's friend "Peace be upon you" [Magen Avraham] see Magen Avraham, that he mentions many verses which there is kabbalah to say them and they have not been printed, since they are already written in seder kiddush levana and all are accustomed to say them.
<b>From the day of the molad</b> - not specifically from the day, rather we count the time of the molad, that it from this time we count 29 days from evening to evening (ie 24-hour periods), and if so, when the molad is in the middle of Monday, it's permitted to sanctify in the night of Tuesday, although there is still not 15 days from evening to evening.
<b>And the 16th is not included</b> - that since the 15th day, each day the moon lessens, and there is no renewal here.
<b>Except until half, etc</b> - that this exists for us, that there is no renewal of the moon in less than 29 days 12 hours and 793 chalakim of an hour [that an hour is split into 1080 chalakim], and if so, if the molad begins on motza'ei Shabbat 2 or 3 hours into the night, it is forbidden to sanctify it in two more weeks at the beginning of the second night, according to the Rema, even though 15 full days are not yet completed.
<b>Until 7 days pass</b> - And the majority of the acharonim disagreed regarding this, and according to them in any case after 3 days from evening to evening from the time of the molad [i.e. 72 hours], that we already benefit from its light, it's possible to bless regarding it, and one should not leave the mitzvah to sour [i.e. delay] - if so, if the 3rd day of the month is on a Sunday, it's correct to wait until the next motza'ei Shabbat. And according to that which was explained in saif 2 in the note, and many acharonim (of whom the Gra was one) were lenient regarding this, and thought that it's inappropriate to delay the mitzvah in any case, and for this reason the person who is accustomed to behave this way has on whom to rely. Particularly in the winter when it's rainy, certainly the person who is eager to sanctify behold they are praised.
<b>Under a roof</b> - rather, under the dome of the heavens. And the reason is that sanctification of the moon is like greeting the face of the Shechina, and this is not honourable to stand under a roof. For this reason, we exit from under the roof to the street, the way one would go to greet kings. And in any case all of this is only lechatchila, but one who has any worry that they would be unable to go outside, such as the place being unclean or living amongst non-Jews, should sanctify in their home via a window or an open door by the moon.

Siman 427



Siman 428



Siman 429


<b>B) Thirty days:</b> And we begin on the day of Purim itself. But now we are accustomed to teach [about the laws of the festival] on Shabbat HaGadol (the Shabbat preceding Passover) [when it does not come out on the eve of Passover; as then we need to  advance it to the previous Shabbat] and on Shabbat Shuvah. [And its essence is to teach the people the ways of God, to teach 'the deed that they should do' - that is the laws of purging vessels, the destruction of chametz, the baking of matzah and the other laws of Passover; and likewise on Shabbat Shuvah, to teach before them, the laws of Yom Kippur and the Sukkot festival, besides what he teaches about the subject of repentance. But if the sermon would only be analysis or just a sermon in general, they would not fulfill their obligation with it.] Regardless, it is a commandment on all individuals to occupy themselves with the laws of Passover thirty days before [it]; and likewise on the holiday itself [Later rabbis (Achronim)].

Siman 430



Siman 431



Siman 432



Siman 433

By candlelight - And on the night of the 14th, when people are usually at home, and candlelight is very effective for searching, whereas during the day candlelight does not illuminate as it does at night, and they [the Sages] established that the search [for chametz] should be specifically by candlelight, with which one can even check holes and crevices. If one prematurely search on the day of the 13th by candlelight, he needs to go back and search on the night of the 14th as the Sages enacted. Nevertheless, he shouldn't make a blessing then at night on the search, because there are authorities who hold that after-the-fact one has fulfilled his obligation with the original search. However, if one checked on the night of the 13th by candlelight, as candlelight if very effective at night for searching, and he was very careful not to bring chametz [into the checked areas], he does not need to go back and check on the night of the 14th - most Later Authorities agree to this, but whoever wants to be stringent and reconduct a search should nevertheless not make a blessing.

Siman 434



Siman 435



Siman 436



Siman 437



Siman 438



Siman 439



Siman 440



Siman 441



Siman 442











































...He is allowed to keep it on Pesach - This applies to deriving benefit, but it is forbidden for consumption on a Rabbinic level until after Pesach. Eventhough it is not intended for consumption since it is disqualified to everyone, in any case, since he wants to consume it, it is forbidden because he considers it important...

Siman 443



Siman 444



Siman 445










...He need not destroy:  In any case, it is proper to not give away all of one's hametz to a non-Jew and to fulfill the mitzvah of "destroy" during the sixth hour with the crumbs that he left in order to burn them, for it is as if these crumbs have already been destroyed and even if he leaves them [and does not destroy them] they would not be sufficient to transgress [the prohibition of] "do not see [any hametz in your domain]." Rather, he should leave at least an olive's bulk of hametz in order to fulfill the mitzvah of "destroy" in its proper fashion. 

Siman 446



Siman 447



Siman 448



Siman 449



Siman 450



Siman 451


































<b>A tripod needs heating</b> - this is a three-legged utensil. When it's used to stand something over a flame, like a pot or a dish in the oven, during the year, and then one wishes to use it on Pesach, one needs to heat it in a flame, since sometimes dough is spilt on it. The tripod then absorbs leaven taste, by means of the flame. And this is only "from the outset", and out of the strictness of leaven -- since in truth, two pots that touch one another don't have any taste transfer, as was explained in Yoreh Deah 92:7. And there's other support for this viewpoint, as even if one spills on it, this is burnt up and leaves, because it's always in the flame. And therefore, certainly "light heating" suffices, and after the fact if it was used without heating at all(!), even this we do not forbid.

Siman 452



Siman 453



Siman 454

(1) <b>One does not fulfill etc.</b> - Since they are not called bread. And so is elucidated in Yoreh Deah Siman 325 <small><i>[translator: should be 324:3]</i></small> that from that reason, they <small>(i.e. doughs made from husk and/or bran)</small> are exempt also from Challah.
(2) <b>Husk</b> - that is <small>[<b>Shaar Tzion 1</b> - <i> (first definition is) Magen Avrohom in the name of Rashi. And the "those that explain" is the opinion of the Rambam and so is the opinion of many Poskim like him</i>]</small> shell remaining from the wheat at the time of crushing. And bran that is thin shell remaining in a sieve after the flour exited. And there are those that explain the opposite. And to the matter of soaking husk or bran in water, I elucidate later in Siman 465 Paragraph 1, see there in the Mishnah Berurah.
(3) <b>(One may knead)with husks and bran in it</b>- so is the way <small>[<b>Shaar HaTzion 2 </b> - <i>(from Gemara) Shabbos 66</i>]</small> of the poor man to eat his bread with flour that is not clean. And they <small><i>(bran and husk)</i></small> also combine to measure a kezayis matzah <small>(minimum size requirement to fulfill mitzvah of matzah)</small>. <small>[<b>Shaar HaTzion 3</b> - <i> (this next point is from) Chok Yaakov and evident from Rabbeinu Manoach, the Gra, the Pri Chadash, and the Griz. Yet not like the Magen Avrohom that is uncertain in this (matter)</i>]</small> And this is specifically if they were not separated from it; but if separated from it, and returned, and mixed with the flour and kneaded together, it is not combined to the measure of a kezayis.
(4) <b> And fulfill with it</b>- so is the law <small>[<b>Shaar HaTzion 4</b> <i>(the source is) Chok Yaakov</i>]</small> that one fulfills with bread that is made from produce that was eaten by worms.
(5) <b> That it is like <i>ashishah</i></b> - And in the Gemara we say "the Bread of Affliction" (לחם עוני) to exclude <i>asishah</i>, definition a large roll. <small>(translator: Gemara is found Pesachim 36b)</small>
2 (6) <b>When the shepherds are eating</b> - that is to say, if its common for this landowner to feed from it <small>[<b>Shaar HaTzion 5</b> Rambam in explanation of the Mishnah (1st chapter of tractate Challah)]</small> also his Jewish shepherds, if so when it was kneaded and baked it was intended that should be also for human consumption.  
(7) <b>They fulfill in it</b> - That since that there is a portion for the shepards, it maintains a presumed status of being watched for the sake of <small>(the mitzvah of)</small> matzah. And despite that logically there is mixed in it much bran and sediment, like the way of dough of dogs, even so one fulfills in it <small>(the mitzvah of Matzah.)</small>
(8) <b>And if not</b> - that is to say, that the shepards not eating and the kneading and baking only are for the needs of the dogs, so with this even if it is clean bread, one does not fulfill with it, like that concluded reason <small>(translator: i.e. see next M'B (9))</small>. 
(9) <b> That this was not guarded for the sake of Matzah</b> - The language isn't exact that truthfully since that it is not considered at all for the eating of people, it does not have the name "bread" upon it at all. And even regarding the matter of the bracha of "HaMotzi". Rather, because the discussion of the matter of Pesach, <small>(The Shulchan Aruch)</small> adds an additional reason because this that also one does not fulfill in it.

Siman 455



Siman 456



Siman 457



Siman 458

(1)- <b>We are accustomed</b>- the implication is that it is only a custom. And the custom relies that since there is a scriptural proximity of eating Matza to the Korban Pesach. As it says "And he shall sacrifice the Pesach to Hashem, your G-d" (Deuteronomy 16:2) etc. and <small>(immediately after it says)</small> "Seven Days you shall eat on it Matzos" (Deuteronomy 16:3) etc. Thus we say like with the slaughter of the Pesach it should be after the 6th hour <small>(on the eve of Pesach)</small>, so the making of Matzos of the mitzvah should be after the 6th hour. But in a strictly legal sense the Poskim establish that there is not to worry about this because the main scripitural proximity <small>(i.e. a <i>hekeish</i> where closely placed laws in the Torah are derived to have similar related rules)</small> is said regarding eating Matzvah, on the 1st night that one should be careful to eat before Chatzos <small>(halachic midnight)</small> like with the Korban Pesach like is elucidated later in Siman 477, but not regarding the making of Matzvah. Therefore, after the fact if one bakes matzvah before the 6th hour even a month or two before Pesach, and does it for the sake of the Mitzvah of Matza, it is fitting <small>(to fulfill the mitzvah on the 1st nights by the Seder).</small>
(2) <b>Mitzvah Matzah</b> - that it is necessary to him to fulfill his obligation on the two first nights but other matzos we are not accustomed to be careful in this <small>(stringency of preparing on the Eve of Pesach)</small>.
(3) <b>Until after etc.</b> - Look later in Siman 460 Paragraph 3 that it is necessary to be careful when kneading during the time of the prohibition of Chametz. Behold most Jews are not accustomed to be careful even in Mitzvah Matza to knead on the eve of Pesach except for a few of them. I searched in the Later Authorities and found in the Bigdei Yishah <small>(commentary on Shulchan Aruch)</small> a reason to protest the custom because there are many opinions that even on the eve of Pesach a little bit <small>(i.e. the prohibition of Chametz which begins on the eve is regarding even a very minimal amount of Chametz causes a large amount to become Chametz)</small> like was eludicdated earlier in Siman 452. And this is hard to be careful that he does not find even a little Chametz in the wheat that they start not to sprout. Therefore we bake before in order to nullify <small>(the potential)</small> Chametz. And in the Maamar Mordechai I found that he writes, and this his language, "Nowadays many are lenient in this matter because it is tough besides for a few that are careful in this to knead and bake after the 6th hour the Matzos that one fulfills in them on the two nights. And so is fitting to do." 
(4) <b>6th hour</b> - behold the Chok Yaakov sides with the Bach that after six and half hours specifically; however, in the Magen Avrohom and in the Elya Rabbah, they side like the Shulchan Aruch that after six hours. So is the <i>p'sak</i> in the Bais Meir, and similarly is implied in the Biur HaGra. And one should know that from a legal perspective <small>(i.e. as opposed to stringency considerations)</small> it is permitted to bake Matza on Pesach; rather, those particular <small>(in mitzva observance)</small> are accustomed to bake everything prior to Pesach, that if a small bit of Chametz gets mixed, it can be nullified as opposed to on Pesach that the prohibition includes a small bit. And obviously when baking before Pesach even if there was in it a small bit of Chametz in the flour, it was already mixed and nullified, and permitted afterwards to bake the Matzos on Pesach; since, there is not becoming Chametz after baking. And there are those men of action that are strict on themselves, and they do not soak nor cook Matzos on Pesach from a concern that  perhaps a little flour remains in the Matzos within that did not knead well, and by soaking it will become Chometz. See the Sharei Teshuva Siman 460 that from a legal perspective, there is not to worry for this; since, an establishment of a prohibition we do not establish <small>(i.e. we do not assume a prohibition without cause)</small> and especially nowadays that the custom is to make them very thin <small>(i.e. the Matzos)</small>. Nonetheless, one who is accustomed to this stringency, do not abandon it, see there that he details in the matter. Write the Poskim one who bakes on the night of Yom Tov Mitvah Matzos should not bake except for what is necessary that night, not for the 2nd night. However, if he baked <small>(some matzos)</small> while still day, on the 1st night, he can say I'll eat today <small>(i.e. the 1st night)</small> hot bread <small>(i.e. freshly baked Matzos)</small>. Then he will be able to bake other Matzos on the 1st night <small>(to eat on the 1st night itself)</small>, and those that he baked while still day he will store away for the 2nd night. Write the Later Authorities that initially it is not worthwhile to bake on Yom Tov in order not to come to complications in separating Challah on Yom Tov. Similarly <small>(there are issues)</small> in pounding the flour, washing the utensils, that the children shouldn't fall asleep, and that one not come to eat the <i>Afikomen</i> after <i>Chatzos</i>. 
(5) <b>Knead Erev Shabbos</b> - that is to say that not like the Stict to bake on the Night of Yom Tov as was explained at the end of Subparagraph 4.
(6) <b>After the 6th hour</b> - as a remembrance to other years.

Siman 459



Siman 460



Siman 461



Siman 462



Siman 463



Siman 464



Siman 465



Siman 466



Siman 467



Siman 468



Siman 469



Siman 470



Siman 471



Siman 472



There is a mitzvah to hurry to eat etc...Meaning, you must be careful to perform the Seder (timely) is that the children don't go to sleep waiting for the meal to start. They need to ask the questions, and you need to answer them to fulfill the commandment of "You will tell your children on that day".

Siman 473





















































Less than a kezayit (the size of an olive) - because with a kezayit there is a doubt about an after bracha, if you should bless or not, therefore it is better to eat less than a kezayit so there will not be an obligation according to everyone.

(55) And he blesses ‘borei Pri Haadaama - and he should intend to exempt with this blessing also the bitter herbs that he will eat afterwards (later authorities/achronim)

Siman 474



Siman 475



Siman 476



Siman 477



Siman 478



Siman 479



Siman 480



Siman 481



Siman 482



Siman 483



Siman 484



Siman 485



Siman 486



Siman 487



Siman 488



Siman 489



Siman 490



Siman 491



Siman 492



Siman 493



Siman 494

.....On the 50th day of Sefira.... Delay praying maariv because shavous starts at tzaits ha cocavim, and this is done in order to make sure the 49th day of the omer was yesterday. It comes to us from the Zohar that the Pious ones used to stay awake all night and concern themselves with Torah. It is already the custom of many (students) to do this (Stay up all night and learn). The Ari ZL brings down that One should know that anyone who doesn't sleep at all, and is engrossed in learning Torah, can be assured that his sleep will be made up and nothing wrong will occur to him. The reason (for this minhug) the Magen Avraham writes that because Israel Slept all night (the night of kabbalas haTorah) and Hashem need to awaken thenm in order to receive the torah (Brought through a Midrash) Therefore, we need to now stay up all night on shavous as a Tikkun. One who is up all night needs to be careful that he does not make a netillas yadyim in the morning unless he first used the bathroom before davoning and then he may make an Al netillas yadyim and an Asher Yatzar like we explained above.. And for the beracha on the tallis katan there are differing opinions among the Authorities and because of this one should try to excuse himself by making a blessing on the Tallis Gadol like we said.... For birkas ha torah see... and Elokai neshama see.. It is proper to be careful according to Kabbalah on the subject of Martial relations on the night of Shavous
... 
... 

....All of the Bechors... And if Shavous begins on Shabbos you need to say more(than the standard 5 aliyas for yom tov), And if it starts on shabbos you must read 7 aliyas beginning from "You shall surely Tithe"


.... Starting on Rosh Chodesh Sivan- Starting on the Second of Sivan Moses said to Bnei Yisroel to santificy themselves (get ready to receive) for the Torah as it says "You shall surely listen to my voice and you will guard my covenant"... And afterwards started the 3 days of boundaries(refraining from martial intercourse). (Did not mention Rosh chodesh because we don't say tachnun on Rosh chodesh)

In remembrance of the joy of receiving the Torah:  for there were grasses around Mount Sinai, as it says "The flocks and cattle shall not graze..." Latter sages wrote that in places where it is the custom to give out fragrant grasses in the synagogue, they should not give them out from Barukh SheAmar until after the Amida, so that one may bless over them (the blessing for fragrant vegetation)-- because during that period it is forbidden to interrupt (the prayer).  There is a custom to stand trees in the synagogues and homes in remembrance that on Shavuot judgment takes place for the fruits of the tree.  The Gr"a abolished this custom because now it is the ritual of the (non-Jewish) nations to put up trees on their holiday.
.. In many places to eat.. And in regards to whether it is permissible to fast a fast due to a dream on Shavuot see...
Dairy foods - See Magen Avraham and I also heard in the name of a Gadol who said a correct reason for this: that when Bnei Yisrael stood at Har Sinai and accepted the Torah(When the 10 commandments were revealed, and through this all the parts of the Torah were also revealed to them, like that Rav Sadya Gaon writes, that the 10 commandments sustain the whole torah) and they went down from the mountain to their homes they found nothing to eat immediately except for dairy foods because for meat they would need much preparation to slaughter with a checked knife like Hashem commanded... And to clean out the strings of forbidden fats and blood, and to rinse and salt (the meat). Also to cook in new vessels because their previous vessels had been used to cook meat (that they now discovered was actually trief) had been used in the last 24 hrs (which is what is forbidden Biblically) so their old vessels were forbidden to them, therefore they choose on account of the time to eat dairy foods and we do this as a commemoration of this.
....On the first day..." - In some places there is also a custom to eat honey and milk because the Torah is likened to them, as it says "honey and milk under your tongue...".
...Like the two that we cook... What this means to say is that on Passover we make a remembrance of the Koraban passover (on our seder plate with the bone) thus we do on Shavout by remember the "Shtei Halechem" that was brought, and therefore we eat a dairy meal and afterwards we eat a meat meal and we need to bring with the meal 2 different breads because it is forbidden to eat Milk and Meat from the same bread and this serves as our remembrance (having 2 breads we force ourselves to have by having a dairy meal then followed by a meat meal) "Shtei ha lechem

Siman 495





 It seems that Shulchan Aruch maintains that food preparation is permitted even if it could have been done the day before but those melachos that are normally done once and last for a number of days are prohibited if they would not lose taste if done in advance of Yom Tov. (M.B. 5)

Siman 496



Siman 497



Siman 498



Siman 499



Siman 500



Siman 501



Siman 502



Siman 503



Siman 504



Siman 505



Siman 506



Siman 507



Siman 508



Siman 509



Siman 510



Siman 511



Siman 512



Siman 513



Siman 514



Siman 515



Siman 516



Siman 517



Siman 518



Siman 519



Siman 520



Siman 521



Siman 522



Siman 523



Siman 524



Siman 525



Siman 526



Siman 527



Siman 528



Siman 529





















......
(22) Thusly should they warn the people... - In truth this obligation [to prevent gender intermingling] applies all the time and anyone who has the power too should stamp it out but on the festival this is a more common issue. See also section 339 s.v. "to be lenient"

Siman 530



Siman 531



Siman 532



Siman 533



Siman 534



Siman 535



Siman 536



Siman 537



Siman 538



Siman 539



Siman 540



Siman 541



Siman 542



Siman 543



Siman 544



Siman 545



Siman 546



Siman 547



Siman 548



Siman 549

We are obliged to fast, etc.  This obligation derives from the words of the prophets, as it is written in Scripture (Zech. 8:19), "The fast of the fourth, the fast of the fifth, the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth..." Our Sages, may their memories be for a blessing, explained that "the fast of the fourth" is the 17th of Tammuz, since it is in the fourth month according to the way we count the months; that "the fast of the fifth" is the Tish'ah B'Av [the 9th of Av], since it is in the fifth month; that "the fast of the seventh" is the Fast of Gedalia, since it is in the seventh month [Tishrei]; and that "the fast of the tenth" is the 10th of Tevet, since it is in the tenth month.  On all of these days, all Israel fasts because of the misfortunes that befell them on these days, in order to arouse their hearts to open up to the paths of repentance [teshuvah].  This [fasting] will be a recollection of our evil deeds and the deeds of our ancestors which were like our deeds now, such that they caused them--and us--these misfortunes, and in the recollection of these things we will return [nashuv] to become better [people], as it is written (Lev. 26:40), "And they will confess their iniquity and the iniquity of their ancestors..."  Therefore, each person is obliged to take to heart on these days to examine their deeds and to repent [lashuv] of them, because the fast [itself] is not the essential [thing], as it is written [in Jonah 3:10] about the people of Nineveh: "And the Eternal saw their deeds, that they repented [turned back] from their evil path..." The Sages, may their memories be a blessing, said that their sackcloth and their fasting were not mentioned--just their deeds.  Fasting is nothing but a preparation for repentance.  Therefore, those people who, as they are fasting, go on walks or [pursue] trivial matters grasp the issue of secondary importance, but loses track of the essence.  But in any case, one may not exempt oneself by means of repentance alone, because to fast on these days is a positive commandment from the prophets, as we wrote above.
On account of the terrible things, etc. Because on 17 Tammuz five misfortunes occurred.  On it, the tablets were broken as Moses descended from the mountain, as is explained in the Torah [Ex. 32:19]; the daily offering was cancelled and was no longer sacrificed in the First Temple; [the walls of] the city [of Jerusalem] were breached [in advance] of the destruction of the Second Temple; the evil Apostomos burnt the Torah; and an idol was placed in the Holy Temple.  On on 9 Av, the great destruction occurred. The First Temple was destroyed on [that day], as was the Second; and on that very day it was decreed that our ancestors that were in the desert would not enter the land; and on that very day, [Romans] conquered a great town, called Beytar [during the Bar Kokhba revolt], which was home to thousands of Jews, all of whom fell into the hands of the idolaters and all of whom perished, which was a calamity as great as the destruction of the Temple; and on this very day, destined for calamity, the evil Turnusrufus plowed the Temple and its environs, thus fulfilling what was said: "Zion will be plowed as a field" (Jer. 26:18). And on the day of 3 Tishrei, Gedalia son of Ahikam was murdered.  He had been appointed to lead the remaining survivors after the [first] destruction [and his death led to] the extinguishing of the remaining embers of Israel, because [in the wake of it] all were exiled and thousands were killed. And on 10 Tevet, the evil king of Babylon, Nebuchadnezzar assaulted Jerusalem and laid it under the siege and distress that led to the destruction.

Siman 550




...should not fast... and all the more so if one is an ill person who is not in danger, they are certainly exempt from fasting, and it is forbidden for them to impose stringency on themselves.
...but they have the custom of being stringent... If they are weak, it would seem that they should not be stringent. In any case, even someone who needs to eat should not feast on meat and wine, but [should eat] only what they need.  And likewise, children who understand [enough] to mourn: although we are not obliged to educate them [to fast] even at age twelve and even for a fast of a few hours, it is in any case appropriate to educate them to eat just enough to sustain their bodies, water and other simple food as they require, in order that they will mourn with the community.
We are permitted to wash ourselves... Because at the time when [Israel] wished [to fast] and accepted upon themselves the obligation to fast on all four of these fasts, they did not accept upon themselves that [all four] would be as stringent a public fast as Tish'ah Be'Av, because the majority of the community would not be able to stand it.  So a pious person should be stringent on all of them as on Tish'ah Be'Av, but if one of them falls on the evening when [a man's wife is due to] immerse [after her period], he should fulfill his obligation [to have marital relations].  Likewise, a person should not be strict about wearing shoes in order not to be a laughingstock. Likewise, if the 10th of Tevet falls on Friday, a person should not be strict about not washing in hot water out of respect for Shabbat.
And it is not required ... while it is still day... [That is,] as is required on Tish'ah Be'Av. Rather, it is permitted to eat and drink during the evening [of these fasts].

Siman 551



Siman 552



Siman 553



Siman 554



Siman 555



Siman 556



Siman 557



Siman 558



Siman 559



Siman 560









(9) To break a glass at the time of the wedding canopy - and this is also the reason for breaking a vessel/kli at the time of writing the tennaim. And it seems that one should break a whole glass under the canopy. And there is no (concern about) waste since they do so as a reminder of mussar/proper moral behavior so that they pay attention.

Siman 561





The Holy Temple - One who enters a holy place suffers karet because we are all tamei met and the original holiness is holiness for the future. 

Siman 562



Siman 563



Siman 564



Siman 565



Siman 566



Siman 567



Siman 568

[Refering to fasting] And he forgot and he ate - even if he did it on purpose and ate a lot. He should not eat more.

Siman 569



Siman 570



Siman 571



Siman 572



Siman 573



Siman 574



Siman 575



Siman 576














"The ill" - And this law also applies, that when varicella (chickenpox) blossoms in babies and they die, one should decree a fast, and a penitential prayer for ill children has already been published, and the Shlah (Rabbi Isaiah ben Avraham Horowitz, 1555-1630) wrote that one should take one's children out from the city during a time like this when a disease is contagious.

Siman 577



Siman 578



Siman 579



Siman 580



Siman 581

<b>We are accustomed to getting up at the [concluding night] watch:</b> Since the Holy One, blessed be He, floats through this world at the end of the night, so it is an opportune time. And regarding that which they  are accustomed [to doing so] from Rosh Chodesh (the first day of the month of Elul), it is because Moshe then ascended Mount Sinai to receive the later tablets, and they blasted a shofar in the camp. Moshe ascended to the mountain, such that they not err again after idolatry. So it became an opportune time. And there is a support from the verse (Song of Songs 6:3), "I am for my Beloved and my Beloved is for me (<i>Ani leDodi veDodi li</i>)" - the first letters of which [spell] Elul; and the last letters of which come to forty, which corresponds to the forty days from Rosh Chodesh Elul to Yom Kippur. For during these forty days, repentance is [more readily] accepted, since one's heart is near to his Beloved (God) with repentance; and then his Beloved will be near to them to accept his repentance with love. And there is another support from the verse (Deuteronomy 30:6), "And the Lord, your God, will circumcise your heart and the heart of your descendants (<i>et levavkha ve'et lev zaraeikha</i>)," the first letters of which [spell] Elul. <b>A) From Elul and onwards:</b> But Rosh Chodesh itself, we don't say penitential prayers and supplications. And likewise, those who are accustomed to say Psalms all of Elul, together with the [prayer], "May it be [His] will" - they should not begin on Rosh Chodesh (Pri Meggadim). 

Siman 582



Siman 583



(3) A sweet apple with honey - and the apple is the main thing, and one blesses on it and exempts the honey. And even if one eats the apple after the blessing of hamotzi, one still needs to bless on it. And there are those who have the custom to dip the hamotzi in honey.
"A sweet year" - because of this, there are those who refrain on Rosh Hashanah from cooking sour foods, such as Borscht. Therefore, those who eat fish as a sign of fertility should not cook them in vinegar. All these symbols are done as a sign of the good which is to come, so obviously one should be very careful not to be angry on this day (apart from it never being permitted!) so that the day is full of goodness. Just fill the heart with happiness, and trusting God, and repentance, and good deeds.



(8) The river, etc. — and to say, "You will take us back in mercy, etc." Because it is found in the Midrash that our father Abraham crossed [a river] until the water reached his neck when he went to sacrifice [Isaac] over the altar. Then he said, "Save [Us]," since the water threatened his life. And we do this to commemorate the binding [of Isaac]. It is good to go to a place where there are living fish as a sign that the evil eye will not overpower us, and that we should be fruitful and multiply like fish. And it is written in some writings: It should be a river or a spring, and it is better if it is outside of the city. One should go on the first day [of Rosh Hashanah] after the afternoon prayers before the sunset, and say: <i>Who is a God like You, etc.</i> (Micah 7:18-20). To here are its [words]. And I have seen in a few places, that when the first day falls out on Shabbat, they go to the river on the second day. And it is possible that it is because of [the prohibition of] transporting out, since we carry books and the like. Hence we go on the second day (Pri Megadim).

Siman 584



Siman 585

(1) "blow" - And the rule that you must stand also applies for the blessing [on the blowing], just like [you must stand for] any blessing on a mitzvah
(2) "standing" - As it is written; "A day of blowing it will be for you"

Siman 586





The Mitzvah is with bent ones... - This means even if it is not from a ram, but from other animals, nevertheless a bent one is better than a straight one...

Siman 587



Siman 588



Siman 589


And a minor - Even if he is 13 years old until we know that he grew 2 hairs he cannot blow to fulfil the obligation of others.












To practice... - If he intended with [the blowing] to also fulfil the mitzva the Eiliyah Raba writes that he fulfils his obligation. However, he must have blown properly.

Siman 590



Siman 591



Siman 592



Siman 593



Siman 594



Siman 595



Siman 596



Siman 597



Siman 598

d

Siman 599



Siman 600



Siman 601



Siman 602



Siman 603



Siman 604

It's a mitzvah to eat etc ... It's written "and you shall afflict your souls (fast) on the 9th of the month at the evening etc" (Vayikra 23:32). And from the facts that (a) it could've been written instead "on the 9th of the month you will afflict your souls (fast) until night etc" and (b) it is written "and you shall afflict ... on the night of the month," perhaps it comes to say that they should truly fast on the 9th. But yom kippur isn't on the ninth, it's on the tenth of the month! Chazal teach that it's a mitzvah from the Torah to eat on erev Yom Kippur and ha-kadosh-baruch-hu wishes to bestow rewar for the feasting as if it were fasting. This is not a comparable mitzvah to those that contain suffering. Like that they say ...

Siman 605



Siman 606



One should appease the other each time with new persuasions, and at the time of requesting forgiveness one must detail the specifics of how one wronged the other. If, however, the other would be embarrassed by learning the details of the transgression, then one should not mention specifics. Furthermore, one who requests forgiveness from a group is not exempted if one knows that a particular individual was specifically wronged.

Siman 607



Siman 608



Siman 609



Siman 610



Siman 611



Siman 612



Siman 613



Siman 614



Siman 615



Siman 616



Siman 617



Siman 618



Siman 619



Siman 620



Siman 621



Siman 622



Siman 623



Siman 624



Siman 625



Siman 626



Siman 627



Siman 628



Siman 629



Siman 630



Siman 631



Siman 632



Siman 633



Siman 634



Siman 635



Siman 636



Siman 637





(5) Borrowed: As it is written: <i>all citizens in Israel shall live in booths</i> (Leviticus 23:42). [Since the spelling of booths in the verse indicates a singular booth,] it teaches that the whole Jewish people is fit to sit in a single booth (meaning one after the other). But this is impossible for all of them, since there is not enough for each one to own the worth of a <i>perutah</i> [a small coin] of it, unless it is done by borrowing [it].

Siman 638



Siman 639



























Authorities agree that the restriction does not begin until the beginning of the 4th hour after chatzos(https://mishnaberurayomi.org/pdf_digest/Chelek_6/1637_Siman_639_Seif_3-4.pdf)

Siman 640



Siman 641



Siman 642



Siman 643



Siman 644



Siman 645



Siman 646



Siman 647



Siman 648



Siman 649



Siman 650



Siman 651



Siman 652


<b>The whole day is suitable...</b> - and if one did not take the species until <i>bein hashmashot</i>, on the first day one is obligated then to take it, since it is a doubt on a Biblical obligation [with which the general rule is to be stringent]. And one should do so without a blessing (since blessings are Rabbinic obligations). And the <i>acharonim</i> agreed with regards the latter days of the festival that even though it is a rabbinic obligation, so too here it is correct to take the species, since there is no trouble in this -- but one should be careful not to bless on this taking.
 ...
<b>At the time of Hallel</b> -- in order to wave it at "Hodu" and "Hoshia na". And some of the scrupulous are accustomed to bless on the lulav at <i>neitz hachama</i> within the sukkah and to wave it, and afterwards during Hallel to wave it again.

Siman 653



Siman 654



Siman 655



Siman 656


(2) See the Magen Avraham who points out that this refers not only to an Etrog, but this is also the case for a Torah scroll or Shofar and the like that one can buy that comes in particularly small size, and one subsequently finds one in a larger size: it is a Mitzvah to spend more for the larger one up to a third again of the price [of the small one].






(9) Wasting the opportunity of a positive commandment prevents its being fulfilled, but in this no action was taken against the will of God the Praised One. This is not, however, the case for a negative commandment if it is transgressed. The Magen Avraham writes: This is what is happening in Gittin 56 in the story of Bar Kamtza: it would have been permissible to transgress the negative commandment [against  offering a blemished animal] because of fear of the gentile rulers. The Acharonim challenge the permissibility of this, but point out that the value of saving lives could have been used as an excuse here.
(10) Even though this person will be a beggar afterwards, we cannot permit that which is forbidden by the Torah. This applies to all negative commandments, and especially those which carry the punishment of Karet(!). An example is a person who would lose out on the opportunity to make a lot of money if doesn't desecrate Shabbat and do forbidden work with the rest of the workers. It is forbidden for him to listen to them. Even if this would affect his ability to have food and feed his household, he should not forfit his life on their behalf.

Siman 657



Siman 658



Siman 659



Siman 660



Siman 661



Siman 662



Siman 663



Siman 664



Siman 665



Siman 666



Siman 667



Siman 668



Siman 669

















(17) Two: And we are not accustomed to [have the Kohanim] go up to [bless the congregation] because drunkenness is common (Levush). But in the Aliyah Rabbah, [the author] wrote that in Prague, they are accustomed to [have them] go up during the additional prayers (<i>mussaf</i>). And there are some [places where] they go up during the morning service. Every place should follow its custom, but they should be careful not to drink.

Siman 670



Siman 671



Siman 672



Siman 673




Any oil is preferable to wax because oil was apart of the miracle.

Siman 674



Siman 675



Siman 676



Siman 677



Siman 678



Siman 679



Siman 680



Siman 681



Siman 682



Siman 683



Siman 684



Siman 685
















(16) To a place that has a quorum etc - This is even in a case where he has a Sefer Torah in his house, but there isn't a quorum in his house, and even if you say that a quorum is only rabbinically ordained nevertheless the essence of reading the reading of Parshas Zachor is biblically ordained. And behold, in the TERUMAS HADESHEN it is written that the hearing of the reading of Parshas Zachor with a quorum of ten is more preferable than the recitation of Megillah in a congregation because for the recitation of the Megillah, according the majority of halachic decisors, it is sufficient to be done at the right time period individually, and, therefore, if it is impossible to fulfill both [readings], then he should see to it to fulfill the reading of Parshas Zachor in a congregation. But the MAGEN AVRAHAM holds that it is better to go to a place that is reading the Megillah in a congregation, and Parshas Zachor can be fulfilled, in a time of necessity, with hearing the reading of the Parsha of "And Amalek came" that with this, one also remembers the actions of Amalek and fulfills his obligation. His [The MAGEN AVRAHAM's] intent is that he fulfills the biblical obligation...

Siman 686

You are allowed to fast before them and after them- and thus you can also eulogize. And the Bach writes that on Chanukah you are not allowed to fast beforehand, and this is also the opinion of the Pri Chadash. And there are people whose custom is to fast the day before Chanukah to make up for [not fasting] Erev Rosh Chodesh [Tevet] (which occurs during Chanukah and hence forbidden). They should notc change their custom, but ideally one should not adopt that practice. And at least it is not allowed to declare a public fast for the day before Chanukah. And similarly it is forbidden to declare a public fast for the first day after Chanukah, even if an individual can fast on that day
We fast on the 13 of the month of Adar - Because in the days of Mordechai and Esther they gathered on the 13 of Adar to fight and stand for their lives and they needed to ask for mercy and they pleaded to be helped by Hashem to take revenge from their enemies. We find that on the day of war they were fasting as the Rabbis says that Moshe Rabbeinu, of blessed memory, fasted on the day [the Israelites] fought with Amalek and therefore certainly also in the days of Mordechai they were fasting on the same day; and therefore the Jews began a custom of fasting on the thirteenth of Adar. And they called this fast Taanit Esther to remember that God looks and listens to every person in their time of distress when they fast and repent to God with all of their heart just as they did in those days:
To fast on the fifth day - but on erev Shabbos you don't schedule/set a fast day because of the honor of Shabbos since usually we say Selichot and pray for mercy and on Erev Shabbos its not proper to do so because you don't have time to prepare for Shabbos. And someone who is traveling and he forgot that [one is supposed to] fast on the fifth day and he ate and at night when he arrived home and he was notified that it was a fast day he should fast on Erev Shabbos. The Maharil did not teach halachah on Ta'anis Ester because everyone was busy preparing for purim, unless if purim came out on Sunday then he (the Maharil) would teach on Ta'anis Ester (which would then fall out on the previous Thursday, because there would be enough time on Friday to prepare for Purim). The Elya Rabbah wrote "it appears to me that (the Maharil's behavior) only applied to attending. Yeshiva but regular study in the Beis Midrash was not included because this does not infringe on people's ability to prepare properly for the Seudah". We don't say the prayer Tzidkascha on Shabbos when Purim falls on Sunday, just like we don't say Tachnunim on Erev Purim that falls on a weekday likewise we don't say Tziduk HaDin on Shabbos that is Erev Purim.
In pain - This refers to someone who has pain in his eyes. But someone who is pregnant shouldn’t fast even if they are not in pain, so says the Yeshuas Yaakov. And the Elya Rabba is more strict on the matter (i.e. he says if you're pregnant you should fast), except if it's within a month of the woman giving birth, he also is lenient.
And repay afterwards - According to the aforementioned Yeshuot Yaakov, it would seem that this only applies to individuals suffering eye pains. [i.e., the requirement to repay for the missed fast of Taanit Ester] that in principle there is an obligation on him (the one with eye pains) to not separate from the community, and only now because his eyes hurt him, and therefore after his pain is removed he'll repay the fast; however this does not apply to someone pregnant or breastfeeding, who to begin with at their core are exempt, even if they are not in pain. But from the words of the Bach it seemingly does not indicate this. 
Should not separate: Even one traveling on the road and it is difficult for them to fast
You are allowed to eat for the circumcision - That is all the people who were invited for the feast, even more than ten, and even in the morning, they are allowed to eat, but they must all fast the next day as will be noted. And see the Taz and the Elya Rabba that disagree with this gloss and their view is that the fast is fixed for Thursday and therefore they are all forbidden to eat on Thursday and they should have the feast at night. But the Baalei Brit themselves are allowed to eat on Thursday after the Milah and don't need to eat the next day, like it is stated in Siman 559:9 concerning Tisha Ba'av; and see the Pri Megadim who wrote that one who is lenient to follow Rema's opinion [here] has not lost; and similarly in Mor uKetziah and Shevus Yaakov [those scholars] agree with Shulchan Aruch (i.e. this lenient ruling)

Three Days - meaning Baha"b (Monday, Thursday, Monday) after Purim. When Adar enters we increase joy. And those who have a court case with non-jews should pursue judgement in Adar. 
 [Gemara ] City members can consensually establish and choose for themselves and those who follow them to create a 'Purim' on the day that a miracle was done. And whoever experienced a miracle in Adar and vows to create a 'Purim' when a leap year occurs the 'Purim' should be celebrated in Adar II, except if the miracle specifically happened during a leap year in Adar I (and therefore the 'Purim' should be celebrating in Adar I).

Siman 687



Siman 688



Siman 689




...It is needed for the reader to have intent to fulfill the listener. As is the law to fulfill the commandment of his people.


...There are those who say women can't fulfill others obligation. It's not similar to Chanukah because (the reading of the) Megillah is similar to the reading of the torah and it's unacceptable because of respect of the congregation and therefore, they can't fulfill the obligation of a single person. The chachamim didn't distinguish in any order and they set forth. And also, she's not obligated in reading, only in listening. And she follows the reading but she's not obligated in the matter of a man, but she can fulfill her woman friend.








It is a good practice to bring... - In order to educate them in the commandment of publicizing the miracle.  For this reason the community is accustomed to read these verses out loud (infra, 690:17), which are the essence of the beginning of the miracle and its end, i.e. "There was a Jewish man," "And Mordechai went out," "For the Jews," "For Mordechai" - in order to wake up the little ones that they not sleep, and they will pay attention to the reading, and they read the verses to them to teach them (Levush).
Young boys and girls - So long as they do not bring very young ones, who confuse the listeners.
To hear, etc. - But now, in our many sins, it is reversed.  For not only do they not listen, but they mix it up so that the adults also cannot listen, and the only reason they come is to beat Haman.  In this way the father does not fulfill the commandment of education at all.  In truth, from the perspective of the commandment of education, every father has to keep his young children near him, and to supervise them that they listen to the reading, and when the reader gets to mentioning the name of Haman the Aggagite, the child is permitted to hit as is his custom, but not that that should be the primary purpose of bringing the child to the study hall.
The reading of the Megillah - And now, everyone should have a kosher megillah and read in an undertone word for word, because it is impossible to hear from the leader because of the noise and commotion, that they hit with sticks and make noise.  And it is appropriate for every Jew to behave this way if he can.  And see infra, 690:4.

Siman 690



Siman 691



Siman 692



Siman 693



Siman 694



Siman 695




<b> 4. Between "cursed is Haman"</b> as this was the first fall - which was a great revenge upon him - and a still greater good than this, the rise of Mordekhai, whom God blessed [such that] he 'rose up to the head.' And behold, before we drink, we certainly give thanks to God, may He be blessed, on these two goods. And so the sages, may their memory be blessed, said not to stop giving praise happily about this, until he comes to the point that he can no longer distinguish between this good and that [one]. And see Ohr Zarua, that nonetheless one sees to be careful about the matter of washing the hands [before the meal] and the blessing on the bread and the grace after the meals, and that the joy be about the commandment. And see Pri Megadim, who wrote that it is possible that one needs intention, [while executing] the Purim meal, gifts to the poor and the giving of portions, that it is for the sake of the commandment.
<b>5. And sleeps and since he sleeps etc.</b> And such should be done. [Pri Megadim]