Teshuvot haRashba part V
שו"ת הרשב"א חלק ה
YU Torah miTzion Beit Midrash
torontotorah

Teshuvot haRashba part V



Teshuva 1



Teshuva 2



Teshuva 3



Teshuva 4



Teshuva 5



Teshuva 6



Teshuva 7



Teshuva 8



Teshuva 9



Teshuva 10



Teshuva 11



Teshuva 12



Teshuva 13



Teshuva 14



Teshuva 15



Teshuva 16



Teshuva 17



Teshuva 18



Teshuva 19



Teshuva 20



Teshuva 21



Teshuva 22



Teshuva 23



Teshuva 24



Teshuva 25



Teshuva 26



Teshuva 27



Teshuva 28



Teshuva 29



Teshuva 30



Teshuva 31



Teshuva 32



Teshuva 33



Teshuva 34



Teshuva 35



Teshuva 36



Teshuva 37



Teshuva 38



Teshuva 39



Teshuva 40



Teshuva 41



Teshuva 42



Teshuva 43



Teshuva 44



Teshuva 45



Teshuva 46



Teshuva 47



Teshuva 48



Teshuva 49



Teshuva 50



Teshuva 51

To the wise, complete person: You asked, "What are blessings? The term 'berachah[blessing]' ‎refers to increased good, but what can a servant add to his Master?" In truth, the word "berachah" ‎is an expression of increase and multiplication, like the expression, "springs [bereichot] of water". ‎There is a deep secret regarding berachot, and one to whom G-d has granted knowledge of the ‎secrets of the Torah will understand it. Blessings, and the increase of blessings, multiply in two ‎ways, sometimes from the recipient and sometimes from the giver and conveyor of blessing. This ‎may be compared to a king who gives an showers of his good upon his servants. The blessing ‎appears to his servants in their multiplication and increase, for they were lacking and now they ‎have been made full. However, for the king, it is well known that possesses as much as he has ‎given and used to benefit others, and so the increase and multiplication is not seen in him. Still, if ‎the king were to constantly give, supplying large gifts to his many forces without interruption, it ‎would truly appears that he is blessed [i.e. increased and multiplied], such that he never stops ‎providing for his forces, even for an instant ...  ‎It’s not that the king is made greater by an external source, receiving blessing and abundance from ‎someone greater than he is, who supplied him. Rather, everyone "blesses" the king, meaning that ‎they give blessing and thanks that he is the master of these blessings, and his storehouses will ‎never fail. When he adds more good, more people recognize and know him, for his blessing has ‎neither limit nor end … This is the matter of blessings, that we give thanks before Him for the food ‎that He provides, and for the good that He gives to us. We pray that He constantly give blessing, so ‎that everyone will know that He is blessed. As we say: Blessed, and blessed in the mouths of every ‎soul … Also, G-d wants his righteous ones to pray before Him, in order to increase His good for‏ ‏His ‎creations, and in order that their sins not‎‏ ‏cause G-d to withhold His good from them. Thus the ‎Sages taught (Berachot7a), "G-d said to Yishmael: My son, bless Me. He answered, 'May it be your ‎will that Your mercy should conquer Your anger, and Your mercy should overtake Your [other] ‎attributes, and You should deal with Your children beyond the line of the law.'"‎