Rambam on Mishnah Niddah
רמב"ם על משנה נדה
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Rambam_on_Mishnah_Niddah
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Rambam on Mishnah Niddah



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Mishnah 1



Mishnah 2



Mishnah 3

A newborn baby girl, from the day of her birth, imparts ritual impurity. 
If a baby boy is born and his mother becomes ritually impure due to postpartum bleeding, and it is possible that she may also experience continuous bleeding for ten days, such as if she sees three consecutive days of bleeding after the seven days of menstrual impurity, then during the entire seven days of her menstrual cycle, she will not be considered a zavah (a woman with abnormal bleeding) according to what we have explained. And she will only be considered a zavah during times when she is not experiencing her menstrual impurity. All these laws are accepted, and there is no exception to them except in cases where no precedence has been established, such as when a baby boy is born on the first day, in which case, according to Rabbi Yosei, his mother is exempt from the laws of yibum (levirate marriage).
They also said, "and exempt from the terumah (priestly offering)," meaning that a kohen's wife who gives birth to a baby boy from a Yisrael (non-priest) is prohibited from consuming terumah (priestly offerings) because she has already given birth to a child who is considered a chalal (a person with a blemished lineage). However, in the case where a kohen has two wives, one of whom is eligible for the priesthood and has children, and the other is ineligible for the priesthood but has a baby boy, who is a chalal and dies, the kohen is still permitted to consume terumah because the baby boy does not affect his status as a kohen. This is an example where a kohen's wife who has a baby boy from a Yisrael is prohibited from consuming terumah due to the baby's status as a chalal.
They also said, "and divorced or widowed," which means that if a woman converted while pregnant and then gave birth, or if she was released from her marriage during pregnancy and then gave birth, or if she was already divorced and then gave birth, or if she is a woman who has not yet given birth and is a kohenet (a female descendant of Aaron) or a leviyah (a female descendant of Levi), or a woman who has already given birth, she is not obligated to observe the laws of yibum. 
They also said, "and inherits and can be inherited," which means that a child inherits from his mother, and siblings inherit from their father. This is exemplified by the case where if the mother dies on the day of her child's birth, the child inherits her possessions, and if the child dies afterward on the same day, his siblings inherit from their father. In this way, inheritance can be transferred from the youngest child to his siblings in one day.
They also said, "and they said, like a complete groom," which means that a person is obligated to mourn for his child who died before reaching the age of thirty days. However, this only applies if the child lived for a full nine months. If the child did not live for a full nine months, the parents are not obligated to mourn for him until they complete thirty days, as the primary criterion is that a person is not considered viable unless he completes thirty days, even if his full term was not completed. Thus, even if the child dies on his thirtieth day, the parents are not obligated to mourn for him.

Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Mishnah 1



Mishnah 2



Mishnah 3



Mishnah 4

All types of blemishes found on a person are considered pure in every situation.
We have already explained that blemishes found, even within the cities of Israel, are considered pure because they do not emit impure blemishes. However, if the garment on which the bloodstain is found is within the cities of Israel, in rooms or in places of impurity, it is subject to scrutiny as menstrual blemishes. Nevertheless, it is concealed there, as previously mentioned, by asking modest individuals discreetly. The Samaritans, however, used to think that an individual who has no share or inheritance in the land should be buried anywhere. This is incorrect. Therefore, the places that are impure due to their origin are impure in a tent, as they are considered akin to a burial place. The halacha does not follow Rabbi Yehuda in this matter. This has been the case from that time onwards. However, as for the Samaritan himself, if he dies, he does not cause impurity in a tent, as they are idolaters, and idolaters do not cause impurity in a tent.