Siddur Sefard
סידור ספרד
Yozerot for Shabbat Shekalim, Zachor, Piyyutim for Purim Festival, Parah, Ha-hodesh, Shabbat HaGadol — Translated with Introduction by Rabbi Dr. Joseph Marcus
https://hebrewbooks.org/3398

Siddur Sefard

Upon Arising

Modeh Ani



Tallit



Tefilin



Introductory Prayers



Upon Entering Synagogue



Weekday Shacharit

Morning Blessings



Blessings on Torah



Morning Prayer



Korbanot



B'raita d'Rabi Yishmael



Hodu



Yishtabach



The Shema



Amidah



Tachanun



Avinu Malkeinu



For Monday & Thursday



Torah Reading



Ashrei



Beit Yaakov



Song of the Day



Barchi Nafshi



L'David Hashem



Kaveh



Aleinu



Additional Prayers 

Six Rememberances



Thirteen Principles



Chapter of Fear of God



Chapter of Repentance



Chapter of Manna



Supplications After Prayers



Chapter of Song



Weekday Mincha

Korbanot



Torah Reading for Fast Day



Amidah



Tachanun



Avinu Malkeinu



Weekday Maariv

The Shema



Amidah



Motzaei Shabbat



Sefirat HaOmer



Kiddush Levanah



Bedtime Shema



Lag BaOmer Songs

Amar Rabbi Akiva



Ashreinu Ma Tov



Ashreinu Uma Naim



Bar Yochai



Bar Yochai Butzina Kadisha



Bar Yochai Hashem Imcha



Bar Yochai Yesod Olam



Bar Yochai Tagel Yoladetecha



Va'amartem Ko Lechai



Lichvod HaTanna



Naaleh V'Navo



Various Blessings

Marriage Blessings



Sheva Berachot



Circumcision



Geula LeBrit Milah



Redeeming Firstborn



Mealtime Blessings



Birchat HaMazon

Birchat HaMazon



Brit Milah



Blessing on Foods



Blessings

Me'ein Shalosh



Ha'etz



Ha'adamah



Shehakol



Borei Nefashot



Shehecheyanu



Fragrant Spices



Fragrant Herbs



Fragrant Shrubs



Fragrant Fruit



Fragrant Oils



Lightning & Thunder



Seeing Rainbow



Seeing Ocean



Blossoming Fruit Tree



Various Blessings of Praise



Immersing Utensils



Mezuzah



Separating Challah



Separating Terumot & Maasrot



Traveler's Prayer



Air Traveler's Prayer



Eruv Tavshilin



Shabbat Candle Lighting



Shabbat Eve Mincha

Song of Songs



Mincha



Amidah



Kabbalat Shabbat



Shabbat Eve Maariv

Shabbat Eve Maariv



Shema & Blessings



Amidah



Vayechulu



Shabbat Evening Meal

Blessing the Children



Shalom Aleichem



Eishet Chayil



Atkinu Seudata



Shabbat Eve Kiddush



Zemirot



Shabbat Morning Services

Pesukei D'Zimrah



Shema & Blessings



Amidah



Shabbat Torah Reading



Blessings on Torah Reading



Prayer for Oleh



Prayer for Mother after Chilbirth



Prayer for Sick



BaHaB Blessing



Thanksgiving Blessing



Bar Mitzva



Hagbahah



Haftarah Blessings



Blessing of New Month



Prayer for Deceased



Av HaRachamim



Musaf



Shabbat Day Meal

Seder Tikunei Shabbat



Shabbat Day Kiddush



Zemirot



Shabbat Mincha

Korbanot



Amidah



Pirkei Avot



Third Meal

Zemirot



Motzaei Shabbat Prayers



Gott Fun Avraham



Motzaei Shabbat 

Havdala



Hamavdil



Melava Malka Zemirot



Shaking Lulav



Rosh Chodesh

Hallel



Song of the Day



Barchi Nafshi



Torah Reading



Ashrei Uva L'Tziyon



Returning Sefer Torah



Mussaf



Holidays

Yom Tov Eve Kiddush



Kaddish Before Maariv Amidah



Maariv, Shacharit & Mincha Amidah



Yizkor



Prayer for Dew



Prayer for Rain



Yom Tov Musaf Amidah



Yom Tov Daytime Kiddush



Prayer Upon Entering Sukkah



Nissan

The'Nasi' Readings



Search for Hametz



Burning Hametz



Pesach Offering



Letter of Rav Shimshon of Ostropol



Pesach Haggadah

Kadesh



Urchatz



Karpas



Yachatz



Maggid



Rochtzoh



Motzi, Matzah



Maror



Korech



Shulchan Orech



Tzafun



Barech



Hallel



Nirtzah



Shir HaShirim



Sukkot

Order of Hoshanot



First Day & Chol HaMoed



Sabbath



Hoshana Rabba



Simchat Torah

Hakafot



Evening Torah Reading



Shavuot



Yotzerot

Parashat Sekalim





According to the institution of Scholars and Sages, and the teaching of learned preceptors, I open my lips with songs and hymns, to give thanks and to praise Him who dwells in the heavenly heights.
From ancient times didst Thou plan, in all Thy works, to bring into being all things by number and weight. Therefore didst Thou speak unto him who was drawn out of the water (Moses) to take the census of Israel who dryshod passed over the sea. But because they exchanged the glory of God for a calf, and in their apostasy called the idol “God,” they were cast away in Thy wrath and plagues overwhelmed them. Then did their friend (Moses) intercede for them, and his prayer brought about their healing. He was told to bear their cumbrance and burden, to plead their just cause that they might be raised high above all.
Pagans, He declared, would be given for their ransom; they would be borne aloft and exalted, when they brought this half shekel offering...
My head hast Thou exalted over all, and hast uplifted me to the heights of the city.
Thy love covered up my every transgression. Thou didst arise to shield me in the shadow of Thy right hand....
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, Shield of Abraham.


Thou who removest mountains, who formest and createst the wind, who dost measure and weigh the flowing water and wind, that no harm befall them that are crushed in spirit. Thou didst command Israel to give a ransom for every soul. Long before the wanton scion of Esau (Haman) sprang up Thou didst foresee that he would arise as a snare and a prickly Hiom to Israel. Thou didst, therefore, advise them to proclaim in their representative assemblies to have ready the shekel gift from the New Moon of Adar, and to read the section from the Holy Writ at this period, that our shekels might anticipate the blood-money of Haman, our adversary. 
When Moses, the chief of the prophets, beheld the fiery likeness of the coin, he was told by the Creator to command Israel to bring such a gift.
God’s name is interwoven with the name of the people that is joined unto Him, who daily offer up their lives for His sake.
He will rouse and bare His arm and stretch forth His hand over all men when the dew of life shall trickle to quicken the dead....
Blessed art Thou, 0 Lord, who quickenest the dead.
The amount (of this ransom silver) is fixed for all; great and small; rich and poor are appraised alike, that the rich shall not brazenly declare before the Assembly: “My wealth has gained me ransom for my sins.” The people that cannot be numbered for multitude, the men from twenty years onward, when man becomes subject to punishment after being duly warned, is thus counted. Thus is their iniquity and transgression atoned, and those that are taxed grow in strength, and their children join in their exaltation. 
May the silver ransom shekels that everyone who is registered give bring them atonement.
From ancient times on has the Holy Congregation continued to bring this sacred offering at three stated intervals...
to the hands of the priests for the expense of the repair of the Temple and for the sacrifice.
O gaze upon our distress and misery, how we are trampled in the mire. Behold our oppression and let us no longer wallow in the dust. 
Proclaim liberty as of yore, and free us from bondage, and let pagans be the ransom for our soul.
O remember to raise up from the surging waves of the sea them that were borne by Thee. Sustain them and crown them with crowns of splendor.
Remember the mighty song of victory with which the people whose number is as the sand of the sea glorified Thy name on the Red Sea.
The Lord shall reign for ever, thy God, 0 Zion, through all generations, Halleluyah. Thou ART holy, O Thou that are enthroned upon the praises of Israel.
Who can compute all those that are mustered? Their number cannot be determined by measure or lot. From of yore a covenant has been made with them that ne’er shall their number be less than that recorded in the Book of Numbers. Were they to be left as a beacon or as an ensign on a hill, yet shall their number e’er be sixty myriads at least. And when pestilence and grievous plagues are ordained for them, then shall they bring the silver half-shekel as their ransom. Every evening they commit their spirit into Thy hand, and every morning they are tried and visited by Thee. As for me, how precious are Thy ordinances to me, and those that are mustered according to these ordinances. O Lord, protect both those that are mustered and those that are left out, who are intent to be like almond-blossoms as they bow their heads to Thee —
LIVING AND ENDURING, AWE-INSPIRING, EXALTED AND HOLY!
When the nursing-father (Moses) heard the command “When you take the census of the children of Israel’’ he trembled and quaked. “How can a people be fathomed that cannot be measured or numbered? When their ancestor Abraham was told ‘Look now, and count the stars,’ he stood off, as he was told again, ‘if you be able to count them.’ Their seed is like the sand of the sea and like the stars of the heaven. How, then, can I count them since they continually multiply?’’ The exalted God then taught him a device to compute their number. “Add the numerical value (in thousands) of the initials of their tribes and the total of their number will result.’’ The noble third tribe (Levi), however, was not mustered among them; the King’s troop was numbered separately. Distinguished from birth, appointed to the charge of the Sanctuary, the hosts of Levi were numbered from a month old and upward. When Moses heard the command: "Then shall every man give a ransom’’ he asked: "How can man gain reconciliation with the Creator of all? What can a creature give as the ransom for his soul, to find grace in the eye of the Creator of his soul?’’ Then showed the Holy One, who desired to free His people from guilt, the likeness of a fiery coin to Moses in a vision. He instructed him: "This shall they give without delay, and they shall publicly declare the sum that they pay.” O Eternal, we cannot comprehend Thee, so mighty in strength art Thou. As Thou didst of yore cleanse from sin those that were mustered in strength,
and didst show mercy to Thy children by the atonement silver, so do Thou accept the rendering of our lips for the offering of bullocks.
O Lord! Forever shalt Thou be adored and eternity and forever and aye shalt Thou reign in exaltation, 0 God, revered, great and holy King. For Thou art the King of kings whose kingdom is enduring. Proclaim His wondrous works, recount His might, glorify Him, His hosts, sanctify Him, exalt in hymn, song and praise His awesome grandeur.
Until my head on high I raise. / As I did in ancient days. / My holy God and Lord to praise;
When in the balance me He lays. / His mercy justice far outweighs.
Well do I remember events of long ago, when I dwelt sale and secure on the towering Temple Hill. But because of my sins I was driven out; how, then shall I bring my shekel offering? Because formerly I did not regularly pay my shekels, I am forced now to pay them as tribute to the oppressor. For the sin also of false balance I have been given over to the tyrant. Because I did not give my mite while I dwelt in joy, I was obliged to pay a gold daric to the returning pilgrims. And now these, too, are vanished and I am denuded bare. In three baskets, each holding three SEAHS, collections were made for purchasing the offerings of bullocks and lambs. Of them, too, I am deprived; they no longer make atonement for the sin of coveteousness. The Shofar-like chests which contained "New Shekel dues," and “Old Shekel dues," and the "Free-will offering" chests in which collections were made, have long been removed from me, long, long ago. The mighty throng in festival procession. like an overflowing river, has been scattered, and I am left lonely like a signal upon the hill. My sacred dwelling lies waste like a hill of rubbish. O, call again the scattered bird-nest to the exalted hill, and lift up again, as in ancient times, the head of those borne by Thee, and raise over them seven shepherds and eight princes (Micah 5,4).
Until my head on high I raise. / As I did in ancient days. / My holy God and Lord to praise.
And thus may sanctification ascend unto Thee, for Thou are the Holy One of Israel, the Savior!
Then didst Thou see and number, order, investigate, measure, compute and weigh, estimate and gather, muster, devise and sum, count calculate, delimit decide and decree, gauge dimensions and quantify, view, reflect, comprehend, gaze and behold. Thou didst write, mark and trace, indicate and engrave, teach and Instruct expound and direct decree and command, call and answer, speak and determine every numeration, calculation, reckoning and summation, every weight balance, weight-bag and its markings, every liquid and dry measure, every line, plane, long measure and its limits; how to attend to the exact calculation of every matter, lest a confused reckoning cause every thing to be destroyed and pass away, 
beginning with the measure of five hundred years' distance (the distance from heaven to earth) and ending with a finger’s breadth. A day's journey is ten PARASANGS. Each PARASANG consists of four MILS. The measure of a MIL is seven and one-half RIS; the measure of a RIS is thirty rods. The measure of a rod is six cubits and a span, every cubit measures three spans. The span measures two SITS, and four finger-breadths yield a handbreadth or a SIT. And just as there is a measure for the measurement of the earth, so is there a measure for the divisions of the earth. The first is one hundred and sixty-six years and the last is a sixth of a finger’s breadth.
The great ocean is a third of the inhabited world, calculated at one hundred and sixty-six plus, and its depth is twenty-four times the width of the Red Sea. The Red Sea is seventy-two times the circuit of the river Gihon, and Gibon is sixty times the measure of Euphrates. Euphrates comprises the content of the two rivers (Hidekel and Pishon), and these two rivers exceed the Jordan in length. The Jordan extends five times the width of the metal sea in the Temple, and the Temple sea contains one hundred and fifty immersion-pools. The measure of the immersion-pool is two HOMER, according the toe dry manure. Each HOMER contains two LETEKS, each LETEK contains five EPHAHS, eachch EPHA makes ten OMERS, and every OMER contains seven-quarters and a KELAH, and the KELAH is about one hundredth part of a SEAH, and a dry- measure SEAH is one-third less than the liquid SEAH. A liquid SEAH is a third of a BATH, a BATH contains six HIN, a HIN twelve LOG; the LOG further is divided into four quarters, a quarter is the measure of each of the four cups of wine, drunk on the Feast of Redemption (Passover). The cup contains two fingers breadths square, and its height is two fingers-breadth minus a sixth.
And just as there is a measurement for the divisions of the earth so are there measures for time. The first number is six thousand years of the duration the universe and the last is a moment. The world's existence is six thousand years, which comprise five cycles (of 1078) and two parts of a cycle. A cycle consists of twenty-two jubilees, a jubilee year contains seven Sabbaths of years. And the Sabbaths of years are about twenty-two periods, and the days of a period are ninety-one and a third. The day is divided into five-hundred and seventy-six divisions, each division is further divided into as many instants, and one who is mathematically precise divides the instant into many parts.
And just as there is a definite measure for all things, so is there weight and balance for all things, beginning with a talent and ending with the small PERUTAH. The large talent weighs two MINAHS, and a MINAH amounts to sixty shekels. A shekel is considered the value of twenty-five SELAHS, halt of a SELAH is a BEKKA, and a quarter thereof is a ZUZ. A ZUZ is divided into two parts, a fifth of a ZUZ is a MAAH. A ZUZ, therefore, contains five silver MAAHS. A MAAH contains two PONDIONS and an ISAR, according to the regulation, an ISAR contains eight PERUTAHS; a BEKKA, therefore, has four-hundred PERUTAHS. These figures are recorded in writing and orally expounded.
As far as man is able to count he is permitted to measure as well as to count. According to his frailty and the paucity of his possessions has the small offering of the shekel been set for him. But God’s praise is according to His wisdom. Great is our Lord and exceedingly strong. I shall, therefore, wait for Him, whose measure and weight, wherewith He measures and weighs, are according to His greatness. All treasuries of wind He weighed with His weight, and the waters at Creation time He measured in the hollow of His hand, and meted out the high heavens with His span. All primeval mountains He weighed with His finger, and the everlasting hills He upheld with His glorious index finger. The earth with all its dust, He upheld with His middle finger. He prepared His right arm to pierce the Dragon (Pharaoh) through. Thus are all the measures of His created world sketched according to the parts of the palm of His hand, and He carries the world, stamped by His seal, on His arm as a strong man carries an amulet. No limit is there to His great, unsearchable might, by which He measured, bounded and fathomed in His heights. Above all the dimensions of His throne and His footstool (heaven and earth) is the dimension of the all-exalted Princess (Torah), surpassing in eminence, in length, breadth, depth and height. All things have a limit, but Thy broad Word has no end. The dimensions of the world are measured by the palm of His hand, but the Torah’s dimension is set between His right and left arms. The length of the world reaches from the ring-finger to the thumb, but the Torah’s length is measured by a very long line. The world measures a third of a cubit, but the Torah’s measures exceed two thousand cubit.s Just like the vision which the prophet Zechariah saw, when he beheld a scroll, twenty by ten cubit; being folded, it was forty by twenty, or eight hundred square cubits. The entire world being a third of a cubit, the Torah is two-thousand and four hundred times wider and longer. The Torah was given to the world as a healing and cure, with her right hand she apportions length of life on earth, and with her left she assigns riches and honor and blessing. She revealed all hidden secrets, she set all enumerated measures. She loosed all knots and she weighed and measured all treasures. She investigated the multitude and number of earthly beings, and she declared the number of the heavenly hosts. She estimated the height of the thousands of angels, who differ from each other in stature. Some are of a stature as great as the great sea, some as the space between heaven and earth; and others, as the fulness of the universe. Some soar through the world in two flights; some—in one flight. Each one is hidden in his own camp, standing in his compartment hushed, silent and speechless, until the King of the universe give permission. They are silent until the eternal people proclaim His sovereignty, then they break out in song to the King of the universe. And having uttered praise they do not repeat, for they plunge again into the River of Fire, whence ever-new angels, like the former, are formed, and chant praise, glorification and hymns unto God. The dome of heaven together with winged angels intone psalm, anthem, ode and song. The Seraphim, most exalted over all angels, graceful six-winged forms, stand above the Throne of Him who dwells in the seventh heaven, and chant in awe to the enthroned God, seeking to find grace by their melody. Before all the heavenly hosts they chant, proclaiming the Trisagion to the high and exalted One. Multitudes upon multitudes they kneel and prostrate themselves to Him who is glorified in the assembly of thousands of myriads of heavenly beings, and sanctified by thousands of myriads of earthly denizens, as it is recorded by Thy prophet that they called to one another, "Holy, holy, holy.’’

Musaf for Shekalim





“A BUNDLE OF HENNA-BLOSSOM IS MY BELOVED UNTO ME, FROM THE GARDENS OF ENGEDI.’’ The All-beloved, the desire of every soul, under His shadow 1 delighted to sit, there to find rest. “I sought Him but I could not find Him”— when I spoke thus in my stupidity, He turned away and was gone, without proclaiming my freedom. I defaulted in paying my shekels for my soul’s ransom, and I sank in deep mire and mud. 
Lift up, O Lord, the light of Thy countenance upon us, that we may again bring the shekel into the established and exalted Temple. By the merit of reading the Biblical portion of “Ki Tisah’’ (When you take the census), shield us with Thy shield. Thou high and exalted God.



As for the atonement money, inquire about it, search diligently in the Book, even as it is engraved in gracious words. Bring it a gift to Him who is compared to a gazelle, that He may be mindful of the merit of Abraham who said: “I am mere dust and ashes.’’ No plague or reproach shall come upon you when you shall bring this gift as atonement money.
Lift up, O Lord, the light of Thy countenance upon us, that we may again bring the shekel into the established and exalted Temple. By the merit of reading the Biblical portion of “Ki Tisa,’’quicken us with rain, Thou high and exalted God....








My Beloved, remember unto me the shekels which the Patriarch Abraham weighed unto Efron for the Cave of Machpelah in Hebron. Search out and remembber unto me, to the end of days, the shekels which David paid to the Jebusite Araunah, which caused God’s wrath to cease. Turn unto the well-ordered supplication which I utter aloud, that I may return to my fortress Jerusalem.
Lift up, O Lord, the light of Thy countenance upon us, that we may again bring the shekel into the established and exalted Temple, by the merit of reading the Biblical portion of “Ki Tisa.” Then shall we sanctify Thee, Thou holy, high and exalted God.














He will bear me on eagle’s pinions, for my upright devotions will intercede for me. I shall offer Him a gift of ransom money from that which is His, for from Him come fortune, riches, honor and wealth. To justify man, to grant him success. He set for him a ransom that he might gain happiness.
Lift up, O Lord, the light of Thy countenance upon us, that we may again bring the shekel into the established and exalted Temple. By the merit of reading the Biblical portion “Ki Tisa,” make us joyful in holy rest, O Thou high and exalted God.



In the vineyards of the Temple, on my breasts, I caused the Almighty to lodge four hundred and ten years. Here He dwelt comfortably and spoke, “It suffices,” though heaven and earth cannot contain Him. But He withdrew and took flight because I used the shekels for my own gain, and my despoilers took away my mantle from me.
Lift up, O Lord, the light of Thy countenance upon us, that we may again bring the shekel into the established and exalted Temple. By the merit of reading the Biblical portion “Ki Tisa” accept our prayers as offerings, Thou high and exalted God.






The mighty fountain of Jacob, the multitude numerous as the sand, who can number and compute them, or even hazard an estimate? God enumerated them in the Five Books, and five other times in all of Scripture. May the pure speech of our lips take the place of offerings of bullocks, since the atonement silver shekels have ceased.
Lift up, O Lord, the light of Thy countenance upon us, that we may again bring the shekel into the established and exalted Temple. By the merit of reading the Biblical portion “Ki Tisa” prosper us in Thy goodness, O Thou high and exalted God.



With goatskins bound on his hands Jacob approached to receive the blessing. He was lovingly received because of his goatskins, and the Shekhinah rejoiced. Pasture his kids in Jerusalem, the Stone of Burden. May his sheep be borne in bosoms and upon shoulders. Bow down the sons of the oppressors who crush in fury her whom Thou wilt array in a garment of excellent beauty.
Lift up, O Lord, the light of Thy countenance upon us, that we may again bring the shekel into the established and exalted Temple. By the merit of reading the Biblical portion “Ki Tisa,” bless us with peace. Thou high and exalted God.

Parashat Zachor




According to the institution of Scholars and Sages, and the teaching of learned preceptors, I open my lips with songs and hymns, to give thanks and praise to Him who dwells in the heavenly heights.
I will always make mention of the deeds which are remembered and kept in these days. The serpent that crept out from among the poisonous reptiles, his abhorring will I mention for fierce condemnation. The thorn that sprouted from briar and bramble rolled on and whirled from generation to generation. I will make mention of Esau, who by his wickedness made his father purblind; let not his sin against his mother be blotted out! For he cast off all pity, tearing his mother’s body, that she who conceived him shall no longer enjoy amorous rapture. For his grandson (Amalek) was reserved the sinful machination, frantically to wage war against those who ate the heavenly bread. He traversed a distance of four hundred PARASANG to spread his net. From Seir he journeyed and hid a trap, shame fully to mutilate those who were faint and weary. Resenting the transfer of his birthright, he intended to destroy and to sell the holy flock into everlasting slavery. His infamy is engraved with an iron pen, that he be the first of the nations to be branded with “Remember!” The Almighty was mindful of Abraham who divided his forces by night, when He caused the wicked root and branch to fall on slippery ground. 
Because he strangled those who lagged behind, God enjoined that the deeds of Amalek be remembered.
The enemy prevailed over the hindmost of the army (Dan), for the sheltering cloud excluded this tribe.
But when Amalek will be blotted out, not one shall escape. But God will shield the people protected and delivered by Him.
Blessed art Thou, 0 Lord, Shield of Abraham.

While the upright were still encamped in Rephidim, robed in finery and adorned with fine jewels, and were about to receive the Torah which was given in flames, there in Rephidim their hands became slack. Then did the oppressor gather all his rabble and assemble them round their camp. He planned to mow down like reeds and rushes the people whose feet had just come up from the Red Sea. Three times he marched out against them, traversing the land of the descendants of five nations. When the scorner was smitten, the simple man (Jethro) became prudent, and merited to range himself with the princely people. In his insolence the scorner set up a high way, and abused the pure young men with unchastity, to dishonor thereby the roundings of my thighs (Israel), to profane the peculiar people by hideous copulation. Bearing the secret grudge of his grandfather, he at first slunk forth stealthily; the second time he leaped forth with a flaming sword, and the third time, because of Israel’s guilt, he came out in open warfare. When the Babylonian (Nebuchadnezzar) overpowered the ruling people (Israel), he stood at the passes to betray the fugitives,
declaring: “Come, let us annihilate those who stumble,’’ even as in ancient times he smote all that were enfeebled.
May Thine enemies be covered with shame, even as they rejoiced at my fall during the drought (at Rephidim),
when Thou wilt put on Thy ten garments of splendor to cause the rain of life to descend as a balm upon her that is lame.
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, Who quickenest the dead.
The chieftains of my tormentor, the grandson of Esau, those descendants of the sons of Seir, hastened, with their straw to consume me in fire, and in tumult ploughed my city under like a field. Thou wast not mindful of Israel, the great nation; why then, didst Thou remember their sins? The bannered hosts (of Israel) Thou didst sell cheaply; the holy ones were offered in exchange of harlots and wine. Remember this against the Edomites who burned the Temple, the oppressors who battered my walls, shouting arrogantly, “Raze them, raze them, to the ground!” Thou, with whom there is no forgetfulness, ever be mindful of their furious wrath, and be cause they knew not to do right, seal their fate for the day of retribution. The law set forth in the Torah proves that it will be remembered and not forgotten, 
on the day when He will come to contend with them. For Thou didst command Thy people, “Do not forget!”
The blasphemer (Amalek) laid a snare to injure the hosts that were marked with the sign of the covenant. He was requited for it measure for measure;
that all may know that at the time of Thy pleasure he will be punished in the name of the Lord of hosts.
THE LORD SHALL REIGN FOR EVER, THY GOD, O ZION, THROUGH ALL GENERATIONS, HALLELUYAH. THOU ART HOLY, O THOU THAT ART ENTHRONED UPON THE PRAISES OP ISRAEL.
O Lord, with the same expression with which Thou didst charge Thy followers “Remember!”, with that very expression they remind Thee, “Pray, remember Thou!” and if they, as humans, have been faithless to the covenant. Thou art God and not human, why dost Thou not remember? I know, indeed, that Thou art able to remember, but my soul is depressed until Thou wilt remember. What strength have I to wait for that time? How long can I be patient until Thou dost remember? If Thou wilt not remember for my sake, remember, then for Thy sake and for Jerusalem’s sake. Remember the testimony (Torah) “For it shall not be forgotten.” “If I forget thee, O Jerusalem” — now do Thou remember her! O remember the torments with which the enemy afflicted me. Shut his arrogant mouth; let him stagger as one drunk. And ne’er again deliver up those called Thy first-born sons,
that were bought by Thee for a LETECH and a KOR (Hosea 3:2). Then will I memorialize Thy glory and seek Thy favor, with the reading of the Scriptural section ZACHOR (Remember).
LIVING AND ENDURING, AWE-INSPIRING, EXALTED AND HOLY!
The thorn, son of a thorn (Amalek), hurried on to cut in pieces my rearguard, and to crush the bruised ones with his shattering speech. When the blasphemer came to outrage them he staggered and was browbeaten, as he urged his warriors to attack with arrows, to pounce on them as a hawk upon a bird. When God broke the sheltering cloud above their heads to exclude some individuals he began his attack. He took off and came again to plough upon my back. He was ordained and named the head, the chief of the malevolent nations, the arch traitor, whose viper’s spawn (Haman) was hanged on the chosen cypress tree. He ran and met by the way those who were enfeebled and exhausted from the road, and spoke: “This is not the way!” They wandered in the wilderness, in a desert way. Against Dan, "The serpent in the way,” he stretched forth his hand, and against the “roundings of the thighs” (Israel); and on every crossroad he cut down all who passed by the way. He rushed headlong, he flew in haste, and out of his hole the viper crept, engendered from the germ of the serpent. He babbled and muttered, and observed the horoscope of his birth. But he was deceived by his sorcery, was forcefully felled and benumbed. Moab deceived him by his own sorceries, and with his own witchcraft confounded him. He retarded the day, and mowed him down, he made the sun stand still and laid him ingloriously low. On and on he strove, but he was given no respite; shameful defeat was his portion. Until the setting of the sun he lingered, when he and his hosts were wiped out. He railed and gnashed his teeth, shrieking abuses and filling his nostrils with stench. He unsheathed his sword and tore at the mark of the covenant throwing it up on high and spitting insolently at the Name that is wafted like sweet scent. The Lord, the merciful God. commanded Moses who was humble like a gazelle, to make his memory like scattered ashes, by writing down Amalek's shame in the Torah, in The Prophets and in The Writings, that his memory be blotted out from the Book and that he never be inscribed with those who are inscribed for life in the Book.
Forever shalt Thou be adored and eternally sanctified, and fore’er and aye shalt Thou reign in exaltation, O God: revered, great and holy King. For Thou art the King of kings whose kingdom is enduring. Proclaim His wondrous works, recount His might; glorify Him, ye His hosts, sanctify Him, exalt in hymn, song and praise His awesome grandeur.
Remember, therefore, how Amalek treated you! 
Blot out his name, his very memory obliterate, that he ne'er be mentioned in the record of the Holy One. 
Because he betrayed. and acted outrageously, he shall not be remembered in the record of the Holy One.
Remember the man (Esau) who caused the Patriarch (Abraham) to expire before his time. By murder, stealing and debauchery he terrified him and abscinded five years from his life Remember him, who contemned his brother’s favor. scorning him who was paying his last respects to his grandfather. He was like one hearing reproach on one in distress. Remember him who violated a betrothed girl in the field; who shed blood on returning from the field, who deceived his father (Isaac) who meditated in the field. Remember him who turned a deaf ear to exhortation; who contemned the birthright for the sake of a cup of indignation; who cast off God’s yoke and effaced the sin of the covenant. Remember the man who by his insolence and crookedness darkened the light of his father with the smoke of idolatrous sacrifice and cruelly harbored revenge against his brother. Remember him who prostituted himself like a woman; whose pride of heart provoked him to such depravity: his mighty men shall therefore be broken like a woman in her pangs. Remember the seed of evildoers. loathsome and tainted, who set out to destroy the smooth one (Jacob) with a shout of exaltation, arrogantly hiding a net to destroy the brother. Remember him from whom AmaLEK budded forth, who like a locust swept on to destroy my nation, who shattered my mighty men to LICK their blood in the sight of all! Remember the madman, bereft of sense, who came down, crushed and destroyed my people; thus has he incurred the penalty of destruction. Remember him who dwelt in the South, unrestrained like a wild-ass, how he changed his dress and speech to appear as the King of Arad, and hastened in tumult to take captives. Remember the fool who repeated his folly, and came up to war allied with Midian; but Jerubaal (Gideon) soon uncovered his villainy. Remember that Thou didst order his utter extermination, not leaving root or branch; that Saul, son of Kish was punished for sparing a root. Remember the debauchery of the chained Agag; who ravished women whom his sword made childless; so was his mother bereaved as he was backed to pieces end given to ostriches. Remember the king (Saul) who determined to snare him; he was deprived of his kingdom and removed from the rank of princes, for the sprout that was spared grew up as a thorn. Remember how Ziklag and the South were raided by Amalek who dwelt in the South: he was slain by the young man who was handsome in appearance, playing on a harp (David). Remember the ruthless tyrant who concealed himself among the Ammonites, who was brought to En-Gedi to destroy my vineyard; they were consumed by one another by their own flaming swords. Remember him who in his fury scattered the fugitives, when my hosts went to seek refuge in Mount Seir; he was zealous to avenge the hatred of the hairy one (Esau). Remember him who stood at the passes to deliver up my fugitives; he stood at the turn of the roads to aid my oppressors; he pursued and delivered into their hands my dispersed and downtrodden ones. Remember him who leapt up to the Gate of Heaven (Temple): who stormed and shouted; “Who is over me in heaven!” High in dominion he swelled up to Heaven. Remember him who came to the hypocritical king to destroy the Jewish kingdom—Shimshai—whose sun was nearing eclipse—who slandered the pure one (Israel) to discourage her from construction. Remember him who weighed out ten thousand talents (Haman), who begot and raised up a hundred plants (sons), ten of whom he appointed to high office. Remember him who asked (the king) to destroy the Five Books of die Torah; he set a whole year to make an end of the orderly people; at the end of the seventy days he was hanged on the flfty-cubit gallows.
And thus may sanctification ascend unto Thee; for Thou art the Holy One of Israel, the Savior!
Keep not still, O God, Thy voice was heard as the sound of the roaring bellows when Thou didst proclaim and command Thy people in the Torah, Thy possession:
“Remember how Amalek treated you, how he fell upon you, and cut off all who flagged. Therefore when the Lord your God has given you rest, you shall blot out his memory from all your territory.” But Israel respond and say unto Thee — Thy own words they fling back at Thee with interest: We pray Thee, fulfill Thou the word which Thou hast spoken! While Thou dost command us; “Remember!”, remember Thou what they have done to Thee! Remember, O Lord, the day of the destruction of Thy Temple, when the enemy insolently spoke: “What dost Thou here?” and they filled Thy nostrils with their stench to defile Thee. Remember Thy great and glorious Throne which they cast down and dishonored in Thy presence, as they sent up Thy Temple in flames and devastated all Thy borders; they ravaged and plucked up Thy Tent — pagans that Thou didst forbid to enter Thy community. They conspired; “Come, let us blot them out till they be no more a nation for Thy sake, and no more shall Thy glorious Name be mentioned, upon whom the hapless put their trust!” Yes, more than they had done to us they did to Thee. Against us they fought in the wilderness; against Thee they waged war on inhabited land. Us they harassed outside the camp; against Thee they raged within the camp. Of us they violated those whom the cloud cast out; of Thee —they tore off the overshadowing cover of Thy Holy Ark. Of us they cut off those who were thrust out by the cloud; as for Thee, they weened to ascend to the heights of the clouds. Against us they rose outside of the barrier; against Thee they forced their way to the Holy of Holies. Us they destroyed far from the Holy City; Thee they shended within Thy dwelling. Us they cut down out side of our habitation; Thee they have battered in the place of Thy habitation. From our flesh they tore the sign of the covenant; Thy ten mighty Words of the Covenant they swept away. Against us they rose when Moses lowered his hands; against Thee they arrogantly raised their hands. Against us they plotted and secretly conspired; Thy Mysterious Cherubim they removed ignominiously. But Thou, O Lord, are enthroned on high forever; while he inhabits over against Thee below. He has seized the wasteland as well as the inhabited land, thinking in his heart; “I am supreme!” If Thou wilt not arise and give heed, in a thirteen-fold rising, to devise and visit vengeance with scare and snare upon the inhabitant, — if Thou wilt not, then wilt Thou be considered like a stranger. Yet, he who would attenpt to compute and calculate, to comprehend and excogitate the marvelous End of Time, his intellectual power would fail him; he would find no answer, and dumb with silence he would hold his peace. Only with faith would he soothe his soul, recalling to mind: “Till the Lord look forth and attend.” I am considered like a false witness who continually devises falsehood; my soul is sore affrighted and horror-stricken. And Thou, O Lord, how long wilt Thou behold and be still? Remember Thy holy Temple which is desolate; everyone that passes by it shudders. O when wilt Thou lift and exalt Thyself, to establish the word of Thy mouth; to disconcert Amalek with Thy threefold determination; to blot out their memory with a threefold death; to obscure their light in three days of thick darkness; to brand them with seven days of wrath; to destroy them with ten varieties of destruction. As they have prevented the holy people from avowing the Ten Commandments and the very old seven Noahidic commandments, so may they be intoxicated with ten and seven poisonous draughts. And a heavenly voice will resound from heaven and peal throughout all camps, proclaiming aloud the prophetic declaration; “Remember ye not the former things,” but reflect on the later deliverances. Make mention with exultant joy how Amalek came and disturbed the camps, and destroyed the report of your invincibility among the nations, so that his fame spread throughout the nations. Behold now and publish it how he was abruptly blotted out in all comers. And upon the host of the high heaven, upon whom Amalek leaned for support, Gid will requite the guilt; after many days they will be called to account, and flung into hideous hell. And the multitude of me nations and all tongues will take up dirges over both helper and accomplice; “The helper has stumbled, the accomplice has fallen,” they lament. Then will every living form know that Thou hast not forgotten, and every living creature will understand that Thou hast cast their name into oblivion. For Thou didst punish Seir and his rulers, and didst rebuke Amalek and his potentates, and didst bring them into judgment. Then will the people Thou wert mindfiil of be remembered, for Thou didst remember them unto good and in their good remembrance Thou hast triumphed.
The redeemed of the Lord shall declare; “So perish all Thy foes, O Lord.” And they who stand by night in the Lord’s house, and they who are planted in the Lord’s house, shall behold the Lord’s goodness and shall declare; “There is none holy as the Lord”; “Happy is everyone who reveres the Lord”; "It is good to give thanks unto the Lord”; “to rely on the Lord”; "Rejoice, ye just in the Lord”; “Singing, Give thanks unto the Lord”; ‘For they are the seed which the Lord has blessed”; “This is the day which the Lord has made”; “For the Lord is a great God,” “Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord,” “I will greatly rejoice in the Lord.” Even if all-festivals should be annulled, the Purim days will not be abolished, nor will the memorial of them perish from the God-fostered people. They will ever be remembered for redemption, joy, delight and gladness. They will reveal the marvelous works of God, and magnify the might of His tremendous acts. All, whether they sing or dance, will intune His paeans with ten forms of ten-stringed instruments, with psalteries and harps; they will praise Him with ten forms of praise, and exult with ten forms of rejoicing. And the sublime, holy Seraphim will ask them, as a scholar asks his master: “What has the God of all gods done?” For Israel shall be on the unside and the angels will clear the way before them, standing from without, while Israel are in the Innermost Presence, finding shelter in the shadow of the Almighty. And with the five sounds of joy reserved for them they will sound the voices of rejoicing and salvation which are preserved in the tents of the righteous, who meditate on the Torah, more precious than pearls. The singers (Israel) go before, the minstrels (angels) follow after, to learn how they sing. Under the shadow of the mighty shield-shaped skin of Leviathan will they be protected; under its pinions will they find shelter. Over Israel’s walls thee angels will be set as keepers and watchmen, at attention day and night, to proclaim the holiness of the faithful people, to glorify the memory of the nation that proclaims “Amen!” They call themselves by the name Israel and devotedly they declare thrice "Holy is God” —two times thus crowning the heads of the sons while one holy crown they prepare for the head of their King. Prepared with the Trisagion they set up the complete Throne and the complete Name. The threefold “Holy” the initiated will then call out as of yore by the Glorious Name, calling directly one to another, even as they now call the Holy One by the appellation. Lord. As it is written by the hand of Thy prophet, “And one called unto another and said; Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts.”

Parashat Parah




According to the institution of Scholars and Sages, and the teaching of learned preceptors, I open my lips with songs and hymns, to give thanks and to praise Him who is in the heavenly heights.
In the Torah, the nurseling of God, tried and purified, in the fountains thereof, is this mysterious law (of the Red heifer) enclosed, enwrapped, concealed, incased. In fitly spoken words it is engraved, clear and well impressed. The ashes (of the heifer) shall be kept for preservation. It is a sevenfold crown, well purified. The statute is firm: purity is attained from impurity! It is stamped in the comprehensible Torah, yet this law is far from comprehension! A most noble doctrine, yet enigmatic, impenetrable! 
The stains of the beautiful (people) are thereby washed away: for the purification of the beloved nation has this law been engraved. God will reveal its place; He will uncover its profundities,
when He will reveal Himself and exalt those shielded by Him.
Blessed art Thou, 0 Lord, Shield of Abraham.

In Marah He had decreed this statute; on Mount Sinai was this command enjoined. The faithful shepherd (Moses) hearkened attentively to it. He was, therefore, forever crowned with its crown. He girded himself with strength to make a path in its mysteries. He gazed at its fruits and they seemed strange to him. He, therefore, enacted it as a statute to the scattered people, so that the crooked infidel mislead them not insidiously. With great finesse was the heifer’s entwined hair examined. Its preparation was made by the assistant (of the High Priest) arrayed in twined linen. 
It was reserved for the purification of the people helped by God. Thus did God command the messenger (Moses): "Seal up the secret message and give it to Elazar.”
The world and the fullness thereof are Thine; Thou didst delight to purify Thy people.
I will, therefore, wait for Thee, to cause the rain of life to descend upon Thy creatures who are incased in the earth.
Blessed art Thou, 0 Lord, who quickenest the dead.
The obscure statute of the precious doctrine, wrapped in rare light, do Thou reveal to Thy worthy people, that it might comprehend its essentials. To them that hunger to uncover the mysterious ordinances, uncover Thou these regulations. To them that thirst to imbibe its enigmas reveal the testimonies. 0 purify the stain of the bannered hosts. Thou Refiner and Purifier. Hasten to wash them again, to cleanse them from their sin. Thou shalt be called Priest when Thou wilt purify the priestly nation with hyssop.
Sprinkle pure water upon us, as a ministering priest, in place of the blood taken by Elazar the priest.
THE LORD SHALL REIGN FOR EVER, THY GOD, O ZION, THROUGH ALL GENERATIONS, HALLELUYAH. THOU ART HOLY, O THOU ART ENTHRONED UPON THE PRAISES OF ISRAEL.
“I said: ‘I will penetrate its mystery’ but it was far from me.” Thus spoke Solomon concerning this statute. In the Torah which is not beyond understanding nor beyond reach, this statute is beyond understanding and out of reach. It began with judgment and statute, and it concluded with law and statute. It is engraved in the Written Law and inscribed in the Oral Law. It is higher than heaven, deeper than the netherworld. From the inhabitants of the earth its path is hidden. It is, therefore, impossible to comprehend its mystery or to reach its foundation. The end thereof is unsearchable, its doctrine cannot be grasped by lot. Its worth cannot be known, its way cannot be understood. God alone understands the way thereof,
LIVING AND ENDURING, AWE-INSPIRING, EXALTED AND HOLY!
Treasured up and reserved, hidden and unexplained, is the statute of the Biblical portion, which is read annually. Even to the Heads of the Assemblies its enigmas are impenetrable, and all souls yearn to grasp its subtleties. Well-ordered it is, and guarded, well-defined and precise, deliberated and discussed by inference from minor to major. God delivered it to the humble one (Moses) in His brilliant heavenly abode, and enlightened his eyes with His flowing fountains (of knowledge). He was perplexed when he heard the beginning of the Mishnah (Parah): “The Red Heifer must be two years old; the heifer (whose neck was broken, Deuteronomy 21) one year old.” The messenger (Moses) entreated as he heard this teaching: “May there blossom forth from me one who will teach this law in its time.” God explained to him its procedure, and taught him the laws, the well-ordered and practicable laws: how to examine it, how to sprinkle its blood; not to fail to expound any detail to this people. At the command: “Say unto the priests,” Moses’ shining face became pale: but God clearly instructed him again and enlightened his eyes. For, when he was told: “For the unclean they shall take (of the ashes),” he was seized with terror and exclaimed: “How can purity arise from impurity? Firm is the dictum of the law: The Red Heifer renders every one clean unclean; how, then, can it remove the spirit of uncleanness?” Then God said to him: “A statute I have instituted, why do you labor to understand it? It is deeper than the netherworld; how can you fathom it? Let the ashes of the Red Heifer come to cleanse the impurity of the son of the heifer (golden calf), that it be an atonement for the stubborn heifer (Israel).” 
In the words: “They shall take unto you” it was intimated to Moses that his heifer would remain continually, “for the ashes of all the heifers will be used up, and yours will remain forever.”
O God, forever shalt Thou be adored and eternally sanctified, and for ever and aye shalt Thou reign in exaltation, O God, revered, great and holy King. For Thou are the King of kings whose kingdom is enduring. Proclaim His wondrous works, recount His might; glorify Him, ye His hosts, sanctify Him, exalt in hymn, song and praise His awesome grandeur.
To purify the impure, to defile the pure—it was appointed by the Holy One.
Its teaching is sifted and refined; it is distinguished in its regulation from the heifer whose neck is broken (Deuteronomy 21). It arose like a leafy-tree for healing. It is interpreted with sevenfold seven interpretations. There were seven sprinklings, seven finger-dippings, and seven washings. There were seven heifers (from Moses to the end of the Second Temple), seven priests, seven days of purification and seven of impurity. The elders of the Hall of Hewn Stones (Sanhedrin), the perfect, unblemished ones, examined every hidden spot that there be no blemish in it, that it be pure for the blushing, unblemished people. Out of the priest’s possessions a causeway was made for the heifer, with an arch directly above each pier, to lead out thereby with glorious splendor the unblemished heifer, which blotted out the sins of the perfect community. His assistants went out with him to the Mount of Olives. The priest hastened to immerse himself a second time, in defiance of them (the Sadducees), who pitted themselves against this, and without delay he arranged the pile. He stood in the East with his face to the West; he slaughtered the heifer, and did not mix the blood He kindled the fire with dry twigs so that the flames flared up. He stepped toward the East gate and sprinkled the blood seven times, glancing at the cedarwood, hyssop and scarlet wool. He called out loud: "Is this cedarwood? Is this hyssop?” He beat (the cinders) and divided (the ashes) into three parts; one part was distributed among the Courses of the priests; (one part was kept on the Mount of Olives); one part was kept on the Rampart to be preserved until He would raise those who are incased in the ground.
And thus may sanctification ascend unto Thee, for Thou art the Holy One of Israel, the Savior!
The potency of Thy wonders cannot be uttered;  the profundities of Thy laws cannot be explained The might of Thy deeds cannot be comprehended; the depth of Thy marvels cannot be disclosed. The secret of Thy rules cannot be pierced; the arcanum of Thy deep lessons cannot be searched out The totality of Thy praises cannot be told; the mystery of Thy testimonies cannot be revealed The explicit are obscure; the plain are occult The clear are sealed; the well-taught inscrutable. The deeply engraved are merely sketched; the defective are full of meaning; the forbidden are permitted; the dark are bright; the exposed are covered. The particulars are treasured; the general are withheld, and the minor are major. Thou bringest forth the precious out of the vile, the permitted out of the forbidden, and out of the impure Thou dost accord pure. In place of suet the fat of the heart (is permitted) and instead of blood, the milt and liver, rich in blood; and in place of the mixture of meat and milk the udder filled with milk. Of blended garments (wool and linen)— the blue thread of wool in a linen garment. It is forbidden to marry a brother's wife, but one is obliged to marry a brother's childless widow. Another man's wife is forbidden, but one is permitted to marry the good-looking war-captive. That which is permitted becomes forbidden, and that which is forbidden be comes permitted. The unclean becomes clean and the clean—unclean. A white spot on a small part (of the skin) renders impure; if it breaks out on the whole body it does not render impure. If the foetus died in its mother's body it does not render unclean; if it left the body, it renders it unclean. The atonement he-goat atones for all uncleanness, yet it renders unclean the garments of all who occupy themselves with it The red heifer renders unclean those who prepare it; yet it is appointed to cleanse all impurity. The ashes thereof become a source of impurity of the first degree; yet they cleanse the source of all impurity (a corpse).
It is therefore impossible to comprehend the mystery of Thy Torah, neither Thy pure commands nor Thy refined decrees. One cannot modify nor reverse. One cannot be hypercritical nor cavil. Nothing can be known and nothing can be made known. It is deeper than the nether-world; how can you know it? The ways thereto waver, you cannot know them. One precept is given by command, one by decree. One is given for a small assembly, another for public discourse. One can be comprehended by light application, one by ardent striving. One must be kept secret, the other must be explained. One must be interpreted, the other passed over in silence. A commandment that is marked as astute one must not search to know wherefore it was instituted, for so it had been given by a sealed Divine Kiss. All of them are plain to him that understands; every thoughtful man will comprehend them, except the reasons for the law of the red heifer, which are incomprehensible. Even a man of great wisdom is too poor to grasp them; all the transactions thereof are beyond comprehension. It is called by (five names as the number of) the books of the Torah. It is different from every other offering, for all offerings are male and this one is female, to cleanse the stain of the abominable golden calf.
They (Israel) changed their Glory for the son of a heifer, and they were unruly toward Him like a stubborn heifer; let his mother come—a heifer—and be for atonement to the people. They were flushed and red in face, their bodies were ruddier than rubies — let his red-faced mother come and through her will God, who is “White and Ruddy," favor and befriend them. They formed it to stand up like a perfect image, thus they incurred guilt; no more were they perfect!—let his mother come, the most perfect of perfect (offerings), and thereby will the Rock, the Perfect One, purify the perfect people. They bowed down to the graven image, an idol full of blemishes, and they were punished thereby to become blemished (invalids), — let his mother come, in which there is no blemish, to rinse the blood of the fair people in whom there is no blemish. They planned to commit a trespass by the calf; they sacrificed to it and cast off God’s yoke;—let his mother come upon whom no yoke was laid, and be placed on their shoulders like a yoke. They gathered round the priest concerning the calf, and the priest was threatened with destruction; let his mother come and be given to the priest, that through her the sin of the priest be expiated.
And as the golden calf was burnt in fire, so shall she be burnt in fire. And just as the calf was ground into powder, so shall she be ground into dust. And just as the calf’s dust was cast in the water, so shall her ashes be cast into the water. And just as through the calf three thousand of the upright people did fall, so do they let fall therein three instruments of purification (hyssop, cedarwood, and scarlet thread) And as the calf sullied the pure people, so shall she render any one who touches it unclean. And as God absolved the people sullied by the golden calf, so shall she purify the man who became impure. And as the sin of the calf was distributed, kept to be requited in part of every generation, so shall the ashes be kept for the water of purification, to rinse the blood, to wash away stains, to cleanse impurities; to wash the filthy, to whiten the (blood-red) sins, to purify the impure, to hallow the consecrated people, to justify them that are borne by God. With cedar wood for them that are leafy like a cedar tree; with hyssop, for them that are lowly like the hyssop; with scarlet for the people whose lips are like scarlet; with the humor of the worm for those to whom it was said “Fear not puny worm.’’ Let him who towers as a cedar tree not pride himself; for if he humble himself not as a hyssop and consider himself as a puny worm, he will not become pure through the hyssop and the scarlet thread. And if he will not pour out his heart like water he will not become pure by the sprinkling of water. For how can grass that withers be arrogant toward God, the all-consuming flame? How can the proud sprout be overbearing against God who is greatly exalted? He rides through heavens in glory; He is exalted over all the presumptuous; majestic over all the lordly. He uplifts Himself like a cedar tree over the proud, and is humble like the hyssop to the lowly. He created in His world five species of power-endowed creatures: the bull among domestic animals, the lion among the wild beasts, the eagle among the winged creatures, man over all, and the King is exalted over all, clothed in majesty more than they all. He graved them in the fire-sparkling Throne, four on the heavenly Throne and one (the cedar tree) on the earthly Throne (the Temple). For the heavenly Throne is directly opposite the earthly Throne, Temple opposite Temple, Sanctuary opposite sanctuary. Dwelling opposite dwelling. Altar opposite altar. Sons of God (angels) opposite sons of God (Israel), Servants opposite servants, Angels opposite angels, Ministers opposite ministers. Hosts opposite hosts, Cherubim opposite cherubim, Thousands opposite thousands, Myriads opposite myriads. Holy beings opposite holy beings. Camps opposite camps. Adorers opposite adorers, Sanctifiers opposite sanctifiers; all these proclaim the threefold Sanctification to the Holy God!

Parashat HaChodesh




According to the institution of Scholars and Sages, and the teaching of learned preceptors, I open my lips with songs and hymns, to give thanks and to praise Him who dwells in the heavenly heights.
When the time of love (redemption) arrived, Egypt was scourged with one and ten plagues. When the outpoured prayer of those who rest in Machpelah reached God, He darted forth, and His people found rest. God looked from His heavenly lattice and applied a healing bandage to her who was wallowing in mingled blood. He skipped over time to accomplish great deeds, to increase both the new and the old. Swiftly He flew and changed the ap pointed time. He started up as from a sleep and awakened as from slumber.
Yearningly He knocked at the doors of the sleeper (Israel) to free her on the first of the months of the year. 0 shield me yet again, sparing and shielding,
when Thou shieldest Lebanon (the Temple) with the shield of the enduring Messiah.
Blessed art Thou, 0 Lord, Shield of Abraham.

Those who bore the burdensome yoke of the heifer (Egypt) Thou didst rescue from pain and didst show them Thy wonders. Their cry hastened the time of the marvels—the four hundred years were cut to two hundred and ten. The lamb caught in the thicket for the offering of the Patriarch (Isaac) was marked for remembrance and kept in trust. For when the people borne by God were nearing the time of safety the merit of that lamb was reserved as a gift for them. To perform miracles in the sight of the Fathers God ordered that the lamb be bound with cords already by the tenth of this month.
The crossing of the Jordan (on the tenth of Nisan) was presaged and foreseen by the order of a lamb for each household.
Would that we continued to hearken unto Thee, that we might draw from the fountains of salvation.
Restore unto us the joy of Thy salvation and may we be worthy of the quickening of our bodies....
Blessed art Thou, 0 Lord, who quickenest the dead. 
The bringing of the bound offering (Isaac) was kept in eternal remembrance. The flame of the divided pieces (Genesis 15, 17) was to consume Egypt. When the petition of the slumbering Patriarchs pleased Him; when the people wallowed in mingled blood. He hastened and brought near the End, to stir up war against the dragon (Egypt). The knowledge of the contribution for the Paschal lamb, which they who were passed over had slaughtered, contributed to destroy the Egyptians, to cut them down and burn them like thorn-bushes, so that the people, few in number, might prove the inanity of idols.
And in order that the glorious majesty of the King shall not be diminished it was indicated that one should join with his neighbor if any household was too small.
This month ye shall keep by the agreement of the Temple Assembly (Sanhedrin). God will be in accord with them to observe therein the three signs (vernal equinox, ripening of fruit and grain). He regards this month when it appears, for He appointed it for signs and wonders 
for His beloved, His holy folk, whom His right hand and His holy arm have saved....
May Thy footstool (Temple), which the (man who sold his birthright for a) pot of lentils dashed to the ground, be rebuilt anew this day in full splendor.
We shall then bring offerings into the Temple on the first day of the first month.
THE LORD SHALL REIGN FOR EVER, THY GOD, O ZION, THROUGH ALL GENERATIONS, HALLELUYAH. THOU ART HOLY, O THOU THAT ART ENTHRONED UPON THE PRAISES OF ISRAEL.
Much hast Thou accomplished, computed and calculated. Thou didst plan to consummate Thy deeds according to the course of the moon. For signs and for sacred seasons its lot Thou didst make fair. For circuits and cycles Thou didst appoint its revolutions. At the end of two thousand four hundred and forty-eight years (since Creation) Thou didst declare its time, and thou didst intercalate nine hundred intercalary months. This day Thou didst point out to the people Thou hast chosen. Thou didst, therefore, exalt this month over every month, investigated its number, explored its form, opened its source, surveyed its won ders, esteemed its festival, and by it Thou wast honored and glorified,
LIVING AND ENDURING, AWE-INSPIRING, EXALTED AND HOLY!
The father of all prophets (Moses) implored in the vision wherein it was said to him: “Behold the form of this new moon,” that he might perceive the form at its birth, the beginning there of, the duration of its full moon, to the last appearance. God approached to show it to him, but Moses did not apprehend its likeness, until He pointed thereto with His finger; then did Moses discern and descry it. If it gleams after the sixth hour (of the day) then can its form be relied upon; before the sixth hour it is dim to all eyes. Those who catch sight of it (the new moon) must be examined, and the witnesses must be investigated. Those who speak the truth are esteemed; those who deceive are severely punished. He set a measure for him by which to measure its thickness; even a hairsbreadth is sufficient for the judges at the gate to receive the testimony. He made clearly known to him the regulations of the new moon which he should explain to the just nation and teach the men of discernment, to determine the three Pilgrimage Festivals, to calculate time, how to establish intercalations, and to attend to the heavenly counsel. Holy angels stood before God, to render the testimony of the new moon. He wrapped Himself in sacred vestments, even as those who declare the new moon hallowed. God examined the witnesses before Moses, care fully investigated their testimony in His camp:then all exclaimed in His heavenly abode: “The New Moon is hallowed in its time!” The end of the course (of Adar) fell exactly on the fourth day of the week at noon; and until after thirty hours the new moon was not clearly visible. The messenger (Moses) was dejected and distressed, and wavered whether he should count the first day (of Nisan) from noon to noon. God, however, explained to him distinctly, that the first day must be reckoned from evening to evening. The birth of the sun and moon fell on exactly the same day, and, just as when they were first created, they found themselves in one heavenly course.
The beloved (Israel) fixed the tradition as it was given them, to calculate, to intercalate, and to declare hallowed according to the mathematical result they found.
O God! Forever shalt Thou be adored and eternally sanctified, and fore’er and ave shalt Thou reign in exaltation, O God, revered, great and holy King. For Thou art the King of kings whose kingdom is enduring. Proclaim His wondrous works, recount His might; glorify Him, ye His hosts, sanctify Him, exalt in hymn, song and praise His awesome grandeur.
It is the first month to YOU, to pass over YOU, that there may be sanctified among YOU, the Holy God!
To you it is the FIRST, you who, like the apple of His eye, are guarded FIRST, that you may glorify Him who is last and FIRST, the Holy God!
From the beginning of time the Lord instituted this month to be the first. Yet He did not reveal this knowledge in the Book of the Creation of the first man. To YOU He revealed it first, how you should calculate it. It must be calculated at the vernal equinox This knowledge is concealed from any people or tongue; it was not even delivered to Adam, the first man. To Sarah was announced in this month the time of her bliss; at this period blossomed forth he who was bound for the offering (Isaac). Her children were therefore given good tidings in this month. The month which was not revealed to the ancestors was reserved to store up therein the new as well as the old, and it was appointed the head of the four New Year days. This month sets the sacred seasons for the bannered hosts (Israel); therein assemble the “eyes” (leaders) of the people who send out messengers on foot (to announce the sanctification of the month) By it is determined the yearly reign of kings, and the festivals are thereby determined. Intercalations are made to keep the New Moon (of Nisan) in its proper time, so that therein meet the ripening of the fruit and grain and the vernal equinox; these three together indicate the sign to support the intercalation. It is hallowed and observed in its beginning; in its third (the tenth day); in its half and the following day. Hallowed is the New Moon; the Paschal lamb is taken on the tenth; the celebration begins on the fifteenth; on the sixteenth the Omer is reaped; the rest of the month is completed in holiness. It is marked in every generation; it is reserved for him who rides on an ass (Messiah, Zechariah 9,9). The merit of keeping the third thereof (the tenth day) stood by them on the Jordan; the merit of the middle thereof sent a flame, destroying the tumultuous multitude of the Assvrians (2 Kings, 19,35). The merit of reaping the Omer raised up their salvation through the Benjaminite (Mordecai).
And thus may the sanctification ascend unto Thee; for Thou art the Holy One of Israel, the Savior!
God is called the Chief, the First, and His Word (Torah) is called the Chief, the First. This festival is called chief, the first; the chosen Temple is called the chief, the first. Israel. His nation, is called the chief, the first, and their enemy (Amalek) is called the chief, the first. Their friend (Abraham) is called the chief, the first, and their Redeemer is called the chief, the first. Behold the appointed one (Messiah) will come as chief and first, at the chief and foremost time, to pass foremost before them, to establish the exalted Temple on the chief and foremost mountain. With Him was he (Messiah) created chief and foremost, to destroy the remnants of ruddy Esau, who was chief and foremost, to arouse the rocks (Patriarchs), who were hewn out chief and fore most to accomplish new things on the chief and foremost month, to atone, by the new gifts, the choicest first fruits, to bring offerings to God, the Foremost the First.
The first things will not be remembered any more, for new things will be renewed for the old, divers miracles and wonders. All who sleep (in death) shall awaken, and chant all sorts of hymns and songs. Men shall no longer say “As God lives, who brought them up by a prophet” but “As surely as God lives who brought them up and brought them in.” God will then roar like a lion as He directs my battle, and brings new tidings by the prophet (Elijah) of the tribe of Levi, to reinvigorate my heart and to renew my spirit within me. He will cause the bud that is called by seven names (Messiah) to sprout, and with him will come seven shepherds (Micah 5, 4); and the seven holy objects will be restored to the people, and seven weeks will he be concealed from them. ...
He will then again reveal himself to the holy people, to all who have preserved themselves in holiness with him, but to all the holy flock only after the end of six months, until the coming of the first of the new moons. Then will he become visible to the holy congregation, who were left over, freed from the yoke of the dissolute, and he will show them new, marvelous signs. He will create a new heaven: he will anoint the Holy of Holies; he will open the Temple gates for the holy on Sabbaths and New Moons. He will then order the renewal of the New Moon service, what should be offered on every new moon; and the service of the first new month will have precedence over all months. For as it was formerly the head of all months, so it will ever be the chief of all months.
Thereon a new thing will happen: a new earth will be created, a new law will be given, a new covenant will be made, a new rebirth of man, and a new spirit will be renewed in him, and a new gift, a new offering will be brought thereon. Sun and moon will gain new splendor, their light will shine in a sevenfold brillance; at the two equinoxes it will be renewed. He will confine His presence within the new Temple gate, and it shall be called by a new name, as the name of the city ever since the sanctified day. A new heart will be bestowed upon the people, that they might sing a new song, a song splendid and new, praised and sanctified above all songs.
For the song of the angels, who chant hymns and praises, do not commence before this song; and the heavenly choirmasters, who shout with joyous exultation, utter no sound before this song. And the chant of the spheres, which, if given leave, would disperse everything before it, their crowning chant is not heard before this song. And the awe-inspiring Cherubim, standing in array like youths, do not glorify before this song. And the splendent Ophanim, endowed with a four-fold countenance, do not adore before this song. And the multitudinous Hosts who proclaim God's majesty, do not assemble before this song. And the mysterious Watchers (angels) who burn like burnished bronze, do not glorify before this song.
And the intoning Holy Ones who each morning are newly-fashioned, do not sanctify before this song. And the roaring Shineanim, who never change their modes, make no sound before this song. And the dreadful Seraphim, who in an instant could burn everything, do not move before this song. For all camps of the holy Ministers minister unto His servants (Israel); yea, the multitude of the angelic hosts pledge allegiance to the sweet-singers (Israel). The nimble troops of sparkling beings fortify their strength; and the brilliant, swift lightnings enlighten their faces. The angels tarry outside of Israel’s abode, they delight in (Israel’s) love, but they do not approach to their compartment. In their fire they are consumed; they are burned in their glow, and are silenced when they utter praise. When they (Israel) begin , they are hushed; when they bring to a close, they begin; when they conclude, they glorify; when they praise, they sanctify; and when they are silent they strike up the threefold Sanctification—as it is written by the hand of Thy prophet:


Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts! The whole earth is full of His glory.

Musaf for Hachodesh





The FIRST month Thou hast established for the blossoming lily (Israel); Thou hast appointed it to rouse the sleeping from their slumber Thou didst remember the covenant with the Patriarchs and we merit 01 the new (Oral Law) as well as the old (Written Law). Thou didst reveal Wis month in the explicit law as the head of the four New Years.
The four beginnings of the year in a vision Thou didst explain to the Prophet in the double tablets. As we have heard of yore, so may we behold again, that Thou shield us with Thy shield in this month.
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, Shield of Abraham. ...


UNTO ZION Thou didst hasten to cause freedom to appear, to reveal unto it the promise of a splendid light. In this month in which saving occurrences concur, those who trust in Him gain vigor, and they go from strength to strength, for it has been app0inted the head of the four seasons.
As for the four seasons of the year, mayest Thou renew their light as at first. As we have heard of yore, so do Thou vouchsafe unto us again, and quicken us with rain on the first of the months of the year. ...
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, who quickenest the dead.







BEHOLD he (the Messiah) comes at intervals; he is appointed to redeem the oppressed of all lands. In this month showers pour down, with overflowing waters to fill the empty reservoirs, to water plants and herbs, to raise up the lambs (Israel) in the four seasons.
The four seasons as in a vision Thou didst explain to the Prophet in the tablets. As we have heard of yore, so may we behold again, that we may extol Thee, Holy God, in this month.
Blessed art Thou, 0 Lord, holy God.













THESE days are blessed; the early rain and the latter rain break out in their due season, to give strength to the tender grain, to roast the ripe ears for brittle food. In order to teach diligently the deeds of Him who glances through the heavenly windows we read before Him the discourses of the four special Sabbaths.
The four discourses I will distinctly read, and I will enumerate the trials of the blossoming rose (Israel). As we have heard of yore so do Thou vouchsafe unto us speedily again, that we may delight in rest on the first of the months of the year.
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, who sanctifiest the Sabbath. 


The miracles destined FOR JERUSALEM in this month remain concealed, veiled from the eyes of every living being; the acts of retribution which are kept in the heart (of God) are defined to come in full array in this month. A lamb shall be taken for each household, by each member’s contribution, and they shall assemble thereupon in banquet with four cups of wine.
The four cups as in the vision (Genesis 40:11-13) Thou didst explain clearly in the Torah to the Prophet. As we have heard of yore, so may we behold again. Accept us graciously, as though we brought offerings in this month.
Blessed art Thou, 0 Lord, who restorest Thy Presence unto Zion in mercy....





A HERALD OF GOOD NEWS to the meritorious people! He will bring up the prisoners from the breakers of the depth; their redemption He disclosed in picturesque speech. Then will they break forth in eulogies instead of elegies, when they will inherit all the delightful, magnnificent possessions. At Jerusalem He will sit in judgment to crush the four kingdoms.
O do Thou crush the four kingdoms, repaying them measure for measure as of yore, and favor us in Thy kindness on the first of the months of the year.
Blessed art Thou, 0 Lord, whose Name is good, and unto Thee it is proper to give thanks.


I SHALL THEN LIFT UP my voice as when the chiefs (Moses and Aaron) sang. I shall sing aloud in the city of the masters (Sanhedrin), when I shall behold the heads of the dragons, who ploughed upon my back, ground to powder. New songs and melo dious compositions my lips shall sing when I shall behold the four craftsmen (Messiah ben Joseph, Messiah ben David, Malchizedek and Elijah).
The four craftsmen as in the vision (Zechariah 2:3) Thou didst point out clearly to the Prophet in the Torah. As we have heard of yore, so may we behold again. Bless us with peace in this month.
Blessed art Thou, 0 Lord, who blessest Thy people Israel with peace.

Shabbat HaGadol




According to the institution of Scholars and Sages, and the teaching of learned preceptors, I open my lips with songs and hymns, to give thanks and to praise Him who is in the heavenly heights. 
O God, when Thou didst march forth to smite Egypt Thou didst pierce their hosts and didst destroy their strongholds. Thy people Thou didst redeem to the sound of the harp and the zither. Thou didst free them and sift them out as fine flour is purified. Thou hast dashed to the ground the multitude of Bubastis (Egypt); desolate it lay to the ground, afflicted with empyema. The forsaken one, wallowing in blood, shone again, strengthened and refreshed through bathing and washing. Even before the bitterness of bondage was removed from the afflicted, salvation had already sprouted for them who are guarded as the apple of His eye.
Even before Thou didst crown them with a soul-restoring Torah Thou didst bestow upon them the gift of the Sabbath (Exodus 16:23).
Ever will I extol Thee, Savior and Ruler, Who didst lead me forth to freedom from the house of him who kept me in darkness.
Thou hast screened me against attack and hast left me a remnant, shielding and saving, sparing and preserving.
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, Shield of Abraham.

When the prisoners were about to go forth from prison to freedom; when to those who were plunged in the mire miracles shone forth. Thou didst invigorate them with a statute of rest and refreshment which had been ordained even before the soul restoring Torah. With its meaning and signification Thou didst command it at Marah, that its pure law should be understood and fulfilled. The holiness thereof should be established by remembrance and observance, with songs of thanksgiving and praise. Great judgments Thou didst execute in Egypt, and didst stretch out a tent whose pegs are never to be pulled up.
The loathsome have vanished, in wrath they were crushed; terror seized Edom and Canaan.
O direct again Thy heart and eyes toward Thy Temple, and cause fat and plenteous produce to sprout forth.
Establish Thy fane and Thy altar, and cause the quickening rain to drop upon those who slumber.
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, Who quickenest the dead.
My Savior, my Glory, my Fortress and Refuge takes a stand to fight my aggressor. He protects me with His wings, the Lord, my Banner, requiting and exacting the judgment due to me. When His lamp shone over my head. He rode on a swift cloud to snatch me away from affliction. He destroyed the fortress of my excruciating tormentor, and He, my Provider, led me to His remote shelter. Front His Holy Dwelling He bandaged my wound, and caused me to draw waters from the fountains of salvation.
He taught me to rest from all trouble on the Sabbath, and He granted me the enjoyment of the heritage of Jacob my father.
THE LORD SHALL REIGN FOREVER, THY GOD. O ZION, THROUGH ALL GENERATIONS, HALLELUYAH. THOU ART HOLY. O THOU THAT ART ENTHRONED UPON THE PRAISES OF ISRAEL.
The pleasant vineyard, the delightful plant (Israel), was munched and crunched by the teeth of the ungodly. Then didst Thou reveal Thyself to deliver her from amidst the transgressors with a host of ninety-thousand myriads, and, through the merit of him who was remembered with a son at ninety-nine (Abraham), she was richly laden with a load of ninety mules. Thou didst clear from before her kings and princes; she pushed her tendrils (to the sea) and came up victoriously. For her portion she took seven of the seventy nations, for a tithe of the property is fixed for the daughters. Through a desert path she went for forty years, eating and being satisfied with royal dainties (Manna), declaring His holiness and pouring forth chants to the—
LIVING AND ENDURING, AWE-INSPIRING, EXALTED AND HOLY!
Thou didst come down to save Thy people, to acquaint them with Thy pleasant path. Thou didst turn Thy steps to the standing ruins, to crush the tyrants in Thy wrath. And when the multitude of spoilers was consumed, and the leaders as well as the hosts were destroyed, the time of love approached and salvation sprouted for the friends of God. When the secret resolution went forth from His Dwelling that the despondent people should march forth to refreshing freedom, then hastened to the captives the messengers, the twin pair of a roe-deer (Moses and Aaron). They met the chief of the palace preparing the royal banquet: “Whoever enters before the king mast have gifts precede him!” At the gates of Egypt stood these ambassadors. They who pluck salt-wort with worm-wood (mean court flunkeys) gazed in astonishment, for they had neither handful nor stalk (present). The arrogant king treated them contemptuously; he rose and mustered his legions: “Let those with gifts enter first, and these at the very last!” Then asked the deaf cobra (Pharaoh): “Concerning whom do you come and In whose name?” They answered him: “You crooked, uprooted one, God will utterly snatch the slaves from you!” The insolent tyrant resisted in his perversity:  “What have I to do with Him? Why should I obey His voice? Not even a gift did He bring me, like a beggar leaning on his staff!” He then looked over the roster of his idols, to see if He had power in His hands. They (Moses and Aaron) approached him with authoritative words: “One does not seek Him among the corpses! You fool, destined for wrathful chastisement, what business has a priest (God) in a graveyard? With the fulfillment of His words will the mighty Master become known! He who is robed in righteousness has girded Himself to requite your evil practices, 0 you cruel tyrant!” He perverted the way of the violent man, his mischief recoiled on his own head.
Locusts, hail, coals of fire He showered down upon the master magicians; down they sank and crumpled up, like hissing serpents gasping for the dust of the earth.
Forever shalt Thou be adored and eternally sanctified, and fore’er and arc shalt Thou reign in exaltation, O God, revered, great and holy King. For Thou art the King of kings. Whose kingdom is enduring. Proclaim His wondrous works, recount His might ; glorify Him, ye His hosts, sanctify Him, exalt in hymn, song and praise His awesome grandeur.
THEM WHO ESCAPED FROM SERVITUDE, HE DID PROVIDE WITH DAILY FOOD, NOT SCANTILY, IN PLENTITUDE, THE HOLY GOD!
The people showed great faith. This time they did not complain and cry: What shall we eat?
“A three-days' journey we shall go in the wilderness,” their guide and leader told them in advance, not concealing anything from them.
The eager leaders hastened to invite His guests, putting their trust in Him who provides food for all His creatures, the good God, Whose faithful servants never want for anything.
The only God regarded this as a most excellent characteristic: “I shall remember your youthful affection and repay your love, how you followed me through the wolds, through lands that were not sown” (Jeremiah 2).
Through places of vipers, stinging serpents, snakes and scorpions, the holy people journeyed under the burning sun, grey head and babe and vast herds.
The holy flock, with prudence and alertness, snatched up early their dough, unleavened as it was, wrapped in their mantles and carried on their shoulders.
They nipped handfuls of pieces of dough and made unleavened cakes which they pressed upon their heads, and the glowing sun baked them and they ate unleavened cakes.
Sixty-one regular meals (until the sixteenth of the second month lyyar) they prepared and ate of the remains which they kept, until bread (Manna) rained down from heaven.
AND IT CAME TO PASS AT MIDNIGHT.
Many marvels Thou didst perform of yore this night. At the beginning of the watches of this night; Abraham was victorious at the division of the night. AND IT CAME TO PASS AT MIDNIGHT.
Thou didst judge Abimelech in a dream at midnight. And didst terrify Laban in the darkness of night, Jacob wrestled with an angel and won, by night. AND IT CAME TO PASS AT MIDNIGHT.
Thou didst crush Egypt's first-born in the middle of the night; They found not their strength when they rose at night; Sisera’s fleeing hosts Thou didst crush by the stars of night. AND IT CAME TO PASS AT MIDNIGHT.
Senacherib’t host, blaspheming the Temple, Thou didst decimate at night; The idol and its pillar were crushed in the night; the secrets were revealed to Daniel in a vision of the night. AND IT CAME TO PASS AT MIDNIGHT.
Belshazzar, drinking from holy vessels was slain in the night; Daniel, saved from the lions’ den, inter­preted dreams of the night; Haman cherished wrath and wrote missives in the night. AND IT CAME TO PASS AT MIDNIGHT.
Thou didst bring victory by disturbing the king’s sleep at night; Reply with the treading of the winepress to the cry: “What of the night?’’ The watchman answers: “Morning came, also night.” AND IT CAME TO PASS AT MIDNIGHT. 
Hasten the day which is neither day not night;  Exalted God, proclaim that Thine are the day and night!  Set sentinels upon Thy city gates day one night; Make bright as day the darkness of the night!  AND IT CAME TO PASS AT MIDNIGHT.
“YE SHALL EAT NOTHING UNLEAVENED!”
With trembling I come to take my place in front of the holy ark. I approach to extol and to utter praise with the permission of Him who is chiefest among ten thousand. I will cause the praise of my Creator to be heard as I concentrate on the investigation of His Law, thinking of it, fathoming it, according to the interpretation of the Sages of the Academy. Him who upholds the world I shall proclaim King; I will cast my burden upon Him, walking humbly before Him as I open my legal discourse. My mouth, with a plethora of words, will sanctify Him who is rich in love, and will embellish the Law with new meanings, with the permission of the holy congregation. In the presence of Him Who speaks uprightly I utter clear words. But first I respectfully ask permission from both master and scholar. Almighty God, increase my strength; augment my little handful of knowledge that I may expound without fault the laws of the removal of the leaven.
The God of all spirits of mankind delivered a Written Law unto His people and admonished them in the Oral Law to search for the leaven on the night of the fourteenth of Nisan, at a time when people are no longer in the marketplace. Only candlelight is fit for the searching. One may not search by the light of the sun, nor by the light of the moon, nor by the light of a torch. The regular benediction must be recited… “concerning the removal of the leaven.”He then puts it in a place of safety until the follow­ing day. He must immediately declare what is left null by word of mouth, saying as follows: “Any kind of leaven which is in this dwelling which I have not seen and have not removed shall be null and of no account as the dust of the earth.” Thus, if any leaven be found after that time, one does not incur the guilt of violating the law:“There shall not be seen nor found any leaven.”Whoever wishes after his search to eat leaven, must put away what he leaves over in a safe hiding place. If he had searched all crevices of his house and left four or five loaves, and then found that one of them was missing, he must take up the search over again because a weasel might have dragged it away. And thus have our Sages taught: Holes and crevices of a house, the upper ones and the lowest ones do not have to be searched, but the middle ones are subject to searching. They further explained: The slanting roofs of siderooms and of towers, stables, straw magazines, fowl-houses, locked storehouses of wine and oil, do not come under the law of the searching of leaven. As for a hole in a partition-wall between two houses, both inhabitants must search as far as their hand can reach, and annul the rest. If there is a partition-wall be­tween a Jew and a non-Jew, the Jew must remove the leaven. Rabbi Palemo exempts him, for the non-Jew might suspect the Jew of trying to bewitch him and to practise sorcery on him. The Rabbis taught: One who sets out on a sea journey, or is about to go with a caravan and does not intend to return before Passover, if it is within thirty days before the holiday he mast remove the leaven; if earlier than thirty days he is not obliged to remove it. If leaven had been deposited with a Jew and the owner is not present to take it away, he may keep it until the fourth hour, as long as it is permitted to eat it. When the fourth hour has passed and the owner had not arrived, he must sell it to a non-Jew. If a rain fell upon leaven on the eve of Passover, and it is certain that a dog could not search after it, it is considered by the Sages as removed. And the trail of a dog is three handbreadths. The Sages taught: Chambers where salt, wax candles, dates and wood are kept must be searched; a court-yard, however, is exempt, because ravens eat it up. If one finds leaven in his house during Passover he may cover it with a vessel, that he should not see it. If, however, it is holy bread he need not cover it, because people keep away from it anyway. Grid irons, iron plates and kettles which are used for hot food, must be scalded. Small vessels are placed and scalded in large vessels. A very large vessel should be provided with a brim and water be boiled therein over fire. Knives used at the table for warm leaven, if it is possible to get new ones it were better; if not, they should be scalded by boiling water. In the first vessel they become clean. Wooden stirring spoons should be scalded in boiling water. The Sages eloquently taught: Basins, glazed bowls and earthen crockery, although they be thoroughly boiled, may not be used. Although they are roomy and airy, yet the prohibition remains. Earthen pots need not, however, be broken; they may be put away until after Passover. Dishes may be used when boiling water is poured over them. Stove utensils are permitted for use by rinsing out with hot water. Utensils in which one keeps leaven all the time are on the level with leaven itself, which is very pungent. If the leaven was placed therein for a moment and did not stay there long, the utensil may be used. The Matzo dough may be smeared with wine and oil, but the Matzos to be used for the first two nights may not be kneaded with these liquids. Slaves that have not yet undergone ritual immersion must not be employed at the kneading. The Matzo cakes are made thin, in memory of the captivity; they must be piously guarded against any leavening. A deaf-mute, an imbecile and a minor may not knead, even if a normal Jew bakes, lest they commit some error. The Sages taught: One should not mix at one time more than five fourths (of a log) flour; this is also the measure for Hallah. It comprises the amount of forty-three eggs, according to the numerical value of the Hebrew letters of Hallah (8+30+5). The Omer (Exodus 16:36) is proof of this. (See concluding paragraph of Sabbath Shekalim). Only such water may be used for kneading which remained over night. The perfect Sages taught in the praiseworthy Mishnah: The water used by the baker should be poured out because it always contains leavened matter. It is further stated that it should be spilled on a declivitous place, that no harm be caused thereby. Here end the laws of removal of leaven, cleansing utensils (and preparation of the dough).
Red wine takes precedence for the commandment, for a man to fulfill his obligation. If such wine be unobtainable, then spiced and cooked wine may be used instead. These four cups must contain at least a quarter (of a log) for men and women alike. Roasted ears and nuts are distributed to the children so that they (stay awake and) ask the Four Questions. The Sages declared: Women must scrupulously observe all matters pertaining to Passover, although they are not bound to perform a positive com­mand the observance of which depends on a certain time. For whosoever is subject to the law: “You shall not eat leaven.” is subject to the law “You shall eat Matzo.”The Sages explained beautifully that at the partaking of the Matzo and wine one should lean, but the bitter herbs do not require it; the latter must be thoroughly chewed. Leaning on the right side is inadmissible; there is even danger that food may enter the windpipe rather than the gullet. Lying on the back is not called leaning; a woman does not have to lean, but it is required of a prominent woman. A son may lean joyfully in the presence of his father; but for a disciple to lean in the presence of his master is a breach of respect. An artisan’s apprentice, however, must absolutely lean. A waiter who ate an olive-size piece of Matzo while leaning, has performed his duty. The Sages urged that the Matzo be eaten without delay on the first two nights of Pass­over, that the children should not fall asleep. It is obligatory to indulge on a festival in pleasurable things: in Temple days — in sacrificial meat; now in wine. People should make their wives happy and joyous, in Babylonia with colorful garments, in the Land of Israel, with bright-hued linen garments. Men should delight themselves with wine. On the eve of Passover, from the time of the first afternoon service until dark one may not eat anything. When the master comes in from the House of Prayer, the first cup is poured for him. First he pronounces the Benediction over the wine, then follows the Sanctification of the day, and the Benediction of gratitude for having reached this season, but no mention is as yet made of the miracles, as this is said in the Haggadah, and it is not proper to repeat it. He then drinks, washes his hands but does not say the regular Benediction. He takes parsley or coriander or radish and dips it in Haroseth (pap of fruit and spices and wine) and says the Benediction: “…Who creates the fruit of the earth.” When about to eat he divides one of the three Matzos, without saying a Benediction; one half he lays on the plate, the other on the table. He then takes from the plate the two dishes, which are roast meat and fish, or a roast and a cooked piece of meat; raises the plate and says: “This is the bread of affliction—” to the end. Then the second of the four cups is poured for him, and here the young son asks his father: “Why is this night different from all other nights?” He continues with the reading of the Haggadah until “Who redeemed Israel.” After drinking he washes his hands and utters the Benediction: “concerning the washing of the hands.” He then pronounces the Benediction Ha-Motzi over the whole Matzo which lies above the two; he does not, however, eat yet thereof, but takes the broken Matzo and says the Benediction “concerning the eating of Matzo,” and eats that together with the Matzo over which he pronounced the Ha-Motzi. Thereupon he says the Benediction over the lettuce: “…to eat bitter herbs,” and dips it lightly into the HAROSETH. He then combines the Matzo and bitter herbs and eats them together, as Hillel did, without a Benediction. He may now visit many houses and guide them in the same procedure. Thereafter the entire meal is served; at the conclusion an olive-size piece of Matzo (Afikomon) must be eaten. Then the hands are washed without a Benediction: this last washing is prescribed, out a Benediction is not re­quired. At the third cup one says Grace after meals. If he goes first to other houses (and says Grace for them) he should not drink the wine there. At the fourth cup he should recite the Egyptian Hallel (Psalms 113-119). From now on he may not partake of anything else this evening; he may, however, drink water. If he is sick or of feeble health and must drink wine, then he must strengthen himself to recite the Great Hallel (Psalm 136) over the fifth cup.
The Passover Seder has reached its termination, / its law, its ritual and regulation. / As we were privileged to hold the celebration, / so may we merit its consummation. / Pure God, from heaven, Thy habitation, / raise up Thy people, the unnumbered congregation. /Speedily lead the seed of Thy plantation / redeemed unto Zion with exultation.
And thus may sanctification ascend unto Thee, for Thou art the Holy One of Israel, the Savior!
Thy praises cannot be set forth in words or speech, the secret of Thy marvels cannot be comprehended or told. How precious is Thy love, Thou Who ordainest the steps of man. Thy thoughts are very deep; Thou givest strength and vigor to men who seek shelter under Thy wings, Thy outstretched pinions. Thou hast made Thy nation great, and hast richly given gladness to the Hebrew people, when the tyrant ruled over the languishing people awaiting Thy help. Thou hast girded Thyself with Thy grace to gather and to unite the scattered and dispersed people. Thou didst awaken the love of those who sleep in Hebron, who rest in Machpelah, and Thou didst inflict corporal and property punishments upon the magicians, crush­ing them with blood, frogs, lice, swarms of dog-flies and pestilence. Thou didst shatter the Dragon’s (Pharaoh’s) head for meddling in a quarrel not his own. For haughtiness results in downfall, and pride ends in destruction. How can the flower of the field, whose days are as a passing shadow, behave arrogantly against the All-highest, who breaks the mountains and shatters the rocks?He is the God of vengeance, the God of judgment who speaks up­ rightly. He causes salvation to sprout to them that wait for Him, and sub­dues nations to them.
Unto us He showed marvelous acts of love and raised His banner over us. He has avenged our wrong at the hand of all oppressors, crushing in wrath and fury the young men of On and Hanes (Egypt). From the kneading of the dough till it is leavened He punished them with the slaying of the first-born. He girded on firmly the girdle of His loins, divided the Red Sea and caused His people to pass over, piling up the waters like a heap. He sustained and fed them in uncultivated land. It is our duty, therefore, to utter thanks for every miracle.
Why is the Passover sacrifice offered from the sheep? Because He passed over and spared them who are called His sheep; and, like a shepherd gathering the lambs, He drew them out and redeemed them from the scorners. And wherefore was the lamb kept ready four days before its slaughtering? Why was incumbent only upon the circumcised and prohibited at that time to the uncircumcised? That they might have holy deeds with which to delight God; for the season of love had already arrived and the time for the fulfillment of God’s oath, since they had been wallowing in two kinds of blood, that redemption might sprout up. And why was the blood sprinkled upon the lintel and the two doorposts, which are like three public, visible altars?These point to the memory of the three altars which Abraham successively built in Dan, in Beth-el and the Oaks of Mamre.
And why may leaven be eaten only till the sixth hour? It is to com­memorate the haste of the Divine Presence to revoke the evil decrees, leap­ing over the mountains, skipping over the hills. What is the meaning of eating Matzo, the bread of affliction? It is be­cause there was not time for the dough to leaven, when He redeemed them from affliction. What is the meaning of the bitter herbs, which are mild at first and later disagreeable?For so were the Israelites first persuaded gently to work, but later they were placed under heavy yoke. Why are they dipped in HAROSETH? In memory of the mortar which both husband and wife had to tread together. And why are spices mixed therein, resembling straw and clay? To commemorate how the people scattered in search of stubble for straw. Why are two kinds of meat placed besides the Matzo? One is in memory of the Passover offering, and one in memory of the Festival offering. And why is the Passover dish raised before its contents are used? So that the child might see and ask: “Why is this night different?” Why are all kinds of herbs partaken of first? To exempt the ordained bitter herbs from the regular Benediction (“Who creates the fruit of the ground”). For it is improper to utter two Benedictions either over one drinking or one eat­ing, just as it is improper to use a drink or a food with which one had al­ready filled himself for the fulfillment of a religious precept. So also the two Matzos (over each one a separate Benediction is uttered) reciprocally exempt each other. Since two Benedictions may not be uttered over the same item of food, one Benediction is pronounced over one Matzo and another over the other, but one does not eat until he had finished both Benedictions.
Why is it obligatory to drink four cups of wine on this night? In memory of the four terms of redemption which were announced to the chosen people: “Freeing,” “Delivering,” “Taking” and “Redeeming.” Over these cups thanks are uttered and praise declared unto Him who dashed to the ground the four cups of the pretty young heifer (Egypt), and that He may intoxicate the abominable and hideous tribes of Amalek with the four cor­responding poisonous cups of indignation. But us He will cause to drink the four cups of compassion. Why do we lean upon beautifully decorated couches? In memory of our freedom and the mass of clouds of glory that enveloped us. For thus is the custom of royal children to live in ostentation and splendor. For the Holy One of Jacob has crowned us with a praiseworthy royal crown. He openly declared the people of His pasture to be His own possession. For the powers of the world belong to God, the Supreme Sovereign.
Exalted in His holiness is the high and holy God, for He is a holy God, sanctified by all forms of holiness: His way is holy. His going is holy. His word is holy. His Dwelling is holy. His bare arm is holy; He is glorious and mighty in holiness. He is holy and His people are holy, and all His Ministers are holy. Nothing is comparable to His holiness, and none can be likened unto Him, who is sanctified by His near ones, over-awing round about, dreaded in the Heavenly Council, highly exalted among the myriads of angels, the holy beings, singing and praising. With sacred hymns the wakeful, holy angels clang and thunder in the Holy of Holies — with intervals of silence and speech. Every morning new hosts arise, surround the Chariot Throne and pronounce clearly the Holy Name as they sanctify the holy and revered God with the Threefold Sanctification.

Haggadah for Shabbat Hagadol



Chanukah

Menorah Lighting



Torah Reading



Song for Shabbat Chanuka



Purim

Parashat Zachor



Megillah Reading



Order of Purim Day



Krovetz L'Purim



Torah Reading



Fast Days

Yom Kippur Katan



Selichot for BaHaB



Selichot for First Monday



Selichot for Thursday



Selichot for Concluding Monday



Selichot for Asara B'Tevet



Selichot for Taanit Esther



Selichot for 20 Sivan



El Maleh Prayer



Selichot for 17 Tamuz



Selichot for Childrens' Illness



Torah Readings

Torah Reading for Shabbat Mincha & Monday, Thursday



Fast Day Torah Reading



Fast Day Mincha Haftara



Torah Reading for Rosh Chodesh



Torah Reading for Chol Hamoed Pesach



Torah Reading for Chol Hamoed Sukkot



Priestly Blessing



Various Prayers & Segulot

Formula Against Evil Eye



Letter of Ramban



Prayer of the Shelah



Parashat Haman Reading for Tuesday Beshalach



Prayer for Livelihood



Awesome Prayer of Rabbeinu Tam

