Bnei Machshava Tova
בני מחשבה טובה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Bnei Machshava Tova

The Association's Goals



Our goal is not new and different from the message and aspiration of every Jewish person, as our desire and goal are to worship Hashem - our G-d, the G-d of Abraham, the G-d of Isaac, the G-d of Jacob. A simple and complete worship, incorporating all aspects of our bodies and souls, so that every fiber of our bodies and every spark of our souls does not depart the holiness of G-d that protects and surrounds us.
But our Father, the Merciful Father, has mercy on us and awakens in our hearts a spark of desire and knowledge, that we know that it is not enough for us to be only like a "slave son of a maidservant." True, he serves the king, but his work is "behind the millstones," far away from the king - he does not hear his words or delight in his brilliance - service with a closed mind and stopped heart. 
Rather, our desire and longing is to be like a (royal) child - "you are children to Hashem your G-d" - so that in our worship of Hashem, whether in Torah, prayer or other commandments, we feel our nearness to Hashem. And like the son who rejoices to greet his father after not seeing him for several years and after suffering great longings for him, so too in our service we wish to feel our soul speeding towards its Father for whom it longs all day and night; running and dissolving - the dissolution of the soul as it spills into the embrace of its Father in heaven.
Not only through prayer and worship do we wish to feel our closeness with Hashem and delight in his blessed glorious brilliance; rather we wish our thoughts to be constantly pure, strong, and attached to His holiness, until they are able to overcome our senses. It is not enough for us that our senses be rendered unable to confuse and fragment our thoughts, telling us "you see a world, you feel rain," rather we want our senses to submit to our heart-thoughts and experience Hashem's holiness spread over all creation, 
so that one clearly sees that he is in Hashem's garden, in Eden before His majestic and blessed throne. 
This is precisely our association's goal

Membership in the Association



Chapter 1

Our association is not for gaining power or being involved in state or communal matters - not directly or indirectly. Rather, our purpose is to rise a level above the world and its tumult. Our association will therefore not assign a hierarchy of leaders and followers. It is founded on humbling and elevating: humbling the substance of body and spirit and elevating their holiness. 
There is no place for honors and authority where there is revelation of the holy.

Chapter 2

Similarly, a strong condition (for membership) is that we must not withdraw or separate from Jews who are not in our association. On the contrary, the first foundation of our association is love of Jews and our associates in an ever-stronger manner. 
Imagine if a fire broke out in a city and the firefighters came to extinguish it and save others in accordance with their knowledge and abilities. Would they detest and reject the other city residents who also work, in accordance with their abilities to rescue and extinguish the fire? Rather, all have the same purpose: to extinguish the fire and save those in the flames, and everyone works in accordance with their means. The collective is more successful than any individual.
So too is it with us: each of us continuously worries about themself: "what will be with me in the end? Every day I long to be near to Hashem with every thought, word, and deed, or at least to not be distant from Him and be cast into the mire of despair, Heaven forbid. Yet every day I actively destroy this desire - not just waiting for Hashem to cast me out from His presence, Heaven forbid, but I cast myself into the unknown void with donkeys and dogs." 
Will we live our lives through days of suffering and grief, only awakening at the end of our days to beat our breasts and crying out "Woe is us! What have we done? Why have we placed ourselves in the mire? All our lived days in this world have been nothing but a disgusting waste, consisting foul desires and thoughts that I now find detestable, while I filled my soul with foolishness and emptiness, thereby removing myself from the world of holiness and purity, that of the sanctity of Hashem and casting myself into the filthy abyss." 
Now, since each of us has this worry constantly gnawing at our hearts and pecking at our thoughts, we worry and sigh, not finding any solace for our broken hearts. 
The members of our association unite to find methods appropriate for those like us who are so despondent to serve Hashem, the One. With all this, maybe Hashem will help us to not waste our days in the depths so that we merit to focus ourselves and shelter ourselves in the Divine even while we continue in this world.

Chapter 3

Because of this, we will only accept people who concern themselves with these matters into our association. Those who know that they do not belong to this category are asked to not join, so that they do not lead themselves and us astray, corrupting the other members of pure heart and clean thoughts. 
Furthermore, we are not comfortable that such a person should even read this pamphlet, 
as is possibly alluded to in the Midrash (Tanchuma, Balak 25) that Israel merited redemption from Egypt by virtue of their not "revealing their secrets" (the Hebrew word for "secret," "mistorin," connotes something that was previously hidden). They didn't just keep the secret of "Each woman will ask from her neighbor" (for valuables - the Jewish people were told a year before the exodus that they would be doing this, but didn't speak about it to their Egyptian neighbors); rather, they kept hidden all spiritual matters that are to be kept secret, for it is not appropriate that others should see exposed souls when they are purifying themselves. Contemplate this.

Chapter 4

We will establish the principles of our association later; however, we first need to declare that only the following may enter our holy group:
1) Someone who truly feels the previously-mentioned ache and sorrow that comes from the separation from Hashem. Not just that one intellectually understands their lowly state - everyone who is not insane or intoxicated understands this - but that they truly feel heartsick and spiritual embitterment, to the point that this worry is no less than one's concern about their physical needs, and overwhelms them to the point that they periodically cry out on their spiritual agonies and individual lowliness.
2) One who studies torah regularly, be it a little or a lot
3) One who engages in any occupation or trade, so long as they meet three times a week with their associates and is meticulous in following the association's principles, as we will explain later, Hashem willing
4) One who is not wishy-washy by nature, who brashly decides one thing one day and negates it the next, turning reality around (lit. "overturning the bowl," see TB Bava Batra 16a).
5) One who is not a liar and deceiver wrapped up in one's falseness. 
It is horrible enough for one to occasionally say something false, heaven forfend, but such a person can still repent and be accepted in our association. 
Some who is fundamentally false and deceitful, however, will corrupt others and themselves. 
I heard from my holy teacher, my father-in-law (may the memory of the righteous be a blessing for eternal life) quoting an anonymous tzadik (may his merit protect us) that such a person has lost the ability to repent, as their repentance is conducted in falseness and self-delusion. Such a person can imagine themselves as instantly transforming themselves into a righteous person, but truly is not righteous and has not accomplished anything.

Principles and Advice



Chapter 1

The verse in Deut. 32:18 chastises Israel, saying "you forgot the G-d who bore you." 
This is the fundamental reason for one's distance from G-d. 
R' Elimelech of Lizhensk wrote in his pre-prayer meditation, "May our thoughts be refined, lucid, clear, and strong." 
Everyone knows that if they were to actually understand how they stand in G-d's presence, there would be no evil inclination; on the contrary, one would express their entire spiritual nature in holy words until they completely sublimated their physicality into the divine. 
Furthermore, even if one just held fast to G-d mentally, they would feel the nullification of the evil inclination and all of its poison suffusing the physical senses would vanish before G-d. Hasn't every Jew felt -- for example on Yom Kippur, particularly during the Kol Nidrei and Ne'ilah services -- the disappearance of all one's sinful desires and thoughts due to their strong mental contemplation of the divine? 
The entire source of human degradation is due to this "forgetting of the G-d Who bore you," when one's thoughts diminish and are no longer as refined, clear, and strong as they were on Yom Kippur or similar occasions. Even if one wanted to strengthen their knowledge and thoughts, they would not be able to sustain their concentration for very long. 
Because this is the case, all of our efforts must be put towards strengthening our thinking: to expand it, strengthen it, and perfect it, so that it may attach to the Blessed G-d -- not only during select times such as during the shofar blasts of Rosh Hashanah or on Yom Kippur, but that it is constantly clear, strong, and connected to holiness.

Chapter 2

Now truthfully, mental practice should work "from the bottom up," as one purifies the body, causing one's thoughts to consequently become purified and strengthened, rather than starting initially with one's thoughts. 
Indeed, in earlier generations, they started with physical practice and complete purification, and only moved on to mental practice and perfection from within a body completely submitted to the sacred. This is the the preferred direction; 
however, this will not work for (this) generation preceding the messianic era, a lowly and insensitive generation (lit. "a generation of heels"), where physical weakness has so degraded self-control that one who tries nowadays to to start by purifying and sanctifying their physical body will not succeed in either: the body will not be purified, and the thoughts, which are therefore not touched at all by these purifying and strengthening efforts, will remain in a low, dark, loathsome, and contaminated state. 
We therefore need to begin our practice with the thought. 
It is for this purpose that we refer to our association as "B'nei Machshava Tovah - People of good thought" as this is our literal aim: to strengthen and reveal the good thought within us, to enhance and broaden it so that it not be infinitesimal (lit. "smallest ground," cf. BT Keritot 6a), a flash that becomes a quickly-extinguished spark, but rather becomes so pure and strong that the body surrenders and the senses are nullified by it as it manifests and dominates the individual. 
Does everyone suddenly sanctify their body during the shofar tekiyot on Rosh Hashanah or on Yom Kippur? 
Since we see that even the unsanctified body can be dominated and sanctified by strong thought, why should we allow this kind of thought with its mighty power to remain dormant within us?

Chapter 3

The enhancement, expansion, and strengthening of the thought: this is the foundation of our association and the fundamental method by which we will be able to connect (to the divine) through our worship; not as the child of the distanced maid (lit. "maid behind the millstones;" see earlier), but as the child who feels their father's closeness and can converse with him. 
Now, there are two fundamental sources of mental challenges and burdens which hinder one from strengthening their hold on their thoughts without losing focus:
1) A weakening of emotional arousal, whether it be joyful enthusiasm or the emotion of brokenheartedness. A Jew is impassioned when purified; even a small emotional arousal should strengthen thought, purifying it and elevating it above its physicality as we explained earlier regarding Yom Kippur. 
However, when one's heart and mind are blocked, one lacks higher, non-physical awareness. Even more so when one is depressed, God forbid. Depression is not brokenheartedness but weakness, as the Rav of blessed and eternal memory (the Ba'al Hatanyah) taught. When a Jew on Yom Kippur feels a broken heart, this causes the heart and mind to open, but during the rest of the year, one falls into depression without feeling or thought.
2) The other loss that one has is a natural one, which is a lack of strong thought in general. If one were to ask a person of limited intelligence to create 

Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8










... Every awakening — even if it is only physical — is a key to our soul… every feeling that is connected to something of this world opens a spark of our soul, and our soul is revealed a little bit. Let us then consciously draw it out even more. Let us greet it with words of love, awe, and pure, God-directed mindfulness. Since this feeling based on physicality has opened and revealed our soul a bit, we have something to begin with. We can now knock upon the door of our heart and summon our soul from behind the gates of bronze, where it stands imprisoned.

Daily Instructions



Proposed Amendments

