Rashi on Ruth
רש"י על רות
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Rashi on Ruth



Chapter 1



Verse 1


<b>and a man went:</b> He was a very wealthy man and was the sustainer of the generation. And he left from the Land of Israel to outside of the Land because of stinginess, as he was stingy with poor people that would pressure him [to support them]. Therefore was he punished.

Verse 2



Verse 3



Verse 4



Verse 5



Verse 6



Verse 7



Verse 8



Verse 9



Verse 10



Verse 11



Verse 12



Verse 13



Verse 14



Verse 15



Verse 16


<b>since everywhere that you will walk, I will walk:</b> From here, our rabbis, may their memory be blessed said, "We inform a convert that comes to convert some of the punishments, that if he wants to go back, he should go back. As from the words of Rut, you learn that Naomi told her, "It is forbidden for us to go out of the domain on Shabbat." She said to her, "in where you will walk, I will walk." "It is forbidden for us that a woman should isolate herself with a man that is not her husband" - she said to her, "in where you will lay, I will lay." "Our people is separated from the other nations by six hundred and thirteen commandments" - "your people is my people." "Idolatry is forbidden to us" - "your God is my God." "Four death penalties are given over to the court" - "in where you will die, I will die." "Two graveyards are given over to the court - one for those stoned and burned and one for those killed (beheaded) and strangled" - she said to her, "and there will I be buried."

Verse 17



Verse 18

She ceased to argue with her: From here we learn that we do not overburden [the prospective convert] nor are we overly meticulous with him.

Verse 19

1 And the two of them walked on: Said Rabbi Abbahu: Come and see how beloved converts are before the Holy Blessing One: Since she decided to convert, the Tanakh equates Ruth with Naomi [who is considered righteous]. 

Chapter 2



Verse 1

A relative, the son of the brother of Elimelech he was.  Our teaches of blessed memory said "Elimelech, and Shalmon the father of Boaz, and Ploni Almoni the redeemer, and the father of Naomi, were all the children of Nachshon son of Aminodov and the merit of the fathers did not benefit them when they the Land for outside the Land."