Teshuvot HaRivash
תשובות הריב"ש
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Teshuvot HaRivash



Teshuva 1



Teshuva 2



Teshuva 3



Teshuva 4



Teshuva 5



Teshuva 6



Teshuva 7



Teshuva 8



Teshuva 9



Teshuva 10



Teshuva 11



Teshuva 12



Teshuva 13



Teshuva 14



Teshuva 15



Teshuva 16



Teshuva 17



Teshuva 18



Teshuva 19



Teshuva 20



Teshuva 21



Teshuva 22



Teshuva 23



Teshuva 24



Teshuva 25



Teshuva 26



Teshuva 27



Teshuva 28



Teshuva 29



Teshuva 30



Teshuva 31



Teshuva 32



Teshuva 33



Teshuva 34



Teshuva 35



Teshuva 36



Teshuva 37



Teshuva 38



Teshuva 39



Teshuva 40



Teshuva 41



Teshuva 42



Teshuva 43



Teshuva 44



Teshuva 45

Regarding "Greek wisdom" which one is to distance oneself from, and those well-known books like "Physics" and "Metaphysics" [from Aristotle]:
From that which is described in the Talmud there (Sotah 49b, Bava Kamma 82b, Menachot 64b), where they forbade [Greek wisdom] on account of what happened when Jerusalem was besieged. They [in Jerusalem] would lower a basket of golden dinars every day over the wall, and [the Romans] would send back sheep for the Tamid offering. There was an old man there who knew Greek wisdom, and mocked them in Greek wisdom that so long as the Jews practiced Temple worship, they would never be defeated. So they sent [instead of sheep] a pig. At that moment, they declared that cursed is a person who raises pigs [in Israel], and cursed is one who teaches his son Greek wisdom. The Talmud then asks, "Is that so? But isn't there a statement 'Why would one speak the Syriac [Sursi] language? One should speak either the sacred tongue, Hebrew, or the Greek language!'" The Talmud answers that references to Greek language are one thing, and references to Greek wisdom is another. From that we see that books were never included in that decree, for if its that they are written in Greek, that was not the prohibition, and all of them were fluent in it. And to the contrary, it says in the Talmud (Megillah 18a) that the Greek language is kosher for everyone [to read the megillah in]. And if the problem is the wisdom itself, what does that have to do with the elder who mocked them in Greek? Therefore, in my opinion, "Greek wisdom" refers to speaking in Greek riddles and obscurities which the masses cannot understand, and only those knowledgeable and trained in riddles could. This is similar to the Talmud's statement (Eruvin 53b), "The maidservant of Rabbi's house would speak in wise language (i.e., enigmatically), saying, The ladle is knocking against the jug. Let the eagles fly to their nest." And this meant that the cup used to get wine from the barrel was knocking at the bottom of the barrel because the wine was finished. And the other statement is that the students should return and the meal is ended. Similarly, it states there that "when Rabbi Yosei bar Asyan would speak enigmatically, he would say: Prepare for me an ox in judgment on a poor mountain." He was asking for beets in mustard, since ox is tor in Aramaic; judgment is din. Combined they form teradin, beets. Tur Masken translated to chardal, mustard. And there are other examples there, and the Sages referred to it as "wise language", like the verse (Proverbs 1:6) says, "The words of the wise and and their riddle." Similarly in the Talmud (Sanhedrin 12a), "They sent [an encoded message] to Rava, 'A pair came from Rakat, but was apprehended." Such riddles, when said in Greek, are called "Greek wisdom", and that is what they prohibited because of the story, and they allowed Rabban Gamliel's household because they were close to the authorities, and they needed to use it because that was the way they would speak in the king's court, so that people would not know their mysteries and secrets. However, Rashi wrote in Menachot that "Greek wisdom" refers to "hints", and it seems he means to explain that they would not say anything, only using gestures with their hands, fingers, or other limbs. This accords with that which the Sages talk about (Gittin 59a) "A deaf-mute may express his wishes through gestures and respond through gestures." And also (Yevamot 119b) "Just as a deaf-mute marries through gestures, he can divorce through gestures." That is the way they would act before kings, as is mentioned in the Talmud (Chagigah 5b), "Rabbi Yehoshua ben Ḥananya was standing in the house of the Caesar. A certain heretic, who was also present, gestured to him, indicating that his was the nation whose Master, God, turned His face away from it. Rabbi Yehoshua gestured to him that His hand is outstretched over us in protection. The Caesar said to Rabbi Yehoshua: What did he gesture to you, and how did you respond? He replied: He indicated that mine is the nation whose Master turned His face from it, and I gestured to him that His hand is outstretched over us. He said to that heretic: What did you gesture to him? He said to them: I gestured that his is the nation whose Master has turned His face from it. They asked: And what did he gesture to you? He said to them: I don’t know; I did not understand. They said: How can a man who does not know what others gesture to him dare to gesture in the presence of the king? They took him out and killed him." And so Rashi explains there that he gestured through hints. So this is "Greek wisdom", which the Greeks were accustomed to, or there was a book they had related to this, and its author was Greek. But my question on this interpretation is that the Talmud did not need to write that the elder mocked them in "Greek wisdom", it could have said he mocked them through gestures, where no speaking at all takes place, and only gestures. Therefore, I believe "Greek wisdom" is as I explained above, and its possible Rashi is saying that any communication that is enigmatic is called "hinting/gesturing". We find this in the Talmud (Kiddushin 80b), "From where is there an allusion to the prohibition against seclusion? As it is stated [concerning one who incites others to idolatrous worship]: 'If your brother, the son of your mother, entices you' (Deuteronomy 13:7)." Similarly in the Talmud (Sanhedrin 10a and Makkot 2b) regarding an allusion to false witnesses. Regardless, whether "Greek wisdom" refers to gestures or enigmatic statements and riddles like I explained, it was only prohibited because of the story.
 However, the well-known [Greek philosophy] books of "Physics", this is not being referred to, though it is proper to distance oneself from them if they try to uproot the principles of our holy Torah, and especially two foundational pillars, which is creation ex nihilo and God's personal divine providence within the human species. They bring demonstrations and proofs according to their opinion to uphold eternity of the world, that it comes as a necessity from God, such as given that light necessarily comes from the sun, and the shade from the tree, God has no ability to change something as part of his very being, He cannot lengthen the wing of a fly and cannot shorten the leg of an ant, just like the sun cannot change the light which comes from it, nor the tree the shade. And similarly with Divine Providence, there is none beneath the sphere of the moon. They write in their books that one can only know through speculation, not through an accepted tradition. And we, receivers of the truth of our knowledge that our Torah is perfect, that it came to us at Sinai from the mouth of God, through the master of all prophets [Moses], this is higher than everything; all their speculation is nothing in comparison. We learn in the Talmud (Sanhedrin 90a) that "These are the ones without a share in the World to Come: One who says: There is no resurrection of the dead derived from the Torah, and one who says: The Torah did not originate from Heaven, and an epikoros. Rabbi Akiva said: Even those who read external books." The Talmud states that it was taught that this refers to the books of the heretics. Is there any greater "books of heretics" than these that try to disprove the principles of the Torah with proofs and demonstrations?! And Rabbi Akiva didn't say, "Those who *believe* in the external books," but rather even those who read them, lest their hearts are lead astray to believe their words, like what happened with Elisha [ben Avuya], Acher, which we see in the Talmud (Chagigah 15b), "They said about Elisha-Acher that when he would stand up in the study house, many books of heresy would fall from his lap." The Nagid, Rabbi Shmuel Halevi, already asked from Rabbi Hai Gaon whether one can learn these wisdoms, and he responded, "The goodness of the body and the ways of a man should be accomplished through learning Mishna and Talmud, and it is the fortune of Israel, for study of Torah helps him and others like him, and helps the regular masses, for it will draw them after the ways of the Torah and the commandments. And one who turns his heart away to study those things, it will turn one away from Torah and fear of heaven, it will cause him to lose those things, for he will cast off all the words of the Torah completely, and from this removal a person will have mistaken ideas, to the point that even abandoning worship won't be a concern for him. But those who have a solid foundation in Torah and fear of heaven stay away from this, for they lead the masses for the good, without doubts, and don't wish to place and doubts about God, and if you will see some people studying these wisdoms, and they will say to you that it is a paved path, that they can achieve knowledge of the Creator, you should not hate them, and you should know that they are lying to you, and one will not find fear of heaven, fear of sin, zealousness to perform commandments, humility, purity, holiness, except with someone who studies Mishna and Talmud." Thus was his answer. And the Rashba also wrote in a letter to stay away from those among them who are always learning these wisdoms, "And the youth brought up on the wisdom of "Physics" and sees Aristotle's proofs will always believe him, and he will will deny the principles [of faith], and if we try to respond to him, he will blaspheme all the more so." One should not bring proof from Maimonides [who studied Greek philosophy], for he first studied the entire Torah completely, its laws, narratives, the Tosefta, the Sifra, the Sifre, the entire Talmud both Babylonian and Jerusalem, as we can see from his Mishneh Torah that he wrote. Plus, he wrote the Guide for the Perplexed to respond to the heretic to fight the proofs and demonstrations that the Philosopher [Aristotle] offered for the eternality of the world, and also for divine providence, and because in his day, many Jews were perplexed about the principles of the Torah out of what they learned from that wisdom. One can also say like that which is stated in the Talmud (Chagigah 15b) regarding Rabbi Meir, "How could he learn Torah from Acher?" And they answered: Rabbi Meir found a verse and expounded it, (Proverbs 22:17) 'Incline your ear and listen to the words of the sages; Pay attention to my wisdom." It does not say "to their wisdom", but "to my wisdom", meaning to wicked ones who one must nevertheless incline one's ear toward. They explain there that this refers to a great man but not a regular person. Meaning, a student who is great, can separate the kernel from the chafe, as they said there about Rabbi Meir, he would eat the content of the pomegranate and through away the outer shell. Thus, Maimonides brings this verse in the beginning of the Guide. Nevertheless, Maimonides was drawn a bit after some of these proofs, like the [resurrection] of the son of the Zarephath woman [see Guide for the Perplexed 1:42], and regarding the revelation at Sinai. Perhaps he only allowed for these things because he could not give great answers for them from end to end, and so he explained some minor things in the Torah with a view of accordance with philosophy. This, too, he wrote in hints, and hid his opinion of the angels that Abraham saw, which he said happened in a prophetic vision, which Nachmanides responded to in his commentary on the Torah. And the sage Rabbi Levi [ben Gershon] was also a great sage, learned in Talmud, and he produced a beautiful commentary to the Torah and the Prophets, and he followed after Maimonides, but he also really inclined much more to those wisdoms that the way of truth, and he took the opposite approach to that of Maimonides in certain topics, such as whether God has knowledge of the possible future, and also whether the sun actually stood for Joshua, and the promise (Isaiah 38:8) of the sun and shadow - he wrote things that is forbidden to hear. Similarly regarding life of the soul after death, and divine providence regarding the punishment of the wicked in this world, all of which is written in the book he titled "Wars of the Lord." Now every person should make an a fortiori argument for himself using these two kings [Maimonides and Gersonides], that if they could not stay on the straight and narrow regarding some things, and they were among the greatest in the world, how much more so we, who cannot compare to them, we see those who have cast off the yoke of worship, loosening the bind of Torah and the commandments, from learning these wisdoms, like what Rabbi Hai Gaon wrote in that response I cited above.

Teshuva 46



Teshuva 47



Teshuva 48



Teshuva 49



Teshuva 50



Teshuva 51



Teshuva 52



Teshuva 53



Teshuva 54



Teshuva 55



Teshuva 56



Teshuva 57



Teshuva 58



Teshuva 59



Teshuva 60



Teshuva 61



Teshuva 62



Teshuva 63



Teshuva 64



Teshuva 65



Teshuva 66



Teshuva 67



Teshuva 68



Teshuva 69



Teshuva 70



Teshuva 71



Teshuva 72



Teshuva 73



Teshuva 74



Teshuva 75



Teshuva 76



Teshuva 77



Teshuva 78



Teshuva 79



Teshuva 80



Teshuva 81



Teshuva 82



Teshuva 83



Teshuva 84



Teshuva 85



Teshuva 86



Teshuva 87



Teshuva 88



Teshuva 89



Teshuva 90



Teshuva 91



Teshuva 92



Teshuva 93



Teshuva 94



Teshuva 95



Teshuva 96



Teshuva 97



Teshuva 98



Teshuva 99



Teshuva 100



Teshuva 101



Teshuva 102



Teshuva 103



Teshuva 104



Teshuva 105



Teshuva 106



Teshuva 107



Teshuva 108



Teshuva 109



Teshuva 110



Teshuva 111



Teshuva 112



Teshuva 113



Teshuva 114



Teshuva 115



Teshuva 116



Teshuva 117



Teshuva 118



Teshuva 119



Teshuva 120



Teshuva 121



Teshuva 122



Teshuva 123



Teshuva 124



Teshuva 125



Teshuva 126



Teshuva 127



Teshuva 128



Teshuva 129



Teshuva 130



Teshuva 131



Teshuva 132



Teshuva 133



Teshuva 134



Teshuva 135



Teshuva 136



Teshuva 137



Teshuva 138



Teshuva 139



Teshuva 140



Teshuva 141



Teshuva 142



Teshuva 143



Teshuva 144



Teshuva 145



Teshuva 146



Teshuva 147



Teshuva 148



Teshuva 149



Teshuva 150



Teshuva 151



Teshuva 152



Teshuva 153



Teshuva 154



Teshuva 155



Teshuva 156



Teshuva 157

And I showed it to Rabbi Amram ben Meir, may his memory be blessed, 11th [response].
Dear esteemed brother, may you be guarded and protected. I received your first letter through the Jew from Shvilay and another letter through Ben Bitash. The congregation responded appropriately to both of them. I have affixed my signature to Ben Bitash's document in your honor since he is going to Baghdad and Constantinople. Another letter arrived during the intermediate days of Sukkot through my dear relative. Regarding all these letters, I had no wonder or ability to respond to you except in the first letter in which I replied to you through that Jew and informed you I wrote to you through the medium of money, by means of a respected merchant from Talmassan, known to the esteemed Rabbi Avraham ben Sheshet, may his soul rest in peace. Along with his letters, I sent you a form of my response to Malka, and likewise, based on your response, there is no doubt in my mind that it reached you or will reach you. If it has not reached you, please inform me, and I will add to my letter to you. I also acknowledge your message, as my teacher, Rabbi Peretz Cohen, may he rest in peace, did not speak at all or consider those spiritual realms. I also heard from him that Rabbi Shimson of Kinon, may he rest in peace, was a great rabbi of his generation. I remember him as well, even though I did not see him with my own eyes And he used to say, "I pray to know this: the intention of these infants, meaning, to extract from the hearts of the Kabbalists who pray once for each Sefirah, and they say that this means that which our Sages of blessed memory desired—to be wise, direct, and enrich themselves, meaning, to intend the attribute of Chesed (kindness) or the attribute of Gevurah (severity), even in the prayer of the Amidah, they have a specific intention for each of the known Sefirot. All of this is very foreign in the eyes of someone who is not initiated like they are and may think it is a matter of secondary belief. I have also heard one of the mystics criticize the Kabbalists and he would say, 'The ignorant believe in the three attributes.'" And the Kabbalists believe in the ten emanations (Sefirot). It already happened to me when I was in Sakhseh, a wise elder named Don Yosef n' Shoshan, may his memory be a blessing, who I had already seen in Valencia. He was a scholar in Talmud, well-versed in philosophy, and he was initiated and a great righteous person. There was a great love and affinity between us. One time I asked him how the Kabbalists, in one blessing, direct their intention to a known Sefirah, and in another blessing, to a different Sefirah. Furthermore, there is divinity attributed to the Sefirot, and a person prays to them. He replied to me, "God forbid that prayer should be like that. Prayer is always directed to the blessed Creator, the ultimate source of all emanations. However, it is comparable to someone who has a dispute and asks the king for justice. He should request from the king to command the judge to adjudicate, not to command the treasurer, as the question might be misunderstood. Similarly, if he asks the king for a gift, he should request that the king command the treasurer to provide it. And if he asks for wine, he should request the king to command the minister of beverages, and if he asks for bread, he should ask the king to command the minister of baking. It is not the reverse. The same applies to prayer, which is always directed towards the ultimate source, but the intention of the mind is to draw the influence toward the corresponding Sefirah that pertains to the desired matter. For example, in the blessing for the righteous, one should direct their intention to the Sefirah called Chesed (kindness), which is the attribute of mercy. And in the blessing for the wicked, one should direct their intention to the Sefirah called Gevurah (severity), which is the attribute of judgment. This is the explanation." It is clear to me, the humble and renowned Kabbalist, that this is very good. However, who leads us into all this goodness? Is it not good to pray simply for the sake of the blessed Creator, with intention, and He knows in which way to fulfill the request, as the verse says, "Roll your way upon the Lord, trust in Him, and He will act" (Psalms 37:5). This is what the great scholar Rabbi Shimson of Kinon, may his memory be a blessing, whom I mentioned earlier, said. And also, I conveyed to you what my teacher, the great Rabbi Nissim, may his memory be a blessing, said, that even more than sufficient, Rabbi Moses ben Nachman (Nachmanides), may his memory be a blessing, fully committed himself to believe in that matter of Kabbalah. I do not presume to involve myself in that wisdom after not receiving it from the mouth of an authoritative Kabbalist. Even though I have seen hints about the secrets of Rabbi Moses ben Nachman (Nachmanides), they are not revelations of the roots of that wisdom; they only reveal a span, and they cover several spans. They are close to being erroneous in some matters. Therefore, I have chosen not to involve myself in the hidden realms. Regarding your question about whether the Sefirot are below or above the level of the angels, there is no doubt that the Sefirot are above them. And they, the Sefirot, first emanated from the Emanator. According to the understanding of the Kabbalists, the angels emanated first. So it is explained by Rabbi Shem Tov ben Gaon, may his memory be a blessing, at the beginning of his commentary on the secrets of Rabbi Moses ben Nachman (Nachmanides). Rabbi Yehuda Halevi, may his memory be a blessing, also wrote in one of his poems that was recited in Barcelona when it was at peace. In it, he mentioned that when King David, peace be upon him, said, "Bless the Lord, you His angels," it refers to the higher world of angels. And when he said, "Bless the Lord, all His hosts," it refers to the intermediate world. And when he said, "Bless the Lord, all His works," it refers to the lower world. In the world of angels, he spoke in a similar manner, with many faces facing the awesome Divine Presence. The book you mentioned, attributed to the wise Rabbi Yitzhak ben Latif, is called "Tzurat Olam" and I have it with me. It consists of 27 chapters. There is also another book called "Tzror HaMor," which consists of 11 chapters. The content of this book is similar to the previous book. There is yet another smaller book called "Rav Pealim," consisting of 100 leaves, which is called so because it discusses various kinds. However, this book is not divided into chapters but into statements. And they, the Sefirot, consist of eighty statements. There is also a commentary on the book of Ecclesiastes, which is a beautiful commentary leaning towards rationality and natural wisdom. Another great and beneficial book in his collection is called "Sha'ar HaShamayim" (Gate of Heaven), resembling "Guide for the Perplexed" by Maimonides. It is divided into four gates: the first gate consists of 28 chapters, the second gate consists of 25 chapters, the third gate consists of 12 chapters, and the fourth gate consists of 16 chapters. This book is highly respected and discusses matters in a rational and philosophical manner, although it contradicts some of their ideas with our Torah. This wise scholar seems to have delved deeply into philosophy while maintaining his commitment to Torah and piety. He also wrote about the reasons for the commandments, and I did not find in that book any mention of the ten Sefirot, only the ten levels of angels as mentioned by Maimonides in his book "The Guide for the Perplexed." However, this book expands on the explanations in all its aspects, except for a few elevated matters that are mentioned and discussed. However, in this son's book, all his words are cryptic and difficult to understand. Anyone who delves into this book called "Sefer Sha'ar HaShamayim" (Book of the Gate of Heaven) will gain additional understanding in this matter. In this hidden book, he mentions the ten Sefirot, but not in the same way as the accepted tradition of Maimonides and those who follow his teachings. In this book, it appears that his perspective is that the levels of angels are included within the ten Sefirot, and he distinguishes three initial levels among the described angels: fire, water, and wind. He also mentioned that the first created being is called "burning fire," and the fourth form is the light of the sun, while the fifth is the sphere of intellect. And this, the encompassing sphere and the remaining four forms, are the four fundamental forms, as mentioned in chapter 80 of the book. However, this does not reflect the opinion of the wise Kabbalists, and it seems that these are his own ideas that stem from his heart and intellect without the influence of Kabbalah. He even mentions this explicitly in chapter 85 of the book, where he says that one should not trouble oneself to understand the new concepts that arise in his heart, as he conceals and covers them. Therefore, I said in my heart that they should remain his alone, and others should not follow him. The truth is explained in the "Sefer Netivot," following the accepted tradition that there are ten Sefirot and twenty-two letters, which constitute the foundation of the divine speech, and are hinted in the words that arise from the twenty-two verses. This is commendable, but as for the essence of the Sefirot, he speculates on his own, and therefore I say that one should not rely on such matters except based on the teachings of a wise and accepted Kabbalist. Yet, perhaps...

Teshuva 158



Teshuva 159



Teshuva 160



Teshuva 161



Teshuva 162



Teshuva 163



Teshuva 164



Teshuva 165



Teshuva 166



Teshuva 167



Teshuva 168



Teshuva 169



Teshuva 170



Teshuva 171



Teshuva 172



Teshuva 173



Teshuva 174



Teshuva 175



Teshuva 176



Teshuva 177



Teshuva 178



Teshuva 179



Teshuva 180



Teshuva 181



Teshuva 182



Teshuva 183



Teshuva 184



Teshuva 185



Teshuva 186



Teshuva 187



Teshuva 188



Teshuva 189



Teshuva 190



Teshuva 191



Teshuva 192



Teshuva 193



Teshuva 194



Teshuva 195



Teshuva 196



Teshuva 197



Teshuva 198



Teshuva 199



Teshuva 200



Teshuva 201



Teshuva 202



Teshuva 203



Teshuva 204



Teshuva 205



Teshuva 206



Teshuva 207



Teshuva 208



Teshuva 209



Teshuva 210



Teshuva 211



Teshuva 212



Teshuva 213



Teshuva 214



Teshuva 215



Teshuva 216



Teshuva 217



Teshuva 218



Teshuva 219



Teshuva 220



Teshuva 221



Teshuva 222



Teshuva 223



Teshuva 224



Teshuva 225



Teshuva 226



Teshuva 227



Teshuva 228



Teshuva 229



Teshuva 230



Teshuva 231



Teshuva 232



Teshuva 233



Teshuva 234



Teshuva 235



Teshuva 236



Teshuva 237



Teshuva 238



Teshuva 239



Teshuva 240



Teshuva 241



Teshuva 242



Teshuva 243



Teshuva 244



Teshuva 245



Teshuva 246



Teshuva 247



Teshuva 248



Teshuva 249



Teshuva 250



Teshuva 251



Teshuva 252



Teshuva 253



Teshuva 254



Teshuva 255



Teshuva 256



Teshuva 257



Teshuva 258



Teshuva 259



Teshuva 260



Teshuva 261



Teshuva 262



Teshuva 263



Teshuva 264



Teshuva 265



Teshuva 266

To Don Salamias Gasia, G-d Bless him.
An incident occurred in which Don Salamias Nasi who lives in Valence arranged a marriage with Mrs. Meirona of Arles as is recorded in the document made in Valence on the 20th day of the month Elul year 5145 [1385 CE] and its witnesses are Shelomo son of Shem Tov Asma'il [and] Nahmani son of Yaakov of Arles. Afterwards she was married to him through his agent, Nestruc Buniac Nasi who lives in Montpellier, with a document of agency that was made in Valence on the 20th day of the month Elul year 5145 and its witnesses are the mentioned Shelomo son of Shem Tov and Nahmani son of Yaakov. The Mentioned agent married the mentioned Mrs. Meirona on behalf of Don Salamias, the mentioned sender, with a gold ring in the city Nimes on the 19th day of the month Tishrei year [5]147 (1386 CE) As was recorded in the document that the witnesses made [testifying] that the marriage was performed before them on the mentioned day, [the witnesses] are Abram Prufeig [and] Bangudas Dusil. The Mastre Duran of Crente Arles claims that before this, the mentioned Mrs. Meirona was married to him (This next phrase is obscure, it might refer to a specific event.) This is in the middle of Jews and Arabs and she was not appeased by him. Afterwards Mastre Duran spread a rumor that he married the mentioned Meirona in Arles before she was married to the mentioned Don Salamias. And this [marriage] was [performed] before witnesses whose testimony was already received before a court of three. The three who received the mentioned testimony were Yosef of Couleon, Diulsal of Belcre, and Estruc Ourged. These three did not make a document of reception of testimony. At that time Mrs. Meirona said that this never happened. In order to determine if the truth is like the words of the mentioned Mastre Duran or like the words of the mentioned Mrs. Meirona, the relatives of the mentioned Mrs. Meirona and the mentioned Mastre Duran agreed to choose three for a court to accept testimony from the first court who accepted testimony from the two witnesses who testified about the marriage [of Mastre Duran]. [To determine] how [the witnesses] testified before [the first court] and what were their words. In order for the second court to see if there is substance to the words of the mentioned Mastre Duran, if the witnesses testified like his words, and if the witnesses align with each other's testimony. The second court was chosen from the classes (<i>kittot</i> probably a technical term), Don Estrouc Avigdor, Don Bouniac Nasi, and Don Cresces Nathan. This court set a location and accepted testimony from the three of the first court in the presence of the mentioned Mastre Duran, and in the presence of the dignitaries, Mastre Abram Avigdor, Don Samuel Calo, and Don Estrouc of Boulceire, under oath and interrogation. The first court also swore that they had not yet signed off the acceptance of testimony that they recieved from the two witnesses with regards to the marriage that the mentioned Mastre Duran claimed. They also swore that they three sign off as one with all that they will testify before the latter court as Duran the mentioned claimant requested of them. This is the detail of the testimony of the mentioned first court:
First, Yosef of Cuoleon, a member of the first court, testified under the power of of his oath, that on Friday the 29th day of the month Tevet of the year [5]147 (1387 CE) The mentioned Duran brought him to the Synagogue, and he also brought Dusal of Belceire and Estrouc Ourger. He requested of them to set a location and receive the testimony of the witnesses that were brought before them. While they were sitting in the courtyard that was in front of the Synagogue, one of the witnesses began to testify before them, whose name was Vidal Abram of Bourion. When he began to testify [the court] presided and descended before the podium of the synagogue courtyard, and there they stood, the three of them leaning on the podium. Then the mentioned Vidal of Bourion came before them to testify. He was not sworn, nor was he interrogated or examined at all, rather they asked him how did the marriage, that Mastre Duran claims, happen. He said we know that on the Wednesday or Tuesday on the first week of the fast in the month of Tamuz in the year [5]145 the mentioned Duran brought [I] and Bonfil Cregud to the house of the mentioned Mrs. Meirona and he hid us in a small dark room facing the house, and the mentioned Duran remained in the yard. Then the mentioned Mrs. Meirona descended there, and saw a ring in the mentioned Duran's hand. She asked him, "What is in your hand?" He said to her, "A beautiful ring." She said to him, "Show it to me." He said to her, "I don't want to." She said to him, "You better show it to me." Then he gave it to her, and this is what the mentioned Duran said to her, "I am giving it to you through the laws of marriage." She took it, wrapped it in white paper, and placed it in her bosom. The she went into the kitchen and the mentioned Duran went in after her. Then the witnesses left the scene. After Yosef of Couleon and his colleagues heard the words of Vidal Abram of Bourion, Bonfil Cregud testified that he was with [Vidal Abram]. He said that he was with him during the incident in the same dark room, and he testified like what the mentioned Vidal Abram testified. But his testimony was not exactly aligned with what his partner said regarding the year. For Bonfil said that is was on the same in the year [5]144, and when his partner heard this, he cried out to [Bonfil], "It happened in [5]145, [5]145." After this they conferred with each other and agreed that it happened in [5]145. During the proceedings, when the his testimony was completed, the mentioned Vidal said, do not believe me at about what I said until I show you a letter that I have in my house that is about this case. The next day on Shabbat he came and brought a letter in his hand, that had written in it, "Truthfully I did not see, I did not hear, and I was not there for the incident. Rather it is certainly entirely false." He gave the letter to the court, and said to them, "This is the letter that I spoke of to you yesterday when I testified before you that you should not believe me until I showed this to you." This is what Yosef de Couleon, a member of the first court, testified before the latter court. Diulosal de Belceire, his colleague also testified before the latter court under oath, interrogation, and examination. He testified like what the mentioned Yosef de Couleon his colleague testified, except that he disagreed with him on one point. This Diulosalen said that Vidal Abram de bourion testified that it happened in [5]145 on the mentioned day, and his partner Bonfil disagreed with him and said [it was] in the year [5]144 on the mentioned day. Each one testified this in front of his partner, and alone. It was regarding this disagreement of contradictory testimony on the year that Vidal de Bourion said [that he would] show the letter and not to believe him regarding the testimony of the year until he showed them the letter. On the next day he showed it to them, it had written within it what is written above and he said to them the words that are said above. This ends the testimony of Diulosal de Belceire who testified before the latter court and before his colleagues of the first court and before Duran the mentioned litigant. Afterwards Estrouc Oudec Ourgeir testified after he was properly sworn, interrogated, and examined. He said he heard from the witnesses what his colleague Diulosal de Belceire testified, when Vidal said [5]145 on the mentioned day and Bonfil said [5]144 on the mentioned day. When they saw this disagreement the agreed that there had been two years since the incident since the marriage, but they were still arguing over the year through how they were counting it. Vidal said [5]145 counting from that day, and Bonfil said [5]144 counting from that day. Regarding this was the disagreement of the witnesses. Vidal de Bourion said not to believe him on this disagreement of the calculation until he showed the letter that he had about it. On the next day, Shabbat, he showed them the letter and gave it to them as was mentioned above. This is what the three members of the first court testified before the latter court who sat to accept their testimony at the will of Mastre Duran the litigant, before him, and before the dignitaries, Mastre Abram Avigdor, Don Samuel Calo, and Don Estrouc de Belceire from what was testified before them by Vidal Abraham de Bourion and Bonfil Cregoud regarding the marriage. This happened on Monday on the tenth day of the month Shevat year [5]147 (1387 CE) in Arles, and from this two from the latter court, who are Estrouc Solomon Avigdor and Bouniac Estrouc Nasi, made a document of reception of testimony, and they signed it in Nimes. They wrote in it, "Even though we sat as three, we signed as two." After that the testimony of Vidal de Bourion was investigated before three [judges, regarding] how he testified before the first court who were JOHN DOE, JOHN DOE, and JOHN DOE about the marriage, and if he anything about the case and what caused him to say it. These three [judges,] who were currently receiving his testimony, swore him, investigated him, examined him, and asked him how did he testify before the three [judges] of the first court regarding the marriage, if the court was sitting while receiving testimony, and if they swore, interrogated, and examinded him. He responded that it was known that they were not sitting, and that he was not sworn, interrogatd, or examined. Rather they asked him how exactly did the marriage, that the Mastre Duran was claiming, occur. They were informed that on Thursday on the 28th day of the month Tevet of this year (1387 CE) Duinet de Rodez de Arles took me in the market that is called Sester and said to me, "If you want, you could take revenge on your enemy Officer Cresces and buy yourself a strong man who loves you, and all the harm that you will get from that one is already returned to him. If you do this, I will give you a beautiful cloak [worth] ten flowers (maybe a fluer de lis coin?). You will say the things that I will tell you. I said to him, it is my desire to take revenge on my enemy and to buy myself a friend, and I will do whatever he tells me. On this the mentioned Duinet said to me that I must accept a <i>Cherem</i> (A kind of strict oath or decree) upon myself like I would accept a <i>Cherem Hakahal</i> (An official Cherem from the leaders of the Jewish community that was enforceable) to say all of the things that he told me whenever the mentioned Mastre Duran requests me to say them. These are the words that the mentioned Duinet said to me after I accepted a <i>Cherem</i> upon myself to say them when they are requested of me. This is what he said to me, when you will be asked about the claim of marriage that Mastre Duran is claims he gave to the mentioned Meirona, you will respond and say, Know that this is true that the mentioned Mastre Duran took me with Bonfil Cregud on the Wednesday after the fast of the month Tammuz of the year [5]144 to go to the house of the mentioned Meirona. He hid us in a dark room that was opposite the door of the house. After that Mrs. Meirona came down and saw the ring in the mentioned Mastre Duran's hand. She asked him to show it to her, but he did not want to. She said to him, "You better show it to me", and he gave it to her and said to her, "I am giving it to you through the laws of marriage." She accepted the ring, wrapped it in paper, placed it in her bosom, and went to the kitchen. Then the mentioned Duran followed her. Then I and Bonfil went to the market to our jobs. This is what the mentioned Duinet told me to testify whenever I will be asked to. On Friday the 29th day of the month Shevat of this year (1387 CE) in the evening, the mentioned Duran came to me and requested me to follow him to the synagogue. I saw there Yosef de Couleon, Devlousal Estrouc, and Estrouc Eidec. The mentioned Mastre Duran set them to receive testimony from me and from the mentioned Bonfil. When I saw the mentioned Bonfil there, I said to him, "I am afraid to say this lie that the mentioned Mastre Duran is asking you and I to say before these three." The mentioned Bonfil said to me, "Don't worry, because all the harm that we will get from this will go back to Mastre Duran." Since I did not realize that these three [men] were a court and because of the <i>Cherem</i> that I accepted upon myself to say the words that the mentioned Duinet placed in my mouth, I told the three while they were still standing that they should not swear me and not examine me, [instead] they should just ask me how the marriage, that the mentioned Mastre Duran is claiming, happened. Then I said the words that the mentioned Duinet placed in my mouth, except that I intentionally changed the number of the year. I said that it happened in the year [5]145. Then the mentioned Bonfil and Mastre Duran said to me, "[5]144, [5]144." On this I went back and I said to them, "Do not believe me at all, and do not sign at all on anything that I said until I show you within two days a letter that I have in my house about this case." This is what I did so that I would not finish my testimony. After that the mentioned Bonfil testified that it happened in the year [5]144. The next day on Shabbat I went to the mentioned Yosef de Couleon, and Devlual de Belceire. I said to them, "Didn't I tell you yesterday that you should not believe me at all and you should not sign at all from what I said to you about the marriage until I show you what I have in my house. This is the letter that I said I would show to you." It was written [in the letter] that in truth I did not see, I did not hear, and I was not there for the event. Rather the whole thing is certainly false, and so you should only believe this letter. The mentioned Yosef de Couleon said to me, "I am more happy from this letter that what you said before us yesterday." After the mentioned Vidal testified before the three [judges], after he was sworn, interrogated, and examnined properly, they sat as one and swore and examined him again if he knew anything about the marriage that the mentioned Mastre Duran was claiming. He said to them, "Be informed that I do not know and did not hear of this matter. It has been almost four and half years since I entered the house of the mentioned Meirona, except for one time that was close to Passover of the year [5]145, when I went there with merchants to purchase vessels from her that were from her brother, Officer Mastre Bongouds. And I have not spoken with the mentioned Mastre Duran for almost four and a half years, except for that day when I was before the mentioned three [judges] on the 29th of Tevet of this year. But you should know that truthfully I would never have thought to say that I saw what I said before the mentioned three [judges], if not for the <i>Cherem</i> that the mentioned Duinet forced me to accept. I thought that I would be sinning if I did not fulfil the vow that I vowed with the strength of a <i>Cherem</i> to the mentioned Duinet. Truthfully I did not see and I did not hear anything about what the mentioned Mastre Duran is claiming about the marriage. Truthfully it seems that he is claiming falsely. This is the testimony of the mentioned Vidal before the three who are, Estrouc Solomo Avigdor, Salouis Vidal De Bourion, and Bouniac Nestrouc Nasi. These three wrote and signed a document about this. Such they were sitting, three seated as one on the 12th of Shevat [5]147. Two days later after the three of the first court testified before the latter court, [the first court] made themselves a document of reception of testimony that they recieved from two witnesses of marriage. They recorded that the mentioned witnesses testified before them, as they were sitting three seated as one, with clear testimony that on Tuesday after the fast of the 17th of Tammuz [5]144 the mentioned Mastre Duran brought them to the house of Mrs. Meirona and said to them, you are my witnesses. They went with him and in front of them Mastre Duran spoke with the mentioned Mrs. Meirona and he had in his hand a gold ring and he showed it to her. She said to him, what is in your hand? He said, a gold ring. She said to him, Show it to me. He answered her, I will not show it to you. The mentioned Meirona retorted and said to him, It is in your interest to show it to me. Then he said to her, I am giving you this ring so that you should be married to me with it. She took the ring through the laws of marriage and wrapped it in somthing white and placed it in her bosom. After that they both went into a room and the witnesses went off on their ways. It is also recorded in this document that this court heard the words of the witnesses and accepted their testimony. When they interrogated each [witnesses] alone, they found that their words aligned with each other about the marriage on the same day, in the same week, in the same month, and in the same place. It was after they interrogated the testimony that Vidal was uncertain if it was in the year [5]144 or the year [5]145, and the mentioned witness said, I am uncertain if on that year they counted [5]144 or [5]145, and this uncertainty can be resolved after I look at a scroll that I have in my house that he written what they counted in that year if it was [5]144 or [5]145, but it is clear to me today that this past fast of Tammuz, that was in the year [5]146, only two years had passed. On that year, that I am uncertain of if it was [5]144 or [5]145, all the mentioned things happened between Mastre Duran and Meirona, as is recorded above, that I Vidal and my colleague Bonfil Cregoud saw. This is the detail of the reception of testimony that the three judges signed, that the witnesses testified before them on Friday the 29th of Tevet of the year [5]147. They [the judges] signed it on the 12th of Shevat [5]147. But they did not record anything about the hiding of the witnesses, and how Vidal Abram showed them a letter on Shabbat the day after their testimony.                        

Teshuva 267



Teshuva 268



Teshuva 269



Teshuva 270



Teshuva 271



Teshuva 272



Teshuva 273



Teshuva 274



Teshuva 275



Teshuva 276



Teshuva 277



Teshuva 278



Teshuva 279



Teshuva 280



Teshuva 281



Teshuva 282



Teshuva 283



Teshuva 284

That with which he challenged him in Avodah Zarah (29b), i.e. Rabbi Ishmael said to Rabbi Aqibah, "My brother, how do you pronounce 'כי טובים דודיך מיין' etc.": How is it possible that a great sage like Rabbi Akiqah could be embarrassed in the pronunciation of a verse that a child would know how to pronounce? If we do not say that their books were not vocalized, we have also a separate challenge in Bava Batra 21A, where Joab consults his teacher on the pronunciation of זכר. Isn't Joab's teacher better than Rabbi Aqibah? Yet it was possible to err in זכר's pronunciation.
ANSWER: Even if their books were vocalized it is not difficult to explain Rabbi Aqibah's error in pronouncing that verset, because it is possible that their books disagreed with each other in its pronunciation as ours do today in many cases. And even on the consonantal spellings the books disagreed in antiquity, as we were taught in Masekhet Sofrim, "Reish Lakish said, 'Three books were found in the Temple, the book of מעון, the book of זאטוטי, and the book of היא. In one was found מעון אלהי קדם and in the others מעונה אלהי קדם, so they accepted the two and rejected the one; in one was found וישלח את זאטוטי בני ישראל and in the others וישלח את נערי בני ישראל, so they accepted the two and rejected the one; in one was found  עשר היא . . .'" In the case of Joab's teacher all their books agreed with our pronunciation, and so he was corrected . . .