Tractate Tefillin
מסכת תפילין
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Tractate Tefillin



Chapter 1

The text of tefillin is not written on parchment made of skins of unclean (i.e. non-kosher) domestic animals or unclean wild animals, but it is written on parchment made from skins of dead (i.e. not slaughtered in a way fit for eating) or sick (in a way that makes them unfit for eating) kosher animals. And we are not concerned that perhaps the skins were pierced at the animal’s heart.
If the tefillin parchments were perforated in the location of the writing, they are invalid; if in an empty space, they are valid. If one wrote the letter vavs as zayins, zayins as vavs, regular letters as final ones, final ones as regular ones, the paragraph breaks petucha as setuma, setuma as petucha, or if he mixed up their other letters or wrote them in Paleo-Hebrew or fashioned the parchments as an amulet, they are invalid.
Women, non-Jewish slaves, and minors are exempt from wearing tefillin.  Any minor who understands what it means to guard the sanctity of tefillin is obligated to wear tefillin. Tavi, the non-Jewish slave of Raban Gamaliel would put on tefillin. Michal daughter of king Shaul would also put on Tefillin. Yonah’s wife would undertake a festival pilgrimage to Jerusalem. 
Regarding pallbearers, those who stand by to replace them, and those who stand by to replace the replacements, those who are in front of the bier and thus have not carried it yet and those behind the bier and thus have already carried it, those who are needed to carry the bier are exempt  from the Shema and from tefillin. Those who are not needed to carry the bier are obligated. Regarding those standing to eulogize, those who are eulogizing are exempt from tefillin, while those with a view inside to where the casket is are obligated.
One who says regarding an ill person on Shabbat “come and recite this verse for my son who is afraid, put on him a Torah scroll, put tefillin on him so that he may sleep” don’t listen to him.
The tefillin is susceptible to ritual impurity. To purify it, one sprinkles it and immerses it a second time. Rabbi Chanina Ben Gamliel says it is necessary to unfasten it first. If the tefillin fell into the water and stayed there long enough for some text to be erased, an inspection is necessary.
Tefillin straps can be taken from anywhere, i.e. they do not have to be prepared specifically for their purpose. Rabbi Shimon Ben Gamliel says any manufactured leather is forbidden to be used for straps because he holds they do have to be prepared specifically for their purpose.
Tefillin may not be obtained except from an expert. If there is no expert, then of the multiple pairs in the bundle  take one pair, i.e. one head tefillin and one arm tefillin, to inspect it. One does not give the portions to the seller to inspect. Rather, he takes them himself and inspects them. If he inspected them and found them to be correct, he should take the entire bundle and should not be concerned that it is unfit.
For the head tefillin one inserts four scriptural portions: “Sanctify to Me”, “It will be when I bring you” , “Listen (Shema)” , “It will be if you listen”. And the same texts appear on the arm tefillin, except that one makes the texts in the arm tefillin into one portion, i.e. one piece of parchment. And if you make them four portions, it is still valid. Rabbi Yehuda says to sew them together and insert them into one compartment. Rabbi Yehuda concedes  that if one has two head tefillin, but no arm tefillin, he can cover up one of them with a skin and make it into an arm tefillin.
The arm tefillin is placed on the upper part i.e. the biceps of the arm. So too “Between your Eyes” means on the upper part of the head and not literally “Between your Eyes”. “On your arm” and “Between your Eyes”. Just like “On your arm” means on the upper part of the arm, so too “Between your Eyes” means on the upper part of the head. How do we know tefillin is worn on the upper part of the hand? Like that that which Rabbi Eliezer Ben Yaakov says. Another derivation that the head tefillin must be on the upper part of the head and not literally “between your eyes”: Rabbi Yehuda says: It says “on your arm” and it says “between your eyes”. Just as “on your arm” is in a place which can be declared impure i.e. tzaras with a single symptom, so too “between your eyes” is in a place which can be declared impure with a single symptom. Another derivation that the head tefillin must be on the upper part of the head and not literally “between your eyes”: It says “Between your Eyes” and it says “Nor make any baldness between your eyes for the dead”. Just as baldness can only be in a place covered by hair so too tefillin is only placed in a place covered by hair. It says “You should write them” and it says “You should bind them”. The hand that writes is the hand that ties. i.e. one should tie the tefillin with the same hand he writes with, so it is put on the opposite hand to the one he writes with.
The mitzvah of tefillin is from the morning until the evening. One who sleeps in the daytime should not be concerned to take them off as long as it is no longer than the time required to walk 100 amos. One who is preparing to go on a journey should not put on the tefillin before the earliest time of the commandment of tefillin. If he does put them on before the time of the commandment, he should put his hand on them  once the time the commandment arrives and recite the blessing(s).
The absence of the arm tefillin does not invalidate the head tefillin and the absence of the head tefillin does not invalidate the arm tefillin, i.e. if one only has one he can wear it without the other. If one overturns the box of the head tefillin from above wearing it upside down, back above and top touching his head, he does not fulfil the obligation of wearing tefillin. When one puts on tefillin, he puts the arm tefillin on first, and when he takes them off he removes the head tefillin first. And so too with regard to sandals, when one puts them on, he puts the right one on first, and when he takes them off he removes the left one first. Similarly, whatever dish is served at a meal first is removed first except for bread which is served first and removed last.
One who makes his tefillin round exposes himself to danger during times of persecution, when there is a ban on tefillin, and yet he does not fulfill the mitzva of tefillin because they must be square. If one placed the head tefillin on his forehead, instead of above his hairline, or if he placed the arm tefillin on his palm, and not on his bicep, this is the way of the heretics. If one plated his tefillin with gold, or paced it on the outside of his niklah, that is a sleeve, this is the way of the opponents of tradition.
On Shabbat tefillin can be moved within the house. But not into or out of a public place except as below. One who finds tefillin in a public place outside of town where they are in danger of becoming damaged, he brings them into the town and into the house pair by pair by wearing them as if for the commandment. Rabban Gamliel says two pairs at a time, two on the head and two on the arm. Just as a man can do this so can a woman. New ones as well as old ones. Rabbi Yehuda says it is permitted to bring in old ones, but forbidden to bring in new ones.
If one finds a Torah scroll  or a tefillin bundle in a public place outside town, as explained above, on Shabbat, he gives it to another less than 4 amos away and the other person gives it to another until it reaches the outer courtyard of the city even if it requires a hundred people. If there is no other person to do the above, one person moves it from one point within four amos of where he is to another point within four amos of where he is. By repeating this he can get it into the town on his own. This is even in accordance with what Rabbi Shimon says above because everything that is decreed by the court is not decreed in the Temple and not regarding sacred writings. One who was in school or the study hall and Shabbat started, or he was in the bathroom or the bathhouse  and forgot to take off his tefillin before entering them he should cover his hair, i.e. the head tefillin, with his hand, get out, go home, and take them off. And if he cannot, he should enter a nearby house and take them off there.
One may put tefillin in his wallet even though there is money in it. One may hang them on the legs of a bed. If someone else  is with him, it is forbidden. One should not put tefillin under his head, but if he is guarding them this is permitted. If the load one is carrying on his head and elsewhere is heavy and he sweats, we are not concerned that it is a disgrace and make him take off his tefillin unless they are being crushed. A potter takes off the arm tefillin, but still wears the head tefillin. A baker takes off the head tefillin, but still wears the arm tefillin. If he bakes with both hands, he takes off his arm tefillin too.
Before one enters the innermost room of the bathhouse where everyone is naked he must take off his tefillin four amos  away from where the naked people are, i.e. the entrance. In the middle room where people dress and undress, where some are naked and some are dressed, one does not take off tefillin nor does one put them on if he is not already wearing them. The outer room where everyone is dressed has no restrictions on putting on tefillin.
Before one enters a tannery or where people soak flax or where they launder leather, he must take off his tefillin four amos away from the entrance. Before one enters a bathroom, he must take off his tefillin four amos away from the entrance. And if the bathhouse he enters is a bathhouse of honor he does not take the tefillin off until he reaches the entrance.
It happened that Rabbi Eliezer went to visit a certain homeowner in the town of Ovelin. They went to immerse in a cave. Rabbi Eliezer took off his clothes, and he took off his tefillin. The homeowner said to Rabbi Eliezer “Rabbi, the water in that other cave is better than this one”. And the distance between the two caves was just four amos. Rabbi Eliezer put on his clothes and put on his tefillin  and went to the other cave and took them off again because Rabbi Eliezer would not walk four amos without tefillin. 
That is how Rabbi Eliezer performed the commandment of tefillin regularly. Rabbi Eliezer used to say: Great is the commandment of tefillin because the Holy One Blessed be He said to Israelites: “recite it day and night”. The Israelites said  before the Holy One Blessed be He: “Master of the Universe, can we really recite it day and night?” The Holy One Blessed be He said to them: “My sons, put tefillin on your heads and on your arms, and I will elevate you as if you study Torah day and night as it says  “And this will serve for you as a sign on your hand and a reminder between your eyes so that the Torah of Hashem may be in your mouth”.
Beloved is Israel because they fulfill all the commandments in the Torah. How is that? Tefillin is on their heads, and tefillin is on their arms, and a mezuza is at their entrances, and four tzitzit are on their garments. It is about them that King David says  “I praised You seven times a day for Your just rules”. They brought a parable: To what is this similar? To a king who told his wife “Adorn and fix yourself before me”. She asked him “Why?” He replied “So that you appear desirable to me”. So too, the Holy One Blessed be He says to Israel “My sons, fix and adorn yourselves before me with commandments”. They asked him “Why?” He replied “so you are desirable to me” as it says  “You are as beautiful as Tirzah” meaning you are beautiful when you make yourself desirable  to me with commandments.