Bemidbar Rabbah
במדבר רבה
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.org

Chapter 1






...Another interpretation of 'And God spoke to Moses' - happy is Moses, [in] that sixty thousand are standing there, and the kohanim, and the levites, and the elders, all are standing there, and He only speaks to Moses.
...And God spoke to Moses in the desert of Sinai. Why in the desert of Sinai? From here our sages taught [that] through three things Torah is given: fire, and water and desert. How do we know [Torah is given] through fire? 'and the mountain of Sinai was all full of smoke' (Exodus 19:18). And through water? '...also the Heavens, also the clouds dropped water' (Judges 5:4) And through the desert? 'And God spoke to Moses in the desert of Sinai'. And why was it given through those three things? To point out that, just as these are free for all the inhabitants of the world, so too the words of Torah are free, as it is written 'Hey, everyone who is thirsty, go to water' (Isaiah 55:1). Another interpretation of 'And God spoke to Moses in the desert of Sinai' - whoever does not make him/herself open to all [lit. ownerless], like a desert is not able to acquire wisdom and Torah, therefore it is written 'in the desert of Sinai'...

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8

Man or woman, who does any of the sins etc. - Rabi Abahu says (Hosea 14:8): 'Those that dwell under His shadow' those are the gerim that come and have love for the shadow of the Holy One of Blessing. 'They shall grow as grain' in [the study of] Talmud. 'Shall blossom as vine' in [the study of] Aggadah. 'His memory/scent shall be as the wine of Lebanon' - said the Holy One of Blessing: "The appreciation of the gerim is as dear to me as the wine that was poured on the altar [as libation.]" And why does He call it [the altar] Lebanon (root LVN)? Because it whitens (maLViN) the sins of Israel like snow, as it is written (Isaiah 1:18) 'though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow.' Rabi Shimon Bar Yochai says: because all the hearts (LeVavot) become happy due to it. As it says (Psalms 48:2): 'Fair in situation, the joy of the whole earth.' And the rabbis say - because of the verse (II Kings 9:3) 'and My eyes and My heart shall be there perpetually.' Another interpretation: 'they will grow as grain' - they will make the essence, they are like Israel; as it is said (Zechariah 9:17) 'grain [for] the young men [of Israel]'. 'They shall blossom as vine', as [just like] Israel, as it says (Psalms 80:9) 'You plucked a vine from Egypt.' And so you find that, just as a portion of the Torah was written regarding one Israel and another - that if he misappropriated something of him, that he is obligated to a sacrifice, as it is written (Leviticus 5:21) 'If any one sin, and commit a trespass etc.' - so too you find that the Holy One of Blessing wrote a portion of the Torah regarding what goes on between Israel and gerim, that if a man from Israel steals from a ger, the judgement is as if he stole from another man from Israel. You find that regarding this it is written 'a sin that he sinned' and regarding stealing from a ger it is written 'from any sins of a man.' Regarding this one it is written 'and trespassed a trespass against the Lord' and regarding this one it is written 'to trespass a trespass against the Lord.' Regarding this one it is written: 'And it will be, when he sins and is guilty' and regarding the ger it is written 'and that soul will be guilty'. Regarding this one it is written: 'And he will pay with his head' and regarding the ger it is written 'and he will return his guilt with his head'. Regarding this one it is written: 'and he will add his fifth' and regarding the ger it is written 'and he will add a fifth'. Regarding this one it is written: 'and he will bring his guilt-offering to the Lord' and regarding stealing a ger it is written 'besides the ram for the kipurim'. Behold we have learned: that the essence of the gerim is like Israel's. Therefore, they will be as grain and blossom.

Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19

This is the ordinance - As it is said verse (Job:14): Who gave (brought forth) purity to one who is impure? , such as Abraham from Terah, Hezekiah from Achaz, etc , Israel from the nations of the world, the world to come from  this world. Who did so, who commanded so, who decreed it so, if not The One! (the world's only!) ....! There we learned (Parah 4:4): those who occupy themselves with the Parah from beginning to end, impurify their clothes, but it makes clothes Pure. God said: I carved a law (into the fabric of creation), a decree i made, you have no ability to  transgress (override) My law!
This is the ordinance of the Torah - (Psalms 12:6) The sayings of G-d are pure (purify). R. Hanan Ben Pazzi elucidated this verse [of psalms with the parsha of Parah] Parah- which has seven seven sevens; seven cows, seven fires, seven sprinkling, seven washes, seven unclean, seven pure, seven priests. And if someone tells you five are, tell him: Moses and Aaron are included, as it is said: And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying, This is the ordinance of the Torah:




...R. Acha in the name of R. Chanina said: At the time when Moses ascended to the heavenly heights, he heard the voice of the Holy One, Blessed Be He, who was sitting and studying the [Torah portion of] the Red Heifer, and uttering a halakhah in the name of the one who spoke it. "R. Eliezer said: a calf [when written in the Torah] is one year old, and a cow is two [years old]." [Moses] said before Him: "Master of All the Worlds! May it be Your will that he [R. Eliezer] would be from my loins [i.e. would be my descendant]." [God] said to him: "By your life [i.e. assuredly] he is from your loins! For so it says in Scripture (Exodus 18:4): "...and the name of the other [son of Moses] was 'Eliezer'...", the same particular name.
A gentile asked Rabbi Yochanan ben Zakkai, "These rituals you do, they seem like witchcraft! You bring a heifer, burn it, crush it up, and take its ashes. [If] one of you is impure by the dead [the highest type impurity], 2 or 3 drops are sprinkled on him, and you declare him pure?!" He said to him, "Has a restless spirit ever entered you?" He said to him, "No!" "Have you ever seen a man where a restless spirit entered him?" He said to him, "Yes!" [Rabbi Yochanan ben Zakkai] said to him, "And what did you do for him?" He sad to him, "We brought roots and made them smoke beneath him, and pour water and it flees." He said to him, "Your ears should hear what leaves from your mouth! The same thing is true for this spirit, the spirit of impurity, as it is written, (Zachariah 13:2) "Even the prophets and the spirit of impurity will I remove from the land." They sprinkle upon him purifying waters, and it [the spirit of impurity] flees." After he left, our rabbi's students said, "You pushed him off with a reed. What will you say to us?" He said to them, "By your lives, a dead person doesn't make things impure, and the water doesn't make things pure. Rather, God said, 'I have engraved a rule, I have decreed a decree (chukah chakakti, gezeira gazarti), and you have no permission to transgress what I decreed, as it says "This is a chok (rule) of the Torah."
"Take the rod ... give the congregation and their cattle drink" -- From here [we learn] that the Holy One takes pity on Israel's money. "And Moses and Aaron gathered the assembly together before the rock" -- similiarly it says "And all of the congregation he gathers to the door of the tent of meeting." This teaches that each one saw himself standing on the face of the rock. Likewise, when they crossed the Jordan, all of the Children of Israel entered between the the staves of the ark, as it says (Joshua 3): "Joshua said to the Children of Israel, come near and listen to the words of Hashem." [Similarly] here all of Israel were standing and seeing all of the miracles of the rock. They began to say "Moses knows the rule of the rock. If he asks, it will bring forth water." So Moses was uncertain -- "If I listen to them I nullify the words of the Allpresent, and the Holy One (Job 5:13) 'takes the wise in theןr craftiness.'" But Moses had been careful for 40 years not to get angry at them, because he was terrified of the oath the the Holy One swore: "Not one of these men will see [the land]..." They said to him: "Here is a rock; just as you want to bring forth water from another rock, bring it forth from this one." He shouted at them "Hear now, you rebels!" "Rebels (morim)" has many meanings: 1) "stubborn ones" 2) "fools" -- in the sea villages they call fools "morim". 3) "those who teach their teachers" 4) "archers" (In I Sam 30:3 the word "morim" is used to mean "archers".)  ... Even so, Moses only used the rock that the Holy One told him [to use].

"
"

Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22

