Menorat HaMaor
מנורת המאור
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Menorat HaMaor

Piyyut



Introduction



i; On Charity



ii; On Prayer

Prayer



Prayer in the Synagogue



Washing



Tzitzit



Tefillin



Hundred Berakhot



Chazzan



Kaddish



Shema



Amidah



Order of Amidah



Birkat Kohanim



Tachanun



Torah Reading



Mincha



Arvit



Bedtime Shema



Shabbat Prayers



Havdalah



Rosh Chodesh



Kiddush Levanah



Chanukah



Purim



Pesach

i



ii







The one checking should take a candle in his hand; and it should be from wax, as I said. Then he recites the blessing, "Blessed are You, Lord our God, King of the Universe, who has commanded us about the destruction of chametz." And he searches afterwards, since the Sages, may their memory be blessed, said, "One must recite the blessing over all commandments, passing upon them" - meaning before [them]. And after checking, he takes the chametz in his hands and places it in a closet or in [another] place that a mouse cannot reach. It is like [the textual version] we teach in the Yerushalmi, "How do we do it? We cover it with a vessel. If he covered it and did not find it, I say that a [human] hand took it. If he did not cover [it] and he did not find it, he needs to check the house another time." And afterwards, he nullifies all of the chametz that is in his possession that he does not know about. And he needs to express the nullification with his mouth, with words that nullify it in any language that he wants. However, it has become customary to nullify [it] with the wording of the Gemara. And that is: All the chametz that I have in my possession that I have not seen and that I do not know about, let it be considered like the dust of the earth (<i>Kol Chamira...</i>).

iii



iv



v



vi



vii



viii



Sefirat HaOmer



Shavuot



Fasts



Drought Relief



Individual Fasts



Matters that Occurred to our Forefathers



Tisha BeAv



Selichot



Rosh Hashanah



Yom Kippur



Sukkot



The Four Species



Lulav



Sukkot Prayers



Addenda



iii; On Repentance

The Quality of Repentance



On Afflictions



The Power of Repentance



Incentives of Repentance



What is Repentance



The Quality of the Repenter



Marganita deRabbi Meir



Merits and Transgressions



Order of Teshuvah



Laws of Teshuvah



Tales of the Righteous



Reprovement



iv; On Humility

Its Attributes



Developing Humility



Its Habits



Haughtiness and its Subclasses



Great is Humility




















Our father Abraham lowered himself, so the Holy One, blessed be He, gave him greatness. And that is to the one to whom the Holy One, blessed be He, first said, “Ask.” Rabbi Yonatan said, “There are three to whom the Holy One, blessed be He, said, ‘Ask.’” Rabbi Acha said they are four - Abraham, Solomon, Achaz and the messianic king. Abraham, from where [do we know it]? As it is written (Genesis 15:2), ‘And [he] said, “My Lord God, what will You give me?’” He would not have said, ‘What will You give me,’ unless He had said to him, ‘Ask.’ Solomon, from where [do we know it]? As it is written (I Kings 3:5), ‘In Givon, the Lord appeared to Solomon [... and …] said, “Ask that which I shall give you.”’ Achaz, from where [do we know it]? As it is written (Isaiah 7:10-11), ‘And the Lord spoke further to Achaz, “Request a sign for yourself from the Lord, your God.”’ The messianic king, from where [do we know it]? As it is written (Psalms 2:8), ‘Request of Me, and I will render nations your inheritance, your estate will be the limits of the earth.’” Rabbi Levi said, “The Holy One, blessed be He, showed our father Abraham, peace be upon him, the stars, the constellations and all the corners of the firmament, as it is stated (Genesis 15:5), ‘And He took him outside (<i>chutzah</i>).’ And did He take him outside of the universe? Rather it is that He showed him the chambers of the skies that are called <i>chutzot</i>, as it is stated (Proverbs 8:26), ‘Before He made earth and <i>chutzot</i>.’” Rabbi Yehudah bar Ilai said, “Five things did the Holy One, blessed be He, show to our father Abraham, peace be upon him, and these are them: 1) He showed him the splitting of the Red Sea, as it is stated (Genesis 15:17), ‘which passed between these pieces (<i>gezarim</i>).’ And likewise does it state (Psalms 136:13), ‘To slice the Red Sea into pieces (<i>gezarim</i>).’ 2) He showed him the giving of the Torah, as it is stated, ‘and behold, a smoking furnace and a flaming torch.’ And likewise is it with the giving of the Torah (Exodus 20:14), ‘And the entire people saw the torches and the sound of the shofar. 3) He showed him the Temple built and [4)] the order of the sacrifices, as it is stated, (Genesis 15:9), ‘He said to him, ‘Take for Me a calf of three.’ [5)] And He showed him the four empires (destined to subjugate Israel), as it is stated, (Genesis 15:12) ‘and behold, a dread of deep darkness fell upon him.’ Those were the four empires.” Rabbi Channan said, “He showed him the revival of the dead, as it is stated (Genesis 15:10), ‘Birds of prey came down upon the carcasses.’ He took the limbs and placed them side by side. And once the bird descended upon them, they came to life, as it is stated, ‘but Abram repelled (<i>vayashev</i>) them.’ And <i>vayashev</i> is always that they are scattered by the wind (which is only possible here if they returned to life), as it is stated (Isaiah 40:7), ‘when the breath [of the Lord] blows (<i>nashvah</i>) upon it.’”

Arrogance



v; On Fixed Hours of Study

Torah Study



Torah is an Architect of Creation



Torah and the Jewish People



The Crown Torah



The Light of Torah



The Healing of Torah



Tree of Life



Dedication to Torah



Bitul Torah



Its Reward



Death of the Righteous



Torah Study by Day and by Night



Excellent is Torah Combined with a Worldly Occupation



Torah for its Own Sake



Seeking Torah



Torah and Derekh Eretz



Sefer Torah



Giving of the Torah



Ignorant People



The Duty to Teach Torah



Teacher Pupil Relationship



Honoring the Sages



Five attributes of the Torah scholar



Great is Torah



vi; On the Commandments

Study in order to keep and teach



The commandments and Israel



Dedication and sacrifice



On their fulfilment

i



ii



iii



iv



v



vi



vii



viii



ix



x



Order of blessings

i



ii



iii



iv



v



vi



vii



viii



ix



x



Laws of circumcision



Great is circumcision



Betrothal blessing



Laws of redeeming the firstborn



Laws of mezuzah



Laws of onen



Laws of mourning



The eulogy



Not to grieve excessively



Eruvin



Laws of Challah



Parapet blessing



vii; On Acts of Mercy

Great is Kindness I



Visiting the Sick



The Vidduy



Eulogizing the dead



Great is Kindness II



viii; On the Observance of Sabbath and Holy Days

Observing Shabbat



The covenant of Shabbat



Oneg Shabbat



Honor the Shabbat



Great is Shabbat



Holidays



Addendum







Strength seduces a person. When he sees about himself that, among his fellows, he is like a lion among flocks of sheep, he will trust in the power of his strength: If they rise up against him and he defeats them, he will not recognize the hand of God that saved him from their hand, so he will not hail and praise [God]. Rather, he will say, "I did it with the strength of my hand." So his heart will turn from God and he will deny a major principle, as happened with Goliath the Philistine, who blasphemed the God of the Jewish war encampments.
What is its antidote? He should put into his heart and contemplate how many strong men failed with their strength; due to the circumstances, they fell into the hands of weaker ones. [Likewise should one contmplate] that there is no strong man who can escape accidents, like hitting his foot on a rock, falling from the roof, drowning in a river, getting sick or other accidents that are similar to this, that have no connection to strength. So the only salvation and rescue for someone from them is God, may He be blessed, who has the salvation. He should attach a poem of accidents to his heart, and see that he has no protections and no shelter other than the supernal Shelter; and that he has no protection if he does not seek protection from Him. For 'who is the one and which one is it' who is as strong as Goliath? But because he relied upon his strength and trusted in his weapons and the copper helmet on his head and his spear, that was like a weaver's shaft, he disparaged David; that is why he fell into his hand. Whereas David who trusted in God, who was his strength, stole the spear from his hand and severed his head. And likewise did he say to him when he approached him (I Samuel 17:45), "You come to me with the sword, etc." When a person looks at and contemplates these things and their particulars, he will place his mind towards Him and plant his spirit in the hand of the 'God of the spirits of all flesh,' 'who gives strength to men to establish power.' And then the haughtiness of his heart will bow down and he will lower his uppity eyes. But 'kindness will surround the one who trusts in God.'

ix; On the Honoring of Parents

Great is honoring one's parents



The ways of honoring



Morals in honoring one's parents



The extent of honoring one's parents



x; On Marriage

One's match; fate or choice



How great is a great wife



The virtues of great wife



Honoring a wife



Marriage and lineage



One who commits adultery is likened to an idolater



The severity of sexual immorality



Marrying a suitable wife while young



The virtues of a modest woman



Communion with one's wife

i According to the Raavad



ii According to the Ramban



xi; On the Education of Children

Discipline a son



He who disciplines his son makes him wise



Chastisement of love

How pleasant is the Musar of Love.  Anyone whom Hashem loves, God brings down upon them suffering. You find three good gifts that God gave to Israel; and they were only given by way of suffering. These are them: Torah, the Land of Israel, and the World to Come.  

Extrication of fathers by sons



Commandment a father must fulfill towards his son



The community must hire teachers



One must teach his son Torah



Love of a father to his sons



xii; On Upright Conduct in Business

Acting in business honestly



Keeping away from theft



Keeping away from fraud



To loan the poor



Engaging in an honorable trade



xiii; On the Proper Administration of Justice

Great is justice



Great is jurisprudence



The qualities of a judge



The disgrace of an unfit judge



Keeping away from bribery



To carry the load of the people



To carry out justice to all



To appoint elderly judges



xiv; On Contentment

To rejoices in one's lot



To be satisfied with a little



Trusting God



Accounts of the pious ones



The reward of he who rejoices in his lot



On jealousy



xv; On Equanimity

The praise of he who is slow to anger



He who becomes angry his wisdom departs from him



The great sin of he who becomes angry regularly



xvi; On Avoidance of Flattery and Deception

On flattery



The classes of flatterers



The ways of flatterers



The severity of flattery



On scoffing



The severity of scoffing



xvii; On Love of Comrades and their Considerate Treatment

Loving one's fellow



The severity of



The severity of discord



Love of all people



Associating with the upright



The qualities of a good friend



Loving the converts equally



Beloved are the converts



Honoring one's friend



xviii; On Cleanness of Speech

Death and life are in the power of the tongue



The severity of slander



The punishment of slander



The classes of slanderers



The greatness of silence



xix; On Keeping a Friend's Secret

Keeping and revealing a secret



On disputes



Classes of treacherous men



Being diligent on vows



xx; On Good Manners

On etiquette



i etiquette of Torah scholars



ii etiquette of elders



iii etiquette of men



iv etiquette of women



v etiquette rules



Ways of the Amorite



More on etiquette



Chupat Eliyahu Rabbah

Forward



Gate of Three



Gate of Four



Gate of Five



Gate of Six



Gate of Seven



Gate of Eight



Gate of Nine



Gate of Ten



Gate of Eleven



Gate of Twelve



Gate of Thirteen



Gate of Fourteen



Gate of Fifteen



Ohr Olam



Ohr Gadol



Great is the peace



Addenda

i



ii



iii

