Onkelos Deuteronomy
תרגום אונקלוס על דברים
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Onkelos Deuteronomy



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6




Hear Israel YY is our God YY is one.
And you shall love YY your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your wealth.
And they shall be, these statements that I command to you on this day, on your heart.
And you shall repeat them to your children and you shall speak with them when you are sitting in your house and when you go walking on the road and when you lie down and when you stand up.
And you shall tie them as a sign on your hand, and they shall be Tefillin between your eyes.
And you shall write them on m'zuzahs and attach them to the doorposts of your house and on your gates.

Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11













And it shall be if you surely listen to my commandments that I am commanding to you today: to love YY your God, and to worship before him with all your hearts and all your souls.
And I will give the rain of your land in its time, early and late, and you will gather your grain, and your wine, and your oil.
And I will give the plant in your field for your animal and your will eat and be satisfied.
Beware for yourselves lest your hearts wander and you deviate and you worship the idols of the nations and you will bow to them.
And it will be vehement, the anger of of YY, upon you, and he will close the Heavens, and there will not be the rain, and the land won't give its produce, and you will perish quickly from the land that is good that YY *gave* to you.

Chapter 12





















If the place which the Lord thy God will choose for His Shekinah to dwell there, is too far from you, you may kill your oxen and sheep which the Lord will give you, as I have commanded you, and eat in your cities as your soul desires.

Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29









You stand today, all of you, before Hashem your God. Your heads, your tribes, your elders, your rulers, all men of Israel.
Your children, your women, your stranger in your camp, from the wood collector to the water drawer.
To enter into the covenant of Hashem, your God, and into his oath that Hashem, your God, decrees with you this day.