Tzofnat Paneach
צפנת פענח
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Tzofnat Paneach

Shemot



Vaera



Bo



Beshalach



Yitro



Mishpatim



Terumah



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



















And it seems to me that what is written in the Sha"s in Menachot 99b, that Resh Lakish said that there are times when the cancelling of the Torah is its foundation, as it is written 'that you broke', teaching us that the Holy One of Blessing said to him 'good for you to break it!'And this is very surprising! How can it be that cancelling Torah is its foundation? And I wrote there [regarding the verse] "[between] the creatures, going and returning" (Ezekiel 1:14) that the soul is always on fire etc, lest there will be, God forbid, a cancellation in reality, and through the effort of taking care of one's body such as eating and drinking and sex and business, the soul stops being on fire, and brings about a constriction and tightening of the soul, etc (Ben Porat Yosef, Shabbat HaGadol 2:83), and these are wise words from a wise mouth. And through this one can understand what Resh Lakish said that sometimes the cancellation of the Torah is its foundation (Menachot 99a) from this deep meaning of "going and returning" - and sit with this. And through the dealing with the needs of this world for the purpose of the soul, then the dealings with this world can become a throne for the world to come, etc, see there.
















Said Rabbi Meir: we consider from where the vegetable lives. (Baba Metzia 10:6) I heard from my teacher (the Baal Shem Tov) regarding the verse "behold, darkness will cover the land etc" (Isaiah 60:2) and on the verse "love covers all sins" (Prov. 10:12) that the base is the center and the root of all construction. If the base is unstable and weak the building will fall. So too a person whose base is unstable and weak, such as when a person has arrogance, then all that person's good deeds are built on a basis that is weak and unstable. This is not the case with a strong base, that is able to deal lovingly with hatred and sin, covering them. And those are words of a wise mouth. And this is "from where the vegetable lives" - whether the source that nurtures it comes from a weak and unstable base of not, as above.

Tetzaveh



Ki Tisa



Vayakhel



Pekudei

