Chiddushei Ramban on Avodah Zarah
חידושי רמב"ן על עבודה זרה
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Chiddushei_Ramban_on_Avodah_Zarah
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Chiddushei Ramban on Avodah Zarah



Daf 1a



Daf 1b



Daf 2a



Daf 2b



Daf 3a



Daf 3b



Daf 4a



Daf 4b



Daf 5a



Daf 5b



Daf 6a



Daf 6b



Daf 7a



Daf 7b



Daf 8a



Daf 8b



Daf 9a



Daf 9b



Daf 10a



Daf 10b



Daf 11a



Daf 11b



Daf 12a



Daf 12b



Daf 13a



Daf 13b



Daf 14a



Daf 14b



Daf 15a



Daf 15b



Daf 16a



Daf 16b



Daf 17a



Daf 17b



Daf 18a



Daf 18b



Daf 19a



Daf 19b



Daf 20a



Daf 20b



Daf 21a



Daf 21b



Daf 22a



Daf 22b



Daf 23a



Daf 23b



Daf 24a



Daf 24b



Daf 25a



Daf 25b



Daf 26a



Daf 26b



Daf 27a



Daf 27b



Daf 28a



Daf 28b



Daf 29a



Daf 29b



Daf 30a



Daf 30b



Daf 31a



Daf 31b



Daf 32a



Daf 32b



Daf 33a



Daf 33b



Daf 34a



Daf 34b



Daf 35a



Daf 35b



Daf 36a



Daf 36b



Daf 37a



Daf 37b



Daf 38a



Daf 38b



Daf 39a



Daf 39b



Daf 40a



Daf 40b

Regarding the question raised: If they are worshipped only once a year... It seems that the questioner does not intend to complete the full difficulty (i.e., it's not a full formal objection), but rather means to say: If they are definitely worshipped, what is the reasoning of the Rabbis (who permit found statues)? And if they are definitely not worshipped, then what is Rabbi Meir saying? And if the case is one of uncertainty, then what is the point of disagreement? But since Rabbi Meir explicitly stated that they are worshipped, the questioner did not feel the need to raise more than one difficulty. Rav Yitzchak bar Yosef answered: In Rabbi Meir's locale, he saw that people actually worshipped them, and he is concerned even about statues found throughout the world, because according to him, one who finds statues on the road, he is concerned they might be like the ones from his own locale. And also a city whose custom is not known he is concerned that perhaps they do like the custom of his place.  Therefore, the majority of the world is forbidden in truth, even in a place they don't serve them, it is decreed other places based on his place.  And the Rabbis are not concerned about the minority and do not decree at all.  They don't make a decree about a thing which is not common because of a minority.  And this is the explanation of the language of the gemora saying that [Rabbi Meir] "decrees" and [the Rabbis] "do not decree".   Rav Yehuda explains the Mishnah as a statue of a king, and there is a minority who accept it as a god.  And the dispute is over whether we are concerned for the minority in all places, and there is no discussion of making a decree in one place because of another place.  And Rabbah bar bar Channa also [adds] that they are standing at the entrance of a city, and there are those who worship it.  And it is not like the assumption of Rav Yitzchak bar Yosef.  And Rava comes and explains: The Mishnah refers specifically to statues in large cities, but those in villages are forbidden by everyone even if they are not at the city gate. And we do not make a decree about large cities because of villages, whether according to Rabbi Meir or according to the Rabbis; rather, the concern is due to the minority, that there are some cities that bow down to these.  However, small villages are also a minority of the  world, that if not for this, one who finds statues they should be prohibited according to the Rabbis, that perhaps they were from a village; rather in in villages it's not common to have statues, but they are common in cities whether for idol worship or for beautifying the city. From the words of Rashi of blessed memory, it appears that the term andrata is explained only according to Rabbi Meir. But from the BeHaG we learn that even if the statue has a staff or a bird, it is not forbidden unless it is an andarta or is standing at the city gate. So too wrote his student, the "Ram".

Daf 41a



Daf 41b



Daf 42a



Daf 42b

The objection raised here—“If so, a human face should be permitted!”—why then was it taught in a Baraita: “All faces [i.e., facial images] are permitted except for the human face”? This does not align with Rava’s explanation, who interpreted the Baraita as referring to someone who finds such an image. Rather, it is Abaye who provides this answer—and according to his explanation, there’s a difficulty, for he said earlier that the middle clause refers to one who makes [the image]. And if that is so, it would imply that the halakha does not follow Abaye, who prohibits only the human face. However, since Abaye derived this from a verse, the halakha does follow him, and Rava does not dispute him on this point. And this is also taught in the Tosefta: “A ring that has a face on it is permitted for sealing.” Rabban Chana ben Gamliel said, “In my father’s house, they used to seal with face-shaped stamps.” Rabbi Elazar ben Tzadok said, “All types of face images were found in Jerusalem, except for a human face.” And our great teacher, of blessed memory, also relied on the opinions of Abaye and Rav Huna bar Ashi—and that is the correct ruling. And the Ra’avad, of blessed memory, explained that the image of the ministering angels is actually the image of a human. And since the version [of the Baraita] that mentions “ministering angels” includes them among the heavenly servants, Abaye did not need to derive from the verse ‘You shall not make with Me’ [Ex. 20:20] anything beyond what he already did—that is, a prohibition on all heavenly servants. But this is incorrect, because earlier we saw that Rav Huna Mar bar Rav Ashi also derived [the prohibition] from this verse, and the Baraita alone would not have sufficed as proof.  Additionally, ministering angels have wings and their form is not entirely like that of a human. And regarding the Baraita that teaches, “and the holy creatures” (chayot hakodesh)—this does not mean that an image of a human face alone would be permitted. For if that were the case, it would contradict Abaye. Rather, if the Torah had not explicitly forbidden making likenesses of the heavenly servants, one might have thought that since a figure with four faces was made, this would not be considered a human form and thus should be permitted. Therefore, the verse was necessary.
And we conclude that images of the heavenly attendants, even those in the lower sphere, are forbidden. And it seems proper to explain and say: it makes no difference whether they are raised (engraved outward) or recessed (engraved inward). And likewise with the image of a human face, for it is written “you shall not make [them]” (Ex. 20:20), and the Torah does not distinguish between raised or recessed. Rather, when others made it for him, the Sages said that recessed is permitted and raised is forbidden—because of suspicion.   And that which is taught in a baraita: a ring whose seal is not of the heavenly attendants but of other figures—since they are raised, one must be concerned for suspicion that perhaps it is an image that is worshipped, since he wears it. And even though others made it for him, it is forbidden to wear it. And likewise, it is forbidden to make any raised form, lest people say he made it for idolatrous purposes, as it is taught: if its seal is recessed, it is permitted to wear it, but forbidden to seal with it. And that which we permitted earlier—to make forms and faces—was all in the case of recessed images. But with raised ones, we are concerned for suspicion, unless he makes them for the public, in a context where there is no suspicion. However, it seems to me that they only said this with regard to a ring and similar items which are considered important and prestigious. But with items that are degraded (not objects of respect), it is permitted to fashion other images whether raised or recessed, since there is no suspicion with them. And that which it taught, “it is forbidden to seal with it,” refers to important objects, such as on ornaments and jewelry, but with a degraded object it is permitted, so it seems to me. But in the Halakhot Gedolot it is written: “The Sages taught: a ring whose seal is raised, etc., and it has upon it the image of the sun, or the image of the moon, or the image of a dragon—what is the reason [for prohibition]? Because of suspicion, lest people say he bows to it.” End quote. And again I saw that many authorities, and the author of the Tosafot as well, hold this way: that any recessed image is permitted, even the image of a human or of the heavenly attendants; but a raised image is forbidden in these mentioned (sun, moon, dragon, human), but not in other figures found on earth. And I saw in the Tosefta (Avodah Zarah 6:1): “Three types of rings that have upon them idolatry: when they are raised, it is forbidden to derive benefit from them; if they are not raised, it is permitted to derive benefit from them, and permitted to seal with them. And a ring that has upon it a seal—it is permitted to seal with it. Rabbi Yehudah says: if its seal is recessed, it is forbidden to seal with it, because a form is thereby produced. A ring whose seal is recessed, etc.; a ring that has upon it a face—it is permitted to seal with it, etc. Rabbi Elazar bar Tzadok says: all kinds of faces were [engraved] in Jerusalem, etc.”  Earlier it presented the case with sun and moon, and holds that vessels only become forbidden when the form is raised; but if it is recessed—even though it is of idolatry—it is permitted to seal with it. And the “ring that has upon it a seal” that the Tosefta taught refers to all other seals of various figures, including the faces mentioned at the end—i.e. of animals and birds. And this is a support to my words.