Tosefta Kiddushin
תוספתא קידושין
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.org



Tosefta Kiddushin

Chapter 1

A woman can be acquired in three ways anbd can acquire herself in two ways. She is acquired by money, document, or intercourse. By money, how so? If he gave her money or valuables and told her "[with this] you are sanctified unto me", "[with this] you are betrothed to me", "[with this] you are my wife", she is married to him, but if she gave him money or valuables and said "[with this] I am sanctified unto you", "[with this] I am betrothed to you", "[with this] I am your wife", she is not married to him. By document, how so? Need I say if the document is valuable? She would be married by the value of it. Rather say that even if he wrote it on clay or paper and gave it to her she is married to him. Intercourse - the rule is that intercourse for the sake of marriage renders her married but if it is not for the sake of marriage she is not married.









One who does one mitzvah, it is good for them, and lengthens their days, and they'll inherit the land. And anyone who does one aveirah, it is bad for them, and shortens their days, and they will not inherit the land. About this it is said, "And one sin can destroy much good" (Ecclesiastes 9:18)—with a single sin this one can remove from themselves much good. 
One should always see oneself as if they were half innocent and half guilty. If they do one mitzvah, they are happy that they moved themselves to the side of innocence. If they do one aveirah, woe to them that they moved themselves to the side of guilt. About this it is said, "And one sin can destroy much good" (Ecclesiastes 9:18)—with a single sin this one can remove from themselves much good.
Rabbi Shimon ben Lazar says in the name of Rabbi Meir: The individual is judged after the majority, and the world is judged after the majority. One should always see oneself as if they were half innocent and half guilty, and the word [as if it were] half innocent and half guilty. If they do one mitzvah, they are happy that they moved themselves and the world to the side of innocence. If they do one aveirah, woe to them that they moved themselves and the world to the side of guilt. About this it is said, "And one sin can destroy much good" (Ecclesiastes 9:18)—with a single sin this one can remove from themselves much good.
Rabbi Shimon says: Someone who was righteous all their days, and in the end rebelled—they lose it all, as it says, "The righteousness of the righteous person will not save them in the day of their guilt" (Ezekiel 33:12). Someone who was evil all their days and did teshuvah at the end, God will receive them, as it is said, "And the wickedness of the wicked person will not conquer them on the day they return from their wickedness" (Ezekiel 33:12).
Anyone who is occupied with Scripture, with recitation, and with a career, about this it is said, "The threefold cord (hut) will not be quickly severed" (Ecclesiastes 4:12).