Rambam on Mishnah Avodah Zarah
רמב"ם על משנה עבודה זרה
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Rambam_on_Mishnah_Avodah_Zarah
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Rambam on Mishnah Avodah Zarah



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Mishnah 1

All statues are forbidden etc....
It is the thought of the masters of this work that when the sun will be at a certain degree from the degrees of the rotation, whatever degree it will be, there will be made a statue for that degree with the appearance of the shape that is associated with that degree.  And it is seen from it strengths in the formation of that image and the actions associated to that image.  And they burn incense to that image and they pray to it and they aggrandize it at that time that the sun will be at that degree.  And this is a type form the types of images and is called in Arabic "talisman".  And in the place of Rav Meir one of these types of images, it's already known that Rav Meir is concerned with the minority, and therefore he decreed on all images that they are forbidden because a small amount of them are made to serve once a year, when the sun goes up at that degree.  And the sages are not concerned with the minority and they say they make them only for beauty.  And if it was with the image anything from what the tanna kamma mentioned, or from whatever they added in the braisa and it is a sword or a crown or a ring, at that time we will know with certainty that it was made with a purpose and they burned incense to it and they prayed to it and they offered sacrifices to it and is well known to the masters of this craft.  And only that this image will be at the gate of the city.  And there is no disagreement between them that all the images that are in the villages and encampments are forbidden because they are definitely made there to serve them because these are not places for beauty that we could say it's made for beauty.  And even if it doesn't have anything in it's hand.  And the law is like the sages.

Mishnah 2

One who finds fragments of imgaes etc...
A form of a hand or a foot is not a hand from a [full] image that broke off because that would be 'fragments' of images.  Rather from the beginning it was made as the form of a had by itself, or the form of a foot.  And so too with the form of any limb that is made, from it's construction it can be determined if from the beginning it was made separately or if it broke off from a complete image.

Mishnah 3

One who finds objects:
The shape of the sun and the moon does not mean that he finds a circle and says this is the sun or a half circle like a rainbow and says this is the moon...  Rather it means to the experts of images who are referred to as 'talisim', they attribute to the stars forms to the point where they say the form of Saturn is the form of an old black man, and the form of Venus is the form of a pretty young girl in a golden adornments.  And the form of the sun is the form of king crowned sitting on a wagon, and thus we attribute to all the constellations and the stars many forms.  And those forms break up into many divisions, because they are made up.  One who contrives something, he will make it big and wide without any doubt (he will speak confidently).   And they said the form of the sun and the moon means to say that he finds a form attributed to the sun or a form attributed to the moon according to whatever opinion that there will be.  And the dragon is the form of a body that there is to it many scales and fins like the scales of a fish.  And this form was by them beautiful, because they attribute it to a portion of the sphere (of the stars).  And one of the men from among these workers told me that this form is the form of the 'serpent of the moon', and it is called in Arabic "al guzahar" and that it makes such a pattern at such a time.  And so I asked which book is this mentioned in because I have never seen this form, and he said that his teacher taught this form from his heart along with many things given to him in secret.  And respectable vessels, these are decorated with gold and silver and a silk garment. And everything else is a non respectable vessel.  And the halakah is like Raban Shimon ben Gamliel and like Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 4

Paraklas (or Proclus) asked:  Aphrodite—this refers to the planet known as Venus. Similarly, it is written [elsewhere] that Venus is called Noga in Hebrew and Zohara in Arabic. In the books of idol worship, it is referred to as Talasia Aphrodite in Arabic, and there was an image of Venus in that bathhouse.  This is why [the person addressed] told him, "One does not respond in a bathhouse." However, he explained this only after leaving the bathhouse, offering an apology for remaining silent and not answering his question. He clarified that his silence was due to the rule that one does not discuss such matters while in a bathhouse.

Chapter 4



Mishnah 1



Mishnah 2



Mishnah 3



Mishnah 4



Mishnah 5



Mishnah 6



Mishnah 7

They asked of [Jewish] sages in Rome, etc. - Amongst that which you should know is that the perfected philosophers do not believe in tzelamim, by which I mean talismanery, but scoff at them and at those who think that they possess efficacy and I will extend on this to say this because I know that most people are seduced by this with great folly, and with similar things, and think that they are real — which is not so, even though the best of the pious in our religion think that they are true, just being forbidden by the Torah, and they do not understand that those things are completely empty lies. We are commanded in the Torah not to do them just as we are commanded against lying. And these are things that have received great publicity amongst the pagans, especially amongst the nation which is called the Sabians, this is a nation that came from Abraham our father, peace be upon him, from his sons, and they follow [those sons'] errors and rotten thinking ... and they promoted and gave honor to the stars, connecting to them deeds that have no connection to them; wrote works dealings with the stars, and witchcraft, and adjurations, and spiritual astrology, and things about stars , and demons, and old tales, and magic, and soothsaying, and asking the dead, and many other such issues. which the true Torah fights and cuts off, being the essence of idolatry and its branches. <br>The first lie is astrology, which has been disproven by natural science, invalidating its primary premises. They claim that a certain star is evil and harsh, while another star is good and brings success, and that a certain part of the celestial sphere suits a particular star and is opposite to another star. This is despite the fact that the entire celestial sphere is one uniform body without variation or falsehood. These two premises are the pillars of astrology, and when their invalidity is proven, as it has been, all their derivatives are also invalidated. <br>Then they built a second lie upon the first, namely the images called talismans. They say that when a certain beneficial star is in its proper place, one should make an image of such-and-such form, and it will bring such-and-such benefit. And when a certain harsh star is in a certain place opposite to it, one should make an image of such-and-such form, and it will ward off such-and-such evil. This notion expanded as widely as astrology itself and all the particulars attributed to it. <br>Then they built a third lie upon these two, which is idolatry. They said that this image, made under a certain ascendant star and in a certain position, when fumigated with certain substances and prayed to with certain words and bowed to, will remove the harm of such-and-such thing. These things were done because in ancient times, they gathered people in cities and deceived the masses, telling them, "The success of your lands and your affairs depends on making these images." When they gathered in their houses, they honored these elders who knew their secrets, and thus kingdoms were established. People thought these things were true and believed in them just as we believe in the perfection and piety of the prophets, peace be upon them. Don't you see how Scripture calls them "prophets of Baal" and "prophets of Asherah"? <br>Later, weak-minded people found these things and these books and thought they were true and beneficial, not realizing they were lies created at a certain time for temporary benefit. The prophet said, "Do not fear them, for they can do no harm, nor can they do any good." <br>The sages have already explained that any effects of these images occur by chance, and are attributed to them erroneously. This is a clear philosophical matter. Similarly, I found that the sages noted that astrology is treated like divination and soothsaying, not as a cause as the astrologers think. They said, "Do not divine" – like those who divine by weasels, birds, and stars. This is the philosophers' view of them. <br>All these things invented by the Sabians are not found at all, neither in small nor large measure, among Greek philosophers. I have elaborated on this here because it is beneficial and corrects beliefs, as people's madness about stars and images (i.e., talismans) is not a small matter. They have already strayed from the Torah once because of their belief in the truth of these things.