Orot HaTeshuvah
אורות התשובה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Orot HaTeshuvah

Introduction



Foreword







Chapter 1

Teshuva of Nature, Faith, and Intellect
We find teshuva in three domains: a) teshuva of nature, b) teshuva of faith, and c) teshuva of intellect
Natural teshuva has two aspects: that of the physical nature and that of the spiritual nature. "Physical" encompasses all of the sins against natural statutes, against ethics, and against the Torah (which are connected to natural statutes). For any evil act will result in affliction and pain, and a person suffers in specific and general ways from this. And after it becomes clear to someone that they themself are guilty and deserving of their life's diminishment as a result of their evil actions, then one focuses on improving the situation, to return to the laws of life and to obey the laws of nature, ethics and Torah, so that one may return and live and have life, with all its freshness, return to them.
Granted, modern medical practice deals with this a lot, but apparently this great work has not yet been completely perfected, and the correct solution to all the difficulties of physical teshuva has not yet been found, to the extent that it is possible during a person's lifetime to restore to them a person all that was lost due to sins that destroy the body and its capabilities. It is therefore apparent that this aspect of teshuva depends heavily on the other ones: spiritual-natural, religious and intellectual.
More internal is the natural soulful &amp; spiritual teshuva. This is the intrinsic ethical nature (lit. "ethics of the kidneys," Cf. Ps 16:7, TB Ber. 61a). It is the natural human spiritual tendency to walk a straight path, but when one strays and falls to sin, so long as one's soul has not been completely corrupted, then this sense of honesty causes heartache and breakdown from the pain, and one acts quickly to repent and repair the distortion so that one can feel that their sin has been erased. This part of teshuva is very complicated and is dependent on many internal and external factors. There are many pitfalls that one must be on guard from, but it remains one of the foundations on which the essence of teshuva rests.
After natural teshuva comes that of faith. This is sourced in the religious tradition, which is greatly involved in teshuva. The Torah guarantees pardon to those who return from sin; the sins of the individual and the community are erased through teshuva. The Prophets are filled with sublime words on the matter of teshuva, just as the Torah's rebukes are established on the teshuva of faith. Its depths contain uncountable details, and even their general foundations require much explanation.
(7) Teshuvah of the Intellect occurs when Teshuvah of Nature and Teshuvah of Faith have already been acquired, such that one has already arrived to a higher level. On this level, the cause of Teshuvah is not physical, spiritual, or ethical suffering and it is not simply the influence of what is received from tradition, whether that be fear of punishment or the ethical impression of every law and instruction which comes from tradition. Rather, the cause of this Teshuvah is clear-minded recognition that emerges from a comprehensive view of life and of the world that emerges after the role of Natural Teshuva and Faith-Teshuvah have left a strong impression. This Teshuvah which encompasses the earlier stages is filled with Endless Light and comes to transform all of the sins into merits. From every mistake, this Teshuvah brings to light lofty lessons and from every crushing humiliation wondrous ascents. This is the Teshuvah towards which all eyes are lifted. This is the Teshuvah which must come and which in the end will come. 


Chapter 2

(1) Immediate Teshuvah and Gradual Teshuvah
(2) With regard to time, teshuvah can be divided into two categories: Immediate Teshuvah and Gradual Teshuvah. 
(3) Immediate Teshuvah comes through some kind of spiritual lightning bolt that enters the soul and in an instant, a person recognizes the wrongness and the ugliness of sin and is transformed into a new person, immediately feeling within oneself a true change for the better. This Teshuvah comes through the appearance of an internal miracle, through some great spiritual influx. It is worthwhile to search for its paths in the mysterious depths of the soul.
(4) There is also Gradual Teshuvah which is not a lightning bolt within the self that transforms a person from the depth of wickedness to goodness. Rather, Gradual Teshuvah is when a person feels that they need to be someone who continually improves their path and their way in the world. They desire this path in thought and they walk on it. Little by little, on this journey, a person conquers the self and wins an upright path, repairing their character traits, improving their actions, and teaching themself how to become kosher, more and more until they come to a high place of refinement and restoration. 
(5) The Supernal Teshuvah comes from a flash of the General Good, the Goodness of G-d which abounds in all the worlds, the Light of the Life of the Worlds. The Soul of All appears intimately before us in Her Splendor and Holiness, as much as the heart can absorb. Isn't the Whole really very good and honest, and the honesty and goodness within us comes from our faithfulness to the Whole? How could one be torn from the Whole, like a strange crumb or a single imperceptible grain of dust? From this realization, which is true G-dly realization, comes Teshuvah in the life of the individual and the collective. 


Chapter 3

(1) Specific Specified Teshuvah and General Encompassing Teshuvah
(2) There is Teshuvah which is directed to counteract a particular sin or many sins. A person puts their sin before their face, regrets it and suffers over having been ensnared in the trap of sin. One's soul climbs and ascends until one becomes free from the enslavement to sin and feels within oneself the holy freedom which is so pleasant to the soul and aura that one becomes increasingly healed. The rays of the light of the sun of Hesed, Supernal Compassion, send out their beams, and a person becomes increasingly happy, and increasingly filled with internal pleasure and delight. This is along with heartbrokenness and a soul swimming in sadness, since even this feeling is beneficial for the person in accord with their situation and can add more internal spiritual pleasure and true wholeness. A person feels themself drawing closer to the Source of Life, to the Living G-d in a way that has not been the case before when they were so far away from G-d. The person's longing soul remembers with heartfelt joy the internal suffering of before and is filled with feelings of gratitude, with thanksgiving and song the soul raises her voice saying " Bless GOD, O my soul, all my being, that holy name. Bless the ETERNAL One, O my soul, and do not forget all God’s bounties. All your sins are forgiven, all your diseases healed. Your life is redeemed from the Pit." You are surrounded with steadfast love and mercy. You are satisfied with good things in the prime of life, so that your youth is renewed like the eagle’s. GOD executes righteous acts and judgments for all who are wronged" (Psalm 103:1-6).
(3) Oy! How weighed down was the soul while still carrying the burden of sin, its gloom, gluttony, and the awful burden upon her. How the soul was held down and despised? Even with external wealth and honor, the soul was on the ropes. What good is all the property if the internal experience, the interiority of life, is saggy and dry? How happy is the soul in the moment of feeling within that she is desired, that the closeness of the Living God shines within her, that her inner burden has been made light; that she is whole and no longer oppressed with internal exploitation and insanity, but rather filled with kosher ease and tranquility: Be at rest, once again, O my soul, for GOD has been good to you. (Psalms 116:7)
(4) There is another experience of Teshuvah which is general and all-encompassing when there is not a single sin or set of sins from the past on the heart of a person, but in general a person feels within themself very sad, that they are full of wrongdoing, and that G-d's light does not shine upon them. A spirit of generosity does not flow within, their heart is closed-off, their personal character traits do not go on an upright and desirable path that would be appropriate for a fulfilling good life and a pure soul. This person feels their mind is grotesque, their emotional awareness is mixed with gloom and thirst that stirs up spiritual nausea. They feel ashamed of themself and knows that G-d is not within them. This is the worst pain for a person, the most awful sin, they resent themself and cannot find refuge from this ensnaring trap that does not have particular substance but rather they just feel trapped in chalk.
(5) From the midst of this bitterness of the soul Teshuvah comes like the prescription of a master doctor. The feeling of Teshuvah flowers into the soul of person along with all of Teshuvah's power, the depth of intimate knowledge, the great basis of teshuvah in the roots of the soul, in the mysteries of nature, and in the chambers of the Torah, faith, and tradition. Through the total revival that Teshuvah extends to all those who embrace it, Teshuvah brings upon a person a spirit of grace and supplication "As a man whose mother comforted us, so will I comfort you" (Isaiah 66:13). A person can feel this each and every day that this supernal and encompassing teshuvah overcomes them. One's sensation becomes increasingly secure, more connected, more enlightened by the light of the mind, and more enlightened according to the basics of Torah. Behold, you walk and shine with light, anger dissipates, light of the will comes and illuminates, and you are filled with strength as your eyes fill with holy fire. Your heart is entirely immersed in rivers of delight, holiness and purity surround. Endless love fills the spirit as milk and oil satisfy thirst of the body, the holy spirit is adorned before you as a partner and you are told that all your wrongdoings have been wiped away, the known and unknown. You become a new creature along with all of the worlds which are renewed and everything erupts in song filled with joy of G-d. “Great is Teshuva which brings healing to the world, even if an individual does Teshuvah he is forgiven and the whole world is forgiven.
