Tosefta Sanhedrin
תוספתא סנהדרין
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com

Tosefta Sanhedrin



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13

The wicked sons of Israel have no portion in the world to come, nor will they live in the world to come, as it is said (Malachi 3:19), for behold, the day is coming, burning like an oven, etc. The words of Rabban Gamaliel, Rabbi Yehoshua, says, "They are not for the world to come." And further on, he says (Psalms 157:6), "The Lord is the protector of the foolish," etc. And further on, he says (Daniel 4): "Grow up, O tree, and prune its branches, but the main part of its roots is in the valley of the fire." Rabban Gamaliel said, "What am I doing?" (Malachi 3:19), who will not leave them root or branch. He said to him, "There is no place for the commandments and the songs of commandments for them and their fathers in the world, something else. The root is the soul, and the branch is the body. And the sons of the wicked idolaters will not live, nor will they be judged." The Lord says, "All the wicked idolaters have no portion in the world to come." As it is said (Psalms 9:18), "The wicked will return to ask her, all the nations that have forgotten God, the wicked will return to ask her." Rabbi Yehoshua said to him, "The wicked of Israel, all the nations, have forgotten God. These are the wicked of idolaters." If the Scripture had said, "The wicked will return to ask her, all the nations," and he remained silent, he would have said as you say, "These are the wicked of Israel and the wicked of idolaters." Now, when the Scripture said, "Forget God," are there any righteous people among the idolaters who have a share in the world to come? The House of Shammai says, "There are three sects: one for the life of the world to come, and one for disgrace and eternal shame. One for eternal life. These are the completely righteous, one for disgrace and eternal shame. These are the completely wicked, equal in that they go down to Gehenna and whine and come up and are healed, as it is said (Zechariah 13:9), "And I brought the third into the fire," etc., and about them Hannah said (1 Samuel 2:6), "The Lord kills and makes alive." And the House of Hillel says (Exodus 34), "And the Lord is very gracious toward me, and about them he says (Psalms 157:1). I loved that it would be heard, because it is about them that the entire section is said: The criminals of Israel in their bodies and the criminals of idolaters in their bodies. They will descend into their hell and be judged there for twelve months, their souls consumed and their bodies burned, and hell will spew them out and they will become ashes, and the wind will scatter them and scatter them, and you will become ashes under the feet of the righteous, as it is said (Malachi 3:21). And the wicked will be crushed because they will be ashes [and so on]. But the traditions, the heretics, and the disbelievers in the Torah, who deviate from the ways of the people, and who do not believe in the resurrection of the dead, and everyone who sinned and caused the multitudes to sin, such as Jeroboam and Ahab, and who changed their lives in the land of the living, and who spread their hands in dung, their hell will be closed before them, and they will be judged there for generations to come, as it is said (Isaiah 66:24). And they will go out and see the corpses of the people, etc., and the grave will be consumed, and they are not vessels, as it is said (Psalms 49:15), and their grief will be for the destruction of the grave, and who caused them to spread their hands in dung, as it is said (I Kings 1:11). 8:13) Son, I have built you a house of dung. The generation of the flood have no part in the world to come, and they shall not live in the world to come, as it is said (Genesis 9). And He wiped out the entire universe, etc., of the heavens in this world, and wiped them from the earth in the world to come. Rabbi Yehuda ben Batira says (Genesis 6:3) And He said, "My Spirit shall not judge man, nor shall My Spirit judge them, nor shall My Spirit judge them in any other world." And He said, "The place says, "I do not return My Spirit to judge." Rabbi Menachem son of Rabbi Yosi says, "They shall not judge." The place says, "I do not judge when I pay wages to the righteous. But the spirit of the wicked is harder for them than anything else, as it is said (Isaiah 33:11). "Your spirit shall be consumed by fire. The generation of the tower, they have no part in the world to come, and they shall not live in the world to come," as it is said (Genesis 11:4). And the Lord scattered them from there over the face of all the earth in this world, and they ceased to build for the world to come. The people of Sodom have no part in the world to come, and they shall not live in the world to come, as it is said (Genesis 13:13). And the people of Sodom, the wicked and sinners, etc., in this world, are very much to the Lord in the world to come. They speak evil of each other, each against his fellow, and sinners in fornication, are very much to the Lord in shedding blood, spies, they have no part in the world to come, and they do not enter the land, as it is said (Numbers 14:23-24). And all the wicked will not see it, nor will their congregation, they have no part in the world to come, and they will not live in the world to come, as it is said (Numbers 16:33). And the earth will cover them, etc., in this world, and they will perish from among the congregation in the world to come. The words of Rabbi Akiva, Rabbi Yehuda ben Batira, say, "They are not, and about them he says (Psalms 119:16), "I erred when I was lost, etc. It is said here, "A loss," and it is said below, "A loss." What is a loss? What is a loss? What is a loss? What is a loss? What is a loss? What is a loss? What is a loss? What is a loss? What is a loss? The generation of the wilderness, they have no part in the world to come, as it is said (Numbers 14:2). In this wilderness, they will be orphaned in this world, and there they will die, as it is said (Psalms 119:16). 25:11) Which I have sworn by my name, etc., the words of Rabbi Akiva. Rabbi Eliezer says, "In their absence, and concerning them he says (Psalms 50:5) Gather my saints to me, etc. What is the Talmud to say, "In their absence, I have sworn, and I will return to myself?" Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korcha says, "These words were not spoken but concerning generations, gather all my saints to me, because they performed acts of kindness for me, and made my covenant, because they were cut off by Eli, a sacrifice, because they were slain by me and sacrificed by Rabbi Shimon ben Nanas." He says, "In their absence, and concerning them he says (Isaiah 51:11) And the redeemed of the Lord shall return, etc. The ten tribes have no portion in the world to come, and they are not their life in the world to come, as it is said (Deuteronomy 29:27) And the Lord will cast them out of their land in anger, in wrath, and in great fury in this world, and will cast them into another land in the world to come." Rabbi Shimon ben Nanas, from there, Rabbi Yehuda, a man from Kfar Ikhus, from this day onward, if their deeds in this day are not like this day. In the absence of or not in the absence of, and our masters said that these and those have a portion in the world to come, as it is said (Isaiah 27:13). And it shall come to pass in that day that a great trumpet shall be blown, and they that are lost in the land of Assyria shall come, and the Assyrians, these are the ten tribes, and they that were cast out in the land of Egypt, these are the generation of the wilderness, these and those, and they shall worship the Lord on the holy mountain in Jerusalem.