Mishneh Torah, Scroll of Esther and Hanukkah
משנה תורה, הלכות מגילה וחנוכה
merged
http://www.sefaria.org/Mishneh_Torah,_Scroll_of_Esther_and_Hanukkah
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-http://www.sefaria.org

Chapter 1

The Reading of the Megillah in its (proper) time is a positive *Rabbinic* commandment. And it is known that it is a Rabbinic enactment. All are obligated in its reading: men, women, converts, and freed slaves. And we educate minors in its reading. Even Priests engaged in worship cease their worship and come to hear the reading of the Megillah, and similarly do we cease Torah study to hear the reading of the Megillah. How much more so, then, are all other commandments of the Torah superseded by the reading of the Megillah. There is nothing that the reading of the Megillah does not supersede, except the burial of a deceased person who has no relatives; one who encounters his [corpse] buries it first, then reads [Megillah].
The same is true of the reader and the person who hears the reader, they have both fulfilled their obligation. And this is so if he heard it from someone who was obligated to read it. Therefore, if the reader was a minor or a fool, the person who heard it has not fulfilled his obligation.


The capital of Shushan, though it was not surrounded by a wall at the time of Joshua son of Nun reads it on the fifteenth, because the miracle occurred there, as it says, "And on the fifteenth day of the same they rested" (Esther 9:18). So why was it [the date] made dependent on the days of Joshua? In order to honor the Land of Israel, which was in ruins at that time. So they read it like the people of Shushan do, and consider themselves to be surrounded by a wall, even though they are now in ruins, since they were walled cities in the time of Joshua they read it on the fifteenth, and there is a reminder of the Land of Israel in this miracle.

Chapter 2


If he found a community that already read half, he must not say, "I will read the latter half with the community and go back and read the first half," since this is reading it in its reverse order. Instead he must read it from its beginning to the end in the proper order. If he read and paused briefly and went back to read it, even if he paused long enough to finish all of it, since he read it in the proper order, he has fulfilled his obligation.


He who reads the megillah without intending to has not fulfilled his obligation. How could this happen? If he was writing it, or explicating it, or examining it, if he intended to fulfill his obligation with this reading, he has fulfilled his obligation, and if he did not intend to fulfill his obligation, he did not fulfill it. If he was reading it and he began to doze off, since he did not fall asleep fully, he has fulfilled his obligation.









What is the nature of our obligation for this feast? A person should eat meat and prepare as attractive a feast as his means permit. He should drink wine until he becomes intoxicated and falls asleep in a stupor. 
One is obligated to give to poor people on the day of Purim. One should give no less than two poor people one gift each of money or types of cooked dishes or types of food, as it says (Esther 9:22) "gifts to the poor": two gifts to to poor people. And one should not be particular about Purim money, rather give to every person who puts out his hand. And one should not change Purim money for another charity.
It is good for people to increase in their gifts to the poor more than they increase in their meal and the gifts that they send to their companions, for there is no greater or glorious joy than to bring happiness to the hearts of the poor and orphans and widows and strangers, for he who brings happiness to the hearts of these unfortunate people is compared to the Divine Presence, as it says, "To revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones" (Isaiah 57:15).
All the books of the Prophets and all the Writings will be annulled in the days of the Messiah, apart from Megillat Esther. It will continue to be binding like the Five Books of Moses and the entire Oral Law which will never be invalidated. Even though all memory of our suffering will be erased…still the days of Purim will not be annulled.

Chapter 3



Chapter 4














14 Someone had a light for his house or light for chanuka, or a light for his house or for the sanctification of the day; the light for the house come first for the sake of peace in the home. For surely God is erased in order to make peace between a husband and wife. Great is the peace for all of the Torah was given in order to make peace in the world as it says; her ways are the ways of pleasantness and all her paths are that of peace.