Mishneh Torah, Scroll of Esther and Hanukkah
משנה תורה, הלכות מגילה וחנוכה
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.org



Mishneh Torah, Scroll of Esther and Hanukkah

Chapter 1

The Reading of the Megillah in its (proper) time is a positive commandment of the Scribes. And it is known that it is an enactment of the Prophets. All are obligated in its reading: men, women, converts, and freed slaves. And we educate minors in its reading. Even Priests engaged in service [of the Temple] cease their service and come to hear the reading of the Megillah, and similarly do we cease Torah study to hear the reading of the Megillah. How much more so, then, are all other commandments of the Torah superseded by the reading of the Megillah. There is nothing that the reading of the Megillah does not supersede, except the burial of a deceased person who has no one to bury him; one who encounters his [corpse] buries it first, then reads [Megillah].
Both the reader and the person who hears the reader have fulfilled their obligation. And this is so if he heard it from someone who was obligated to read it. Therefore, if the reader was a minor or a fool, the person who heard it has not fulfilled his obligation.
The commandment is to read it entirely, and the commandments is to read it at night and in the day. One may read the nightly reading the entire night, and one may read the day reading the entire day. The one who blesses before the nightly reading makes three blessings, and these are they: "Blessed are you God our God, king of the world, who sanctified us with His commandments, and commanded us upon the reading of the Megillah." "Blessed are you God our God, king of the world, who performed miracles for our ancestors in those days and this time." "Blessed are you God our God, king of the world, who renews us and preserves us and lets us reach this time." And during the day, one does not repeat and make the "Renew us" blessing. And places that have the custom to bless after [the reading], bless, "Blessed are you God our God, king of the world, the God who fights our fights, and judges our judgement, and avenges our vengeances, who retaliates for our suffering, who pays back on all the enemies of our souls. Blessed are you God who retaliates for Israel from all their suffering, the God who saves."
Which is the time of its reading? The Sages instituted many times, as it says, "in their times." And these are the times of its reading: Any province that was surrounded by a wall from the times of Joshua bin Nun, whether in the land [of Israel] or outside the land [of Israel]. even if it has no wall now, reads on the 15th of Adar. And this province is called a "k'rach" - "large city". And any province that was not surrounded by a wall from the times of Joshua, even if it has a wall now, reads on the 14th. And this province is called an "ir" - "small city." 
The province of Shushan, though it was not surrounded by a wall at the time of Joshua son of Nun reads it on the 15th, because the miracle occurred there, as it says, "And on the 15th they rested" (Esther 9:18). And why was the issue made dependent on the time of Joshua? In order to honor the Land of Israel, which was in ruins at that time. So they read it like the people of Shushan do, and consider themselves to be surrounded by a wall, even though they are now in ruins, since they were walled cities in the time of Joshua they read it on the 15th, and it would be a reminder of the Land of Israel in this miracle.


Chapter 2


If he found a community that already read half, he must not say, "I will read the latter half with the community and go back and read the first half," since this is reading it in its reverse order. Instead he must read it from its beginning to the end in the proper order. If he read and paused briefly and went back to read it, even if he paused long enough to finish all of it, since he read it in the proper order, he has fulfilled his obligation.
One who reads the megillah by heart has not fulfilled one's obligation. One who speaks a foreign language that hears the megillah written in the holy language and holy script, despite that one does not know what they are saying has fulfilled one's obligation. And this is also so if it was written in Greek and one heard it - one fulfilled one's obligation despite that one is not familiar [with Greek], and even if the one who hears [speaks] Hebrew.

He who reads the megillah without intending to has not fulfilled his obligation. How could this happen? If he was writing it, or explicating it, or examining it, if he intended to fulfill his obligation with this reading, he has fulfilled his obligation, and if he did not intend to fulfill his obligation, he did not fulfill it. If he was reading it and he began to doze off, since he did not fall asleep fully, he has fulfilled his obligation.









What is the nature of our obligation for this feast? A person should eat meat and prepare as attractive a feast as his means permit. He should drink wine until he becomes intoxicated and falls asleep in his intoxication. And similarly a a person is obligated to send two portions of meat or two types of cooked food or two types of food to his friend, as it says (Esther 9:22) "and send portions one man to another" two portions to one man. And all that increase to send to others is praiseworthy. And if he has no [money] he should exchange with his friend: this one sends to this his meal and this one sends to this his meal in order to fulfill (Esther 9:22) "and send portions one man to another".
One is obligated to give to poor people on the day of Purim. One should give no less than two poor people one gift each of money or types of cooked dishes or types of food, as it says (Esther 9:22) "gifts to the poor": two gifts to to poor people. And one should not be particular about Purim money, rather give to every person who puts out his hand. And one should not change Purim money for another charity.
It is good for people to increase in their gifts to the poor more than they increase in their meal and the gifts that they send to their companions, for there is no greater or glorious joy than to bring happiness to the hearts of the poor and orphans and widows and strangers, for he who brings happiness to the hearts of these unfortunate people is compared to the Divine Presence, as it says, "To revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones" (Isaiah 57:15).
All the books of the Prophets and all the Writings will be annulled in the days of the Messiah, apart from Megillat Esther. It will continue to be binding like the Five Books of Moses and the entire Oral Law which will never be invalidated. Even though all memory of our suffering will be erased…still the days of Purim will not be annulled.

Chapter 3

During the Second Temple period, when the Hellenic kings decreed decrees upon Israel, and [sought to] nullify their religion, and they did not allow them to immerse in Torah and in commandments. And they reached out their hands against their money and their daughters, and they entered the shrine, and put in there idols, and defiled that which was pure. And was Israel was distressed because of them, and oppressed them greatly until the God of their ancestors had compassion on them, and saved them from their hands, and rescued them, and the Hasmoneans, the High Priests,  overcame and killed them, and saved Israel from their hand, and set up a king from among the Priests, and brought back kingship to Israel for more than two hundred years until the destruction of the Second Temple. 
When the Jews overcame their enemies and won the military battle on the 25th day of Kislev, they entered the sanctuary of the Temple and found only one flask of pure oil.  That flask only contained enough oil to burn for one day but it remained lit for eight full days, until fresh olives were crushed into pure oil.
Because of this, the Sages of that same generation established that these eight days which begin on the 25th of Kislev [would be] days of joy, and singing-praise, and would light lights on them in the evening at the entrances of their houses every night of the eight nights, to show and reveal the miracle. And these days are called Hanukkah (lit. Dedication), and on then it is forbidden to eulogize, and to fast, like the days of Purim (lit. Lots). And lighting the lights on them is a commandment from the teachings of the Scribes, like Reading the Megillah (lit. Scroll). 
All who are obligated with respect to reading the Megillah (lit. Scroll) are obligated with respect to lighting the Hanukkah light. And the one who lights it on the first night says three blessings, and they are: "Bountiful are You, Eternal One, our God, Sovereign of the Universe, who makes us holy with His commandments, and commanded us to light the light of Hanukkah," and "...who did miracles for our ancestors..." and "who has given us life, and sustained us..." And all who see it, and had not blessed, say two blessings - "who did miracles for our ancestors" and "who has given us life." And on the other nights, one who lights says two blessings, and the one who sees [but did not light] says one blessing, for we only say "who has given us life" on the first night.
On each day of these eight days, we complete the Hallel, and say a blessing before it, "who makes us holy with His commandments, and has commanded us to complete the Hallel," whether it is recited as an individual or a community. Even though reciting the Hallel is a commandment from the teachings of the Scribes, we say a blessing "who made us holy with His commandments and commanded us..." like the way one says a blessing over the Megillah, and over the Eruv. For every clear teaching of their teachings, we say blessing over it. But a matter which is from their teachings, and the essence of doing it is from doubt, such as tithing doubtfully tithed produce, we do not say a blessing on it. And why do we say blessings over the second days of a festive day? Did not they decree them for no reason other than doubt, so that people who not desecrate them?
And not only is Hallel on Hanukkah alone from the teachings of the Scribes, but rather the recitation of Hallel in general is from the teachings of the Scribes for all days where we complete the Hallel. And there are eighteen days of the year where it is a commandment to complete the Hallel. And they are: the eight days of the Festival. And the eight days of Hanukkah. And the first day of Passover, and the day of Shavuot (lit. Atzeret). But Rosh Hashanah and Yom HaKippurim have no Hallel recitation, because they are days of Turning, and Awe, and Fear, not days of extra joy. And they did not establish Hallel on Purim, because the Reading of the Megillah is the Hallel.
In place where they do a festive day for two days, they complete the Hallel on twenty one days. The nine days of the Festival. And the eight days of Hanukkah. And the two days of Pesach. And the two days of Atzeret, but on Rosh Chodesh (i.e. the new month) the recitation of Hallel is a custom, and not a commandment. And this custom is for public recitation, therefore it is recited with skipping [certain portions]. One does not say a blessing on it, for one does not says a blessing for a custom. And an individual does not recite it at all. And if one begins, one should complete it, and recite it with skipping in the manner that it is done in public. And thus on the rest of the days of Pesach, we recite with skipping, like on Rosh Chodesh.
How do we skip [during Hallel]? We begin from the beginning of Hallel until (Psalms 114:8) "Flint from a pool of water," and skip, and say (Psalms 115:12) "May Hashem who remembers us, bless..." until (Psalms 115:18) "Halleluyah," and skip and say (Psalms 116:12), "How shall I repay Hashem..." until (Psalms 116:19) "Halleluyah," and skip and say (Psalms 118:5) "From the depths I called Yah!" until the end of the Hallel. This is the simple custom. And there are some who skip another way. 
The entire days of suitable for reciting Hallel. The one who recites the Hallel back ways has not fulfilled [their obligation]. One who recites and pauses, and returns to reciting, even though they paused long enough to complete all of it, they have fulfilled [their obligation]. One days when we complete the Hallel, one may pause between each chapter, but one may not pause in the middle of a chapter. And one days when we recite the Hallel with skipping, one may even pause in the middle of a chapter.
Each day when we complete the Hallel, we say a blessing beforehand. In a place where it is the custom to bless afterwards, we bless. How do we say the blessing? "May they praise You, Hashem, our  God, all of Your doings, and the righteous and the pious who do Your will, and Your entire people the House of Israel with song acknowledge Your name, for You are Hashem, it is good to acknowledge You, and it is pleasant to sing to Your name, and for ever You are God. Bountiful are You, Hashem, the Sovereign, praised, glorified and beautified in song, eternally living and extant, may You rule for ever and ever."
There are some place where they have the custom to double from (Psalms 118:21) "I thank you for You have answered me" until the end of the Hallel, doubling each and every word two times. In a place where they have the custom to double, one doubles, and in a place where they don't double, one does not double.
The custom of reciting the Hallel in the days of the Sages was a such. After one says the blessing, the great one who is reciting the Hallel begins and says "Halleluyah" and all of the people respond "Halleluyah" and he would resume "Praise, servants of Hashem" and all of the people would respond "Halleluyah," he would resume "Praise Hashem's name" and all of the people would respond "Halleluyah," and he would resume "May Hashem's name be praised now and always," and all of the people would respond, "Halleluyah," and thus for each verse. [They would do this] until they have responded in each Hallel "Halleluyah" one hundred and thirty times, a symbol for the years of Aaron.

Chapter 4

How many lights do you kindle on Chanukah?  It is a commandment that one light be kindled in each and every house whether it be a household with many people or a house with a single person.  To exalt the mitzvah, one may kindle light according to the number of people in the household, a light for each and every person, whether they are men or women.  One who wishes to further glorify this and performs the mitzvah in the most choice manner kindles a light for each person on the first night and adds on following nights one light.










The mitzvah of the Hanukkah candle is an extremely dear one. And one must be careful with it, to publicize the miracle and to increase the praise of God and the thanks to him for the miracles he has done for us. Even if one does not have anything to eat except from charity, he borrows, or he sells his clothes and gets oil and candles and lights.
Therefore, if one has only a limited amount of money, and the mitzvot available to him are either kiddush of Shabbat or lighting the Hanukkah candles, preference should be given to buying oil for lighting the Hanukkah candles over buying wine for kiddush, since both are mitzvot instituted by the Sages. One gives preference to Hanukkah candles, as they have an additional component of recalling the miracle.
14 Someone had a light for his house or light for chanuka, or a light for his house or for the sanctification of the day; the light for the house come first for the sake of peace in the home. For surely God is erased in order to make peace between a husband and wife. Great is the peace for all of the Torah was given in order to make peace in the world as it says; her ways are the ways of pleasantness and all her paths are that of peace. 