Nefesh HaChayim
נפש החיים
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Nefesh HaChayim

An Introduction by the Author's Son



Gate I



Chapter 1


Behold the inner depth of the term, צלם, is from among that subject matter which stands at the very heights of the universe and includes most of the inner secrets of the זוהר הקודש. However, here we will speak about the word, צלם, according to the simple explanation of the ראשונים of blessed memory. "That is, the words, צלם and דמות, here are not to be read according to their simple inferences (meanings).  As it is written, "For, what דמות  (physical characteristic or likeness) could be attributed to ה?"  {For G-d is incorporeal and has no physical form.}  Therefore, its meaning is that there is within man a resemblance (to the attributes of ה).  As is written in Psalms, "I was like a desert owl."  [Certainly,] King David was not saying that he became an owl with wings and a beak or that his (physical) appearance was changed into that of an owl.  Rather, he was like an owl (in certain aspects) -- that his actions in his wanderings from place to place became like that of a desert owl which lives in solitude and flies from place to place.  So too, according to the simple explanation of the ראשונים of blessed memory.
And similarly (על דרך זה) concerning the use of the word, צלם,  that they are comparable (to that of ה); they are similar in their inference in certain respects.

Chapter 2

However, in order to understand what is meant by man having being created in the צלם (image) of אלקים -- One should infer only in the image of אלקים, but not in the image of another name of ה.  It is well known that the definition of אלקים is that ה, May His Name be Blessed, is the source of all the forces in the universe, as it is written in the טור (that ה is All-Powerful).
We say that ה is the בעל or the source of all forces.  Man and 'ה are להבדיל different.  When a man builds a building from wood, for example, the builder doesn't create or manufacture the wood from his own essence.  Rather, he takes wood which has already been created and re-orders them into a building.  After he has organized them according to his will, if he later forgets the building (and his focus is no longer upon it) the building continues to exist.
However, when ה, May His Name Be Blessed, Created the universe, He Created (it) ex nehilo  (something from nothing) with an unlimited non-physical power/force.  From that moment, every power which exists within them and organizes them is dependent only on the fact that 'ה focuses His energy on them at every moment.  For if ה, May His Name be Blessed, would remove the strength/power of His influence from them even for a moment, they would all disappear into nothingness. 
This is what the men of the Great Assembly intended when they instituted (the morning prayers) that "'ה constantly renews His creation" -- literally meaning at all times, at every moment, His creation is renewed.  As it is written/explained (in Psalms):  "...He, Who Makes (present tense) the great luminaries..."  It does not say that "He Made" (past tense)....


This is the reason that 'ה, May His Name be Blessed, is called אלקים, which means the בעל (master, source, owner) of all of forces in the universe.  Any force or power that exists within the universe, emanates from Him, ית''ש, the בעל or source of all the forces or powers.  He continues every moment to infuse within them His power (which Sustains them); everything hangs in His hands at all times to change them or to order them according to His will, ית''ש.
הגהה:  The name/שם of אלקים or the power of אלקים is not just reserved to 'ה as the שם of אלקים is also shared with every בעל כח which is found in the universe.  [As it is known,] each שר is referred to as אלקים.  As it is written, אלהי העמים (the gods of the nations).  As it says, כי כל העמים ילכו איש בשם אלהיו (each member of each of the nations will walk in the name of his own god).  Look the in זוהר ויקרא ח' ע''א, ובפרשת בלק ר''ח א concerning the phrase, ויבא אלקים (and the god came) as it says concerning Avi-Melech, Lavan, and Bilam...This is referring to their שר.  Each nation has a שר that was appointed over them to guide them.  Similarly, judges are referred to as אלקים.
However, none of these forces have power of their own [essence] -- only that which 'ה, Himself, May He be Blessed, implanted within them in order to (be able to) rule over them.  Therefore, 'ה, May He be Blessed, is called, אלקי האלקים (The All-Powerful of the Powerful) and it is written, כי גדול ה' מכל האלהים (that ה' is greater than all the gods/powers).  It is written:  השתחוו לו כל אלהים (all the gods/powers will prostrate themselves before Him).  And also, all of the idolators will call Him G-d of gods.
Therefore, they are called אלהים אחרים (other gods); meaning to say that they have no power of their own -- only that which was granted to them by the true source/בעל כח of them all, His Name be Blessed.
Therefore, as it says in ירמיה י'א that ה' אלקים אמת (that ה is the true power/אלקים); He is the Master/Source of all true power of all and they all receive any power that they might have from ה Himself, May He be Blessed.  This is what is meant by ויפלו על פניהם ויאמרו ה' הוא האלקים (They will fall upon their faces and declare that ה is the true G-d/האלקים).

Chapter 3

Likewise, (as man is created בצלם אלקים and therefore contains the כחות of ה) .אלקים, May He Be Blessed, created man and empowered him over tens of thousands of upper worlds which cannot be numbered.  ה' gave it into the hand of mankind that he should be the המדבר (leader) to direct/guide them according to the actions and activities of man, be they for good or the opposite, ח''ו.
For man’s good activities/actions, words, and thoughts sustain and give strength to the many forces of the Holy upper worlds and to which man adds holiness and light/radiance to them, as it is written, "I have placed My words in your mouth to implant the very Heavens and to set the foundations of the world/universe.  As it has been said by the חכמים of blessed memory:  Read it not as "your children," but rather "your builders."  For they (the children who learn Torah and keep His commandments) set/build the upper worlds like a builder sets/orders his building and gives to them great strength/power
or conversely the opposite, ר''ל, through his actions/activities, words, and thoughts when not for good.  Man, therefore, can cause incalculable destruction, ר''ל, to the many forces and innumerable holy upper worlds beyond calculation.  As it is written, "The destroyers and the ruiners come out from your midst." [We ourselves cause the destruction.]  This may darken (מחשיך) and diminish (מקטין) their radiance, ח''ו.  Strength is thereby added to the other side (עומת) and to the progenitors/sources (מדורות) of spiritual impurity, ר''ל.
This what is the meaning of man having been created in the likeness (צלם) of אלקים.  For man was made (בצלם אלקים) in His likeness, etc.  Just like ה', May His Name Be Blessed, is the אלקים, the Master (בעל) of all of the forces (כחות) that are found within the universe which He orders and guides at every moment, thusly ה' has empowered [through] His Will, May He be Blessed, that man (האדם) should be sovereign (man opens and closes) [depending upon his actions] hundreds of  thousands of (upper) worlds and forces through each of his ways (הנהגות) and matters (עניניו) at each moment in actuality (ממש).  {Meaning not just when man fulfills His commandments and learns Torah, but ALL of man’s actions and matters, even the most mundane and seemingly trivial have great effects} according to the far-reaching effects (כפי שרשו העליון) of his actions, words, and thoughts.  It is as if man (כאלו) was also made a master of these forces/energies, just like ה, Himself (כביכול).
As is says in Midrash Eichah concerning the (פסוק) phrase, "וילכו בלא כח."  Rabbi Akiva said in the name of Rabbi Yehudah Ben Simay:  "When ישראל does the will of ה, they add strength and power to Above, as it says in Psalms, "באלקים נעשה חיל" {Concerning the power of Above/אלקים, we, the בני ישראל give strength/power to the upper worlds.}  However, when ישראל does not do His will, they undermine (מתישין) the great power and strength of Above, as it says in פרשת Ha'zin'nu, צור ילדך תשי (You weaken the rock that gave birth to you.) 
In many places in the זוהר הקדוש, it is written that "The sins of man cause פגם (damage/deficiency) to Above.  Conversely, the opposite is true as well as we explained above."  (דחובי בר נש עבדין פגימו לעילא כו'. וכן להיפך כנ''ל)  Similarly, it states, "Come and give power to ה' (תנו עוז לאלקים).  As the זוהר says in the beginning of פרשת בא regarding a פסוק in Jov:  כד בעאן לקיימא על אינון עובדין דישראל על ה' ודאי קיימין (When the accusing angels came to levy complaints against Israel for their improper acts, they stood on solid ground).  דהא כד ישראל עבדין עובדין דלא כשרן כביכול מתישין חילא דקב''ה (When Israel engages in improper actions, they weaken the power of The Holy One Blessed be He.)  וכד עבדין עובדין דכשרן יהבין תוקפא וחילא לקב''ה (But when they act appropriately, they give strength and glory to The Holy One Blessed be He.)  Concerning this it is written תנו עז לאלקים, meaning that might is given to אלקים when they act goodly.
This is why it says, לאלקים (to אלקים).  Thus, it says, וכן באלקים נעשה חיל (and we will do that which empowers אלקים) as was explained the Master (בעל) of all of the forces (כחות) as was mentioned above.

Chapter 4

This is a lesson for everyone.  Each and every Jewish man (איש ישראל) should never say [think] within his heart ח''ו (Heaven Forbid), "What am I and what power do have to accomplish with my lowly actions in any matter in the world/universe."
[Rather,] he should understand, know, and implant within his heart/mind, that every detail of his actions, words, and thoughts at every moment in time, is never for naught, ח''ו.  [He should know/understand] the great significance of his actions even to the loftiest heights.  For each (action, word, or thought) rises to the loftiest heights according to its root (שרש) in the upper-most worlds of light and their brilliant radiance.
2.  הגהה:  It is likely/probable to hear that this concept is also included within the intent of that which was stated in פירקי אבות, of blessed memory, "Be Aware of which is above you!"  [Simple Meaning:  You should know/realize that there is ה' above you.]  [However, it means much more than that.]  Meaning to say, although the eye can not see the awesome effects/consequences of his actions, you should know well that truthfully everything that occurs above within the most high of the upper worlds actually results as a consequence of your actions (הכל ממך).  As a consequence of them (your activities), they emerge and go.
In truth when the wise man understands the awesome truth of this, his heart will be stirred to tremble.  A man should therefore give heart (take heed and consider) his actions when not good ח''ו the extent that they can reach (on high) to cause damage and destruction as a result of even a light (קל) sin ח''ו.  A Jew's sin can cause far more damage and destruction than that which was destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar and Titus.
Nebuchadnezzar and Titus effected no damage at all with their actions on high (למעלה) as they had no portion or roots within the upper worlds that they would be able to reach there with their (meager) actions (done in this world alone).  Rather, it was only because of our sins that we weakened and diminished the power of on high (למעלה) [at the very root].  The מקדש (Sanctuary) of ה was defiled [here by us by the spilling of blood, engaging in illicit relationships, and by involving ourselves in idolatry] which caused the defilement of the מקדש העליון.  It was through (our sins) that they, Nebuchadnezzar and Titus, had the power to destroy the מקדש של מטה (the earthly Sanctuary) of the lower realm [the earthly building] which represented the upper sanctuary (מקדש של מעלה).  As is said by our Rabbis of blessed memory, "The flour (קמחא) had already been ground." [The בת קול revealed that Nebuchadnezzar and Titus merely ground flour that was already ground].  For our transgressions had already destroyed the upper Dwelling Place of the Holy upper worlds;  [Nebuchadnezzar and Titus] destroyed only the lower dwelling (נוה מטה).  {Had we, through our sins and transgressions, not destroyed the מקדש של מעלה, Nebuchadnezzar and Titus would not have been able to destroy the מקדש של מטה.}
As King David, peace be upon him, prayed in Psalm ע''ד:  {The simple understanding:  When Israel had finally been given permission to build the בית המיקדש, for which they needed to chop trees, they regarded (יודע) this task as if they were bringing a gift of axes in the thicket of trees (בסבך עץ קרדומות) to (למעלה) on high.}  Rather, the נפש החיים explains that David prayed that [Nebuchadnezzar and Titus] should be regarded as if they had actually destroyed the upper [מרומים] realm, although truthfully, their actions did not touch/reach (לא נגעו) there [to the מקדש של מעלה] in any way, as we explained above.
Similarly, the heart of any man from the holy nation should tremble to consider the holiness that is within his very frame/stature which encompasses all the powers and worlds as we shall explain in with the help of ה in Chapter 6 of Gate 2.  {Man is a counterpart, a blue-print, to all of  the forces and upper worlds in existence.}  Man is thus a blueprint of the upper dwelling (והמקדש העליון) which is the source of all of the forces (כחות) and worlds (עולמות).  The heart of man, in the center (אמצעיתא) of his body (גוף) [which contains his life force] corresponds to the most Holy part of the בית המקדש, the Holies of Holies, (קודש הקדשים) which is the center of the אבן שתיה (Foundation Stone) {upon which the לוחות rested [מסכת יומא דף ה]; the place where יעקב אבינו slept; the site of עקדת יצחק} which encompasses all of the root-source of holiness as chaz"l have alluded to in the גמרא in פרק תפלת השחר:  "A person should concentrate his thoughts to the קודש הקדשים during prayer."
The זוהר in פרשת שלח explains:  Come and hear. When The Holy One Blessed Be He created man in the world, he set within him in an exalted physical form/appearance.  ה gave him might and power within the middle of his body (גוף), the resting place of the heart.  The same way that The Holy One Blessed Be made the universe as a single mass (חד גופא) with its heart (אבן שתיה) in its center from which all forces emanate which parallels the היכל and the קודש הקדשים upon which rests the Heavenly Presence and where the כפורת וכרובים וארון were placed, the heart of the entire universe, and from here everything is nurtured (מהכא אתזנו) [see there in greater length].
Therefore, if a man encourages (יתור) indecent thoughts of promiscuity to enter his mind, ר''ל, behold, he is bringing a זונה and graven images through his jealousy/envy into the awesome upper most קודש הקדשים and the holy upper worlds, ח''ו.  Thereby, a man strengthens the forces of uncleanliness ר''ל within the house of the upper קודש הקדשים -- far worse than even the act of Titus who strengthened the forces of uncleanliness by bringing a זונה into the קודש הקדשים of the earthly מקדש.
Similarly, any sin or transgression of a Jew when he permits the entrance of anger or evil thoughts/lusts into his heart ח''ו it is as if he brought an alien fire upon the altar.  Meaning to say:  A man in actuality through his thoughts and deeds brings a devouring fire to His house, which was our glory and splendor, May the Merciful One save us, May he be Blessed.
This is what ה said to יחזקאל:  "The Place of My Throne which I shall cause to dwell there within the midst of the children of Israel shall never again defile My Holy Name בזנותם (through their defilements).  Now, distance yourselves from defilement and I Shall Dwell in their midst forever (לעולם)."
הגהה:  The המשכן and the מקדש contain (within them) all of the forces and all of the worlds with all of their קדושה. All of their houses and exalted inner sanctums, places, and holy utensils have an exalted דוגמה in the structured in the likeness of the holy (upper) worlds according to the manner in which they were ordered according to the secret visions of Ezikiel concerning the המרכבה, the סוד of that which was viewed by  King David and the Prophet Shemuel. By the Hand of ה was the framework/template (formed).
As it says in זבחים דף נ״ד עמוד ב "......................."  Therefore, it was written concerning Betzallel, "and I have filled him with רוח אלקים with wisdom and understanding"  As it is written in משלי ג׳:י״ט that "ה with wisdom set the foundations of the world and established the Heavens with understanding" Therefore, as it is was said in ברכות דף נ״ה עמוד א, "Betzallel knew to form the אותיות which through them were created Heaven and earth." 
Man having been embued with this holiness, contains within him the entire creation (in miniature) which is the model and framework for the משכן, the מקדש, and their (holy) utensils.  This is reflected in the physical stature of each man according to the framework of each limb (of man) including each of his strengths/abilities is thus reflected and alluded to in the very framework of the משכן (and creation).
לזאת:  Therefore, behold, it is obvious that the main aspect of Holiness and [the actual] מקדש {which is the upper מקדש and not the mere עיצים ואבנים of the earthly realm, but rather the מקדש של מעלה} and His Presence, May He be Blessed, is [dependent upon] man himself.  If man will sanctify himself as appropriate through keeping all the commandments which are rooted above...Therefore, man, himself becomes a מקדש and within him is ה's Presence, May His Name be Blessed.

And there is to say according to our explanation here that when the pasuq says, "ועשו לי מקדש" it means that just as I showed you how the מקדש and its utensils were to be made and used, thus shall you do.  And our Rabbis of blessed memory expounded in סנהדרין מ״ו that לדרכינו means that you also should make yourselves into a מקדש.
Do not think that the purpose of the מקדש is that I need a shell (חיצוני) {a physical place of wood and stones}.  Rather, you should know that my will and intention is that you, the children of Israel, it is a hint/allusion that you should look upon it and model yourselves and your deeds according to the structure of the משכן and all of its utensils.  For all of you should become holy (קדושים) to become prepared and ready for Me to cause to rest My Presence within you IN ACTUALITY.  This is what it meant when I Said, "ועשו לי מקדש ושכנתי בתוכם" which you should infer that all which I showed to you the purpose of My Intentions was (only) that you should make yourselves thus. 
And He said, May His Name be Blessed, at the time of the completion of the building of the מקדש in (מלכים א''ל) that this house which I (commanded you to build) is only that you should walk in My Ways and I Shall Dwell amongst my nation, Israel.
Therefore, if you should damage the innards of the מקדש that is within them, the outer shell of a מקדש is of no benefit because the foundation would have already been destroyed (through sin) ר״ל.
This is what was meant when ה  spoke to יחזקאל...

Reb Itzele's Long Annotation



Gate II



Gate III



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12








        In truth it (having belief &amp; faith in Hash-m) is a great matter &amp; an awesome ability (Segulah) to remove &amp; nullify from oneself all judgments &amp; wills of others – that they will have no power or influence upon you whatsoever. When a person fixes in his heart to say “Is not Hash-m the true G-d &amp; besides Him, may He be Blessed, there is no power whatsoever in the world &amp; in all the worlds at all &amp; all is filled only with His simple Oneness, may His Name be Blessed.” And [then] he shall nullify with a complete nullification &amp; he will not be concerned about any power or will in the world. And he will attach &amp; cling the purity of his thoughts – only to the One Master, Blessed be He. Thus the Blessed One will give in his hands – to automatically nullify by himself all of the forces &amp; desires in the world that absolutely nothing will be able to affect him.

Chapters



Gate IV

