Mishneh Torah, Agents and Partners
משנה תורה, הלכות שלוחין ושותפין
Maimonides' Mishneh Torah, edited by Philip Birnbaum, New York, 1967
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH002108864

Mishneh Torah, Agents and Partners



Chapter 1

If one said to his messenger: "Go out and sell a piece of land for me," or "movable goods," or "buy for me," the latter can sell and buy and act as his agent, and all his actions are valid.— —
If an agent has transgressed the bidding of his principal, his acts are void. So too, if he has committed an error in any quantity soever, whether in realty or in movables, his principal may lawfully retract, because he can say: "I have sent you to do the right thing as my agent and not the wrong thing."— —

Chapter 2






A broker is an agent who is paid for his services. Accordingly, if he acted otherwise than his principal's instructions, he must pay for the loss he has caused. If, for example, Reuben gave an object to Simeon the broker and told him: "Sell this for me, but do not sell it for less than one hundred," and he went and sold it for fifty, he must pay fifty of his own. If, however, he sold it for two hundred, it all belongs to Reuben. And so it is in all similar cases.— —

Chapter 3

If a man has a piece of land in the care of another person, or if he has movables deposited, and he wishes to appoint an agent to enter a lawsuit against that person and to take the land or the deposited object away from him, he should write an authorization for him. This authorization should be confirmed by the symbolical transfer of some article, referred to as <i>kinyan</i>, and he should address him in writing with these words: "Plead, acquire, and dispossess for yourself," or something like this. If he has not written such an authorization for the agent, the latter cannot enter a suit against the other, who can say to him: "You are not entitled to sue me." And even if he has written such an authorization for the agent, the latter remains no more than an agent, and whatever he wins belongs to his principal. All the expenses that the agent incurs in a case to which he has been authorized must be defrayed by his principal, for it is written in the deed of authorization: "Whatever you will spend on this case I will have to pay."





If one has money deposited with another and he wishes to authorize an an agent to obtain it for him, the formal authorization is of no avail in such a case, because coins cannot be acquired by symbolic barter. How then should he do? He should give the agent any piece of land soever and transfer title to the money along with it, so that he may obtain the money by means of this authorization. The agent can then proceed to sue the other party and obtain the money.— —

Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6

If two persons transact business with funds held in partnership, even though the money has been provided by only one of the two, it is called a partnership ; in the case of either a loss or a profit, it is divided equally.— — But if only one of the partners transacts business with the money held in partnership, even though the money has been provided by both, it is called <i>ések</i>, and the one who carries on the business is called <i>mithassek</i>, because it is he alone who engages in the transactions ; his partner who does not carry on the business is called the investor.
The sages have provided that when someone gives money to another person to do business, half the amount should be regarded as a loan, so that the one who engages in the transactions (<i>mithassek</i>) is held responsible for it, even if it is lost by accident; the other half should be in the form of a deposit, so that the investor remains responsible for it. Accordingly, if half the amount that is regarded as a deposit is stolen or lost, the <i>mithassek</i> is not required to pay. Hence, the profit made by this half belongs to the investor.— —
The sages have furthermore provided that when anyone advances capital to another to do business, and there is a loss or a profit, and he does not care to pay the other the daily wages for his work, nor have they made any agreement as to wages, one-third of the profit made by the half that is considered a deposit, which is one-sixth of the profit of the entire amount, should serve as the wage of the <i>mithassek</i> as to the half serving as a deposit. Accordingly, if they have made a profit, the <i>mithassek</i> will receive two-thirds of the profit: half the profit for half the amount in the form of a loan, and one-sixth of the entire profit as compensation for doing business with the deposit, totaling in all two-thirds of the profit, while the investor will receive one-third of the entire profit. In the case of a loss, the <i>mithassek</i> (operator) will bear one-third of it, since he is responsible for half the loss owing to half the amount in the form of a loan, but he is allowed one-sixth as compensation for handling the half which is regarded as a deposit; hence, one-third of the loss is borne by him, and the investor bears two-thirds of the loss.

Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9

All partners, tenants, guardians appointed by the court over orphans, — — must each take an oath imposed by the sages in a case of doubtful claim (suspicion of fraud) : perhaps he has robbed the other in a transaction, or maybe he was careless in computing the accounts between them. Why did the sages institute this oath? Because these people are likely to decide the law to their advantage, thinking that whatever they take from the property of the investor belongs rightfully to them, inasmuch as they carry on the business and do all the work. Hence, the sages have ruled that they should be required to take an oath in a doubtful claim, so that they may do all their work justly and faithfully.