Mishneh Torah, Agents and Partners
משנה תורה, הלכות שלוחין ושותפין
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Mishneh_Torah,_Agents_and_Partners
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Mishneh Torah, trans. by Eliyahu Touger. Jerusalem, Moznaim Pub. c1986-c2007
-https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH001020101/NLI

Mishneh Torah, Agents and Partners



Chapter 1

When a person tells a colleague: "Go out and sell landed property for me," "...movable property...," or "...purchase for me...," then the person should perform his agency, selling or buying. All his deeds are binding.<br>It is not necessary for a person who appoints an agent to perform a <i>kinyan</i> or have the appointment observed by witnesses. Instead, the statement he makes to his colleague is sufficient. Witnesses are necessary solely to reveal what transpired if one of the two denies the matter, as is the case with regard to other claims.
When an agent intentionally violates the instructions of his principal, his deeds are of no consequence. Similarly, if he erred even with regard to the slightest amount, the transaction - whether involving landed property or movable property - is nullified. For the principal can claim: "I sent you to improve my position, not to impair it."<br>The principle is that with regard to movable property, the laws of <i>ona'ah</i> do not apply unless one pays a sixth or more than the proper price for an article, and that these laws do not apply at all with regard to the sale of servants, promissory notes and landed property. They do, however, apply when the seller or the purchaser himself conducts the transaction. When, however, it is conducted by an agent, and he erred in his valuation with regard to even the slightest amount, the transaction is nullified.
When a person gives money to an agent to purchase landed property, and the agent purchases it for him without requiring the seller to accept financial responsibility if it is expropriated from the purchaser, he is considered to have damaged the principal's position. The agent must purchase the property without financial responsibility, as he did, for himself. Then he must sell it to the principal and accept financial responsibility. This decision is rendered because the agent purchased the property with money belonging to the principal. The agent must accept the financial responsibility himself. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.<br>Therefore, if the principal explicitly stipulates that he is appointing the agent in that capacity, whether he improves his position or impairs it, he may not retract, even if the agent sold a field worth 100 <i>dinarim</i> for a <i>dinar</i> for him, or purchased one worth a <i>dinar</i> for 100. And the principal must pay the agent as he originally stipulated.
When a person tells his agent: "Sell a portion of my field large enough to sow a <i>se'ah</i>," and he sells a portion large enough to sow two <i>se'ah</i>, the agent is considered to have added to the principal's instructions, and the purchaser acquires only an area large enough to sow one <i>se'ah</i>.<br>If the principal told the agent: "Sell a portion large enough to sow two <i>se'ah</i>," and the agent sold only an area large enough to sow one <i>se'ah</i>, the agent is considered to have violated the principal's instructions, and the purchaser does not acquire anything.<br>If the principal told the agent: "Sell my field to one person for me," and the agent sold it to two people, the sale is nullified, for he violated the principal's instructions. If the principal told the agent: "Sell the field for me" without giving further instructions, the sales made by the agent are binding, even if he sold the property in 100 portions.
When a person gives money to his agent to purchase wheat or any other type of merchandise, and the agent does not make the purchase, the principal does not have a financial claim against the agent, only complaints.<br>The following rules apply if a principal gives an agent money to purchase wheat - whether to eat or to use as merchandise - and the agent purchases barley. If the price of the barley that he purchased becomes less than the price of wheat, the agent must bear the loss, because he deviated from the instructions he was given. If the price of the barley increases more than the price of wheat, the profit belongs to the owner of the money.<br>If the price of merchandise was fixed, and an additional quantity, weight or measure was given the agent, whatever was added by the seller should be divided between the two; i.e., the additional measure should be split between the agent and the principal. If the object sold does not have a fixed price, everything should be given to the principal.
The following rules apply when a person owes a colleague money, whether because of a debt, an entrusted article or a wage, and he gave the money to an agent and told him: "Bring this money to my creditor," the agent is not required to take special care of the matter and pay the creditor in the presence of witnesses.<br>If the principal told the agent: "Do not pay the debt unless witnesses observe it, " and he paid the debt in the absence of witnesses, the agent is liable should the creditor demand payment of the debt again. Similarly, if the debt was recorded in a promissory note, and the agent paid the debt outside the presence of witnesses, and did not take the promissory note, the agent is liable should the creditor demand payment of the debt again.This applies whether the debtor told the agent: "Take the promissory note and give him the money," or "Give him the money and take the promissory note." For by not taking the note, the agent impaired the principal's position and did not improve it.
The following rules apply when a person sends money that he possesses with an agent, saying: "Bring this money to so and so, because I owe it to him," and the agent went and gave the creditor the money outside the presence of witnesses. If the agent said: "I paid," and the creditor or the worker said: "I did not receive it," and the three are standing together the following course of action should be taken.<br>The agent should take a <i>sh'vuat hesset</i> that he paid the debt. The creditor or the worker should take an oath that he did not receive anything, and then the principal should pay the creditor or the owner of the entrusted object. Even if there were two agents entrusted with making the payment, their testimony is of no consequence, because they are involved parties - for they are required to take a <i>sh'vuat hesset</i>.<br>When does the above apply? When the agent denies the statements of the creditor and the three are standing together. If, however, the agent comes to the principal and tells him: "I paid your creditor as you instructed me," the principal may not require him to take an oath that he performed the mission, for there is no one who issues a definite claim that he did not perform his mission.<br>Similarly, if the agents died or traveled overseas, and the creditor came and demanded payment of the debt, the debtor may not require him to take a <i>sh'vuat hesset</i> that the agent did not pay him, for there is no one who issues a definite claim that he received the money. Instead, the debtor should have a ban of ostracism issued against anyone who demands payment a second time. Afterwards, he must pay the debt he owes. Similar principles apply in other analogous situations.
The following laws apply when Reuven sends a letter to Shimon telling him: "You owe me a <i>maneh</i>. Send it to me with Levi." If Shimon is willing to send the money with him, he is no longer responsible for it. This applies whether a loan or an entrusted object is involved, provided he recognized that the letter was written in Reuven's handwriting.<br>If the creditor claims "I did not write the note or send it to you," the debtor must take a <i>sh'vuat hesset</i> that he received a note and he therefore sent the money. He is not under any further obligation. This is the manner in which my teachers ruled.<br>Different rules apply, however, if the note was not written in the principal's handwriting, or the debtor did not know that it was written in his handwriting - even if it contained signs and letters that only they knew about. If Reuven claims: "I did not send a letter; other people tricked you," Shimon is responsible for the funds and must pay Reuven if the funds do not reach him after he issues a ban of ostracism against anyone who intentionally sent a letter and denies it. There are those who rule that Reuven must take an oath before collecting the money, as is required of others who take oaths before collecting their due.
The following laws apply when Levi comes as an agent of Reuven and takes 50 <i>zuz</i> from Shimon, and then Reuven comes and claims: "I sent him to take only 20, and all that he brought me was 20." Reuven must take an oath supporting his claim, as is required of anyone who admits a portion of the claim made against him. And Levi must take a <i>sh'vuat hesset</i> that he gave Reuven the 50 <i>zuz</i> that were given to him.<br>If the above scenario was repeated in an instance where Shimon owed money to Reuven, Shimon must pay the difference from his own resources. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.

Chapter 2

A non-Jew may never be appointed as an agent for any mission whatsoever. Similarly, a Jew may never be appointed as an agent for a non-Jew for any mission whatsoever. These concepts are derived from Numbers 18:28: "And so shall you offer, also yourselves." This is interpreted to mean: Just as you are members of the covenant, so too, your agents must be members of the covenant. This principle is applied to the entire Torah.<br>Moreover, the converse is also true: Just as your principals are members of the covenant, so too, in every aspect of Torah law, the principal must be a member of the covenant.
A man may appoint either a man or a woman as an agent. He may even appoint a married woman, a servant or a maidservant. Since they possess a developed intellectual capacity and are obligated to perform some of the mitzvot, they may serve as agents with regard to financial matters.<br>A person who does not have a developed intellectual capacity - i.e., a deaf-mute, a mentally or emotionally unsound individual or a minor - may not be appointed as an agent, nor may they appoint agents. This applies to both a male minor and a female minor.<br>Accordingly, if a person sends a son who is below the age of majority to a storekeeper for oil, the storekeeper measures out an <i>isar's</i> worth of oil for him and gives the child an <i>isar</i> as change, but the child loses the oil and the <i>isar</i> he gave him, the storekeeper is liable to pay. For the father sent the child only to inform the storekeeper that he needed the oil, and the storekeeper should have sent it with a mature person. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations. If, however, the recipient explicitly told the storekeeper: "Send it to me with the child," the storekeeper is not liable.
When a person tells a colleague: "You owe me a <i>maneh</i>, send it to me with so and so" - if the debtor desires to send it to the creditor with that person, he discharges his obligation and is no longer responsible for the money even if the person named was a minor. This applies regardless of whether the money was given as a loan or as an entrusted object.<br>Similarly, when two people agree on a stipulation between themselves that whoever desires to send an object to his colleague may send it with whomever the sender desires, the sender may send it with whomever he sees fit, provided he is appropriate to transfer such an article. If the article is stolen or lost on the way, or the agent denies receiving it, the sender is not liable. The rationale is that every stipulation regarding financial matters that is accepted is binding.
When an agent buys or sells an article and notifies the other party that he is acting as an agent for another person in this transaction, and it is discovered that he violated the instructions given him by the principal, the sale is nullified and the article must be returned, even if <i>meshichah</i> was performed.<br>If the agent did not notify the other party that he was an agent, the transaction is binding, and the agent must then satisfy the principal.
The following rules apply when Reuven purchased a field from Shimon and told him: "I purchased it on behalf of Levi," Reuven drew up a deed of sale for Levi, and afterwards Reuven said: "I purchased the field for myself. Draw up a deed of sale for me." The seller is not compelled to draw up another deed of sale for Reuven.<br>If, however, Reuven made a stipulation at the outset, telling the seller: "I am purchasing it for myself, I am having the deed of sale drawn up on behalf of Levi only so that people will not know that I am the buyer," Reuven may compel Shimon to compose another deed of sale in his own name.
A broker is an agent, except that he receives a fee for his services. Therefore, if he deviates from the instructions of the owners, he must take responsibility for the loss he caused.<br>What is implied? Reuven gave an article to Shimon - a broker - and told him: "Sell this article for me, but do not sell it for less than 100 <i>zuz</i>." If Shimon sold it for 50, he must pay Reuven 50 from his own resources. If he sold it for 200, Reuven receives everything. Similar principles apply in all analogous situations.<br>If Reuven claims: "I told you to sell it for 100," and the broker says: "You told me 50, and I sold it for 50," the broker must take an oath mandated by Scriptural Law, for he admitted a portion of the plaintiff's claim. If he already gave him the 50, he is required to take only a <i>sh'vuat hesset</i> that he carried out the mission, and the purchaser acquires the article.<br>If the purchaser knew that the article belonged to Reuven and that the person selling it to him was only a broker, he must return the article to its owner. He may, however, have a ban of ostracism issued against anyone who gave permission for an article to be sold for 50 <i>zuz</i> or agreed to the sale at 50 and then retracted after the sale was made.
The following rule applies whenever a broker informs the purchaser that a specific article or piece of property belongs to a principal, Reuven. If, after the purchaser acquires the article, Reuven says: "I don't want to sell at this price," the purchaser must return the article. For Reuven did not specify a price and tell the agent: "Sell the article for this and this much."<br>Whenever a broker loses an article, or it is stolen or broken, he is liable to reimburse the owner, for he is considered a paid watchman.
The following rules apply when a person takes articles from a craftsman's workplace to send as presents to his future father-in-law's home and tells the craftsman: "If they accept them from me, I will pay you for them. If not, I will reimburse you slightly for the favor." If the presents were destroyed by forces beyond his control while they were being delivered, the giver is liable to pay. If they were destroyed by forces beyond his control while they were being returned, he is not liable.<br>More stringent rules apply if he took the articles with the intent of selling them to others, telling him: "If they will be able to be sold in such and such a place," or "until such and such a time, I will pay you such and such. If they will not be sold, I will return them to you." If they were destroyed by forces beyond his control, whether while they were being transported or while they were being returned, the person who took the articles is liable to pay.
Whenever an agent claims that a loss beyond his control occurred, causing him to lose this and this amount, he must take the oath required of agents to support his claim, and then he is released of responsibility.<br>If the loss occurred in a place where it was likely that he would be able to find witnesses to corroborate his statements or the matter is of public knowledge and witnesses could thus be found, he must bring witnesses to substantiate his claim. If he does not bring witnesses, his claim is not accepted, and he is required to pay.<br>An incident occurred concerning a person who told his agent: "Buy 400 measures of wine for me with money of mine that is in your possession." The agent bought the wine for him and it turned out to be vinegar. The Sages said: "Such a large quantity of vinegar is bound to have been spoken about publicly." Since it is possible to substantiate the claim with witnesses, the agent must bring witnesses that the wine had not turned into vinegar at the time of the purchase, and thus free himself from responsibility. If he does not substantiate his claim, he must pay. Similar laws apply in all instances regarding entities where it is feasible to substantiate a claim.<br>When, by contrast, the claim concerns a hidden matter that is not easy to substantiate, the agent must take an oath concerning it. Similar laws apply to all claims to be issued by a partner and the like. And similar laws apply with regard to watchmen. If it is likely that the claim can be substantiated, the watchman must substantiate it, as will be explained.

Chapter 3

The following laws apply when a person owns landed property that another person is using or he has movable property that he had given him as an entrusted object, and he seeks to appoint an agent to carry out legal procedures with that other person and expropriate that property or entrusted object from his possession. He must compose a deed granting him power of attorney. And he must perform a <i>kinyan</i> certifying that he was granted power of attorney, telling him: "Take it to court, acquire it, and expropriate it for yourself," or the like.<br>If the principal does not compose such a deed for the agent, he may not enter into litigation on his behalf, for the defendant will argue: "You are not the party with whom I have contention."<br>Even if the principal does compose such a deed, the agent is no more than that, and any property that he acquires belongs to the principal. And any expenses undertaken by the agent with regard to the dispute for which he was given power of attorney must be borne by the principal. For this is also written in the deed granting power of attorney: "Any expenses that you undertake in this case, I undertake to pay."
If the principal transfers ownership to the person to whom he gave power of attorney, granting him only a third or a fourth of the property his colleague is holding, the person granted power of attorney may enter into litigation concerning the entire holding. Since he is entitled to enter into litigation concerning the portion that he owns, and he is justified to enter into litigation with him on that, he may enter into litigation concerning the entire amount.
When one of a group of brothers who have not divided an estate between themselves, or one of a group of partners comes and lodges a claim on a portion of the property they assert to be their own, his claim involves the entire property. The defendant must respond to him. Since this person owns a portion of the property in question, he does not need power of attorney from the other partners.<br>If the defendant prevails, another one of the partners cannot lodge a claim against the partner who engaged in the litigation, telling him: "If I had been there, I would have raised other arguments and caused the defendant to be held liable," for the partner who engaged in the litigation can tell him: "Why didn't you come and raise those arguments?"<br>For this reason, if the other partner was in another country, that partner can seek out the defendant and enter litigation against him, telling him: "I do not agree with all the arguments my partner raised."<br>Accordingly, the defendant can delay, telling the first partner: "Either enter into litigation concerning only your share, or bring me power of attorney from the other party. For I am holding property belonging to both of you, and you both are involved parties in this case. Tomorrow, your brother - or your partner - will come and also lodge a claim against me."
A husband needs power of attorney to lodge a claim concerning his wife's property. If, however, there is produce on the property, he has the right to lodge a claim concerning the produce - for it belongs to him - he may also lodge a claim about the property itself. For if his wife does not own the property, he has no right to the produce.
Although a person has entrusted an object to a colleague or given him a loan - whether movable property or money - and appointed an agent in the presence of witnesses to bring that object or loan back to him, the option belongs to the borrower or the lender. If he desires to give it to the agent, he is no longer liable, and is free of responsibility if it does not reach the principal, for he gave it to his agent.<br>If he does not desire to give it to the agent, he is not required to do so. For the agent is not the litigant. This applies unless the agent brings power of attorney from the owner of the entrusted object.<br>Every person who comes to demand payment from a colleague, using power of attorney, is described by the verse (Ezekiel 18:18 : "He did what is not good among his people."
When a person lodges a court claim against a colleague for either movable property or money he entrusted to him, and the defendant has already denied it, the plaintiff cannot write a bill giving another person power of attorney to collect this property or money from that person. The rationale is that he appears to be making a false statement. For he says: "I am granting you power of attorney to take everything that I own that so and so has," and so and so has already denied possessing anything belonging to the principal.<br>Similarly, if a person is required to take an oath in response to a colleague's claim, that colleague cannot grant another person power of attorney to have the oath administered. The rationale is that he is not transferring to the prospective agent an object of substance. And a person cannot transfer power of attorney on a claim that involves merely words. For words cannot be transferred unless they are associated with a financial claim.
When a person has entrusted money to a colleague and desires to grant an agent power of attorney to bring it, a <i>kinyan chalifin</i> is not effective. For money is not acquired through a <i>kinyan chalifin</i>.<br>What should he do? He should give the agent a portion of land of any sizeand transfer the money to him by virtue of his acquisition of the land with the intent that he expropriate it with this power of attorney. The agent may then go, enter into litigation, and expropriate the money.<br>If a person lent money to another person, he cannot compose a bill transferring power of attorney concerning it. This applies even if the loan is recorded in a legal document.The rationale is that a loan was given with the intent that the borrower spend the money. Thus, the money given by the lender no longer exists. And a person cannot transfer ownership over an entity that does not exist. The only way a person can transfer ownership of a debt is through a <i>ma'amad sh'loshtan</i> - which is a dictate whose rationale cannot be explained, as mentioned above, or through transferring the debt by writing a deed transferring ownership of the promissory note and giving it to the recipient, for in this way one transfers the lien that the note conveys.<br>This is my understanding of the law from the <i>Gemara.</i> The <i>Geonim</i> have, however, ordained that one may also grant power of attorney with regard to a loan, so that no one should take money belonging to a colleague and go to a distant country.<br>They also ordained that if a person was granted power of attorney to collect money belonging to a colleague that was held by another person or to demand payment of a loan from him, and the person transferring the debt did not own land, he could transfer to him four cubits of his heritage in <i>Eretz Yisrael</i>, and then transfer the money to him, by virtue of his acquisition of the land.<br>Such statements appear to me extremely flimsy and insubstantial. For who is to say that this person has a portion in <i>Eretz Yisrael</i>? And even if he is fit to receive a portion of the land, it is presently not in his possession. The <i>Geonim</i> who ordained this ruling did not say: "Let the law pierce the mountain." Instead, they explained that the ruling was issued only to intimidate the defendant, so that if he desires to enter into litigation and pay the money when presented with this power of attorney, he is no longer under obligation.<br>Why is he no longer under obligation? For a person who brings this insubstantial power of attorney is no worse than an agent appointed in the presence of witnesses. If, however, the defendant does not desire to enter into litigation with the person granted the power of attorney, he is not compelled to give him the money or take an oath until the principal comes himself.<br>Similarly, the <i>Geonim</i> ruled that if a person granted a colleague a loan, whether it is supported by a promissory note or by a <i>kinyan</i> observed by witnesses, even though the person denied his obligation in court, a deed granting power of attorney can be composed, because the defendant is denying a claim involving a lien on property. If, however, the loan is supported by a verbal commitment alone, and it is denied, the <i>Geonim</i> did not ordain that a deed granting power of attorney be composed concerning it.
When a person granted power of attorney to one individual and then desired to nullify his agency and grant power of attorney to someone else, he may nullify his first appointment.<br>The person granted power of attorney, however, may not grant power of attorney to another person. For the principal might not agree, saying: "I do not want my property entrusted to another individual." Therefore, if the agent had stipulated that he be given the right to grant power of attorney to someone else, and have that person grant power of attorney to another, the agent may write a deed granting power of attorney to a second individual, and the second individual may do so for a third. Everything follows the stipulation.
When a person who was granted power of attorney waives the payment owed by the defendant, sells him the article he was sent to collect, waives his obligation to take an oath, or negotiates a compromise with him, his actions are of no substance. For the principal will tell the agent: "I sent you to improve my position, not to impair it."<br>Therefore, if the agent had the principal stipulate that the agency is effective whether he improves his position or impairs it, his acts are binding, even if he waives payment of the entire obligation.
When Reuven is granted power of attorney and files a claim against Shimon, Shimon cannot turn him away, saying: "Maybe the principal who sent you appointed another person and nullified your agency." For Reuven will tell him: "Give me the article that was entrusted, and I will leave the deed recording my power of attorney with you." If the principal does in fact grant another person power of attorney, he has caused himself a loss. Shimon is not liable, for he gave the object to a person with power of attorney.
The following law applies when Reuven comes with power of attorney from Shimon and demands payment from Levi, and Levi tells him: "Nothing like that ever happened, but if Shimon wants, he may take an oath and collect the article he claims." We expropriate the money from Levi and have it kept in court until Shimon comes, takes the oath and collects the article.<br>Similarly, with regard to any other claim that Levi makes that is dependent on Shimon, Reuven should enter into litigation regarding the matter, and the property should be placed in the court until Shimon comes and is questioned. Reuven may have a ban of ostracism issued against anyone who issues a false claim to withhold payment and delay it.<br>If Levi is required to take an oath, he may not delay and say: "I will not take an oath until I have a ban of ostracism issued in the presence of Shimon against anyone who issues a false claim against me." For the issuance of this ban of ostracism is merely a minor ordinance that the later <i>Geonim</i> ordained so that the litigants will be forthright in their claims. And we do not delay having the defendant take an oath, because of this minor ordinance.

Chapter 4

When partners desire to establish a partnership, how does each one acquire the assets invested by his colleague, so that they are considered partners? If they desire to establish a partnership with money, each one should bring his money and place it in a common pouch. Then each of them lifts up the pouch.<br>If, however, they composed a legal document detailing the partnership and had witnesses testify that they both performed a <i>kinyan chalifin</i> that each will bring 100 <i>zuz</i> for the partnership, the agreement is not binding and the partnership has not yet been established, for money is not acquired through <i>chalifin</i>.<br>Therefore, if they established their partnership with regard to other movable property, when they entered into a <i>kinyan</i> that one would bring his barrel of wine and the other his jug of honey and they would become partners, the partnership is established in this manner. Similarly, if they mixed their produce together or hired a property in partnership, and one left the jug and the other the barrel with which they desired to act as partners, the partnership is established.<br>The general principle is: All the means of acquisition that a purchaser employs to acquire property can be used by partners to acquire the assets that are contributed to the partnership.
When craftsmen join together in a professional partnership, even though they perform a <i>kinyan</i> with each other, they are not considered partners.<br>What is implied? If two tailors or two weavers stipulate between themselves that whatever either of them earns will be divided between them equally, they are not considered partners. For a person cannot transfer ownership to a colleague of an article that does not yet exist. If, however, they purchase the cloth for the garments with their common funds, sew them and sell them, or purchase the woof and warp with their common funds, weave garments and sell them, and a partnership has been established through the use of the money, they are partners. Whatever they earn as payment for their work and their commercial activity is divided equally.
When three partners enter into a partnership, one investing a <i>maneh,</i> the second 200 <i>zuz</i>, and the third 300, and they all do business with the money, whether they profit or lose, the profit or loss is divided among them according to their number, not according to the size of their investments. Even if they purchase a bull for slaughter in which instance, if they slaughter it, each one of them would take a portion of its flesh according to the size of his investment. If they sell the bull while it is alive and profit or lose, the profit or loss is divided equally among the partners.<br>When does the above apply? When they bought and sold with the money of the partnership. If, however, the money still exists within the treasury of the partnership, and was not spent, but its value rose or dropped because of currency fluctuations depending on the ruling authority or the local populace, the profit or the loss is divided according to the amount of money invested.<br>When does the above apply? When the partners entered into the partnership without making a specific agreement. If, however, it was stipulated that the person who invested 100 <i>zuz</i> should receive three fourths of the profit, and the person who invested 200, one fourth, and if they lose the person who would be given three fourths of the profit would not suffer more than one fourth of the loss, and the one who would gain one fourth of the profit should suffer three fourths of the loss, the money is divided according to their stipulation. For every stipulation made with regard to financial matters is binding.
When partners make a stipulation that they continue in the partnership for a specific duration of time, each them can prevent his colleague from dissolving the partnership. Neither one can withdraw until the set time arrives or the money in the partnership is exhausted. Neither can take his portion of the principal or of the profit until the end of that time.<br>If they established a partnership without making a stipulation and without establishing a set time, they may dissolve the partnership whenever any of them desires. This one should take his portion of the merchandise from the partnership, and this one should take his portion. If the merchandise is of the type that cannot be divided, or if making the division would cause a loss, the article should be sold and the money should be divided.<br>If there was a time when the merchandise of the partnership would ordinarily be sold, each partner can prevent his colleague from dissolving the partnership until the merchandise will be sold at the known time for such merchandise to be sold. Neither can take his portion of the principal or of the profit until the time of the division, unless a stipulation was made between them.<br>If the partnership was owed a debt by others, one partner cannot tell the other: "Let us not dissolve the partnership until we collect all the debts that are owed to us." Instead, the assets of the partnership should be divided. When the debts are repaid, each one should be given his portion.<br>The following rules apply when, by contrast, the partnership owes a debt to another person. If they are not responsible for each other, they should divide the assets of the partnership, and when the time for the debt comes, each one should pay his portion of the debt.<br>If they are responsible for each other, each one can prevent the other from dissolving the partnership until the time when the promissory note comes due and the debt is repaid. Why is each one given this right? Because one colleague can tell the other: "Since each of us can be required to pay the entire promissory note, let us continue to do business with the money until the date of payment comes."<br>If his colleague tells him: "Let us divide the assets, and you can receive all the money for the promissory note. Do business by yourself and pay the note when it comes due," the other colleague may still impede, saying "Maybe I will lose, for two people make greater profit than one."
When a person gives a colleague money to go to a different country and buy merchandise, buy produce to sell as merchandise, or buy and sell merchandise while sitting in a store, the person who took the money may not retract and return the money to his partner until he goes to the place where the stipulation was made and returns, buys the produce and sells it, or sits in the store. The rationale is that this is considered as if he fixed a time to sell the merchandise.

Chapter 5

When a person enters into a partnership agreement without making any stipulations, he should not deviate from the local custom followed with regard to that merchandise. He should not take the merchandise and travel to another place, enter into a partnership with other individuals, be involved with other merchandise, sell it on an extended payment plan unless it is ordinarily sold in such a manner, nor should it be entrusted to others unless a stipulation to that effect was made at the outset or he did so with the consent of his colleague.<br>If a partner transgresses, and performs one of the above activities without the knowledge of his colleague, but when he informs him afterwards of what he did the other partner agrees, he is not liable. A <i>kinyan</i> is not necessary to formalize a partner's consent to any of the above matters; a verbal commitment is sufficient.
When one of the partners transgresses and sells merchandise on credit, takes it on a sea voyage, travels with it to another place, does business with other merchandise at the same time, or the like, he alone is liable to pay for any loss that occurs because of his activity. If he profits from his activity, the profit should be split between the partners according to their stipulations regarding profit.<br>For this reason, the following rules apply when a person gives a colleague money to purchase wheat as part of a partnership agreement and the partner purchases barley, or he gives him money to purchase barley and he purchases wheat: if there is a loss, it is suffered by the one who transgressed. If there is a profit, it is split.<br>Similarly, if a partner entered into partnership with another person using funds belonging to the partnership, if there is a loss, the persons suffers it alone. If there is a profit, it is split. If, however, he entered into a partnership with another person with his own money: if there is a loss, the persons suffers it alone. If there is a profit, he alone receives the profit. If a stipulation was made between the partners, everything is concluded according to that stipulation.
When a person gives a colleague money to purchase produce with the profits to be divided in half, the person given the money is permitted to purchase more of that produce for himself. When he sells the produce, he should not sell the two together. Instead, he should sell the produce owned jointly separately, and his own produce separately.<br>Similarly, he should not purchase wheat for himself and barley for his colleague.Instead, he should purchase wheat for the entire amount, or barley for the entire amount, so that the funds of them both should be equal in case of loss.
When one of the partners says: "Let's take the merchandise to this and this place, where it is highly priced, and sell it there," the other partner may prevent him from doing so even if the first partner accepts responsibility for any loss by factors beyond his control or depreciation that may occur. The rationale is that the second partner may tell the first: "I do not desire to give you the money that is in my possession and then have to pursue you and bring you to court to expropriate it from you." Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.
If one of the partners desires to let the produce age until the time when it is known to sell that produce, his colleague cannot prevent him from doing so. If there is no set time to sell this type of produce, his colleague can prevent him from aging the produce.
When partners evaluated their produce, and then established a partnership with them, the laws of <i>ona'ah</i> apply to each of them. If they mixed their produce together without evaluating it, sold it, and then did business with the profits, they should evaluate the worth of the produce at the time the partnership was established, and appraise the profit or the loss accordingly.
When custom collectors waived a fee from partners, each is granted an equal share. If the collectors say: "We waived the fee because of so and so," he alone is granted the value of the waiver.<br>The following rules apply when partners were traveling on the road and were attacked by thieves, who sought to steal the merchandise carried by the caravan.If one of the partners saved the goods from being taken, all the partners receive an equal share in what he saved. If he says: "I am saving it for myself," he has saved it for himself alone.
When property is known to belong to the partnership, it is assumed that both partners have a share in its ownership throughout the entire duration of the partnership. This applies even though the property was located in the domain of only one of the partners. The partner in whose domain it is located may not claim that he purchased it from the other partner, or that he gave it to him as a present. In such an instance, we do not follow the principle: When a person desires to expropriate property from a colleague the burden of proof is on him. Instead, the property is assumed to belong to both partners unless one of them brings proof otherwise.
When one of the partners desires to dissolve the partnership without the knowledge of his partner, he should divide the assets in the presence of three people. They may even be unlearned people, provided they are trustworthy and able to evaluate property. If a partner divides the assets in the presence of fewer than three people, his actions are of no consequence.<br>When does the above apply? When he divides produce. If, however, the partnership's assets were money, the money is considered as if it had been already divided. The partner may therefore divide the money outside the presence of a court and then deposit his colleague's share with the court for safe-keeping.<br>When does the above apply? When all the money is of one currency and of equal value. If, however, some coins are new and others old - and needless to say if some are considered desirable and others considered undesirable - the money is also considered as produce and should not be divided outside the presence of a court of three.
It is forbidden for a person to enter into partnership with a gentile, lest his colleague be obligated to take an oath to him and he swear in the name of his false deity.<br>We have already explained in the appropriate place that it is forbidden to do business with produce that grows in the Sabbatical year, nor with firstborn animals, nor with animals that are <i>trefah</i>, nor with meat from dead animals, nor with produce that is <i>terumah</i>, nor with crawling or teeming animals. If a person transgresses and invests money belonging to a partnership in these, the profit should be divided among the partners. It appears to me that if he loses, he must bear the loss himself. This ruling is granted because he transgressed.
When one of the members of a partnership or an investment agreement dies, the partnership or the investment agreement is nullified. This applies even if the agreement was originally made for a specific time. The rationale is that the money has already been transferred to the domain of the heirs. The <i>Geonim</i> ruled in accordance with this decision.

Chapter 6

When two partners both do business with the money belonging to the partnership, even if the money was originally invested by only one of them, their relationship is referred to as a partnership. If they lose or they profit, the loss or the profit is divided equally, or they may stipulate any other division of the profits or the losses, as we have explained.<br>If, however, only one of the partners was doing business with the money belonging to the partnership, even if the money was originally invested by both of them, this type of partnership is called an <i>esek</i> (an investment agreement). The person who does the buying and selling is called an administrator, for he alone is the one involved in the transactions. And the partner who is not involved in the business dealings is referred to as the investor.
Our Sages ordained that whenever a person entrusts money to a colleague to use for business purposes, half of the money should be considered a loan. The administrator is responsible for this money even if it is destroyed by forces beyond his control. The second half is considered an entrusted object, and the investor is responsible for it. If the half that is considered an entrusted article is stolen or lost, the administrator is not liable to pay. Therefore, any profit that is earned by this half of the investment will belong to the investor.<br>According to this construct, the profit or the loss of the entire investment should not be equally divided between the investor and the administrator. For if this were the case, the investor would receive a profit for the half of his money that is an entrusted object without doing anything for it. The administrator is working for the sake of the half of the investment that was an entrusted article, because of the money that he was lent. Thus, this brings the two to <i>avak ribit</i>, the shade of interest.<br>What should be done if they desire that the profit or the loss be equally shared? The investor should pay the administrator the wages to be paid to an unemployed laborer of the profession in which he was involved. If the administrator has any other occupation in which he is involved aside from caring for this investment, the investor does not have to pay him a daily wage. Instead, even if he paid him only one <i>dinar</i> for the entire time of the partnership, this is sufficient. If the partnership lost or gained, the loss or profit should be divided equally.<br>Similarly, if the investor told the administrator: "In addition to the portion that is divided, you will receive one third or one tenth of the profit," since he has another occupation, it is permitted. If there is a loss, the loss is divided equally.<br>If the administrator is a sharecropper working the fields of the investor, and he has another business, he is not required to pay him any other wage at all. For a sharecropper is obligated to take care of the interests of the owner of the field.
Our Sages also ordained that whenever a person gives a colleague money to use for a business and the investor did not desire to pay the administrator a wage, and they did not make any stipulation with regard to the division of the profits and the losses, the profit or the loss should be divided as follows: The wage of the administrator for handling the half of the investment that is considered an entrusted article is one third of the profit of that half, which is one sixth of the profit of the entire investment.<br>Therefore, if a profit is made, the administrator should receive two thirds of the profit: half of the profit stemming from the half of the investment that was a loan, and the sixth of the profit that is his wages for handling the money considered as an entrusted article. Thus, he receives two thirds of the profit.<br>If there is a loss, the administrator should bear a third of the loss. This figure is reached as follows: He is liable for half the loss because of the half [of the original investment that was a loan. He deserves a sixth of the loss as his wage for handling the half of the investment that was considered an entrusted article. Thus, his responsibility is one third of the loss. The investor must bear two thirds of the loss.
There is an opinion that makes an error, maintaining that when a person makes an investment without making any stipulations with regard to the division of profits and losses, they should be divided as follows: If there is a profit, the administrator should receive half, but if there is a loss, he must bear only a third of the loss. This is not the rule unless they made an explicit stipulation to this effect.<br>Similarly, if they stipulated that if there be a loss the administrator should suffer half the loss, and if there be a profit he should be granted two thirds of the profit, this is permitted. Similarly, if they stipulated that if there be a profit, the administrator should receive one ninth and if there be a loss, he should lose one tenth, this stipulation is binding. The rationale is that they made a stipulation that the administrator should receive a greater share of the profit than his share of the loss, and he is granted this additional amount because of his work.<br>My teachers ruled that such a conditional agreement is not effective unless the administrator has another occupation. If he does not have another occupation, the profit that the administrator can receive must be at least a sixth more than the loss he could suffer, as we have explained. They maintain that a prohibition is involved, and the stipulation cannot supersede it. This ruling does not appear correct to me.
My teachers ruled that if a stipulation was made that the administrator should receive three fourths of the profit and the investor only one portion, only one fourth of the money will be considered an entrusted article and three fourths will be considered a loan. Therefore, if there is a loss, the administrator should bear three fourths of the loss, minus a twelfth. The investor should suffer a fourth of the loss plus a twelfth - i.e., one third of the entire loss.<br>What is implied? The investor gave the administrator 100 <i>dinarim</i> according to this stipulation, and they lost 24 <i>dinarim</i>, the investor should lose eight, and the administrator sixteen.<br>These ratios should be followed at all times. Whenever there is a profit, the investor should receive the share of the profit that was stipulated. If there is a loss, he should bear that same proportion of the loss, but should be given one third of the investor's portion. Thus, according to this approach, if it was agreed that the administrator would receive a fourth of the profits, he does not lose anything if there is a loss. For in place of the fourth of the loss that he is required to bear, he is due one third of the portion of the owner - i.e., one fourth. And so, one cancels out the other.<br>These authorities maintain that similar principles apply if a stipulation was made regarding losses without mentioning profits. If a loss was incurred, the administrator must bear the loss as stipulated. If a profit was made, the administrator should receive the share of the loss that he was supposed to bear, plus one third of the portion to be received by the investor.<br>What is implied? If a stipulation was made that in the event of a loss, the administrator should bear one fourth of the loss. If there is a loss, he must pay the investor one fourth. If there is a profit, the administrator receives half the profit.<br>Although the rules that they issued are words of logic, if these principles are followed, it is possible for the administrator to cause a loss and yet receive profit.<br>What is implied? It was stipulated that the administrator should receive one seventh of the profit. A loss was incurred. Thus, the administrator should receive as a wage one seventh in addition to this loss.<br>How is this illustrated? They suffered a loss of seven <i>dinarim</i>. The administrator will tell the investor: "I owe you one <i>dinar</i> according to our stipulation, but you owe me two <i>dinarim</i>, which is one third of the portion of the entrusted article." Thus, the investor is obligated to pay him a <i>dinar</i> as wages for losing seven <i>dinarim</i>. And if he had lost fourteen <i>dinarim</i>, the investor would have to pay him two <i>dinarim</i> as wages. This is an unfathomable matter, which cannot be accepted by logic. To me, it appears like a dream.<br>Instead, the proper approach and the true law appears to me as follows: If there is a loss, the administrator should bear as a loss two thirds of the percentage he would receive if there were a profit. Similarly, if they made a stipulation concerning a loss and they profited, the administrator should receive the portion he would lose in the event of a loss, plus a third of the share of his colleague. Thus, according to this approach, if a stipulation was made that the administrator should receive one fourth of the profit and he incurred a loss, he should pay one sixth of the loss. And if a stipulation was made that he should lose a fourth and he profited, he should receive a half. Following this approach will not lead to unthinkable results, and there will be expressed a law that is just.

Chapter 7

When a person gives money to a colleague to use for business purposes without making any stipulation, or explicitly states that they will share the profit and the losses equally, and the money is lost, there is an opinion that states that if only a portion of the money is lost, the administrator should pay the investor one third, as we have explained. It appears to me, however, that the administrator should pay the half that is a loan. Our Sages' statement that he should bear one third of the loss applies when the loss is not great enough for the investor to receive less than half of his money.<br>What is implied? Reuven gave Shimon 120 <i>dinarim</i> to invest in a business. Shimon did business with the money and lost ninety <i>dinarim</i>. Shimon should pay 30. Thus, Reuven receives 60.<br>If, however, Shimon lost 105 <i>dinarim</i>, we do not say that Shimon must pay only 35 <i>dinarim</i>. For if so, Reuven will receive only 50, and Reuven should never receive less than 60.<br>For this reason, if a legal document recording an investment contract involving the deceased father of orphans was presented against them, the possessor of the contract must take an oath. Afterwards, he is entitled to collect the half that is a loan. This applies even though we always advance arguments in support of an heir. Thus, we can derive from this that an investor never receives less than half.<br>Why do I not say that the extent of the loss the administrator must bear should be reduced in consideration of his wage for taking care of the portion of the investment considered as an entrusted article? Because the entire half considered as an entrusted article was lost, and no portion remained. Hence, it is not appropriate to say that if he does not receive a wage, his efforts will appear as interest. For all that he receives is the portion that he gave as a loan.<br>Similarly, if it is stipulated that the administrator would receive one fourth of the profit, in the event of the loss of the entire investment, he must pay the entire fourth that was given to him as a loan. If, however, enough of the money remains so that if the administrator adds one sixth of the loss to the small portion that remains, the investor would receive a fourth or more of his original investment, the administrator is required to pay only one sixth of the loss, because of the reasons we have explained.
When an administrator loses money and then labors until he profits, he cannot tell the investor: "Let us first calculate the loss that we suffered originally, of which you will bear two thirds. And then we will calculate the profit that we accrued at the end, of which you will receive only a third." Instead, we calculate only the profit or the loss that was ultimately arrived at. And the administrator receives only a share of the profit that he gained beyond the principal.
When an investor gives an administrator 200 curtains for 200 <i>dinarim</i> in an <i>iska</i> agreement, and composes two separate legal documents concerning the partnership, the administrator may calculate each legal document as a separate investment. The investor caused himself a loss.<br>If he gave him 100 curtains for 100 <i>dinarim</i> and then gave him another investment of 100 barrels of wine for 100 <i>dinarim</i>, but wrote one investment contract for 200 <i>dinarim</i>, they must consider it a single contract. The administrator caused himself a loss.<br>What is implied? If he sold the 100 curtains for 130 <i>dinarim</i> and the hundred barrels for 70, the investor receives the entire amount, because one contract was composed, and the administrator did not make any profit. If, however, he had left them as two separate investments as they originally were, the administrator would have earned a profit of 20 <i>dinarim</i> in the deal involving the cloth, and would have lost 10 in the deal involving the barrels. Thus, he would have earned a total profit of 10 <i>dinarim</i>. The same principles apply in all analogous situations.
An administrator may not divide the money or the merchandise he was entrusted, saying; "I will take the half that I was given as a loan for myself and do business with it, and I will place the half that is considered an entrusted object in the court for safekeeping." For he was given this money solely with the intent that he do business with the entire amount. If he dissolved the investment contract and did the above, even if he entrusted the money to the nation's highest court, his actions are of no consequence. The profit or the loss should be divided among them according to the principles we have explained.
When an administrator gives other people a present from movable property belonging to the investment agreement or from money belonging to the investment, and the investor brings clear proof that this movable property or this money belongs to the investment, it may be expropriated from the recipient. Even if the recipient changed it, sold it or gave it away as a present to others, or destroyed it, the administrator is obligated to pay for it, provided the investor brings definite proof that the recipient was given property or funds belonging to the investment.<br>We have already explained that if the administrator dies, the investor may take an oath and collect half of the money invested. If there are witnesses who testify that merchandise was purchased with the money of the investment, the investor may take it without taking an oath. Similarly, no other creditors or wives of the administrator may expropriate anything from these goods unless there was a profit. For the portion of the profit belonging to the deceased belongs to his heirs, and from that portion, his creditors and wives may expropriate money that is due them.
When a person gives a colleague money to purchase produce, with the profits to be split among them, and the colleague fails to do so, all the investor has against him are complaints. If he has definite proof that he purchased produce and then sold it, he may expropriate the profit from him against his will.
When a person gives a colleague money to purchase produce with the profits to be split among them, the colleague may purchase any type that he desires. He should not, however, buy garments, wood or the like.<br>When a person hires a colleague to run a store with the profits to be split among them, if the person hired as the storekeeper is a craftsman, he should not work at his craft, for his attention is not focused on the store while he is working at his craft. If, however, his partner was present in the courtyard at that time, it is permitted. The person hired as the storekeeper should not purchase and sell other merchandise. If he does, the profit should be split.

Chapter 8

When a person gives eggs to a chicken farmer with the intent that the chicken farmer have chickens sit on the eggs until they hatch, and then for the chicken farmer to raise the chicks with the profits to be divided between them, the owner of the eggs must provide the chicken farmer with a wage for his work and sustenance.<br>Similarly, when a person evaluates calves and ponies and then entrusts them to a caretaker with the intent that he tend to them until they grow into large animals with the profits to be divided between them, the owner of the animals must provide the caretaker with a wage for his work and sustenance for every day, like an unemployed worker. He must raise calves until they are three years old, and a donkey until it is capable of bearing a burden. He cannot sell the animal without the consent of his partner until this time.<br>Similarly, if one evaluates animals and then entrusts them to a caretaker to fatten them, with the profits to be divided between them, the owner of the animals must provide the caretaker with a wage for his work, like an unemployed worker. If the owner tells the caretaker: "Take the head and the fat tail for yourself in exchange for your work, aside from your share of the profits," it is permitted.<br>If the caretaker has other animals that he was also working to fatten in addition to this one that was evaluated, and similarly, if one has other calves, ponies or eggs, since he is caring for his own at the same time as he is caring for his colleagues', even if the owner gives him only a small amount as a wage for the entire period of the partnership, it is acceptable, and they may divide the profits equally. If the caretaker was already employed as the owner's sharecropper and he is taking care of animals belonging to both himself and the owner of the field, the owner does not have to pay him anything as a wage.
When a person has calves or ponies evaluated, he has chickens sit on eggs, or he has an animal evaluated to be fattened with the profits to be divided between them and he does not pay a wage to the caretaker, the laws that govern such a relationship are the same as those that govern an investment of money. We see how much the animals or the eggs were evaluated for and how much profit was made, and the caretaker is given two thirds of the profit. If there is a loss, he is required to bear one third of the loss.
We evaluate a cow, a donkey and any other animal that usually performs work and eats, and the profits are divided between the owner and the caretaker. For although care is required, the caretaker is able to derive other profit for himself because of the work of the animals. For he may hire them or work with them himself and benefit from the fee or their work.<br>One should not evaluate a calf together with its mother, or a pony with its mother. For the calf or the pony does not perform any work, and yet it requires care.
When a person has an animal evaluated and entrusts it to a colleague, until when is the colleague obligated to care for it? For a female donkey, 18 months. For an animal that lives in a corral - e.g., sheep or cattle - 24 months. If the owner desires to divide the profits within this period, the caretaker can prevent him from doing so, because they entered into a partnership without making any stipulations.<br>We set these rules because the care and profit ratio for an animal for the first year cannot be compared to that of the second year. In the first year, it requires much care and brings little profit, because at the beginning it becomes heavier only with much difficulty. In the second year, by contrast, it requires little care and there is much profit, because it becomes much heavier, gaining every day. Therefore, the caretaker may prevent him from dissolving the partnership until the end of the second year.<br>If the animal that was evaluated gives birth while in the possession of the caretaker, the calf is considered part of the profit and is divided between them. In a place where the custom is that the caretaker raises the offspring, he should raise them and afterwards sell them. In a place where it is not customary that the caretaker raise the offspring, he is nevertheless required to care for the offspring for a limited period. For a lightweight animal, he is required to care for it for 30 days. For a large animal, he is required to care for it for 50 days. Afterwards, the offspring is sold and the profits are divided.<br>If the caretaker desires to care for them longer than this period, he should evaluate them before three men on the thirtieth or fiftieth day. Afterwards, any profit that is made should be divided between them as follows: The caretaker should receive three fourths of the profit, and his partner, one fourth. The rationale is that the caretaker owns half of the offspring and because he cares for the half belonging to his colleague, he is given half of that half - i.e., a total of three fourths. If the caretaker did not make such a stipulation in the presence of three witnesses, he is considered to have waived this extra profit, and the offspring are divided equally among them.<br>In a place where it is customary to figure in a porter's fee to the money invested, that fee should be added. The entire fee that the administrator receives for carrying the merchandise should be figured into the profit on the investment. Similarly, if it is the local custom to add an extra fee for handling an animal, it should be added. In a place where it is customary to add an extra fee to the caretaker's wages for handling offspring, it should be added. Whenever a person enters into an investment or partnership agreement, he should not deviate from the local business practices.
The following rules apply when Reuven owns a field and invites Shimon to till it, to sow it or to plant within it, to manage the expenses spent on its account, to sell the produce, and to divide between them the profit that exceeds the cost. Whether they agreed to divide the profits equally or they agreed that Reuven would receive a larger share, whether all the expenses were undertaken by Reuven or by Shimon, any such arrangement is permitted. Even "the shade of interest" is not involved.<br>Shimon, who takes care of working the land, managing the expenses and selling the produce, is called a sharecropper. If the sharecropper claims: "I agreed to till the field for half the profits," but the owner of the field claims that they agreed on a third, we follow the local custom. The one whose claim departs from the local custom must bring proof to support his position.
The following laws apply when a husband hires sharecroppers to till property belonging to his wife, and then he divorces her. If the husband is himself a sharecropper, since the husband does not have any connection to the property any longer, the sharecroppers' connection also ceases. If the value of the field increases, they are granted only the share of their expenses equal to the field's increase in value. And they must support their claim with an oath.<br>If the husband is not a sharecropper, we assume that the sharecroppers were hired according to the custom of the land, and they are given the share granted to other sharecroppers.
When brothers or other heirs do not divide the estate of their benefactor, but instead, they all use it together, they are considered partners in all matters.<br>If one of a group of brothers or one of a group of partners was appointed to the service of the king, the profit he receives is divided among them. If one of them becomes ill and is cured, the expenses required for his cure should be shared. If, however, he became sick because of his own negligence, he went out in the snow, or in the sun during the summer until he became ill or the like, he is responsible for bearing the expenses for his cure by himself.

Chapter 9

The following - all types of partners, sharecroppers, guardians of orphans who were appointed by the court, a woman who does business in the family home or who was charged by her husband to serve as a storekeeper, and a member of the household - are all required by Rabbinic Law to take an oath, despite the fact that the claimant does not have a certain claim against them, lest they may have stolen something from their colleague while performing business on his behalf, or perhaps they were not exact when making a reckoning.<br>Why did the Sages ordain this oath? Because these people give themselves license, thinking that they are deserving of whatever they will take from the property of the owner, since they do business and work on his behalf. Therefore, the Sages ordained that they are required to take an oath despite the fact that the claimant does not have a certain claim against them, so that they will perform all their deeds justly and in good faith.
None of the above are required to take an oath because of an indefinite claim until the plaintiff suspects them of taking two silver pieces - i.e., two silver <i>me'ah</i>, as will be explained. If, however, they are suspected of taking less than this amount, they are not required to take an oath.
Based on this, my teachers ruled that if one partner died, the heirs cannot compel their father's partners to take an oath concerning an indefinite claim. For they are not knowledgeable about their father's affairs and do not know for certain that their father suspected the partner of wrongdoing so that it can be said that the heirs suspect the partner of taking two silver <i>me'ah</i>.<br>There are, however, others who rule that the heir may require him to take an oath despite the fact that his claim is indefinite. It is proper to rule in this manner. For we see that the heirs may require a widow who became a guardian during the lifetime of her husband to take an oath.
Although there are no witnesses that a person was his colleague's sharecropper or partner, but rather he himself admits to this fact, saying: "I am his partner, sharecropper or member of his household - but I did not steal anything from him," he must take an oath while holding a sacred article. The rationale is that we do not employ the principle of <i>migo</i> to free a person from the responsibility of taking an oath, but only to free him from a financial commitment.<br>Which member of the household can be required to take an oath because of an indefinite claim? One who brings workers in and leads workers out, who brings produce in and takes produce out. When, however, a member of the household is not involved in the business affairs of the household, but merely enters and leaves, he cannot be required to take an oath because of an indefinite claim.<br>Similarly, a guardian appointed by the father of orphans before his death cannot be required by the orphans to take an oath because of an indefinite claim. Similarly, a woman who did not serve as a guardian in her husband's lifetime, and did not do business with the property of the estate after her husband's burial cannot be required to take an oath because of an indefinite claim.<br>Similarly, if she did business with the property of the estate between her husband's death and burial, she is not required to take an oath regarding the transactions conducted during this period. For if she were required to take an oath, she would not sell any property in order to make the burial possible, and the deceased would become loathsome.
When a person sends an article with a colleague to sell, or sends money with him to purchase produce or merchandise for him, even though the principal did not pay the agent a wage, and the agent does not own any portion of the merchandise nor derive any benefit from it, since he did business with his colleague's money, he is considered a member of his household. Even though the principal has merely an indefinite claim, the agent can be required to take an oath that he did not steal anything from him when he brought him the merchandise that he purchased or a portion of it, or the money from the sale he conducted for him.
When both partners are involved in the business of the partnership or the one who is involved in the business entrusts the merchandise - or a portion of the merchandise - or the funds belonging to the partnership without weighing, measuring or counting them, there is a doubt concerning both of them, and either one can require the other to take the oath required of a partner. If, however, only one of the partners does business and the other is not involved in the business dealings at all, only the former can be required to take this oath.
The above oath can be administered when the initial relationship is still current. If, however, the partners or the sharecroppers dissolved their relationship, the woman was divorced, the member of the household went elsewhere, or the agent brought the principal the merchandise he purchased for him or the money from the merchandise he sold for him, the principal remained silent without making a claim against the other party, and the other party departed, the principal is not able to require that other party to take an oath because of an indefinite claim afterwards. If, however, the principal has a definite claim against him, he can require him to take an oath, and then require him to take additional oaths concerning anything he desires.<br>Similarly, if at a later time, the other person is required to take an oath to the principal - whether required by Scriptural Law or by Rabbinic Law - e.g., he became a partner or a member of the person's household again - the principal can require him to take an oath that he did not steal anything during their present partnership or while he was his partner, sharecropper, member of his household or guardian previously. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.
When partners have dissolved their partnership, but the partnership is still owed debts by others, the partners cannot require each other to take an oath because of an indefinite claim, for they have already divided the partnership's resources. The debts that remain are not significant in this context, for they are matters of public knowledge. When any portion of the debt is repaid, they will each take their appropriate portion of the debt.<br>Similar concepts apply if it has been made known that cash remains in the coffers of the partnership, but the partners have not taken their portion of that cash. Neither may require an oath of the other, because cash is considered as if it is already divided.<br>Similarly, if a reckoning was made of the assets of the partnership possessed by all the partners, and it was determined that one partner was holding a specific and known entity belonging to another, it is considered as if the assets were divided, even though he had not taken it as of that time.<br>If, however, any of the produce belonging to the partnership remained, and it had not been divided or weighed, or any dimension of the partnership remained concerning which an accounting had not been made and thus, neither of them knew the extent of the portion that is due him, the partnership is still considered viable, and either may require the other to take the oath mentioned above.
When a person issues a claim against a colleague after the dissolution of a partnership, he cannot compel him to take an oath except through the convention of <i>gilgul sh'vuah</i>, as explained above. He may, however, have a ban of ostracism issued against anyone who stole from his colleague while he was his partner, sharecropper or member of his household, and does not admit that he stole.

Chapter 10

The following law applies when a partner claims that the partnership relationship with his colleague involved a certain stipulation, and the colleague denies that such a stipulation ever existed or admits the existence of a stipulation, but claims it was for a lesser amount than the plaintiff claims. The plaintiff may determine the oath the defendant takes.<br>The same ruling applies if the plaintiff asks that property belonging to the partnership be returned to him, and the defendant claims to have given it to him, but the plaintiff claims that he never received it, or the defendant claims that merchandise was his, while the plaintiff claims that it belongs to the partnership, or with regard to any other claims of this type.<br>What is implied? If the plaintiff desires not to require the partner to take the oath required of partners, but instead to require him to take merely a <i>sh'vuat hesset</i> on the claim he denies and does not admit to have taken place, he may require him to take only the lesser oath. If he desires, he can include all the claims in the oath required of a partner. Although he has an indefinite claim, he will require the partner to take an oath that he did not steal anything throughout the duration of the partnership, that these and these stipulations existed between the partners, that the merchandise was his, or that he paid this and this amount. The same principles apply in all analogous situations.
The following rule applies when a person lodges a claim against a partner with the intent of obligating him to take the oath required of partners, the defendant claims: "We have already divided the assets of the partnership, and nothing that belongs to you remains in my possession," and the plaintiff differs, maintaining that the assets were not divided, nor was a reckoning made. The defendant cannot be required to take an oath because of an indefinite claim. [This ruling also applies when the plaintiff admits dividing the assets, but claims that the division was made with the stipulation that the defendant take the oath required of partners whenever the plaintiff demanded, and the defendant has constantly been procrastinating.<br>This ruling applies even when the defendant admits that after the division of the assets, he owed the plaintiff something, but claims that the plaintiff agreed to consider that as a debt, or considered it as an object entrusted to the defendant for safekeeping.<br>Even if there are witnesses that the two were once partners, the plaintiff cannot require an oath with an indefinite claim. Nor may the plaintiff require the defendant to take a <i>sh'vuat hesset</i> that they divided the assets or that they were never partners. The rationale is that a <i>sh'vuat hesset</i> is never required, nor even is a claim included in an oath using the convention of <i>gilgul sh'vuah</i>, unless the claim is such that if the defendant admitted it, he would be liable to pay money. If, however, the claim is one that if the defendant admitted it, he would be required only to take an oath, he may not be required to take an oath on the indefinite claim, even because of the convention of <i>gilgul sh'vuah</i>. <i>Geonim</i>, who are masters of instruction, ruled in this manner.
The following rule applies if the plaintiff claims: "You are still my partner, and property belonging to me worth such and such remains in your possession," and the defendant counters, by claiming: "We already divided the assets of the partnership, and I no longer have anything belonging to you in my possession," or "I was never your partner." The defendant must take a <i>sh'vuat hesset</i> that he does not possess anything belonging to the plaintiff, and because of the convention of <i>gilgul sh'vuah</i>, he must include in the oath that he did not steal anything from him. The defendant need not include in the oath that he was not his partner or that they already divided the assets of the partnership, for the reason explained above.
The following rule applies when the plaintiff claims that he and the defendant are still partners, and that he therefore has the right to require him to take an oath because of an indefinite claim, while the defendant denies ever becoming the plaintiff's partner. If the plaintiff brings witnesses who testify that the defendant was his partner, and the defendant then claims: "We divided the assets of the partnership," his claim is not accepted. The rationale is that he was proven to be a liar with regard to this oath. Therefore, he is required to take the oath required of a partner. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.
The convention of <i>gilgul sh'vuah</i> is also relevant in the following situation. Reuven placed 400 <i>dinarim</i> in the coffers of the partnership, while Shimon invested 200 <i>dinarim</i>. They worked as partners and did business together, but all the money was held by Reuven. If Reuven claimed that there was a loss of 500 <i>dinarim</i>, Reuven may not take the oath required of partners that he suffered such a loss to require Shimon to pay 50 <i>dinarim</i> from his own funds. Instead, Reuven should take the oath required of partners that there was a loss. He should take the <i>maneh</i> that is in his possession, but Shimon is not required to pay anything.<br>If Reuven claims that Shimon has definite knowledge of the loss, he may require Shimon to take the oath required of partners, and based on the convention of <i>gilgul sh'vuah</i>, he may compel him to include that he does not have definite knowledge of this loss.<br>Different rules apply if Shimon was not at all involved in the work of the partnership. Shimon should take a <i>sh'vuat hesset</i> that he does not have definite knowledge of the loss, and he is then freed of liability. Moreover, if the <i>maneh</i> that remains was in Shimon's possession, it should be divided equally between them. The rationale is that a partner is not one of those who is required to take an oath and then collect money from the defendant. Instead, the oath he takes enables him merely to be freed of responsibility or to assume ownership of property in his possession. Be careful with regard to this law, for even masters of instruction have erred with regard to it.
The following law also involves the division of the assets of a partnership. Shimon claims that he owes Levi a <i>maneh</i> because of this partnership. If he has resources of the partnership in his possession that are sufficient to pay the debt, and he can give them to Levi, his word is accepted. He should repay the debt, and afterwards he and Reuven should calculate how the assets should be divided.<br>If Shimon does not have funds from the partnership in his possession, we do not rely upon his word to expropriate money from Reuven or merchandise known to belong to the partnership, lest Shimon and Levi are perpetrating deception, seeking to obtain Reuven's property. Even if the loan is recorded in a promissory note, Reuven is not required to pay any portion of it.<br>If Shimon claims that Reuven has definite knowledge that the debt Shimon incurred came as a result of the partnership, and should be borne by both of them, Reuven is required to take a <i>sh'vuat hesset</i> that he does not know that the partnership has incurred this debt - or because of the convention of <i>gilgul sh'vuah</i>, he should include this statement in the oath he takes as required of partners. Afterwards, Shimon should pay the debt from his own funds.<br>Similarly, if there is a promissory note stating that, due to Shimon, Levi owes the partnership 100 <i>dinarim</i>, and Shimon claims: "I received payment and returned the money to the coffers of the partnership," or "I extended credit to him for a two- or three-year period," his word is not accepted, lest he be perpetrating deception, seeking to obtain Reuven's property.<br>How should this case be adjudicated? Levi was already freed from obligation through Shimon's admission. If Shimon does not bring proof of his claim, Shimon must pay Reuven's share from his own funds. He should then demand payment from Levi at the end of the time span he mentioned. Similar principles apply in all analogous situations.