Abudarham
אבודרהם
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Abudarham
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-YU Torah miTzion Beit Midrash
-http://www.torontotorah.com
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Abudarham

Introduction



First Gate; Laws of Kriat Shema



Second Gate; Prayer



Third Gate; Blessings on Commandments




























The reason women are exempt from time-triggered positive commandments is that a woman is subjugated to her husband fo rthe fulfillment of his needs. If she were obligated to perform time-triggered commandments, it might happen that just when she is performing the commandment her husband will command her to do his bidding. If she were to fulfill the command of the Creator and ignores his [her husband's] command, woe to her from her husband! And if she were to fulfill his command and ignore that of the Creator, woe to her from her Maker! Therefore the creator exempted her from his commandments, so that she can be at peace with her husband.

Weekday Prayers

Bedtime Recitation of Shema



Morning Blessings





























A person blesses these three blessings each day: the first is <b>who has not made me a gentile</b>, since "All nations are as naught in His sight; He accounts them as less than nothing" (Isaiah 40:17). The second is <b>who has not made me a [Canaanite] slave</b> since the slave is not commanded in positive commandments which are caused by time, and further, that they have no merit of ancestry, since their ancestors did not stand at Mount Sinai. And further, that we do not believe them, since "the more slaves, the more theft" (Pirkei Avot 2:7). And further, that it is forbidden for a slave to marry a Jewish woman, and that a slave is close to a gentile. The Rama"h questions if a convert blesses "who has not made me a gentile" and if a captive blesses "who has not made me a slave", and replies that so we have seen, the blessing applies specifically to the beginning of the creation of man, and as such a convert does not bless "who has not made me a gentile" except when they were entirely born and bred (pregnancy and birth) in holiness [Judaism]. But the captive blesses "who has not made me a slave", since this blessing was not established for slavery itself but rather since the slave is not obligated in commandments like a Jew, and is not fitting to enter the community [marry into it], and is unsuitable for many things. And the third blessing is <b>who has not made me a woman</b>, since she is not commanded in positive commandments that are caused by time as we have explaned in the introduction to this book. The man is similar to a labourer who enters a field and plants with permission, and the woman is similar to one who enters a field without permission. And further, that the fear of her husband is upon her and she is unable to perform even that which she is commanded in. And women are accustomed to bless instead of "who has not made me a woman", "who has made me according to His will", like one who justifies the Judgement regarding the evil that has come upon them.


Blessings on Torah



Tzitzit



Tefillin



Mishnah on the Location of the Sacrifices



Baraita of Rabbi Ishmael



Songs of Praise



Kaddish and Barchu



Blessings on the Shema



Amidah



Amidah Repetition



Laws of Prayer



Post Amidah



Torah Reading



Afternoon Service



Evening Service



Compensatory Prayer (Tashlumin)



Shabbat Prayers

Shabbat eve



Evening Service



Mishna of 'Bameh Madlikin'



Kiddush



Morning Service



Torah Reading



Musaf



Day Meal



Afternoon Service



Three Meals of Shabbos



The Conclusion of Shabbat



Rosh Chodesh



Chanukah



Purim



Pesach

Month of Nissan





Before one looks [for chametz,bedikat chametzRL], one blesses, “Blessed are You ... who commanded  us  regarding destroying chametz” (Pesachim 7b). We do not bless before we nullify chametz; the act of nullification depends on the intentions in one’s heart and one is not required to utter any words and no deed is involved at all, and one does recite a blessing on any mitzvah which is devoid of action, as we wrote in the introduction to this book. We do not bless upon searching for chametz, because that is a rabbinic mitzva. 
After the bedikah, one must say, “All chametz that is in my possession that I have not seen and I have not destroyed, and about which I do not know, shall be nullified and considered like dust.” One should not say, “that is in this house,” but “that is in my possession,” as one might possess chametz in a different location.
You might ask: Why does one need to check for chametz in the corners and remove it from his  house, which is more than is required for other forbidden items, such as the forbidden fat of an animal and meat that was not ritually slaughtered? You might answer that people separate from forbidden fat and meat that was not ritually slaughtered throughout the year, so we do not worry lest one accidentally partake of them, but one normally eats chametz and so we must worry. However, the question still stands, as we do not require a nazir to remove wine from his possessions even though he only separates himself  from it during the time of  his  vow. Furthermore, even though we eat grain all year round, and the new grains are forbidden  to be eaten until the 16th of Nisan even in the Diaspora, we are not required to remove it from our houses! Rather, we may explain that we are stringent regarding chametz because the Torah itself warned us more regarding chametz than regarding other mitzvot, prohibiting us from seeing chametz or having it found in our possession. Therefore, our Sages were more stringent and required us to perform bedikah to ensure we do not have a stumbling block. You can see that this is true from the fact that non-chametz prohibited foods are forbidden [in a  mixture] as long as they can be tasted. This even applies to wine used for libations to an idol; though even a minimal quantity of such wine prohibits wine into which it is mixed, it only prohibits other substances into which it is mixed so long as it can be tasted. On the other hand, any minimal amount of Chametz, in mixtures with both similar and dissimilar substances, prohibits the entire entity

Evening Service



First Part of the Seder



The Haggadah



Second Part of the Seder



Festival Prayers
















The reason God commanded us to count the Omer is because each person was busy with their personal harvests, and everyone was separately spending time in their own granaries - and might have forgotten to join the rest of the nation in Jerusalem for the holiday. The commandment to count the Omer reminds everyone to go up to Jerusalem for the holiday.

Customs for the Days of the Counting (Sefirah)



Shavuot



Fasts

Prayers



Tishah B'Av



Rosh HaShanah

Prayers



Blowing the Shofar



Musaf



Yom Kippur

Yom Kippur Eve



Kol Nidrei



Confession



Prayers



Sukkot and Shemini Atzeret

First Days



Hoshana Rabba



Shmini Atzeret



Hebrew Calendar

Introduction



Gate of Moladot (Initial Appearances)



Gate of Designations and Postponements



Gate of Designations of the Years



Order of Parashiot and Haftarot



Calendar Patterns



Gate of Seasons (Tekufot)



Laws of Blessings

Introduction



First Gate; Blessing on Bread



Second Gate; Mezonot (Grain Products)



Third Gate; Shehakol (Everything)



Fourth Gate; Ha'adama (Fruit of the Ground)



Fifth Gate; Ha'etz (Fruit of the Tree)



Sixth Gate; Food During and After the Meal



Seventh Gate; Blessings on Scents



Eighth Gate; Blessings of Praise and Thanksgiving



Ninth Gate; Blessings on Commandments

Circumcision



Redeeming a Firstborn



Redeeming Neta Revai



Betrothal Blessing



Marriage Blessings



Mourning



Mezuzah, Parapet, Covering Blood and Separation of Challah



Eruvin



Havinenu and Short Prayer



Nail Cutting



Concluding Poems

