Abudarham
אבודרהם
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Abudarham

Introduction



First Gate; Laws of Kriat Shema



Second Gate; Prayer



Third Gate; Blessings on Commandments




























The reason women are exempt from time-triggered positive commandments is that a woman is subjugated to her husband fo rthe fulfillment of his needs. If she were obligated to perform time-triggered commandments, it might happen that just when she is performing the commandment her husband will command her to do his bidding. If she were to fulfill the command of the Creator and ignores his [her husband's] command, woe to her from her husband! And if she were to fulfill his command and ignore that of the Creator, woe to her from her Maker! Therefore the creator exempted her from his commandments, so that she can be at peace with her husband.

Weekday Prayers

Bedtime Recitation of Shema



Morning Blessings





























A person blesses these three blessings each day: the first is <b>who has not made me a gentile</b>, since "All nations are as naught in His sight; He accounts them as less than nothing" (Isaiah 40:17). The second is <b>who has not made me a [Canaanite] slave</b> since the slave is not commanded in positive commandments which are caused by time, and further, that they have no merit of ancestry, since their ancestors did not stand at Mount Sinai. And further, that we do not believe them, since "the more slaves, the more theft" (Pirkei Avot 2:7). And further, that it is forbidden for a slave to marry a Jewish woman, and that a slave is close to a gentile. The Rama"h questions if a convert blesses "who has not made me a gentile" and if a captive blesses "who has not made me a slave", and replies that so we have seen, the blessing applies specifically to the beginning of the creation of man, and as such a convert does not bless "who has not made me a gentile" except when they were entirely born and bred (pregnancy and birth) in holiness [Judaism]. But the captive blesses "who has not made me a slave", since this blessing was not established for slavery itself but rather since the slave is not obligated in commandments like a Jew, and is not fitting to enter the community [marry into it], and is unsuitable for many things. And the third blessing is <b>who has not made me a woman</b>, since she is not commanded in positive commandments that are caused by time as we have explaned in the introduction to this book. The man is similar to a labourer who enters a field and plants with permission, and the woman is similar to one who enters a field without permission. And further, that the fear of her husband is upon her and she is unable to perform even that which she is commanded in. And women are accustomed to bless instead of "who has not made me a woman", "who has made me according to His will", like one who justifies the Judgement regarding the evil that has come upon them.


Blessings on Torah



Tzitzit



Tefillin



Mishnah on the Location of the Sacrifices



Baraita of Rabbi Ishmael



Songs of Praise



Kaddish and Barchu



Blessings on the Shema



Amidah



Amidah Repetition



Laws of Prayer



Post Amidah



Torah Reading



Afternoon Service



Evening Service



Compensatory Prayer (Tashlumin)



Shabbat Prayers

Shabbat eve



Evening Service



Mishna of 'Bameh Madlikin'



Kiddush



Morning Service



Torah Reading



Musaf



Day Meal



Afternoon Service



Three Meals of Shabbos



The Conclusion of Shabbat



Rosh Chodesh



Chanukah



Purim



Pesach

Month of Nissan



Evening Service



First Part of the Seder



The Haggadah



Second Part of the Seder



Festival Prayers
















The reason God commanded us to count the Omer is because each person was busy with their personal harvests, and everyone was separately spending time in their own granaries - and might have forgotten to join the rest of the nation in Jerusalem for the holiday. The commandment to count the Omer reminds everyone to go up to Jerusalem for the holiday.

Customs for the Days of the Counting (Sefirah)



Shavuot



Fasts

Prayers



Tishah B'Av



Rosh HaShanah

Prayers



Blowing the Shofar



Musaf



Yom Kippur

Yom Kippur Eve



Kol Nidrei



Confession



Prayers



Sukkot and Shemini Atzeret

First Days



Hoshana Rabba



Shmini Atzeret



Hebrew Calendar

Introduction



Gate of Moladot (Initial Appearances)



Gate of Designations and Postponements



Gate of Designations of the Years



Order of Parashiot and Haftarot



Calendar Patterns



Gate of Seasons (Tekufot)



Laws of Blessings

Introduction



First Gate; Blessing on Bread



Second Gate; Mezonot (Grain Products)



Third Gate; Shehakol (Everything)



Fourth Gate; Ha'adama (Fruit of the Ground)



Fifth Gate; Ha'etz (Fruit of the Tree)



Sixth Gate; Food During and After the Meal



Seventh Gate; Blessings on Scents



Eighth Gate; Blessings of Praise and Thanksgiving



Ninth Gate; Blessings on Commandments

Circumcision



Redeeming a Firstborn



Redeeming Neta Revai



Betrothal Blessing



Marriage Blessings



Mourning



Mezuzah, Parapet, Covering Blood and Separation of Challah



Eruvin



Havinenu and Short Prayer



Nail Cutting



Concluding Poems

