Yosher Divrei Emet
יושר דברי אמת
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Yosher_Divrei_Emet
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Yosher Divrei Emet

Introduction



First Kuntres



Section 1

Tuesday, the 19th of Sivan, 5537 (June 4, 1777), in Zbarazh. 
I, the writer, for the love of my fellows and friends with whom I have grown up in the study of God's Torah and fear of Him, according to our limited understanding, a great mountain separates us. When I parted from him, he asked me to write down for him the righteous words of truth and faith that are heard from the sages of the generation, men of miracles, endowed with divine inspiration, whom I have seen with my own eyes, as angels of God, their awe and fear. All of them drink from the same wellspring, namely the divine Rabbi Israel Baal Shem Tov, of blessed memory. I was only privileged to see the face of his divine disciple, Rabbi Dov Ber, of blessed memory. Later, I received holy writings from his sacred words that ignite the hearts of those who tremble in true service of the Blessed Holy One. Many times I was before the great divine oak, Rabbi Menachem Mendel of Premishlan, of blessed memory. Moreover, to distinguish between the living and the dead, I heard from the holy community, the offspring of saints, the righteous son of a righteous man, the distinguished divine Rabbi Yechiel Michel, may he live long.
In truth, in this generation, there are mockers and heretics against the sages, just as there were in the time of the Ari, of blessed memory, people like this, as written by Rabbi Chaim Vital, of blessed memory. From my youth, my heart has adhered to the faith of these sages, and my friend and fellow, my brother-in-law, Rabbi Yoel, may he live long, also adhered to their faith. Blessed is he who clings to their faith and words; woe to the wicked who cast off the yoke of Torah and fear of the Blessed Holy One from upon them and present themselves as righteous, mocking the angels of God with lies and falsehoods they invent. My soul knows very well their evil and wickedness, for many of them are sinners in adultery, God forbid. Some are full of pride and jealousy, and from their jealousy, they blemish and defile the holy ones with their lies and falsehoods. True prophets have already prophesied about them that this would be in the last generation, as it is written (Isaiah 59:15), "And truth is lacking," and (Isaiah 5:20), "Woe to those who call evil good and good evil," especially in the Mishnah in Sotah (49b), "In the footsteps of the Messiah," etc. They will have what they deserve, and we have saved our souls.
In truth, our sages said (Arachin 16a) that in this generation there is no rebuke, and a person can only rebuke himself or his friend and disciple who clings to his voice with love. For, unfortunately, in this generation, the sin of jealousy and hatred has increased, coming from the arrogance of the heart. Truly, if all the seas were ink, etc., they could not write the emptiness of the authority, as our sages said (Shabbat 11a). In my opinion, they hinted at the arrogance of the heart, which inclines a person to rule over those beneath him in rank, for authority is synonymous with kingship, as is known. The thought of arrogance is so deep that human mouths and all their days cannot suffice to speak of it. It is very deep for one who wants to search for it to remove it and then to merit the trait of humility with a whole heart. Our sages said (Avodah Zarah 20a), "Great humility."
In truth, I recently heard on this Shavuot from the holy community, Rabbi the preacher, may he live long, who said in these words: The world thinks that it is a commandment to be humble, but in truth, this commandment is not mentioned in the Torah. The Torah only narrates the praise of Moses. Truly, the Satan has instilled in their hearts that it is a commandment to be humble. Initially, he exalts every person's heart in his arrogance, making him imagine that he is a great scholar, of noble lineage, rich, pious, righteous, with good and straight qualities, fearful, pleasant, and charming. Truly, according to his status, he should be greater than all his people and not turn to them or associate with them. But this is a negative trait, making him despised in the eyes of the world, who will see him as proud. In truth, it is a commandment to also be humble and lowly, to speak with everyone, and to be humble among all. Therefore, he makes himself humble. All this is the temptation of the Satan. First, he exalts his heart, making it burn to the lowest depths, and then he adds this commandment to increase pride upon his pride.

Second Kuntres



Derekh Emet

