Avodat Yisrael
עבודת ישראל
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Avodat_Yisrael
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Avodat Yisrael

Title



Approbations



Introduction



Sefer Bereshit

Bereshit



Noach



Lech Lecha



Vayera



Chayei Sara



Toldot



Vayetzei



Vayishlach



Vayeshev



Teachings on Chanukah



Miketz



Vayigash



Vayechi



Sefer Shemot

Shemot



Vaera



Bo



Yitro



Mishpatim



Shabbat Shekalim



Terumah



Tetzaveh



Shabbat Zachor



Ki Tisa



Shabbat Parah



Pekudei



Sefer Vayikra

Vayikra



Shabbat HaChodesh



Shabbat HaGadol



In the gemara <b>at ohr to the 14th we search for chametz</b> I already explained that the chametz is the yetzer hara [inclination to selfishness] as the Rambam explained that chametz comes from the expression for stealing, from the verse (Isaiah 1:17) 'aid the wronged', and therefore chametz eludes to the yetzer hara, since whoever goes according to the advice of the yetzer hara steals from their [soul] root. Therefore one needs to burn the chametz on erev Pesach and to make preparations so that the great holiness that is revealed in night of Pesach will infused itself upon oneself, since Pesach comes from the expression leaped and skipped because in all festivals holiness does not come to a person in one moment, a person needs to continue the holiness with the prayers of Night, Morning and Afternoon. But on Pesach, the holiness comes to a person in one moment, like the expression to skip, as we explained, and therefore there is the need for preparations, since even though the shining light comes, even though it does come, a person needs to cleanse oneself so as to be able to receive the shining light. For example,the sun, even though it shines strongly, the windows need to be open, because if they are closed the sun cannot shine within the house. And in all festivals one needs to continue the holiness on oneself, through the prayers, as the verse says 'that you will call them in their time, a holy convocation' (Leviticus 23:2) - that is one needs to call [to convocate] the holiness. But on Pesach the shining light needs to come in one moment, because 'in haste you came out of Egypt'(Deuteronomy 16:3) Chipazon [haste] its letters are chet"peh [and] zayin"nun, that is to say all the holidays the holiness comes from the Holy One as male [zayin] and female [nun], groom and bride; that is, the more the bride (the people of Israel) adorns herself all the more the groom (the Holy One) comes closer and closer to her. But on Pesach, because Israel needed to get out from Egypt, because were they to stay there for yet another moment they would not have been able to get out of there, and this is why the redemption needed to be in haste [chipazon] that is to say covered [from chupah] from the way of the male [zayin] to the female [nun], so the shining light comes in a skip and a leap but regardless [that fact] obviously a person needs to prepare oneself, as explained above in the simile of the sun and the windows.






<b>All places where one does bring chametz in, need to be searched</b> meaning, one needs to search every place where their yetzer harah, which is the chametz, usually resides. And this place is different for each and everyone: the one whose yetzer resides on finding fault on others, God forbid, or whose eyes are always turned to that that should not be seen, God forbid, they need to search, and destroy, and completely return from that path so they won’t do it anymore, and if they return from what did in the past in a complete return (teshuvah) obviously the Holy One of Blessing will forgive them. And in places where one does not put chametz in, there is no need to search ~ and it appears to me that this is a remez, hint: there are those who do not notice their own behavior, but only the behavior of other people. And the warning of our mishnah is regarding this: and in places where one does not put … there is no need to search, meaning, one should not investigate other people’s behavior, but should investigate their own, and fix their own behavior.
<b>Those (holes) that are too tall for the hand to reach, and those that are lower than nine inches do not need to be searched</b> here we read it as a remez,  hint: one should never say ‘I won’t be able to check all my misdeeds and sins, because I don’t remember them all!’ To this is the reference Holes that are too tall for the hand to reach – if you don’t remember them, there is no need to search there. Yet regarding those one does remember, one needs to search, to fix and to return. And those one does not remember immediately will be cancelled, since the Holy One of Blessing will say ‘if s/he had remembered their earlier misdeeds and sins, obviously s/he would regret them and turn from them, just as s/he regrets and returns from those s/he remembers.
<b>Every person has to sweep his rooms before checking for chametz</b> this is a hint: every person needs to clear their thoughts on the 13th of Nisan, and get ready on the 13th so they can begin the search at night. This is because if one does not clear their thoughts beforehand, and wants to search suddenly, out of the blue, obviously they won’t see in themselves any chametz, and they will say “I am perfectly righteous!” One only needs to clear their thoughts beforehand, and obviously they will find chametz there. 

Pesach



Haggadah Commentary



Second Day of Pesach



Seventh Day of Pesach



Pesach Sheni



Shmini



Tazria



Metzora



Achrei Mot



Kedoshim



Emor



Behar



Bechukotai



Sefer Bamidbar

Bamidbar



Shavuot



Nasso



Beha'alotcha



Sh'lach



Chukat



Balak



Pinchas



Matot



Masei



Lamentations



Sefer Devarim

Devarim



Vaetchanan



Tu B'Av



Eikev



Re'eh



Shoftim



Ki Teitzei



Ki Tavo



Nitzavim



Vayeilech



Rosh HaShanah



Ha'Azinu



Shabbat Shuvah



Yom Kippur



Sukkot



Shemini Atzeret



V'Zot HaBerachah



Anthology

Kings



Isaiah



Psalms



Nehemiah



Chagigah



Taanit



Ketubot



Zevachim



Biur Tefilah



Hilchot Tefilah



Igeret Hakodesh



Pirkei Avot

Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Mishnah 1



Mishnah 2



Mishnah 3



Mishnah 4



Mishnah 5



Mishnah 6



Mishnah 7



Mishnah 8



Mishnah 9


Rabbi Eliezer said a 'good eye': According to the simple understanding, this means that his eyes will look with gladness on what his friend possesses and will not be mean.  This (meanness) comes from a certain level of denial (of G-d) because if a man considers that everything comes from G-d, he will not be jealous of anything that belongs to his friend.  If G-d gave his friend something, it is definitely proper that he should have it.  If on the other hand he doesn't think that, and that really he should have what his friend possesses he denies the lot that G-d has given him.  this is the meaning of a 'good eye'.

Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Mishnah 1



Mishnah 2



Mishnah 3



Mishnah 4



Mishnah 5

And it is written in the Talmud, even if a snake is wound around his foot, he should not cease. And this is because 

Chapter 6



Chidushei Halachot

