Avodat Yisrael
עבודת ישראל
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Avodat Yisrael

Title



Approbations



Introduction



Sefer Bereshit

Bereshit



Noach



Lech Lecha



Vayera



Chayei Sara



Toldot



Vayetzei



Vayishlach



Vayeshev



Teachings on Chanukah



Miketz



Vayigash



Vayechi



Sefer Shemot

Shemot



Vaera



Bo



Yitro



Mishpatim



Shabbat Shekalim



Terumah



Tetzaveh



Shabbat Zachor



Ki Tisa



Shabbat Parah



Pekudei



Sefer Vayikra

Vayikra



Shabbat HaChodesh



Shabbat HaGadol










All places where one does bring chametz in, need to be searched ~ meaning, one needs to search every place where their yetzer harah, which is the chametz, usually resides. And this place is different for each and everyone: the one whose yetzer resides on finding fault on others, God forbid, or whose eyes are always turned to that that should not be seen, God forbid, they need to search, and destroy, and completely return from that path so they won’t do it anymore, and if they return from what did in the past in a complete return (teshuvah) obviously the Holy One of Blessing will forgive them. And in places where one does not put chametz in, there is no need to search ~ and it appears to me that this is a remez, hint: there are those who do not notice their own behavior, but only the behavior of other people. And the warning of our mishnah is regarding this: and in places where one does not put … there is no need to search, meaning, one should not investigate other people’s behavior, but should investigate their own, and fix their own behavior.
Those (holes) that are too tall for the hand to reach, and those that are lower than nine inches do not need to be searched ~ here we read it as a remez,  hint: one should never say ‘I won’t be able to check all my misdeeds and sins, because I don’t remember them all!’ To this is the reference Holes that are too tall for the hand to reach – if you don’t remember them, there is no need to search there. Yet regarding those one does remember, one needs to search, to fix and to return. And those one does not remember immediately will be cancelled, since the Holy One of Blessing will say ‘if s/he had remembered their earlier misdeeds and sins, obviously s/he would regret them and turn from them, just as s/he regrets and returns from those s/he remembers.
Every person has to sweep his rooms before checking for chametz ~ this is a hint: every person needs to clear their thoughts on the 13th of Nisan, and get ready on the 13th so they can begin the search at night. This is because if one does not clear their thoughts beforehand, and wants to search suddenly, out of the blue, obviously they won’t see in themselves any chametz, and they will say “I am perfectly righteous!” One only needs to clear their thoughts beforehand, and obviously they will find chametz there.


Pesach



Haggadah Commentary



Second Day of Pesach



Seventh Day of Pesach



Pesach Sheni



Shmini



Tazria



Metzora



Achrei Mot



Kedoshim



Emor



Behar



Bechukotai



Sefer Bamidbar

Bamidbar



Shavuot



Nasso



Beha'alotcha



Sh'lach



Chukat



Balak



Pinchas



Matot



Masei



Lamentations



Sefer Devarim

Devarim



Vaetchanan



Tu B'Av



Eikev



Re'eh



Shoftim



Ki Teitzei



Ki Tavo



Nitzavim



Vayeilech



Rosh HaShanah



Ha'Azinu



Shabbat Shuvah



Yom Kippur



Sukkot



Shemini Atzeret



V'Zot HaBerachah



Anthology

Kings



Isaiah



Psalms



Nehemiah



Chagigah



Taanit



Ketubot



Zevachim



Biur Tefilah



Hilchot Tefilah



Igeret Hakodesh



Pirkei Avot

Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Mishnah 1



Mishnah 2



Mishnah 3



Mishnah 4



Mishnah 5



Mishnah 6



Mishnah 7



Mishnah 8



Mishnah 9


Rabbi Eliezer said a 'good eye': According to the simple understanding, this means that his eyes will look with gladness on what his friend possesses and will not be mean.  This (meanness) comes from a certain level of denial (of G-d) because if a man considers that everything comes from G-d, he will not be jealous of anything that belongs to his friend.  If G-d gave his friend something, it is definitely proper that he should have it.  If on the other hand he doesn't think that, and that really he should have what his friend possesses he denies the lot that G-d has given him.  this is the meaning of a 'good eye'.

Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Mishnah 1



Mishnah 2



Mishnah 3



Mishnah 4



Mishnah 5

And it is written in the Talmud, even if a snake is wound around his foot, he should not cease. And this is because 

Chapter 6



Chidushei Halachot

