Zohar
ספר הזהר
Ira Robinson
sefaria.org

Zohar

Introduction



Bereshit



Noach



Lech Lecha



Vayera



Chayei Sara



Toldot



Vayetzei



Vayishlach



Vayeshev



Miketz



Vayigash



Vayechi



Shemot



Vaera



Bo



Beshalach



Yitro



Mishpatim



Terumah



Sifra DiTzniuta



Tetzaveh



Ki Tisa



Vayakhel



Pekudei



Vayikra



Tzav



Shmini



Tazria



Metzora



Achrei Mot



Kedoshim



Emor



Behar



Bechukotai



Bamidbar



Nasso



Idra Rabba



Beha'alotcha



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Rabbi Simeon said; Woe to the person who says that this Torah has come to present an ordinary story and ordinary words. For if this were so, even in this time we would be able to make a Torah of ordinary words; [one] better than any of them. If [the Torah] comes merely to present ordinary words, then there are even greater words among the nobles of the world. If so, let us seek [those words] and make a Torah of them. However, all the words of the Torah are sublime and supernal secrets. 
Come and see: The upper world and the lower world are evenly balanced: Israel below and the high angels above. Of the lofty angels it is written, He makes His angels as winds (Ps. 104:4). This [refers to their state] in the high place. When they come down to earth [the angels] clothe themselves in the garments of this world. Had they not clothed themselves in garments after the fashion of this world, they would not have been able to exist in this world, and the world would not suffer them [to exist]. If this is so with regard to the angels, then [how much more so] with regard to the Torah, which created them and all the worlds, and everything exists for its sake.  When [the Torah] did come down into the world, were it not clothed in the garments of this world, the world would not have been able to suffer it. 
Therefore the story of the Torah constitutes its garment. He who thinks that the garment is actually the Torah and and not something else, let his spirit deflate and let him have no portion in the world-to-come. It was in this connection that David said, Open my eye that I may behold wondrous things out of your Torah (Ps. 119:18), [meaning] that which is under the garment is really Torah.
Come and see: A garment is visible to all. Those fools, when they see a man in a garment that appears good to them, seek no farther. They think that the garment is the actual thing. [However,] the essence of the body is the soul. 
Just so, the Torah has a body. The commandments of the Torah are called the "body" of the Torah. This body is clothed in a garment made up of the stories of this world. The fools of the world look on nothing save the garment, which is the story of the Torah and nothing more. They do not look at that which is under the garment. The wise, who worship the Most High King, those who stood at Mount Sinai, look only at the soul, It is the true Torah. In the world-to-come, they will look at the soul of the soul of the Torah. 
Come and see. Thus it is above: There is garment and body and soul and soul of souls. The heavens and their host are the garment. The congregation of Israel is the body which receives the soul, which is the glory [Tiferet] of Israel... which is the very Torah. The soul of the soul is the ancient Holy One All are connected one to the other. 
Woe to those sinners of the world who say that this Torah is nothing but an ordinary story. They look at the garment and no farther. Happy are the righteous who regard the Torah properly. Wine cannot stay except in a jar. So Torah cannot abide except in this garment. Because of this one must seek to look at [the Torah] only only through what exists under the garment. Thus all those words and stories are garments.

Sh'lach



Korach



Chukat



Balak



Pinchas



Matot



Vaetchanan



Eikev



Shoftim



Ki Teitzei



Vayeilech



Ha'Azinu



Idra Zuta



Addenda

Volume I



Volume II



Volume III

