Zohar
ספר הזהר
Scholem, Gershom
sefaria.org

Zohar

Introduction



Bereshit



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29



Chapter 30



Chapter 31



Chapter 32



Chapter 33



Chapter 34



Chapter 35



Chapter 36

“And God said, Let there be light, and there was light” {Gen. 1:3}.This is the primal light which God made. It is the light of the eye. This light God showed to Adam, and by means of it he was enabled to see from end to end of the world. This light God showed to David, and he, beholding it, sang forth his praise, saying, “Oh how abundant is Thy goodness, which Thou hast laid up for them that fear Thee” {Ps. 31: 20}. This is the light through which God revealed to Moses the land of Israel from Gilead to Dan.”...
“Foreseeing the rise of three sinful generations, the generation of Enoch, the generation of the Flood, and the generation of the Tower of Babel, God put away the light from their enjoyment. Then he gave it to Moses in the time that his mother was hiding him, for the first three months after his birth.
When Moses was taken before Pharaoh, God took it from him, and did not give it again until he stood upon the mount of Sinai to receive the Torah. Thenceforth Moses had it for his until the end of his life, and therefore he could not be approached by the Israelites until he had put a veil upon his face {Exod. 34:33}. 
“Let there be light, and there was light” {Gen. 1:3}. To whatsoever the word vayehi {and there was} is applied, that thing is in this world and in the world to come.” “Rabbi Isaac said: At the Creation, God irradiated the world from end to end with the light, but then it was withdrawn,
so as to deprive the sinners of the world of its enjoyment, and it is stored away for the righteous,

Chapter 37



Chapter 38



Chapter 39



Chapter 40



Chapter 41





Rabbi Simeon then rose and spoke: In meditating, I have perceived that when God was about to create man, then above and below all creatures commenced to tremble. The course of the sixth day was unfolding when at last the divine decision was made. Then there blazed forth the source of all lights 
and opened up the gate of the East, from where light flows. The light which had been bestowed on it at the beginning, the South gave forth in full glory, and the South took hold upon the East. The East took hold on the North, and the North awakened and, opening forth, called loud to the West that he should come to him. Then the West traveled up into the North and came together with it, and after that the South took hold on the West, and the North and the South surrounded the Garden, being its fences. Then the East drew near to the West, and the West was gladdened and it said, “Let us make man in our image, after our likeness” {Gen. 1:26}, to embrace like us the four quarters and the higher and the lower. Thereupon were East and West united, and produced man. Therefore have our sages said that man arose out from the site of the Temple.
Moreover, we may regard the words “Let us make man” as conveying this: to the lower beings who derived from the side of the upper world God disclosed the secret of how to form the divine name Adam, in which is encompassed the upper and the lower, in the force of its three letters alef, dalet, and mem final. ...
When the three letters had come down below, there was perceived in their form, complete, the name Adam, to comprehend male and female. The female was fastened to the side of the male, and God cast the male into a deep slumber, and he lay on the site of the Temple.
God then cut the female from him and decked her as a bride and led her to him, as it is written, “And he took one of his sides, and closed up the place with flesh” {Gen. 2:21}. In the ancient books, I have seen it said that here the word “one” means “one woman,” that is, the original Lilith, who lay with him and from him conceived. 
But up to that time, she was no help to him, as it is said, “but for Adam there was not found an help meet for him” {Gen. 2:20}. Adam, then, was the very last, for it was right that he should find the world complete when he made his appearance.

Chapter 42

“No shrub of the field was yet in the earth” {Gen. 2:5}. Rabbi Simeon went on to say: The allusion is to the magnificent trees which grew later, but as yet were minute.
Adam and Eve, as we have said, were created side by side. Why not face to face? For the reason that heaven and earth were not yet in complete harmony, “the Lord God had not caused it to rain upon the earth” {Gen. 2:5}. When the lower union was rendered perfect, and Adam and Eve turned face to face, then was the upper union perfected.
This we may know from the matter of the Tabernacle: for we have learned that together with it there was put up another tabernacle, nor was the upper one raised until the lower one was erected; and so it was in this case. Moreover, inasmuch as all above was not yet perfectly ordered, Adam and Eve were not created face to face. This is borne out by the order of the verses in the Scripture; first it is written, “For the Lord God had not caused it to rain upon the earth,” and following, “there was not a man to till the ground” {ibid.},
and it signifies that man was yet imperfect, for only when Eve was made perfect, was he then made perfect too. Further proof is that in the word <i>vayisgor</i> {and he closed}, there occurs for the first time in this passage the letter samekh, which signifies “support,” as much as to say that male and female they now supported the one the other. In like wise, do the lower world and the upper sustain each other.
Not until the lower world was made perfect, was the other world also made perfect. When the lower world was made to support the upper, by being turned face to face with it, the world was then finished, for previously “the Lord God had not caused it to rain upon the earth.”
Then, “There went up a mist from the earth” {Gen. 2:6}, to make up for the lack, by “watering the whole face of the ground” {ibid.}; and the mist rising is the yearning of the female for the male. Yet another interpretation says that we take the word “not” from the first verse to use in the second with “mist,” and this means that God failed to send rain because a mist had not gone up, for from below must come the impulse to move the power above.
Thus, to form the cloud, vapor ascends first from the earth. And likewise, the smoke of the sacrifice ascends, creating harmony above, and the uniting of all, and so the celestial sphere has completion in it. It is from below that the movement starts, and thereafter is all perfected. If the Community of Israel failed to initiate the impulse, the One above would also not move to go to her, and it is thus the yearning from below which brings about the completion above.

Chapter 43



Chapter 44



Chapter 45



Chapter 46



Chapter 47



Chapter 48



Chapter 49



Chapter 50



Chapter 51



Chapter 52



Chapter 53



Chapter 54



Chapter 55



Chapter 56



Chapter 57



Chapter 58



Chapter 59



Chapter 60



Chapter 61



Chapter 62



Chapter 63



Chapter 64



Chapter 65



Chapter 66



Chapter 67



Chapter 68



Chapter 69



Chapter 70



Chapter 71



Chapter 72



Chapter 73



Chapter 74



Chapter 75



Chapter 76



Chapter 77



Chapter 78



Chapter 79



Chapter 80



Chapter 81



Chapter 82



Chapter 83

Rabbi Simeon set out one time for Tiberias, and with him were Rabbi Yose, Rabbi Judah, and Rabbi Hiyya. On the road coming toward them they met Rabbi Phineas. All dismounted and sat down on the mountainside, under a tree. Rabbi Phineas spoke: While we sit, I should like to hear some of those wondrous ideas which figure in your discourse daily.
Then Rabbi Simeon spoke, commencing with the text, “And he went on his journeys from the South even to Bethel, unto the place where his tent had been at the beginning, between Beth-el and Ai” {Gen. 13:3}. He said: We might here have expected the word journey; but instead we read “journeys,” which is intended to mean that on the journey with him was the Divine Presence. It behooves a man to be “male and female,” always, so that his faith may remain stable, and in order that the Presence may never leave him.
 You will ask: How with the man who makes a journey, and, away from his wife, ceases to be “male and female”? Such a one, before starting, and while he still is “male and female,” must pray to God, to draw unto himself the Presence of his Master. After he has prayed and offered thanksgiving, and when the Presence is resting on him, then he may go, for by virtue of his union with the Presence he is now male and female in the country, just as he was male and female in the town, for it is written: “Righteousness {zedek, feminine of zaddik} shall go before him and shall make his footsteps a way” {Ps. 85:14}.
time of his traveling a man should heed well his actions, lest the holy union break off, and he be left imperfect, deprived of the union with the female. If it was needful when he and his wife were together, how much greater the need when the heavenly mate is with him? And the more so, indeed, since this heavenly union acts as his constant guard on his journey, until his return home.
Moreover, it is his duty, once back home, to give his wife pleasure, inasmuch as she it was who obtained for him the heavenly union. There is twofold reason for this duty of cohabitation. First, this pleasure is a religious one, giving joy also to the Divine Presence,
and it is an instrument for peace in the world, as it stands written, “and thou shalt know that thy tent is in peace; and thou shalt visit thy habitation and not sin” {Job 5:24}. (It may be questioned, is it a sin if he fails to go in to his wife? It is a sin, for in his failure, he detracts from the honor of the heavenly mate who was given him by reason of his wife.) 
Secondly, if his wife should conceive, the heavenly partner bestows upon the child a holy soul; for this covenant is called the covenant of the Holy One, be blessed. Hence, a man should be as zealous to enjoy this joy as to enjoy the joy of the Sabbath, at which time is consummated the union of the sages with their wives. Thus, “thou shalt know that thy tent is in peace,” for the Presence accompanies you and sojourns in your house, and for this reason “thou shalt visit thy habitation and not sin,” in gladly carrying out the religious duty to have conjugal intercourse before the Presence.
So it is that the students of Torah, away from their wives the six days of the week they engage in study, are in this period attached to a heavenly mate, so that they do not cease to be “male and female.” And with the incoming of the Sabbath, it behooves them to rejoice their wives, to the honor of the heavenly union, and in seeking to do the will of their Master, as has been stated.
In like wise, when a man’s wife is in her days of separation, in those days while he waits for her the man has with him the heavenly mate, so that he continues to be “male and female.” When the wife is purified, the man is in duty bound to rejoice her, in the joyful fulfillment of a religious obligation. The same reasons we have given apply also in this case. According to secret doctrine, the mystics are bound to give their whole mind and purpose to the one {the Shekhinah}.
 It may be objected that in the light of the previous argument, a man is in a state of more honor on a journey than at home, by virtue of the heavenly mate who is then with him. This is not so. At home, the wife is the foundation of a man’s house, inasmuch as it is by virtue of her that the Presence does not leave the house. So the verse, “and Isaac brought her into his mother Sarah’s tent” {Gen. 24:67}, our masters have interpreted to mean that the Divine Presence came to Isaac’s house along with Rebecca. 
According to secret doctrine, the supernal Mother is together with the male only when the house is in readiness and at that time the male and female are conjoined. At such time blessings are showered forth by the supernal Mother upon them. Likewise, the lower Mother is found together with the male only when the house is in readiness, and the male goes in to the female and they conjoin together; then the blessings of the lower Mother are showered forth for them.
Therefore, two females, his Mother and his wife, are to compass a man about in his house, like the Male above. There is reference to this in the verse “Unto {<i>ad</i>} the desire of the everlasting hills” {Gen. 49:26}. This ad is the desired object of the “everlasting hills,” by which is meant the supreme female, who is to make ready for him, and make him blissful and bless him, and also the lower female, who is to be joined in union with him and take support from him.
Likewise below, the desire of the “everlasting hills” is for the man when he is married, and two females, one of the upper, one of the lower world, are to give him bliss—the upper one in showering upon him all blessings and the lower one in receiving support from him and being joined together with him. So it is with the man in his house.
But when he is on a journey, while the supernal Mother is still with him, the lower wife remains behind; and therefore on his returning, it behooves him to do that which will compass him about with two females, as we have explained...

Chapter 84



Chapter 85



Chapter 86


Rabbi Simeon said: In one place it is written, “For the Lord thy God is a consuming fire” {Deut. 4:24}, and elsewhere, “But ye that cleave unto the Lord your God are alive every one of you this day” {Deut. 4:4}. The Companions have already discussed the seeming inconsistency between these texts, but I offer yet another interpretation. It has been affirmed by the Companions that there exists a sort of fire which is stronger than other fire, and the one consumes and annihilates the other.
If we continue this thought, it can be said that he who cares to pierce into the mystery of the holy unity of God should consider the flame as it rises from a burning coal or candle.
In the flame itself may be seen two lights: the one white and glowing, the other black, or blue. Of the two, the white light is the higher and rises unwavering. Underneath it is the blue or black light upon which the other rests as on a support.
The two are conjoined, the white reposing upon the throne of the black. 
The blue or black base is, likewise, connected to something beneath it, which feeds it and makes it to cling to the white light above. 
At times this blue or black light turns red, but the light above remains constantly white. This lower light, at times black, at times blue, at times red, 
serves to link the white light above it with the material substance below to which it is bound and through which it keeps kindled.
This lower light is in its nature an instrument for destruction and death, devouring whatever comes near it.
But the white light above neither consumes nor demolishes, nor does it ever change. Therefore Moses said, “For the Lord thy God is a consuming fire” {Deut. 4:24}, consuming, actually, all that is beneath him; for this reason he said “thy God” and not “our God,” inasmuch as Moses stood in the supernal light which does not consume and does not demolish.
Remark further. It is Israel alone which impels the blue light to kindle and to link itself with the white light, Israel, who cleave to the blue light from below.
And though it be in the nature of the blue or black light to destroy whatever it touches beneath, yet Israel, cleaving to it from beneath, are not destroyed; so it is said, “But ye that cleave unto the Lord your God are alive every one of you this day.” Your God and not our God; that is to say, it is the blue or black flame, consuming and annihilating whatever cleaves to it from below, and still you cleave and are alive.
Only just perceptible above the white light and encompassing it, is yet another light, this one symbolizing the supreme essence. So does the aspiring flame symbolize the supernal mysteries of wisdom. Rabbi Phineas went to him and kissed him, and said, Blessed be God who guided me here. And they went out with Rabbi Phineas, accompanying him for three miles. 
When they had returned, Rabbi Simeon spoke: The description I have given may be taken as a symbol of the holy unity of God. In the holy name YHVH,<sup class="footnote-marker">1</sup><i class="footnote">The four letters of the name of God represent four stages of ever increasing divine manifestation.</i> the second letter <i>hé</i> is the blue or black light attached to the remaining letters <i>yod</i>, <i>hé</i>, <i>vav</i>, which constitute the luminous white light.
 But there come times when this blue light is not <i>hé</i> but <i>dalet</i>, which is to say, poverty; this means, when Israel fail to cleave to it from beneath and it in turn fails therefore to burn and cleave to the white light, the blue light is <i>dalet</i>, but when Israel make it to cleave to the white light, then it is <i>hé</i>. 
If male and female are not together, than <i>hé</i> is erased and there remains only <i>dalet</i> {poverty}.
But when the chain is perfect, the <i>hé</i> cleaves to the white light, and Israel cleave to the <i>hé</i> and give substance for its light, and are yet not destroyed. In this we see the mystery of the sacrifice. The rising smoke kindles the blue light, which then joins itself to the 
white light, whereupon the entire candle is wholly kindled, alight with a single unified flame.
 As it is the nature of the blue light to demolish whatever comes into touch with it from beneath, therefore if the sacrifice be acceptable and the candle wholly kindled, then, as with Elijah, “the fire of the Lord descends and consumes the burnt-offering” {I Kings 18:38}, and this reveals that the chain is perfected, for then the blue light cleaves to the white light above, while at the same time consuming the fat and flesh of the burnt-offering beneath, nor can it consume what is below, except it rise and join itself to the white light. At such time, peace reigns in all worlds, and all together form a unity.
The blue light having devoured every thing beneath, the priests, the Levites, and the laity gather at its base with singing and meditation and with prayer, while above them the lamp glows, the lights are merged into a unity, worlds are illumined, and above and below, all are blessed.
Therefore it is written, “ye, even while cleaving to the Lord your God, are alive every one of you this day.” The word <i>atem</i> {you} is here preceded by the letter <i>vav</i> {and}, which indicates that while the fat and flesh cleaving to the flame are devoured by it, you who cleave to it are yet alive.

Noach



Lech Lecha



Vayera



Chayei Sara



Toldot



Vayetzei



Vayishlach



Vayeshev



Miketz



Vayigash



Vayechi



Shemot



Vaera



Bo



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15


If one should ask: Is it not written, “For ye saw no manner of similitude” [Deut. 4:15], the answer would be: Truly, it was granted us to behold him in a given similitude for concerning Moses it is written, “and the similitude of the Lord doth he behold” [Num. 12:8]. Yet the Lord was revealed only in that similitude which Moses saw, and in none other, of any creation formed by His signs. Therefore it stands written: “To whom then will ye liken God? Or what likeness will ye compare unto Him?” [Isa. 40:18].
Also, even that similitude was a semblance of the Holy One, be blessed, not as he is in his very place which we know to be impenetrable, but as the King manifesting his might of dominion over his entire creation, and thus appearing to each one of his creatures as each can grasp him, as it is written: “And by the ministry of the prophets have I used similitudes” [Hos. 12:11].
Hence says He: Albeit in your own likeness do I represent myself, to whom will you com- pare me and make me comparable? Because in the beginning, shape and form having not yet been created, He had neither form nor similitude. Hence is it forbidden to one apprehending him as he is before Creation to imagine him under any kind of form or shape, not even by his letters He and Vav, not either by his complete holy Name, nor by letter or sign of any kind. Thus, “For ye saw no manner of similitude” means, You beheld nothing which could be imagined in form or shape, nothing which you could embody into a finite conception. 
But when He had created the shape of supernal man, it was to him for a chariot, and on it he descended, to be known by the appellation YHVH, so as to be apprehended by his attributes and in each particular one, to be perceived. Hence it was he caused himself to be named El, Elohim, Shaddai, Zevaot and YHVH, of which each was a symbol among men of his several divine attributes, making manifest that the world is upheld by mercy and justice, in acordance with man’s deeds. If the radiance of the glory of the Holy One, be blessed, had not been shed over his entire crea- tion, how could even the wise have apprehended him? He would have continued to be unknowable, and the words could not be verily said, “The whole earth is full of His glory” [Isa. 6:3]. 
However, woe to the man who should make bold to identify the Lord with any single attribute, even if it be His own, and the less so any human form existent, “whose foundation is in the dust” [Job 4:19], and whose creatures are frail, soon gone, soon lost to mind. Man dare project one sole conception of the Holy One, be blessed, that of his sovereignty over some one attribute or over the creation in its entirety. But if he be not seen under these manifestations, then there is neither attribute, nor likeness, nor form in him;
as the very sea, whose waters lack form and solidity in themselves, having these only when they are spread over the vessel of the earth. From this we may reckon it so: One, is the source of the sea. A current comes forth from it making a revolution which is Yod. The source is one, and the current makes two.
Then is formed the vast basin known as the sea, which is like a channel dug into the earth, and it is filled by the waters issuing from the source; and this sea is the third thing. This vast basin is divided up into seven channels, resembling that number of long tubes, and the waters go from the sea into the seven channels. Together, the source, the current, the sea, and the seven channels make the number ten. If the Creator who made these tubes should choose to break them, then would the waters return to their source, and only broken vessels would remain, dry, without water.
In this same wise has the Cause of causes derived the ten aspects of his Being which are known as sefirot, and named the crown the Source, which is a never-to-be-exhausted fountain of light, wherefrom he designates himself Eyn Sof, the Infinite. Neither shape nor form has he, and no vessel exists to contain him, nor any means to apprehend him. This is referred to in the words: “Refrain from searching after the things that are too hard for thee, and refrain from seeking for the thing which is hidden from thee” [Ben Sira 3:21].
Then He shaped a vessel diminutive as the letter Yod<sup class="footnote-marker">1</sup><i class="footnote"> The first letter in the name of God.</i> and filled it from him, and called it Wisdom-gushing Fountain, and called himself wise on its account. And after, he fashioned a large vessel named sea, and designated it Understanding [binah] and himself understanding, on its account.
Both wise and understanding is he, in his own essence; whereas Wisdom in itself cannot claim that title, but only through him who is wise and has made it full from his fountain; and so Understanding in itself cannot claim that title, but only through him who filled it from his own essence, and it would be rendered into an aridity if he were to go from it. In this regard, it is written, “As the waters fail from the sea, and the river is drained dry” [Job 14:11].
Finally, “He smites [the sea] into seven streams” [Isa. 11.15]. that is, he directs it into seven precious vessels, the which he calls Greatness, Strength, Glory, Victory, Majesty, Foundation, Sovereignty<sup class="footnote-marker">2</sup><i class="footnote"> These designate the seven lower sefirot.</i>; in each he designates himself thus: great in Greatness, strong in Strength, glorious in Glory, victorious in Victory, “the beauty of our Maker” in Majesty, righteous in Foundation [cf. Prov. 10:25]. All things, all vessels, and all worlds does he uphold in Foundation.  In the last, in Sovereignty, he calls himself King, and his is “the greatness, and the strength, and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty; for all that is in heaven and in the earth is Thine; Thine is the kingdom, O Lord, and Thou art exalted as head above all” [1 Chron. 29:11]. 
In his power lie all things, be it that he chooses to reduce the number of vessels, or to increase the light issuing therefrom, or be it the contrary. But over him, there exists no deity with power to increase or reduce. 
Also, he made beings to serve these vessels: each a throne supported by four columns, with six steps to the throne; in all, ten. Altogether, the throne is like the cup of benediction about which ten statements are made [in the Talmud], harmonious with the Torah which was given in Ten Words [the Decalogue], and with the Ten Words by which the world was created.

Beshalach



Yitro



Mishpatim



Terumah



Sifra DiTzniuta



Tetzaveh



Ki Tisa



Vayakhel



Pekudei



Vayikra



Tzav



Shmini



Tazria



Metzora



Achrei Mot



Kedoshim



Emor



Behar



Bechukotai



Bamidbar



Nasso



Idra Rabba



Beha'alotcha



Sh'lach



Korach



Chukat



Balak



Pinchas



Matot



Vaetchanan



Eikev



Shoftim



Ki Teitzei



Vayeilech



Ha'Azinu



Idra Zuta



Addenda

Volume I



Volume II



Volume III

