Midrash Tehillim
מדרש תהילים
merged
http://www.sefaria.org/Midrash_Tehillim
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Rabbi Mike Feuer, Jerusalem Anthology
-http://www.sefaria.org



Midrash Tehillim

Psalm 1



Psalm 2



Psalm 3



Psalm 4



Psalm 5



Psalm 6



Psalm 7



Psalm 8



Psalm 9



Psalm 10



Psalm 11


“For, behold, the wicked bend the bow…” (Tehillim 11:2) R’ Berachia said in the name of R’ Aba that this is referring to Shevna and Yoach who wrote a letter, fastened it to an arrow and shot it out through a window to Sancheriv. They wrote on it ‘Hezekiah and Isaiah will not allow us to make peace with you. “…that they may shoot in darkness at the upright in heart” (ibid.) at the two upright in heart, Hezekiah and Isaiah. 
“For when the foundations are destroyed; what has the righteous man done?” (Tehillim 11:3) If the wicked arose and destroyed the righteous who founded your world, as it is written “and the righteous is the base of the world,” (Mishle 10:25) Righteous of the World (the Holy One) – what work have they left for You in Your world? If the wicked arose and destroyed the foundation stone, from which the world was begun, You oh Righteous One of the world, what benefit is left for You in Your world or Your works? And if the wicked arose and destroyed the foundations  which precede the deeps, Righteous one of the world – what work have You achieved?

Psalm 12



Psalm 13



Psalm 14



Psalm 15



Psalm 16



Psalm 17



Psalm 18























“For by You I run upon a troop...” (Tehillim 18:30) R’ Chiyah said in the name of R’ Levi: when David went to wage war against the Jebusites, he began by saying “Whoever smites the Jebusites and reaches the tower…” (Shmuel II 5:8) and in another verse he says “Whoever smites the Jebusites first will be a chief (l’rosh) and an officer…” (Divre HaYamim I 11:6) So what did Yoav do? He brought a fresh cypress tree (brosh) and fixed it next to the wall of the city. He bent back the flexible head of the cypress, climbed up on to David’s head, grabbed on to the top of the tree and swung onto the top of the wall. David said “May a righteous man strike me with kindness and reprove me (yochicheni rosh)…” (Tehillim 141:5) What did the Holy One do? He lowered the wall and David went up after Yoav, as it says “…and by my God I scale a wall.” (Tehillim 18:30)

Psalm 19



Psalm 20



Psalm 21



Psalm 22



Psalm 23



Psalm 24








“You gates, lift your heads…” (Tehillim 24:7/9) You find that at the time when Shlomo built the Holy temple he wanted to bring the ark into the Holy of Holies, but the gate was too small. It was five cubits long and two and a half cubits wide, while the ark was one and a half cubits long, one and a half wide and one and a half tall. Can’t one and a half cubits fit into two and a half?! Rather, at that moment the gates cleaved to one another. Shlomo said twenty four songs of joy and was not answered, he said ‘you gates lift up your heads’ and was not answered. He tried again and said “You] gates, lift your heads…so that the King of Glory may enter. Who is this King of Glory?” (Tehillim 24:7-8) He was not answered. Once he said “O Lord God, do not turn back the face of Your anointed one; remember the kind deeds of David Your servant,” (Divre HaYamim II 6:42) immediately the gates lifted up their heads, the ark entered and fire descended from heaven. Why did Shlomo suffer all of this? Because he was filled with pride and said “I have surely built You a house to dwell in…” (Melachim I 8:13) Since all of Israel saw this, they immediately said ‘it is certain that the Holy One has given atonement for that sin of David.’ Immediately their expression turned black like the bottom of a pot and they were ashamed. This is what is written “Grant me a sign for good, and let my enemies see [it] and be ashamed, for You, O Lord, have helped me and comforted me.” (Tehillim 86:17) ‘Helped me’ in this world and ‘comforted me’ in the world to come.


Psalm 25



Psalm 26



Psalm 27



Psalm 28



Psalm 29



Psalm 30



Psalm 31



Psalm 32



Psalm 33



Psalm 34



Psalm 35



Psalm 36



Psalm 37



Psalm 38



Psalm 39



Psalm 40



Psalm 41



Psalm 42



Psalm 43



Psalm 44



Psalm 45



Psalm 46



Psalm 47



Psalm 48



Psalm 49



Psalm 50



Psalm 51



Psalm 52



Psalm 53



Psalm 54



Psalm 55



Psalm 56



Psalm 57



Psalm 58



Psalm 59



Psalm 60



Psalm 61



Psalm 62



Psalm 63



Psalm 64



Psalm 65



Psalm 66



Psalm 67



Psalm 68



Psalm 69



Psalm 70



Psalm 71



Psalm 72



Psalm 73



Psalm 74



Psalm 75



Psalm 76


His tabernacle was in Shalem, and His dwelling place in Zion. R’ Brachia said: from the beginning of the creation of the world the Holy One made a tabernacle in Jerusalem. He, so to speak, would pray in it ‘may be willed that My children will do My will in order that I not destroy My house and sanctuary, [and once sin had caused it what was written? “And He stripped His Tabernacle like a garden, and laid in ruins His meeting place…” (Eicha 2:6) The place where he would make Himself known in prayer]. Since it was destroyed He prays ‘may it be willed from before Me that my children repent that I bring nearer the building of My house and sanctuary, this is ‘His tabernacle was in Shalem.’ You find that the Temple is called Shalem as it says, “Malchitzedek king of Shalem” (Bereshit 14:18) and he is Shem the son of Noach as it says “and he was a priest to the Most High Gd” (ibid.) It is written, “May God expand Japheth, and may He dwell in the tents of Shem…” (Bereshit 9:27) that he dwelled in His tent implies that he served Him as they translate into Aramaic ‘and he was a priest to the Most High Gd’ as ‘and he served before the High Gd,’ this was Shem. Avraham called the Temple yireh as it says “And Abraham called that place, The Lord will see (yireh)…” (Bereshit 22:14) HaMakom (Gd) said – if I call it Shalem as Shem did, I will nullify the words of Avraham who loves me who called it yireh. And if I call it yireh I will nullify the words of Shem the righteous who called it Shalem. What did the Holy One do? He combined what the two of them called it: Avraham called it yireh, Shem called it Shalem and the Holy One called it Yerushalayim, this is ‘His tabernacle was in Shalem’ what is it? Jerusalem, yireh and Shalem. Another thing: when will Gd be known in Yehudah? (Tehillim 76:2) When that tabernacle is erected of which you said , “On that day, I will raise up the fallen tabernacle of David…” (Amos 9:11), this is ‘His tabernacle was in Shalem.’

Psalm 77



Psalm 78



Psalm 79



Psalm 80



Psalm 81



Psalm 82



Psalm 83



Psalm 84



Psalm 85



Psalm 86



Psalm 87



Psalm 88



Psalm 89



Psalm 90






“O Lord, You have been our dwelling place throughout all generations.” (Tehillim 90:1) R’ Yitzchak said ‘from that which the Scripture says “…which are the abode for the God Who precedes all…” (Devarim 33:27) we do not know if the Holy One is the dwelling place of the world, or if the world is His abode, until Moshe came and explained it ‘You have been our dwelling place throughout all generations.’ R’ Yosi bar Halifta said ‘ we do not know if the Holy One is dependent on His world or His world is dependent on Him, until the Holy One came and explained “…Behold, there is a place with Me…” (Shemot 33:21) This means that He is the place of the world and the world is not His place, therefore the world is dependent on Him and He is not dependent on His world. R’ Huna said in the name of R’ Ami ‘why is the Holy One called ‘place’? Because He is the place of His world, as it says “…Behold, there is a place with Me…” (Shemot 33:21) Avraham called Him ‘place,’ as it says “And Abraham named that place, The Lord will see…” (Bereshit 22:14) Yaakov called Him ‘place,’ as it says “And he was frightened, and he said, "How awesome is this place!” (Bereshit 28:17) Moshe called Him ‘place,’ as it says “…Behold, there is a place with Me…” (Shemot 33:21) [Another explanation -  why is He called ‘place’? Because anywhere the righteous are standing, there He is found with them, as it says “Wherever I allow My name to be mentioned, I will come to you and bless you.” (Shemot 20:21) So too it says “And he arrived at the place and lodged there…” (Bereshit 28:11)

Psalm 91





... Another version. The Rabbis said the minimum number that the word ‘stones’ can refer to is two, and Yaakov woke up in the morning and found that they were one. He was in great fear and said ‘the house of the Holy One is in this place and I was not conscious of His Presence’ as it says “And he was afraid and said, How dreadful is this place! This is no other than the house of Gd…” (Bereshit 28:17) From here they said that anyone who prays in Jerusalem is as if they pray before the Throne of Glory, because the gate of heaven is there; and an open door to hear prayer, as it says “…and this is the gate of heaven. (ibid.) Yaakov went back to gather the stones and he found that they were one stone. Yaakov took the stone and placed it as a monument in the midst of the place and oil descended from heaven for him and he pour it out on the stone, as it says “…and he poured oil on top of it.” (Bereshit 28:18) What did the Holy One do? He took its right foot, sank it to the deepest depths and made it a keystone for the earth, like a man who places a keystone in an arch. Therefore it is called foundation stone, because there is the navel of the world and from there the world was opened out. And upon it is the palace of Gd, as it says “And this stone, which I have placed as a monument, shall be a house of God…” (Bereshit 28:22) And Yaakov fell to the ground before the foundation stone, praying before the Holy One, and said ‘Master of the World! If you bring me back to this place in peace, then I will sacrifice before you whole offerings and thanksgiving offerings!’ as it says, “And Jacob uttered a vow, saying…” (Bereshit 28:20) He vowed and he fulfilled is vow. From there he picked up his feet (to go) and there he left the well, because the well had been going before him, and in the blink of an eye came to Haran as it says, [“Now Jacob lifted his feet…” (Bereshit 29:10] “And Jacob left Be’er Sheva, and he went to Haran.” (Bereshit 28:10) About him the tradition says, “When you walk, your step will not be constrained, and if you run, you will not stumble.” (Mishle 4:12) R’ Abahu said in the name of R’ Yochanan – the angels carried him as it says, “On [their] hands they will bear you…” (Tehillim 91:12) Ya’akov’s steps were not constrained and his strength did not falter and like a mighty man he rolled back the stone from off of the mouth of the well. Then the well rose up and overflowed and the shepherds were astounded because all together they were unable to roll off the stone and he did it alone as it says, “…that Jacob drew near and rolled the rock off…” (Bereshit 29:10)

Psalm 92




... The first man was driven out of the Garden and settled on Mount Moriah, because the gates of the Garden of Eden are close by Mount Moriah. From there He took him and to there He returned him to the place from which he was taken, as it says “Now the Lord God took the man…” (Bereshit 2:15) From where did He take him? From the place of the Holy Temple, and he settled outside of the Garden of Eden on Mount Moriah, as it says “…to till the soil, whence he had been taken.” (Bereshit 3:23)…