Tosefta Eduyot
תוספתא עדויות
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Tosefta Eduyot



Chapter 1

When the sages entered the vineyard at Yavneh, they said, “In the future there will be an hour when a person will search for a matter among the words of Torah and will not find it in, in the teachings of the scribes and will not find it. As it says, ‘Behold, days are coming, says the Lord. . . they will seek out the word of God and they will not find it’ (Amos 8:11-12). ‘The word of God,’ this is prophecy. ‘The word of God,’ this is [knowledge] of the eschaton. ‘The word of God,’ that one matter in the words of Torah is not similar to another.” They said, “Let us begin from Hillel and Shammai.” Shammai says, [dough made] from a qav [of flour] requires challah [to be taken]. Hillel says, from two qavs. But the Sages say, it is not according to this one or that one, rather [dough made] from a qav and a half requires challah [to be taken], as it says, “The first of your kneading” (Numbers 15:20). [Challah is taken] according to your kneading. And how much is “according to your kneading”? According to your kneading in the wilderness. And how much is “your kneading in the wilderness”? [An amount equal to] the omer [offering], as it says, “The omer is a tenth of an ephah” (Ex 16:36). The Sages measured seven fourths and a little more from that of the wilderness, which are five Tzipporit quarters and a Jerusalem qav and a half.
Hillel said, a full hin of drawn water—which is twelve logs—invalidates the mikveh. Shammai says, a full hin of drawn water—which is thirty six logs—invalidates a mikveh. But the Sages say, it is not according to this one or that one, rather three logs of drawn water invalidate a mikveh.  A case in which two weavers came from the Dung Gate in Jerusalem and testified in the names of Shemaya and Avtalyon that three lugin of water invalidate a miqveh. And they upheld their words. Why did they mention their place of origin and their profession? Because you cannot find a more lowly profession than a weaver, nor a lowlier place than the Dung Gate. But just as the Fathers of the World would not stand on their words on the basis of rumor, how much more so one (today) should not stand on his words on the basis of rumor. The law is always in accordance with the majority; the only reason the words of a single dissenting voice are mentioned among the majority is in case they are needed in a given hour and can be relied upon. The Sages say, "The only reason the words of a single dissenting voice are mentioned among the majority is that from one person ruling 'Pure!' and another ruling 'Impure, as Rabbi Eliezer said!', they can then say to him, 'Have you really heard this in the name of Rabbi Eliezer?'" 
If a matter was asked to one Master, and he rendered it impure, he should not ask another Master. If there were two, and one prohibited and the other permitted, one rendered it pure and the other impure -- if there is another Master, we ask him. If not, we follow the stricter ruling. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korha says, "In teachings of Scripture, we follow the stricter opinion. In teachings of the Scribes, we follow the more lenient opinion."
A woman who went with her husband to medinat hayam and there was peace between them and in the world, if she returned and said, “My husband died,” she may remarry. If there was peace in the world, and she said, “My husband died,” whether she is crying or not, whether her clothing is torn or not, she is believed. Rabbi Yehuda says, she is never believed unless she came crying and her clothes were torn. They said to him, if so, a bright woman will be able to remarry and a less bright woman will not. Beit Hillel says, we heard this only if she comes from the harvest alone. Beit Shammai said to them, aren’t all the days of the year time for harvesting? When the barley harvest comes, the wheat harvest goes. When the wheat harvest comes, another harvest comes and then it goes. We find that all the days of the year there is a harvest. Beit Hillel said to them, we find that brothers do not enter the inheritance on her word. Beit Shammai said to them, doesn’t one write in a ketubah? We learn that it is written in it when you remarry, you will take what is written to you in your ketubah and go. Beit Hillel went back and agreed with the words of Beit Shammai.
Six things Rabbi Akiva declares unclean and the Sages declare clean: a sheretz and a frog in the public thoroughfare, and also an olive’s-bulk of a corpse or an olive’s-bulk of a n’veilah, a bone from a corpse or from a n’veilah. A lump of clean earth, a lump from a grave; a lump from clean earth, a lump of the land of the nations; two paths, one of which is unclean and one of which is clean [and a person doesn’t know which one he touched]—Rabbi Akiva declares impure and the Sages declare pure. 
The backbone and skull of two corpses, a quarter-log of blood from two corpses, a quarter of bones from two corpses, a limb from more than one corpse, a limb from more than one living person: Rabbi Akiva declares them impure and the Sages declare them pure.
Three things they said before Rabbi Yishmael and he did not say whether they were prohibited or permitted, and Rabbi Yehoshua ben Matya figured them out. The one who lances an abscess on Shabbat, if it is to scrape it and make for it an opening in the same manner as a doctors do, he is liable. If it is to draw pus from it, he is exempt. Garlic and half-ripe grapes and parched ears that one was pressing while it was still daytime, Rabbi Yishmael says, he may finish it after it gets dark. But Rabbi Akiva says, he may not finish it, but the priests acted according to Rabbi Yishmael. 
Three things they said before Rabbi Akiva, two of them in the name of Rabbi Eliezer and one in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua, and he did not say which of them was prohibited and which was permitted, which was fit and which was invalid, which was impure and which was pure. Two in the name of Rabbi Eliezer: a woman, what is [the rule] for going out of the city of gold? And he did not say whether it was prohibited or permitted. Rabbi Eliezer permitted and the Sages prohibited. Pigeon racers, what is [the rule] for testifying?  And he did not tell them whether it was fit or invalid. Rabbi Eliezer deemed them fit [to testify] and the Sages deemed them unfit. One in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua: the sheretz in the mouth of a weasel and the weasel walks on loaves of teruma and there is a doubt whether it touched or not, Rabbi Eliezer deemed [the loaves] clean and Rabbi Yehoshua deemed them unclean, but the Sages say, if its assured [that the sheretz touched], they are impure, but if there is a doubt, they are pure.
An oven that in the beginning is four [handbreadths] and what is left of it is four [handbreadths]. At the beginning they would say three. A wooden sandal and a limeworker’s sandal are susceptible to midras impurity. About the remannts of the oven, Rabbi Akiva deemed them impure. And a woman may perform halitzah with [the sandal] and they go out in it on Shabbat and they did not agree with him. 
Five matters Rabbi Akiva expounded in the manner of aggadah. If five matters does a father endow his son. And the Sages say, until the age of maturity, he gives him merit. From there forward, [the son] endows himself. Rabbi Akiva said, where do we find [a case] in which they limp until the age of maturity and when the age of maturity arrived, they were straightened? Or that they were deaf-mutes until the age of maturity and when the age of maturity arrived, they recovered their faculties? Or who were blind until the age of maturity, and when the age of maturity arrived they could see? How would he have endowed him [with merit] until that time? They said to him, no. Do we find [any cases] where they walked straight until the age of maturity and when the age of maturity arrived they limped? Or who had their faculties until the age of maturity and when the age of maturity arrived they were rendered deaf-mute? Or whether they had sight until the age of maturity and when the age of maturity arrived they were blinded? He does not endow him only to that time alone.
The number of generations which are before him, which is the end. Even though the days and the hours are like a thread of hair before ha-maqom, he counts only the generations, as it says, “He announced the generations from the start” (Is 41:4). Even though it says, “They shall be enslaved and oppressed [four hundred years]” (Gen 15:13), it also says, “And they shall return here in the fourth generation” (Gen 15:16). Indeed it says, “I will let you enjoy the full count of your days” (Ex 23:26). These are the two generations, and the remainder of the people, if he has merit they make full his years. If he did not have merit, they will take away from his years according to Rabbi Akiva. But the Sages say, If he has merit, they add to his years and if not, they take away from them. They said to Rabbi Akiva, indeed it says, “And I will add fifteen years to your life” (II Kings 20:6). He said to them, his own they added. Rabbi Akiva said to them, indeed it says, “A son shall be born to the house of David, Yoshiyahu by name” (I Kings 13:2), but Manasseh wasn’t even in the world! They said to him, does it say, “a son has been born to the House of David, son of Chizkiyah? Doesn’t it say only, “a son has been born to the House of David,” whether from Chizkiyah son of Michal of Beit David [or not]?
Five sheep for shearing, a maneh or a maneh and a half—which is seventy-five selas—are obligated for [the offering of] the first fleece, according to Rabbi Dosa, but the Sages say, five sheep for shearing whatever amount. Rabbi Natan says Rabbi Dosa says, as an egg’s-worth of food including its peel. But the Sages say, excluding its peel. The woman who says, “I was taken captive but I am clean,” eats of teruma. If there were witnesses that she had been taken captive and she says, “I am clean,” she may not eat.
In four [cases of] doubt, Rabbi Yehoshua deems unclean and the Sages deem clean. The clean person who stands and the unclean person passes, the unclean thing in the private domain and the clean thing in the public domain, the clean thing in the private domain and the unclean thing in the public domain, if there is a doubt whether it touched or not, if there is a doubt whether it overhung or not, if there is a doubt whether he moved or not, Rabbi Yehoshua deems impure but the Sages deem pure.

Chapter 2

Four things Rabbi Eliezer declares pure while the Sages declare impure. The rim of a stone strainer—Rabbi Eliezer says: It is not impure in the air; but the Sages say: It is impure in the air. A baker's sheet which is fixed to a nail, or attached to a beam—Rabbi Eliezer makes it pure; but the Sages make it impure. A shoe that is on the shoe mold—Rabbi Eliezer makes it pure; but the Sages make it impure. He cut it [an oven, see Mishnah Kelim 5:10] into rings, and sand is placed between each ring, Rabbi Eliezer makes it pure; but the Sages make it impure. This was called the oven of Akhnai, for on its account, disagreement (mahloket) increased in Israel.
In twenty-four matters Beit Shammai was lenient while Beit Hillel was stringent. Beit Shammai says: a person cannot impose a vow on his wife; Beit Hillel says, a man cannot impose a nazirite vow on his son. An egg which was born on a yom tov—others say in the name of Rabbi Eliezer, it and its mother may be eaten. If the one who anointed himself with clean oil and then became unclean went down and immersed himself, Beit Shammai says, even though [the oil] drops and falls, he is clean. Beit Hillel says, [if there remained on him enough] to anoint a small limb, he is unclean, but less than that, he is clean. Rabbi Eliezer son of Rabbi Tzadoq said, when I was at Rabbi Yohanan ben Hahironi’s, I saw that he ate his bread dry for they were years of famine. I came and told my father. He said to me, bring him olives. I brought him olives. He took them and looked at them and saw they were wet. He said to me, I don’t eat olives. I came and told my father. He said to me, go tell him the jar is perforated according to Beit Hillel but the dregs have stopped it up. This informs you that he ate in a state of purity, for even though he was a student of Beit Shammai, he acted only according to the words of Beit Hillel.
The halakhah always follows the words of Beth Hillel.  One who wishes to be strict upon oneself and to follow the strictures of both Beth Hillel and Beth Shammai, regarding this person it is said “the fool walks in darkness” (Ecclesiastes 2:14), while one who accepts the leniencies of Beth Shamai and the leniencies of Beth Hillel is evil – [one must follow] either Beth Shammai in accordance with their leniencies and strictures, or Beth Hillel in accordance with their leniencies and strictures. Beit Hillel says, a man may not send out his wife with an old get, so her get will not be older than her child. If he wrote in the name of a provincial government or an office, or if there were two standing kings and he wrote it in the name of one of them, it is valid. If he wrote it in the name of his father’s father, it is valid. In the name of his family, it is invalid. But if he was called by the same name, it is valid.
Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar said, Beit Hillel and Beit Shammai did not dispute about the one who divorces his wife and she spent a night with him at an inn and she did not require of him a second get. About what did they dispute? About the one who takes a vow not to have sex with his wife. Beit Shammai says, two weeks, like when she gives birth to a female child. Beit Hillel says, a single week, like when she gives birth to a male child or like the days of her niddah. Longer than that, he must send her out and give her her ketubah. A basket, Beit Shammai exempts and Beit Hillel deems liable. Rabbi Yehuda says, Hillel himself would prohibit. A basket of chosen fruits, Beit Shammai exempts and Beit Hillel deems liable. Rabbi Yehuda says, Hillel himself would prohibit. The one who takes a basket to send to his fellow should not eat until it has been tithed. Rabbi Yehuda says, Hillel himself would prohibit.
Rabbi Yishmael son of Rabbi Yohanan ben B’roqah said, Beit Shammai and Beit Hillel did not disagree about when there are two groups of witnesses to testify for someone that he is a nazir in purity. About what did they have a disagreement? When there are two witnesses to testify for him. Beit Shammai says, there is a disagreement whether he is a nazirite. Beit Hillel says, there are in five two, so he is a nazirite twice.
Rabbi Yehuda says, in five matters Beit Shammai was lenient while Beit Hillel was stringent. The blood of carrion—Beit Shammai deems it clean and Beit Hillel deems it unclean. Rabbi Yosei son of rabbi Yehuda says, even when Beit Hillel deemed it unclean, they only deemed in unclean if the blood was in the amount of a revi’it, so that if it congealed it would be an olive’s-bulk. And they agreed concerning the egg of a torn animal, that it is prohibited because it grew up prohibited. About what do they disagree? About the egg of carrion, of which Beit Shammai says, if one such as that is sold in the market, it is permitted, and if not, it is prohibited. Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaaqov says, another matter about which Beit Shammai was lenient while Beit Hillel was stringent. Beit Shammai says, [multiple] acts of sprinkling [blood on the altar] make the sin-offering acceptable or piggul, and a single act for all other sacrifices. Beit Hillel says, for both the sin-offering and all other sacrifices, a single act renders acceptable or piggul.
Rabbi Shimon says, about three matters Beit Shammai was lenient and Beit Hillel was stringent. [The book of] Qohelet does not impart impurity to the hands according to Beit Shammai. Beit Hillel says, it does impart impurity to the hands. Water of purification  which has done its work, Beit Shammai says it is pure and Beit Shammai [probably read: Beit Hillel] deems it impure. A woman who is in active labor, how long may she be relieved [from pain] and become a zavah? Rabbi Eliezer says, a full day, and the halakhah according to him. Rabbi Shimon ben Yehuda says in the name of Rabbi Shimon, Beit Shammai says three days and Beit Hillel says one day.
Rabbi Eliezer says, about two matters Beit Shammai was lenient and Beit Hillel was stringent. The blood of a woman after childbirth who has not immersed imparts impurity when wet but does not impart impurity when dry, according to Beit Shammai. Beit Hillel says, it imparts purity both wet and dry. Four brothers, two of whom marry two sisters, and the ones married to the sisters die, they perform halitzah and do not do yibum, and if they had already gone ahead and gotten married, they must send them away. Rabbi Eliezer says in the name of Beit Shammai, [the marriage] stands. But Beit Hillel says, the send them out. Abba Shaul says, the lenient [position] was Beit Hillel’s in this matter.
The one who plucks [hair] from an unblemished first-born and puts it in the window, even though a blemish comes upon [the animal] after that and it is slaughtered, this is buried. A blemished first-born from which he picked [hair] and after that it died, Akavya ben Mehalalel permits but the Sages prohibit. Rabbi Yehuda said, in this Akavya concedes that it is prohibited. About what did they disagree? About [a case where] it was made unclean and he plucked from it and after that he slaughtered it. In which case Akavya permits and the Sages prohibit. Rabbi Yosei says, Rabbi Halafta concedes that this is permitted. But the Sages specifically said, let him put it in the window, lest there is a time that if it dies it will be prohibited. But if he slaughtered it, it is permitted. About what did they disagree? About [a case when] it became unclean and he plucked from it and after that it died, when Akavya ben Mehalalel permits and the Sages prohibit.
An olive’s-bulk of flesh which is separated from the limb of a living being, Rabbi Eliezer deems impure. They gave Rabbi Eliezer three responses. No, if you said of a house [to which applies the rule of] a quarter-kav and moldering. Will you say of the limb of a living animal which is not subject [to the rule] of a quarter-kav or moldering? Another thing: which depends on which? Does a limb depend on the flesh or does the flesh depend on the limb? The flesh depends on the limb. Is it possible that flesh could render impure by touching, carrying, and [being] in a tent and the limb should be clean? Rabbi Shimon said, it is surprising to me that Rabbi Eliezer would deem it impure. He declared impure only in a time when there was on the limb flesh enough so that this and this could render impure by touching, carrying, or [being] in a tent. A bone the size of a barley-grain which is separated [from the limb of a living animal], Rabbi Nehunya declares impure. They gave Rabbi Nehunya three answers. No. If you said of a corpse which is subject to [the laws of] a quarter-kav and molding, will you say of a limb of a living animal which is not subject to [the laws] of a quarter-kav or molding. Another thing: Which depends on which? Does a limb depend on the bone, or does a bone depend on the limb? Ah, he would say that a bone depends on the limb. It is possible that the bone renders impure through touching and carrying but the limb is pure. Rabbi Shimon said, it is surprising to me if Rabbi Nehunya deemed it impure. He only deemed it impure when there was on the limb a barley-grain’s worth of bone, so that this and this render impure through touching and carrying. Rabbi Yehoshua responded to the words of both of them, and what of a case of a living being which there are 248 bones, bone and flesh that separated form it are clean. A limb from a living animal which does not have as many, bone and flesh that are separated from it should be clean. Rabbi responded to the words of Rabbi Yehoshua, no. If you say that the thins which separate from a living being [are clean], it is because they separate from something living which is clean. Will you say [the same] that the limb of a living being which has separated from something which is unclean?

Chapter 3

Rabbi Tzadoq testified about a brine of unclean locusts that it is clean and permitted to those who eat teruma. Rabbi Yehoshua and Rabbi Papyas testified on the baker’s sheet that they attached to a joist or a beam or affixed with a nail that it is [susceptible] to impurity, but Rabbi Eliezer deems it not [susceptible] to impurity. If he did not attach it all the way, everyone agrees that it is [susceptible] to impurity. They testified that at first they would say “until Purim.” Rabbi Yehoshua and Rabbi Papyas came and testified that all of Adar is fit for intercalation. Menahem ben Povgi, who was a dyer, testified about the rim of the olive-boiler’s kettle that it is [susceptible] to impurity, but that the one used by dyers is not. At the beginning they would say that the matters were reversed. And when they seated him in the yeshiva, everyone was surprised by him. He said to them, this from that, I am the head of all who come after me.
Rabbi Yehoshua ben B’teira testified about the blood of carrion that it is clean. Rabbi Shimon ben B’teira said, they would stab whole herds to death in the royal court of the king and the pilgrims would sink to their knees and didn’t worry about uncleanness.
Rabbi Yehuda haKohein testified about a bat Yisrael who married a priest, as soon as she is married in the chuppah [she eats the sacred food] even though they have not yet had sex. Rabbi Eliezer says, [not until] they have sex. And thus Rabbi Eliezer said, because [he must] have sex with her, a priest should not marry a woman until she is mature. The court that came after them said that a woman from a suspected family is believed regarding uncleanness and cleanness, for prohibition or permission, for sending away or coming near. But the widow from a suspected family they did not reach. Rabbi Shimon ben Azzai said to them, a ma’aseh in which bones were found in Jerusalem in the woodshed and the Sages wanted to deem the whole of Jerusalem unclean. Rabbi Yehoshua said to them, a shame and a disgrace it would be for us to declare our house unclean. Where are the dead of the [great] flood? Where are the dead of Nevukadnetzer? Where are the dead that died in war up til now? They have said, if it is definite, it is unclean. [If there is] a doubt, it is clean. Rabbi Yehoshua said, I heard that they slaughter even those there are no libations, and they eat the most holy things even though there is no curtain, and they [eat] less holy things and ma’aser sheni even though there is no wall. The consecration in the beginning was for its time and for the future time to come. 
The family of the house of Tzarifah was over the Jordan and Ben Tzion kicked it out by force. And there was another [family] there and Ben Tzion brought it close by force. The Sages did not want to reveal them, but they transmit to their children and to their students once in seven [years]. [Families] like these Eliyahu comes to deem unclean and clean, to send away or bring near. Rabbi says, to draw near but not to send away. Rabbi Yehuda says, the matters are reversed. Rabbi Hananya ben Ado says, indeed it says, “There came out among the Israelites a man whose mother was Israelite and whose father was Egyptian, and the half-Israelite and another Israelite fought” (Lev 24:10). These matters [produce] a qal v’homer: just as Moses our teacher  did not want to reveal the mamzers until they revealed themselves, Elijah—Moses’s student—all the more so would not reveal until they revealed themselves. The one has students, they call him rabbi. When his students were forgotten, they called him rabban. When both of these are forgotten, they call him by his name.