Ma'aneh Lashon Chabad
מענה לשון חב"ד
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Ma'aneh_Lashon_Chabad
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Ma'aneh Lashon Chabad



Part 1

Book of Spoken Answers
To recite at the graves of the righteous, as practiced by the Holy Master Rabbi Dov Ber (whose soul is in Eden) in Hadiach at the grave of the Holy Master [Rabbi Shneur Zalman of Liadi] (whose soul is in heaven).
Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who created you in judgment, and nourished you in judgment, and sustained you in judgment, and brought you to death in judgment. And Who knows the fate of everyone in judgement. Who, in the future, will return and resurrect you in judgment. Blessed are You LORD, Who resurrects the dead.
You are forever mighty, my LORD, You resurrect the dead, abundant is Your salvation. He sustains the living with kindness, resurrects the dead with abundant mercy. He supports the fallen, and heals the sickly, and redeems those held captive. And He upholds His faithfulness to those sleeping in the dust. Who is like You, O mighty One! And who is compared to You, O King; Who brings death and restores life, and Who causes redemption to sprout forth. And You are trusted to resurrect the dead.
Afterwards one should say the following:
And for all this we must offer thanks to You and to proclaim the unity of Name; the great, the mighty, and the formidable. None can be compared to You, our God, in this world; and there is nothing besides You, our King, in the life of the World to Come. Nothing is apart from You, our Redeemer, in the days of Messiah. And none are like You, our Deliverer, in [the era of] the Resurrection of the Dead.
This is the customary recitation at the time of lighting the [oil] lamps:
I am hereby lighting the lamp of olive oil in the honor of the soul of our masters, teachers, and rabbis whose souls are in the heavenly realms, may their merit protect me, Amen! and so may it be Your will. May their light shine upon the Nefesh, Ruach, Neshamah, Chayah and Yechidah of [*state first name*] the son/daughter of [*state mother's name*] in spiritual and in material matters, for children, health and an abundance of sustenance.

Part 2

Sing forth, O you righteous, to the LORD; it is fit that the upright acclaim Him. Praise the LORD with the lyre; with the ten-stringed harp sing to Him; Sing Him a new song; play sweetly with shouts of joy. For the word of the LORD is right; His every deed is faithful. He loves what is right and just; the earth is full of the LORD’s faithful care. By the word of the LORD the heavens were made, by the breath of His mouth, all their host. He heaps up the ocean waters like a mound, stores the deep in vaults. Let all the earth fear the LORD; let all the inhabitants of the world dread Him. For He spoke, and it was; He commanded, and it endured. The LORD frustrates the plans of nations, brings to naught the designs of peoples. What the LORD plans endures forever, what He designs, for ages on end. Happy the nation whose God is the LORD, the people He has chosen to be His own. The LORD looks down from heaven; He sees all mankind. From His dwelling-place He gazes on all the inhabitants of the earth. He who fashions the hearts of them all, who discerns all their doings. Kings are not delivered by a large force; warriors are not saved by great strength; Horses are a false hope for deliverance; for all their great power they provide no escape. Truly the eye of the LORD is on those who fear Him, who wait for His faithful care. To save them from death, to sustain them in famine. We set our hope on the LORD, He is our help and shield; In Him our hearts rejoice, for in His holy name we trust. May we enjoy, O LORD, Your faithful care, as we have put our hope in You.




A prayer of Moses, the man of God. O Lord, You have been our refuge in every generation. Before the mountains came into being, before You brought forth the earth and the world, from eternity to eternity You are God. You return man to dust;a You decreed, “Return you mortals!” For in Your sight a thousand years are like yesterday that has passed, like a watch of the night. You engulf men in sleep; at daybreak they are like grass that renews itself; At daybreak it flourishes anew; by dusk it withers and dries up. So we are consumed by Your anger, terror-struck by Your fury. You have set our iniquities before You, our hidden sins in the light of Your face. All our days pass away in Your wrath; we spend our years like a sigh. The span of our life is seventy years, or, given the strength, eighty years; but the bbest of them are trouble and sorrow. They pass by speedily, and we care in darkness. Who can know Your furious anger? Your wrath matches the fear of You. Teach us to count our days rightly, that we may obtain a wise heart. Turn, O LORD! How long? Show mercy to Your servants. Satisfy us at daybreak with Your steadfast love that we may sing for joy all our days. Give us joy for as long as You have afflicted us, for the years we have suffered misfortune. Let Your deeds be seen by Your servants, Your glory by their children.
May the favor of the Lord, our God, be upon us; let the work of our hands prosper, O prosper the work of our hands!