Pardes Rimmonim
פרדס רמונים
AI Pardes
http://chatgpt.com

Pardes Rimmonim

Author's Introduction



Index



A Prayer







Gate 1



Chapter 1

The first gate, called ten and not nine.
It is known and well-publicized that regarding the number of the Sefirot, all those who engage in this hidden wisdom unanimously agree that they are ten, and there is no disagreement about this at all.
And behold, this is one of the things upon which a covenant was made in the wisdom of the Sefirot. And with us is the Book of Creation, attributed to our father Abraham, peace be upon him. Some attribute it to Rabbi Akiva, but this is not agreed upon.
And behold, the words of this book are deep, lofty, and hidden from the understanding of those who look into it. And even though there are many different interpretations, nevertheless, in all its parts, we still require guidance. And yet we will explain its words to the best of our limited understanding. And these are its words: 'Ten Sefirot without substance, the number of ten fingers, five opposite five, and the single covenant directed in the middle, in the word of the tongue and in the word of the organ.' End of quote.
Although we thought not to explain this teaching because its depths and secrets are hidden from us, being certainly beyond our understanding, and no person can fully grasp the depth of its language except Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai, peace be upon him, and Rabbi Akiva, peace be upon him, "whose abode is not among the mortals" [Daniel 2:11]. But due to the obligation upon us, we will interpret it forcefully. And there are points that need clarification. Firstly, regarding the phrase 'Ten Sefirot without substance, number.' In truth, it is superfluous, as it should say 'Ten Sefirot without substance against the fingers, number for what?' Secondly, why is the word 'five' necessary? Thirdly, according to his words, they are eleven, since there are five opposite five, and the covenant in the middle makes eleven. Fourthly, the mention of 'the word of the tongue and the word of the organ' implies two intermediaries—why are both needed? Fifthly, what is his intent in explaining that they correspond to the fingers? For it seems unrelated to the topic at hand. Sixthly, now that he descended to explain through limbs, it would have been appropriate to explain all the limbs that allude to the Sefirot, as we will explain in the Gate of the Soul in Chapter Four, God willing, with His help. And we say that the author of this book intended in this chapter to conceal the entire wisdom of the Sefirot and to assert it. And he said that they are ten Sefirot, and since he said they are ten, which may imply limitation and corporeality, as they are divided in number, he said they are belimah, meaning the two words beli mah (without what), and the intention is 'without essence.' Even though we use the expression 'ten,' the true belief is that they are without essence, without substance. The meaning is that they have no comprehensible essence to humans, for they are not limited or understood because they are free from limitation and corporeality, and what is not corporeal can only be grasped in the heart of the wise among the people of Israel through visionary insight, as in prophecy. The reason for the number ten, though they are without substance, will be explained in the following gates, God willing. And he said 'number ten, etc.,' so that we do not mistakenly think due to our limited knowledge that there is nothing in existence but the simple One. Therefore, he said they are indeed a number. And the term 'Sefirot' is a term of numbering, by which number is judged, even though they are without substance. The proof of this is their name, 'Sefirot,' meaning number, as we have explained. And to establish that they are a number, and that their number is ten, he said 'the number of ten fingers.' And as the verse says (Psalms 8:4), 'When I consider Your heavens, the work of Your fingers.