Selichot Edot HaMizrach
סליחות נוסח עדות המזרח
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Selichot_Edot_HaMizrach
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Selichot Edot HaMizrach

...I have arised during the watchhour, to request (forgiveness) for my wrongdoings. My soul is blacked because of my great straying. Have mercy on your congregation, on the sheep you shepard. 
...See translation to psalm 145

......Person, why should you sleep. Arise and read supplication. Spill out your thoughts, seek forgiveness, from the ruler of rulers. Run and purify yourself and do not delay before the days of introspection. And quickly! run for help before the one who dwells in the heights. And from sin and wickedness flee and fear from tragedies. I plead Israel knows your name and believes. To you God is justice and for is the embarrassment. Stand like a man and overcome (your insecurities) to admit wrongdoings. God you should seek with a heavy heart to atone for wrongdoings. For forever it will not be forgotten from him of wonders (ie. God). And every saying which you said before him are read. The merciful one should (lit. will) have mercy upon like a father has mercy on his children
To you God is justice and to us is shameful faces. How (lit. What) shall we complain and what should we say. How can we speak and how can we be righteous? We will examine our ways and straighten and return to you. For your right hand is simple, to accept the ones returning to you. They are returning to you with all their hearts, their beseechments accept in your mercy. For your great mercy we have come before you, like weak and impoverished people we have knocked on your door. Your door we have knocked merciful and gracious one, do not let us return empty from before you. From you our king empty-handed do not return us,  for you hear prayers. The one who hears prayers, to you all the lives should come before. The lives should come before you, and all of the souls. The soul and the body are yours, spare your work. The soul and the body are yours, you are a rock that there are none like you, spare your work. The soul and the body are yours, god bring the messiah (lit. do it) for the sake of your name.  We have pleaded for your name, do it for the sake of your name. For the sake of your name, for your name is a gracious and merciful king. Your name will be pronounce about us, God our Lord. Your name will be pronounced among us, do not put us aside God our Lord. Lord we are embarrassed of our actions, and we are ashamed of our wrongdoings. We do not have a mouth to rebut, nor the forehead to lift our head. For our backsliding has become great, we have sinned before you. We have sinned with our fathers, we have become criminals and wicked.What shall we say before you the one who sits above, what will we say before the one who dwells up above. Do you not know what's hidden and revealed, you do know. You know the mysteries of the world, and what hidden by every living being. You can search the innermost parts of the abdomen, you see the kidneys and the heart. There is nothing that is lost before you, there is nothing that is concealed before your eyes. If we have within us sins, God, do it for the sake of your name. If you should hold on to sins, God who will remain standing. For from you is forgiveness, for the sake of fear. For it is not because of our righteousness that we cast our supplications before you, For it is for your great mercy.