Mishnah Yevamot
משנה יבמות
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.org

Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4













What's the definition of a mamzer?  [The offspring of a union with] someone who shares the same flesh who the Torah forbids to you, according to Rabbi Akiva.  Shimon the Yemenite says, a mamzer is  [the offspring resulting from] any [sexual] prohibition that carries the penalty of excision by the Hand of Heaven ["kareit"].  The halacha is according to Shimon the Yemenite.  Rabbi Joshua says, any [offspring resulting from a union] where there is a penalty of death by the court.  Rabbi Simon the son of Azai said, "I found that it was written in the scroll where the courts would record the lineages of the families of Jerusalem that someone is a mamzer if he is the offspring of a married woman [and a man other than her husband], supporting the words of Rabbi Joshua.  

If a man's wife died, he is permitted to marry her sister.  If they divorced, and then the wife died, he is permitted to marry her sister.  If [they divorced and] the wife married another, and then the former wife died, he is permitted to marry his former wife's sister.  If he performed the ritual of yevamot with a woman, and that woman died, he is permitted to marry that woman's sister.  If he performed the ritual of chalitza with a woman and then she died, he is permitted to marry that woman's sister.

Chapter 5



Chapter 6

Someone who has sex with his
deceased brother's wife [with whom he must perform the ritual of levirate marriage], it makes no difference it was whether by accident [he didn't know that she was his sister-in-law] or on purpose [for sexual fulfillment without intent to satisfy the obligation of levirate marriage], whether by force or by free will, even if he performed it by accident and she on purpose, or if he did it on purpose and she by accident, or if he was forced and she was not forced, or if she was forced and he was not forced, whether he made only the first contact [penetrated with only the glans of his penis and then withdrew] or fully penetrated, in all cases he has fulfilled the ritual of yibum, and the woman becomes his wife, and the law does not differentiate between vaginal sex and anal sex.
If a man had sex with one of the relatives with whom he was forbidden by the Torah, or with a woman who is ineligible to him, no marriage can take effect, irrespective of whether the sex was vaginal or anal.  Examples of women ineligible to him include a widow of the High Priest, a divorcee or woman who performed the ritual of chalitza with a regular priest, a woman born of an illegitimate union according to Jewish law, a female descendent of the netina [water carriers], or the female offspring of the union of a female Jew who is neither a Levi or a Priest and a mamzer [male descendent of an illegitimate union] or a netina.
The widow of the High Priest, the divorcee and woman who performed the ritual of chalitza with a regular priest are not allowed to eat teruma from the moment that they perform the first stage of a wedding ceremony [erusin/betrothal] with another man.   Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Simon permit her to eat teruma after the first stage of the wedding ceremony as long as she has not had sex yet.  If these women become widowed or divorced from their subsequent marriages, they are not eligible to eat teruma, but if they became widowed or divorced from someone with whom they were betrothed, they may still eat teruma.
The High Priest must not marry a widow, either a widow from marriage or a widow from betrothal, and must not marry a grown woman. Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Shimon permit a grown woman. He must not marry a woman who was hit by a woodstick [in her genitals, so as to break the hymene]. If he has betrothed a widow and [afterwards] is elected High Priest, he must not consume the marriage. But it happened that Yoshua, the son of Gamla, betrothed Marta, the daughter of Baytos, and the king elected him High Priest, and he consumed the marriage with her. If a woman who has to perform levirate falls upon a Priest and he is elected High Priest, even if he has made a promis of marriage to her, he must not consume the marriage with her. A High Priest, if his [older] brother [with no descendants] dies, must perform Chalitzah and not levirate marriage.
A regular priest should not marry a sterile woman, unless he already has a wife and children.  Rabbi Yehuda Says, "Even if he already has a wife and children he should not marry a sterile woman because she is the harlot mentioned in the Torah."  The Rabbis disagree, "By harlot the Torah meant [a priest] should not marry a convert, a woman who was held captive, or a woman who had out of marriage relations.

Chapter 7




A fetus, a brother-in-law [who is required to fulfill yibum], a betrothal, a deaf mute and a boy nine days and one year old disqualify [a woman from eating teruma] but do not give them the right to eat, and [this is the case] even if it is unclear that he is nine years old and a day or unclear that he is not, or unclear if he has grown two pubic hairs or not. If a house collapses on a man and on his brother's daughter and it is unknown who died first, the rival must perform chalitza but does not contract levirate marriage.
The rapist, the seducer, and the mentally incompetent can neither deprive a woman of the right of eating terumah, nor can they grant the right upon her. If, however, they are unfit to enter into the assembly of Israel, they do deprive a woman of her right to eat terumah. How so? If an Israelite had relations with the daughter of a kohen, she may still continue to eat terumah. Iif she gets pregnant, she may no longer eat terumah. If the fetus was aborted in her womb, she may eat. But if she gave birth to a child, she may eat. The power of the son is thus greater than the father's power. A slave deprives a woman, due to his cohabitation, from eating terumah, but not as her offspring. How so? If the daughter of an Israelite was wed to a kohen, or if the daughter of a kohen was married to an Israelite, and she had a son by him, and that son went and violated a bondswoman who had a son by him, such a son is a slave. And if his paternal grandmother was a bat yisrael (daughter of an Israelite) married to a kohen (priest), she is not allowed to eat terumah. But if she were a bat kohen (priest's daughter) and married to an Israelite, she may eat terumah. A mamzer (bastard, illegitimate child) deprives a woman from eating terumah, and also bestows the privilege on her? How so? If an Israelite's daughter was married to a kohen, or a kohen's daughter was married to an Israelite, and she bore him a daughter, and the daughter married a slave or idolater, and had a son by him, the son is a mamzer. If his maternal grandmother was a bat yisrael  (daughter of an Israelite) married to a kohen, she may eat terumah. But if she was a kohen's daughter married to an Israelite, she may not eat terumah. 

Chapter 8

An uncircumcised [priest] and all impure persons may not eat terumah.  Their wives and slaves may eat terumah.    [A priest] whose testes are crushed or whose member is cut off, as well as their slaves, may eat terumah, but their wives may not.    But if he did not know her after the his testes were crushed or his member was cut off, the wives may eat [terumah]. 
Who is considered a “petzua dakkah”?    Anyone whose testes are wounded even one of them.  And a “kerut shofkhah”?  One whose member is cut off.  If [any part] of the corona remained, even so much as a hair’s breadth, he is fit. A man who testes are wounded, and one whose member is cut off, are permitted to marry a convert or a freed slave.  They are only forbidden to enter into the congregation, as it is said “No one whose testes are crushed or whose member is cut off shall be admitted into the congregation of the Lord” (Deuteronomy 23:2). 
An Ammonite and a Moabite are forbidden [to enter into the congregation of the Lord] and their prohibition is for ever. However, their females are permitted at once.    An Egyptian and an Edomite are forbidden only until the third generation, both males or females.  Rabbi Shimon permits their women immediately.    Said Rabbi Shimon:  This is an a fortiori situation : if where the males are forbidden for all time the females are permitted immediately, where the males are forbidden only until the third generation how much more should the females be permitted immediately.    They said to him:  If this is a received tradition, we shall accept it; but if it is only a logical reference, there is a refutation.  He replied: This is not so, I am in fact saying a received tradition. Mamzerim and netinim are forbidden, and their prohibition is forever, both males or females. 
Rabbi Joshua said:  I have heard that a eunuch performs halitzah and that halitzah is performed by others for his wife, and also that a eunuch does not perform halitzah and that no halitzah is performed for his wife, and I am unable to explain this.   Rabbi Akiva said:  I will explain it: a man-made eunuch performs halitzah and halitzah is also performed for his wife, because there was a time when he was fit [to have children]. A eunuch by nature neither performs halitzah nor is halitzah performed for his wife, since there never was a time when he was fit.  Rabbi Eliezer said: Not so!  Rather a eunuch by nature performs halitzah and halitzah is performed for his wife, because he may be cured. A man-made eunuch neither performs halitzah nor is halitzah performed for his wife, since he cannot be cured.  Rabbi Joshua ben Baterra testified concerning Ben Megusat, who was a man-made eunuch living in Jerusalem and they performed levirate marriage for his wife, to uphold the opinion of Rabbi Akiva. 
The eunuch neither performs halitzah nor contracts levirate marriage. So too a woman who is incapable of procreation neither performs halizah nor is taken in levirate marriage. If a eunuch performed halitzah for his dead brother's sister, he does not disqualify her [from subsequently marrying a priest].    If he has intercourse with her he disqualifies her, since this is an act of fornication.    Similarly where brothers performed halitzah for a woman incapable of procreation, they do not disqualify her [from marrying a priest].    If they have intercourse with her they do disqualify her, since this is an act of fornication. 
If a priest who was eunuch by nature married the daughter of an Israelite, he confers upon her the right to eat terumah.  Rabbi Yose and Rabbi Shimon stated: if a priest who was an hermaphrodite married the daughter of an Israelite, he confers upon her the right to eat terumah. Rabbi Judah stated: if a tumtum (one with no apparrent gender) was opened up and found to be a male, he may not perform halitzah, because he has the same status as a eunuch.  The hermaphrodite may marry [a wife] but may not be married [by a man].    Rabbi Eliezer stated: concerning the hermaphrodite, [the one who has relations with him] is liable to be stoned like one [who has relations with] a male.   

Chapter 9



Chapter 10






A boy of the age of nine years and one day disqualifies [his sister-in-law for marriage] with his brothers, and his brothers disqualify her for him, but while he disqualifies her from the outset only, the brothers disqualify her from the outset and at the end. 
How is this so?   A boy of the age of nine years and one day who had intercourse with his sister-in-law disqualifies her [for marriage] with his brothers;
If the brothers  had intercourse with her, or did ma’amar with her, or gave her a get or submitted to her halitzah they have disqualified her for marriage with him.

A boy of the age of nine years and one day who had intercourse with his dead brother's wife and then another brother who was of the age of nine years and one day had intercourse with her, [the latter] disqualifies her for [the former].  
Rabbi Shimon says: he does not disqualify.

A boy of the age of nine years and one day who had intercourse with his dead brother's wife and afterwards had intercourse with her rival wife, he has disqualified [both women for marriage] with himself.  
Rabbi Shimon says: he does not disqualify them.
A boy of the age of nine years and one day had intercourse with his dead brother's wife and then died, she must undergo halitzah but may not be taken in levirate marriage.   
If he had married [any other] woman and she subsequently died, she is exempt.

A boy of the age of nine years and one day had intercourse with his dead husband's wife, and after he had come of age he married another woman and then died, if he had not known the first woman after he had become of age, the first one must have halitzah but may not be taken in levirate marriage, while the second may either have halitzah or levirate marriage. 
Rabbi Shimon says: he may perform levirate marriage with whichever one he wants, and he must perform halitzah for the other [woman].   
[The same law applies] whether he is nine years and one day, or whether he is twenty years but had not produced two pubic hairs. 


Chapter 11



Chapter 12

The ceremony of Chalitzah must take place before three judges, who may be laymen. If it is performed with a shoe, it is valid, but not if with a shoe made of felt, or of cloth. The Chalitzah is also valid when it is performed with a sandal which has a leather strap at the heel, but not if it is not furnished with such a strap. If it is tied under the knee, it is valid, but not if it was tied above the knee.
If Chalitzah was performed with a sandal which does not belong to the man, or with a wooden sandal [covered with leather], or on the right foot, with a sandal belonging to the left foot, it is valid. If with a sandal which is too large, but with which the man may walk nevertheless, or with one too small [to cover the whole foot], but which nevertheless covers the greater part of the foot, the Chalitzah is valid. If that ceremony was performed at night it is valid, but R. Eleazar declares it void. A Chalitzah performed on the left foot is void, but R. Eleazar declares it to he valid.
If the woman took off the shoe, and did expectorate [before the brother-in-law], but did not pronounce the words [necessary to be spoken on that occasion], the Chalitzah is valid; if she spoke the words and expectorated, but did not take off the shoe, the Chalitzah is valid; if she took off the shoe and spoke the words, but did not expectorate, the Chalitzah is void, according to R. Eleazar; but valid according to R. Akivah. R. Eleazar thus expounds the text (Deut. xxv. 9), "Thus shall it be done," &amp;c. viz. "All acts there prescribed must be performed, and the omission of any renders the Chalitzah void." But R. Akivah replied, "The same text affords a proof of my opinion, for it is there stated, 'Thus shall it be done to the man;' which proves that it only relates to the acts of the man."
§ 4. When a deaf and dumb man had performed to him the ceremony of Chalitzah, or if a deaf and dumb woman performed it, or when a woman performed it to a minor, the Chalitzah is void. A female who, during her minority performed a Chalitzah, must repeat it on attaining her majority, otherwise the first Chalitzah is void.
When a woman gave Chalitzah in the presence of two, or even of three judges, if one of them happens to be related to her, or incompetent to give evidence, the Chalitzah is void: but R. Simeon and R. Jochanan Hasandelar declare it valid. It happened once that a man received Chalitzah from a woman in a prison, where none but themselves were present, and when that case was submitted to R. Akivah, he declared it a valid Chalitzah.
The due performance of the precept of Chalitzah is as follows:—The man and his sister-in-law shall appear before the tribunal [Beth Din] who are to advise him according to circumstances, for it is said (Deut. xxv. 8), "The elders of his city shall call him, and speak unto him," &amp;c., she shall say (Deut. xxv. 7), "My husband's brother refuseth to raise up unto his brother a name in Israel, he will not perform to me the duty of a husband's brother." He shall then say, "I like not to take her (Deut. xxv. 8)." This was always said in the Holy language [Hebrew], "Then shall the brother's wife come unto him, and spit out before him;" viz. so that the judges can plainly see her expectorate. Then shall she answer and say, "So shall it be done with the man that will not build up his brother's house" (Deut. xxv. 9). Thus far was it read formerly, but when R. Hyrcanus had the whole passage read under an oak in the village Atam [‏עיטם‎], it became customary ever after to read the whole section. The injunction of the law (Deut. xxv. 16), "His name shall be called in Israel the house of him that hath his shoe loosened," is obligatory on the judges only, but not on the disciples present; but according to R. Jehudah, it is incumbent on every one present at the ceremony to call out three times [‏חלוץ הנעל‎], Unshod one! Unshod one! Unshod one!