Yismach Moshe
ישמח משה
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Yismach_Moshe
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Yismach Moshe

Introduction



Bereshit



Noach



Lech Lecha



Vayera



Chayei Sara



Toldot



Vayetzei



Vayishlach



Vayeshev



Miketz



Vayigash



Vayechi



Shemot



Comment 1



Comment 2



Comment 3



Comment 4



Comment 5



Comment 6



Comment 7



Comment 8



Comment 9



Comment 10



Comment 11



Comment 12



Comment 13



Comment 14



Comment 15



Comment 16



Comment 17



Comment 18



Comment 19



Comment 20



Comment 21



Comment 22



Comment 23



Comment 24



Comment 25



Comment 26



Comment 27



Comment 28



Comment 29



Comment 30



Comment 31



Comment 32



Comment 33

"Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: Let My people go that they may celebrate a festival for Me in the wilderness.” (Exodus 5:1) This can be explained according to what is written in the verse "I was asleep, But my heart was wakeful." (Song of Songs 5:2) This is the idea - every member of Israel should wake with great joy and powerful desire in the middle of the night to contemplate the following. If a king of flesh and blood wanted one to make him a crown, and they were able, and they knew that the king would take great pleasure and delight in this crown, and due to his joy the king would make them one of his intimate ministers, imagine with what alacrity they would arise, rejoicing and glad, to speedily make the crown. They would wipe the sleep from their eyes and neither rain, sleet, ice nor snow would stop them. All the more so this is true of the songs and praises from which a crown is made for the Kinng, king of kings, when they are a product of one's heartfelt will. The verse cries out "worship the LORD in gladness..." (Psalms 100:2) and it is explained in the holy Zohar 'even one who has sinned before their master and must return in repentance, confessing in brokenhearted bitterness, nevertheless must also fulfill "worship the Lord in gladness."' (Zohar 3:8a) The root of the matter is thus - when one prays the midnight fixing (tikkun chatzot) or when they confess, asking for pardon and forgiveness, they should do so with great weeping and bitterness of heart. In the same manner, when one says the songs and praises which were written by the sweet singer of Israel, their soul should ignite with tremendous joy that they merit to make a crown for the King, king  of kings - just as King David said them in joy. It is also true that when one is occupied with Torah that they should be in a state of great joy. It is explained in the Reishit Chochmah (Sha'ar HaAhavah ch. 10) that one who desires to bring joy to their soul should seclude themselves for part of the day and contemplate the greatness of the letters of the four-lettered Name of God. A proof for this can be found in what David said "I have placed the Lord (four-lettered name before me continually...So my heart rejoices, my whole being exults..." (Psalms 16:8-9) This second part refers to the soul (neshama) because the neshama is an emanation from the four-lettered Name as it says "You are children of the Lord your God..." (Deuteronomy 14:1) Therefore when one contemplates the four-lettered name, the soul is illuminated and shines with a wondrous brilliance - this is joy. The power of this illumination has the strength to plant its sparks even with one's flesh, so  that "...even my body rests secure," (Psalms 16:9) meaning that no rot will rule over it. These are his holy words, see there further. According to this our verse is explained  'Thus says the LORD (the four-lettered Name), the God of Israel, from whom the souls of Israel emanate, Let My people go that they may celebrate a festival for Me  - this is as its says regarding Sukkot "You shall rejoice in your festival..." (Deuteronomy 16:14)

Vaera



Bo



Beshalach



Yitro



Mishpatim



Terumah



Tetzaveh



Ki Tisa



Vayakhel



Pekudei



Vayikra



Tzav



Shmini



Tazria



Metzora



Achrei Mot



Kedoshim



Emor



Behar



Bechukotai



Bamidbar



Nasso



Beha'alotcha



Sh'lach



Korach



Chukat



Balak



Pinchas



Comment 1



Comment 2



Comment 3



Comment 4



Comment 5



Comment 6



Comment 7

The Hanochites (Numbers 26:5). And see Rashi (first word: family of) that explains this through David (Psalms 122:4) the tribes of Yah are a testimony to Israel etc. see there. And we have to understand what is hinted at by this testimony being given by the name Yah, precisely. And we can explain through what the Alsheich explained in the verse (Isaiah 51:1) "Look at the Rock from which you were hewn" - because Israel's root is from Avraham and Sarah, and both had no strength to conceive, so the father who gave birth to Israel is the letter Hey of the name of the Holy One of Blessing that was added to Avraham, as to say 'Avram does not give birth, but Avraham does' (Bereshit Rabbah 44:10), and the mother giving birth is also through hey, that changed from Sarai to Sarah (Genesis 17:15). And look, it was explained in the books that the Yud of Sarai was separated into two Heys, and pay attention to this to understand. And it is known that the quarry is called Tzur, and the stones quarried from it are called by the names Sela and Even. And according to this, the essence of the quarry of giving birth s the Yud, and the strength to give birth is the Hey, and the fact that they are double each other should not come to mind, just the separating of the letters: we find [that there is] the essence of conception of Israel, and the strength to give birth to them are both Yud and Hey, Y"ah. And this is the tribes of Yah, just as the branches separated out of the body of the tree, so too they separate out from, and seize, the name Yah; and so the name Yah is written in their families to explicit that they are children of Yah, and from Yah they come out, and not from a different people. And this is the explanation for the verse "And Yah chose for Him Yaakov" [can also be read "And Yaakov chose for him Yah"] and understandm because this is true, with the help of Heaven.

Matot



Masei



Devarim



Vaetchanan



Comment 1



Comment 2



Comment 3






And according to this, the aspect of trust is only relevant to people. For they have choice, such that they deserve reward and punishment, and the Holy One, blessed be He, promised to repay a goodly reward to those who do His will, as it is explained in the holy Torah. But since reward and punishment are irrelevant to the higher beings, since they do not have choice, they do not have the aspect of trust, but rather protection. And this is [the meaning of] that which [Hannah] said, <i>the Lord of hosts</i>. This means that from all the myriad hosts that You created in Your world (and as the sages, may their memory be blessed, expounded (Berakhot 31b) about the hosts that Hannah mentioned [I Samuel 1:11]), fortunate is man. And the reason is that he trusts in You. But with the higher creatures, they do not have the aspect of trust, but rather protection, as mentioned. And what can be taken from this is that trust is irrelevant to those who do not have volitional good deeds with total volition, and they rather only have protection, such that they find their protection with God. But trust is relevant to those who do have volitional good deeds with total volition. And these are <i>the mighty-hearted who are far from charity</i> (Isaiah 46:12), about whom the sages, may their memory be blessed expounded (Berakhot 17b:2). And in my opinion, it is very sweet that the mighty-heart are those with choice (as those who do not have choice do not have a mighty heart that produces mightiness of the heart, since they do not have choice and their hearts are not in their control [see Bereishit Rabbah 34:10], and understand [this]). And according to this, it would come out very sweet — that since they have choice and willpower, they are hence far from [needing] charity. That means "they are sustained by force [of their deeds]," as the rabbis, may their memory be blessed, said.

Eikev



Re'eh



Shoftim



Ki Teitzei



Ki Tavo



Nitzavim



Vayeilech



Ha'Azinu



V'Zot HaBerachah

