II Samuel
שמואל ב
Rabbi Mike Feuer, Jerusalem Anthology
https://www.sefaria.org

II Samuel



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5






And the king and his men went to Jerusalem to the Jebusite[s], the inhabitants of the land, who spoke to David, saying: 'you shall not come here unless you remove the blind and the lame'; as if to say: 'David shall not come here.' 
And David conquered the stronghold of Zion which is the city of David. 
And David said on that day; "Whoever smites the Jebusites and reaches the tower, and [removes] the lame and the blind, despised by the soul of David." Therefore they say; "The blind and the lame shall not come into the house." 
And David dwelt in the stronghold and he called it the city of David. And David built round about from the mound and inward. 
And David grew steadily greater, and the Lord the God of Hosts [was] with him.

Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24
















And the angel stretched out his hand toward Jerusalem to destroy it, and the Lord regretted the evil, and he said to the angel that destroyed among the people, "It is enough; now stay your hand." And the angel of the Lord was by the threshing-floor of Aravnah the Jebusite. 
And David said to the Lord when he saw the angel that smote among the people, and he said, "Behold I have sinned, and have acted iniquitously; but these sheep, what have they done? I beg that Your hand be against me, and against my father's house." 
And Gad came to David on that day, and said to him, "Go up to erect an altar to the Lord in the threshing-floor of Aravnah the Jebusite." 
And David went up according to the word of Gad, as the Lord had commanded. 
And Aravnah looked afar and he saw the king and his servants passing on towards him: and Aravnah went out and he bowed down to the king with his face to the ground. 
And Aravnah said, "Why has the lord my king come to his servant?" And David said, "To acquire from you the threshing-floor, in order to build an altar to the Lord, that the plague be stayed from the people." 
And Aravnah said to David, "Let my lord the king take and offer up what seems good in his eyes; behold the oxen for the burnt-offering and the threshing tools, and the [wooden] tools of the oxen for [fire] wood."
All this Aravnah the king gave to the king. And Aravnah said to the king, "May the Lord your God accept you." 
And the king said to Aravnah, "No; for I will only buy it from you at a price; so that I will not offer to the Lord my God burnt-offerings [which I had received] for nothing." And David bought the threshing-floor and the oxen for fifty shekels of silver. 
And David built there an altar to the Lord, and he offered up burnt-offerings and peace offerings. And the Lord was entreated for the land, and the plague was stayed from Israel.