Mishneh Torah, Blessings
משנה תורה, הלכות ברכות
Maimonides' Mishneh Torah, edited by Philip Birnbaum, New York, 1967
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH002108864

Mishneh Torah, Blessings



Chapter 1

It is a biblical positive command to recite grace after meals, as it is written: "When you have eaten your fill, bless the Lord your God" (Deuteronomy 8:10). One is biblically obligated to recite the grace only when sated, since it is written <i>when you have eaten your fill, bless</i>. But on rabbinic grounds, one is to recite grace after eating anything the size of an olive.
By rabbinical enactment, one should recite a blessing before enjoying any food. He should even recite a blessing before eating or drinking anything at all. So too, one should recite a blessing before enjoying a sweet fragrance. Whoever enjoys anything without a blessing commits sacrilege. Similarly, by rabbinical enactment, one should recite grace after eating or drinking anything; that is, if he drinks a quarter of a <i>log</i> [equal to the contents of an egg and a half] or eats an olive's bulk. Mere tasting requires no blessing either before or after, if it is less than a quarter of a <i>log</i>.
Just as blessings are recited over food enjoyment, so must we recite a blessing before the performance of each religious duty. The sages instituted many blessings in the form of praise, thanksgiving, and petition, in order to have God in mind constantly, even when one does not partake of food and drink or perform a religious duty.


All blessings may be recited in any language, provided that they are in the form instituted by the sages. If one has changed the formula, he has nevertheless fulfilled his duty, since the divine name and sovereignty as well as the subject matter of the blessing have been mentioned, even though in a secular language.
One should recite all blessings audibly enough for himself to hear what he is saying; but if he did not recite them audibly, he has nevertheless fulfilled his duty, whether he uttered them with his lips or recited them in his mind.
There must be no pause between any blessing and the object for which it is pronounced. If such a pause has occurred, the blessing must be repeated. If the interruption was due to anything pertaining to the blessing, the blessing should not be repeated. If, for example, one recited the blessing over bread, and before eating he said: "Bring salt, bring the cooked food, give food to so-and-so, feed the animals," he should not repeat the blessing.


Anyone who hears a blessing from beginning to end, thereby intending to fulfill his duty, has fulfilled his duty even if he has failed to answer <i>Amen</i>. Whoever answers <i>Amen</i> after a blessing recited by someone else is regarded as if he has recited it himself, provided that the person who recites the blessing is obliged to do so. — —
When many people assembled to eat bread or drink wine, and one of them recited the blessing while all the rest answered <i>Amen</i>, they are permitted to eat and drink.— —
Whoever hears a Jew recite a blessing has to answer <i>Amen</i>, even if he has not heard the entire blessing from beginning to end.— —

Whoever recites a blessing in vain is like one who takes the name of God in vain or swears in vain. It is forbidden to answer <i>Amen</i> after such a blessing. Children are taught the blessings in their regular form. This is permitted, even though they recite the blessings in vain during the study period. We should not answer <i>Amen</i> after them; he who answers <i>Amen</i> after them does not fulfill his duty.

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5


If three eat bread together, they should say an introductory blessing before the grace. It is as follows: if the table companions number from three to ten, one of them leads by saying: "Let us bless him whose food we have eaten." And they respond: "Blessed be he whose food we have eaten and through whose goodness we live." The leader then repeats: "Blessed be he whose food we have eaten and through whose goodness we live."

If the table companions number ten or more, the introductory blessing includes the name of God. The leader says: "Let us bless our God whose food we have eaten." And they respond: "Blessed be our God whose food we have eaten and through whose goodness we live." The leader then repeats: "Blessed be our God whose food we have eaten and through whose goodness we live." And he begins the grace.










If two eat together, each of them says grace for himself. If one knows the grace and the other does not, the one who knows should recite it aloud while the other should answer <i>Amen</i> after each blessing, thus fulfilling his duty.— —

If one joins a group of people who are about to recite grace, and hears the leader say: "Let us bless," he should respond: "Blessed be he." If he hears the table companions answer: "Blessed be he whose food we have eaten," he should respond <i>Amen</i>.

Chapter 6

Anyone who eats bread for which the blessing <i>Hammotzi</i> is required must wash his hands before and after the meal. Even if it is ordinary, unconsecrated bread and his hands are not soiled and he is unaware of any uncleanness, he must not eat until he has washed his hands.— —
Anyone who washes his hands, whether before eating or reciting the <i>Shema</i> or the <i>Amidah</i> prayer, should first say: "Blessed … who hast sanctified us with thy commandments, and commanded us concerning the washing of the hands." This is an enactment by the sages, and we are commanded to obey them, as it is written: "You shall be careful to do according to the instruction which they give you" (Deuteronomy 17:11). No blessing is pronounced over the washing of hands after meals, since it is merely a precautionary measure against danger to health. One should therefore carefully wash his hands after meals.

















One should dry his hands before eating. Anyone who eats without first drying his hands is like one who eats unclean bread.— —

Chapter 7



Chapter 8

Over fruits growing on trees the initial blessing is "who createst the fruit of the tree," and at the end, after the eating, "who createst many living beings and the things they need." The five species of fruit mentioned in the Torah form an exception. They are: grapes, pomegranates, figs, olives and dates. After eating any of these, one blessing is recited that sums up the first three blessings of the grace after meals. Over fruit that grows on the ground and over green vegetables the initial blessing is "who createst the fruit of the earth," and at the end, "who createst many living beings." Over food that does not grow from the soil, such as meat, cheese, fish, eggs, water, milk and honey, the initial blessing is "by whose word all things come into being," and at the end, "who createst many living beings." A person who drinks water not to quench his thirst is not required to say a blessing before or after.









If one took a glass of strong drink [other than wine] and began the blessing, intending to say "by whose word all things come into being," but made a mistake and said instead "who createst the fruit of the vine," he should not be made to repeat the blessing correctly. So too, if he had in front of him fruits that grow from the soil, and he began reciting the blessing "who createst the fruit of the earth" but made a mistake and said instead "who createst the fruit of the tree," he should not be made to repeat the blessing correctly; because when he utterd the divine name and declared the sovereignty of God, the essential part of the blessing, he intended to pronounce the blessing appropriate to that particular kind of food only. Since there was no error in the essential part of the blessing, even though he made a mistake at the end, he fulfilled his duty, and he should not be made to repeat the blessing correctly.

Chapter 9



Chapter 10



On hearing good news, one should say: "Blessed art thou, Lord our God, King of the universe, who art good and beneficent." On hearing bad news, one should say: "Blessed be the true Judge." One is required to bless goodheartedly for the evil, even as he blesses for the good joyously.— —
When a person has attained good fortune or heard good news, even though the indications are that the good will cause him evil, he should say "who art good and beneficent." So too, if disaster has overtaken him, or he has heard evil tidings, even though the indications are that the evil will result in good, he should say: "Blessed be the true Judge." The blessings we recite refer to what has happened and not to future events.





















In sum: One should always pray for what is still to come, and offer praise for past events, lauding and praising as much as possible. The more anyone praises God at all times, the more praise he deserves himself.