Mishneh Torah, Blessings
משנה תורה, הלכות ברכות
merged
http://www.sefaria.org/Mishneh_Torah,_Blessings
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-http://www.sefaria.org

Chapter 1

It’s a positive mitzvah from the Torah to bless after eating food, as it says, “And you shall eat, and you shall be satisfied, and you shall bless HaShem your God.” And there is no obligation from the Torah unless there he is satiated, as it says, “And you shall eat, and you shall be satisfied, and you shall bless,” but the words of the scribes [from the rabbis] [if] he ate even the size of an olive, he bless after. 
According to our sages [also], bless upon all food that we eat in at the beginning and after that the enjoyments from it. And even if one intends to eat or drink anything he wants, he blesses. And after that, enjoy it…. And all the enjoyment in not blessing is misappropriated. It is also a rabbinic saying that one should bless after anything that one eats and whatever one drinks. This is the case when one that drinks 4 milliliters and one that eats an olive-sizes food item. And a taster doesn’t need a b’racha before or after for up to a 4 milliliter taste. 
And like the name that the blessing over the enjoyment thus the blessing over all the mitzvah and the mitzvah and after that do it. Our sages established many blessings, expressions of praise and thanks, and ways of requests in order to remember the creator always even if there is no enjoyment and no positive mitzvah. 
So it is that there are three forms of blessing: blessing for deriving benefit, blessing for fulfilling a mitzvah, and blessing of thanks. Expressions of praise and gratitude and requests in order to remember the Creator always and to see from them. 
And the rites of all blessings were established by Ezra and his Beit Din. And one should not change them and not add to them or subtract from any of it. And all the text formula that the sages formulated in the blessings only tinkers it. And each blessing that doesn’t contain the mentioning of HaShem and Sovereignty is not a blessing, unless it was attached to its fellow blessing. 
And all of all the blessings are said  in every tongue. Namely, one that says like the eye of [the essence of] that which the sages established. And if one changes the formula, since he mentioned the mention [of the Name] and Sovereignty, and the essence of the blessing, even in the vernacular tongue, he has fulfilled his obligation.  
All of every blessing needs to be made audible to his ears what he says. And if he doesn’t cause his ear to hear it he has still fulfilled his obligation, whether it comes out his lips or that he blessed in his heart.  








Anyone who answers “Amen” after his own brachot, such a person is a disgrace. However, if one answer “amen” at the conclusion of a blessing that is the end of a series of concluding blessings, this is praiseworthy. This is the case after “building of Jerusalem” in the Birkat HaMazon and after the blessing concluding the Keriat Shema of the evening. And thus in the end of the end of the bracha that end the concluding blessing in it, he who says “amen” after that.  
Why would one say “amen” after “building Jerusalem” and this concluding the blessings of goodness and making good. Because that this blessing is established from the days of the sages of the Mishnah, and it is as if it was like the Tosefta. But the end of the essence of the blessing of the Birkat Hamazon has “boneh Yirushalyim”. And why does one not say “amen” after the “Ahavat Olam”, which is the last of the first blessings of the keriat shema, and so all are like as though they have fulfilled the obligation in it from the blessing that blessed its praise to speak like the case of the blessings that bless before the keriat Megillah and the lighting of the Hanukkah candles? In order that one not interrupt with an “amen” between the blessing and the subject of the blessing. 

Anyone who eats a thing that is forbidden whether it is intentional or mistaken, there is not blessing over it. Not at the beginning and not at the end. How is this implied? Behold, the tithe of the rabbis, or the first tithes, that the terumah is not separate or the second pledge that wasn’t divvied up as in its proper way. One does not bless and do not need to say if one ate treyf (an animal killed but not in correct kosher slaughter) or niveilah (carrion) or drank wine libations and the like in it. 


Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5


Three that ate bread as one (together) is obligated to bless Birkat HaZimun. Preceding Birkat Hamazon and what is Birkat HaZimun? If they that ate from the three to the ten bless one, from them, and saying “Let us bless because we ate from His” and all answer “Blessed be for we have eaten from that which is His, and by His goodness, we live.” And he responds and blesses “Blessed be for we have eaten from that which is His, and by His goodness, we live.”

Chapter 6



Chapter 7






Two wait for each other [to take from] the plate. Three don't wait. If two of the three finished, the third stops with them. If one of them finished, the [other] two don't stop, but instead, keep eating until they finish. We don't converse during a meal, so as not to come to danger. And therefore, if wine arrived in the middle of the meal, each one makes his own blessing, since if one blesses  and another answers, someone who says "Amen" while swallowing will come to danger. And we don't look at the face of someone who is eating or at his serving, so as not to embarrass him.

Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10








Four [categories of people] are required to give thanks [with Birchat haGomel]: A sick person who was healed, a prisoner who was released, someone who went to sea upon reaching dry land, and a traveler upon reaching a settlement. All of these must give thanks in front of ten Jewish men, two of whom must be scholars as it says "Let them exalt Him also in the assembly of the people, and praise Him in the seat of the elders." And this is [the formula for] how he gives thanks: "Blessed are You, O God, King of the Universe who does good to the undeserving and has done me only good" and everyone answers "May He who as done you good grant you only good forever."

Chapter 11









Any [performance of positive] commandments that comes from time to time (i.e. during the calendar year), such as shofar, sukkah, lulav, reading of the megillah, lighting of Hannukah candles, as well as any [positive] commandment that involves personal acquisition, such as tzitzit, tefillin, mezuzah, installment of a railing, as well as a [positive] commandment that is not routine and is not available to perform at any time, as it is similar to a [positive] commandment that comes from time to time, such as the circumcision and redemption of one's son, a "shehechiyanu" blessing is said on the [positive] commandment at the time it is performed. And if one did not make the blessing on sukkah and lulav and the like at the time the commandment was performed, one may make the "shehechiyanu" blessing at the time that his obligation to perform the commandment is fulfilled and similarly for like cases.