Mishneh Torah, Blessings
משנה תורה, הלכות ברכות
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Mishneh Torah, Blessings



Chapter 1

It’s a positive mitzvah from the Torah to bless after eating food, as it says, “And you shall eat, and you shall be satisfied, and you shall bless HaShem your God.” And there is no obligation from the Torah unless there he is satiated, as it says, “And you shall eat, and you shall be satisfied, and you shall bless,” but the words of the scribes [from the rabbis] [if] he ate even the size of an olive, he bless after. 
According to our sages [also], bless upon all food that we eat in at the beginning and after that the enjoyments from it. And even if one intends to eat or drink anything he wants, he blesses. And after that, enjoy it…. And all the enjoyment in not blessing is misappropriated. It is also a rabbinic saying that one should bless after anything that one eats and whatever one drinks. This is the case when one that drinks 4 milliliters and one that eats an olive-sizes food item. And a taster doesn’t need a b’racha before or after for up to a 4 milliliter taste. 
And like the name that the blessing over the enjoyment thus the blessing over all the mitzvah and the mitzvah and after that do it. Our sages established many blessings, expressions of praise and thanks, and ways of requests in order to remember the creator always even if there is no enjoyment and no positive mitzvah. 
So it is that there are three forms of blessing: blessing for deriving benefit, blessing for fulfilling a mitzvah, and blessing of thanks. Expressions of praise and gratitude and requests in order to remember the Creator always and to see from them. 
And the rites of all blessings were established by Ezra and his Beit Din. And one should not change them and not add to them or subtract from any of it. And all the text formula that the sages formulated in the blessings only tinkers it. And each blessing that doesn’t contain the mentioning of HaShem and Sovereignty is not a blessing, unless it was attached to its fellow blessing. 
And all of all the blessings are said  in every tongue. Namely, one that says like the eye of [the essence of] that which the sages established. And if one changes the formula, since he mentioned the mention [of the Name] and Sovereignty, and the essence of the blessing, even in the vernacular tongue, he has fulfilled his obligation.  
All of every blessing needs to be made audible to his ears what he says. And if he doesn’t cause his ear to hear it he has still fulfilled his obligation, whether it comes out his lips or that he blessed in his heart.  








Anyone who answers “Amen” after his own brachot, such a person is a disgrace. However, if one answer “amen” at the conclusion of a blessing that is the end of a series of concluding blessings, this is praiseworthy. This is the case after “building of Jerusalem” in the Birkat HaMazon and after the blessing concluding the Keriat Shema of the evening. And thus in the end of the end of the bracha that end the concluding blessing in it, he who says “amen” after that.  
Why would one say “amen” after “building Jerusalem” and this concluding the blessings of goodness and making good. Because that this blessing is established from the days of the sages of the Mishnah, and it is as if it was like the Tosefta. But the end of the essence of the blessing of the Birkat Hamazon has “boneh Yirushalyim”. And why does one not say “amen” after the “Ahavat Olam”, which is the last of the first blessings of the keriat shema, and so all are like as though they have fulfilled the obligation in it from the blessing that blessed its praise to speak like the case of the blessings that bless before the keriat Megillah and the lighting of the Hanukkah candles? In order that one not interrupt with an “amen” between the blessing and the subject of the blessing. 

Anyone who eats a thing that is forbidden whether it is intentional or mistaken, there is not blessing over it. Not at the beginning and not at the end. How is this implied? Behold, the tithe of the rabbis, or the first tithes, that the terumah is not separate or the second pledge that wasn’t divvied up as in its proper way. One does not bless and do not need to say if one ate treyf (an animal killed but not in correct kosher slaughter) or niveilah (carrion) or drank wine libations and the like in it. 

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5

Women and Slaves are obligated in Birkat HaMazon, and there is a doubt in the matter, whether they are biblically obligated because there is no fixed time, or whether they are not biblically obligated. Therefore, they do not fulfill the requirement for adult [men]. But minors are obligated in Birkat HaMazon by the words of the Scribes to teach them the commandments.
Three that ate bread as one (together) is obligated to bless Birkat HaZimun. Preceding Birkat Hamazon and what is Birkat HaZimun? If they that ate from the three to the ten bless one, from them, and saying “Let us bless because we ate from His” and all answer “Blessed be for we have eaten from that which is His, and by His goodness, we live.” And he responds and blesses “Blessed be for we have eaten from that which is His, and by His goodness, we live.”














If one enters a place of others and finds them blessing with Grace After Meals, if  he found the one blessing saying "let us bless", he responds: "Blessed is He and may He be blessed"; if he found the eaters responding "blessed is He from whom we have eaten", he responds "amen" after them.  

Chapter 6

Anyone who eats bread, which we bless ha-motzi [who brings out]" over, requires washing of the hands at the beginning and end [of the meal]. And [this is the case] even though the bread is ordinary [i.e. not consecrated] and even though his hands are not dirty, and he does not know of any ritual impurity regarding them, he does not eat until he washes his two hands. And so too any matter of dipping in liquids - it requires washing of the hands at the beginning.
Anyone who washes his hands, whether for eating or for reciting the Sh'ma or for  prayer, blesses at the beginning, "who made us holy with His commandments and commanded us regarding washing of hands", since this is a commandment of the Sages, [and] we are commanded from the Torah to listen to them, as was said, "according to  Torah which they instruct you" (Deut. 17:11). And latter water [i.e. washing] - we do not bless over it since it is for none other than because of the danger, and therefore a person is obligated to be exceedingly careful regarding it.

















A person needs to dry his hands and afterwards eat. And anyone who eats without drying hands, it is like eating ritually impure bread.  And anyone who washes his hands in the latter [washing] dries and afterwards blesses, and proceeds immediately from washing of hands to Grace After Meals. One does not interrupt between them for any other matter, even to drink water. After he washes his hands in the latter [washing], it is forbidden until  he blesses Grace After Meals.

Chapter 7






Two wait for each other [to take from] the plate. Three don't wait. If two of the three finished, the third stops with them. If one of them finished, the [other] two don't stop, but instead, keep eating until they finish. We don't converse during a meal, so as not to come to danger. And therefore, if wine arrived in the middle of the meal, each one makes his own blessing, since if one blesses  and another answers, someone who says "Amen" while swallowing will come to danger. And we don't look at the face of someone who is eating or at his serving, so as not to embarrass him.

Chapter 8

The blessings to be made upon all fruits of the tree are, before [eating] "...who creates the fruit of the tree", and after "...who creates many souls...", except the five species which are written in the <i>Torah</i>, namely: grapes, pomegranates, figs, olives, and dates, after which one makes the threefold blessing. And on fruits of the earth and vegetables, one makes the blessing, before: "...who creates the fruit of the earth", and after "...who creates many souls...". Things which do not grow from the ground, such as meat, cheese, fish, eggs, water, milk, honey, and so on, before [eating] one makes the blessing "...that all...", and after "...who creates many souls...". And one who drinks water for purposes other than to quench his thirst does not require a blessing, neither before nor after.









The one who took a cup of strong drink in his hand and began the blessing intending to say  "...that all...", but erred and said "...who creates fruit of the vine", we do not make him return  [and say the correct blessing]. And similarly if there were fruits of the earth before him and he began the blessing intending to say "...who creates fruit of the earth", but errs and says "...who creates fruit of the tree", we do not make him go back. And similarly, if a cooked dish of grain was before him and he opened intending to say "...who creates types of foods", but erred and said "...who brings out", he has fulfilled his obligation because at the time that he mentioned the Name and the kingship, which are the essence of the blessing, he had no other intention but for the appropriate blessing for that type, and since the essence of the blessing was not in error, despite that he erred in its ending, he fulfilled [his obligation], and we do not make him go back.

Chapter 9

Just as it is forbidden for a person to enjoy a food or drink before blessing, so it is forbidden for him to enjoy a good smell before blessing. And how should he bless on a good smell? If it was this that it is possible to smell wood or a kind of wood, he blesses "the Creator of woods of incense." And if it was grass or a kind of grass, he blesses "the Creator of grasses of incense." And if it was not from wood and not from the ground, such as myrrh, which is from an animal, he blesses "the Creator of types of incense." And if it was a fruit that is fit to eat, such as a citron or apple, he blesses "Who put good smell into fruits." And on all of  them, if he said "the Creator of types of incense," he discharged his obligation.

Chapter 10












On seeing a Cushite [Rabbinic euphemism for a person of color], or anyone unusual in facial appearance or conformation of his limbs, one says, "Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, King of the Universe, Who variest the forms of creatures." On seeing a blind person, a person with a physical disability, or one afflicted with boils or tetters, etc. the blessing said is "Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, King of the Universe, the true Judge." If the affliction is congenital, the blessing is "Who variest the forms of creatures." On seeing an elephant, an ape or an owl one says, "Blessed be He Who varieth the forms of creatures."

Chapter 11









Any [performance of positive] commandments that comes from time to time (i.e. during the calendar year), such as shofar, sukkah, lulav, reading of the megillah, lighting of Hannukah candles, as well as any [positive] commandment that involves personal acquisition, such as tzitzit, tefillin, mezuzah, installment of a railing, as well as a [positive] commandment that is not routine and is not available to perform at any time, as it is similar to a [positive] commandment that comes from time to time, such as the circumcision and redemption of one's son, a "shehechiyanu" blessing is said on the [positive] commandment at the time it is performed. And if one did not make the blessing on sukkah and lulav and the like at the time the commandment was performed, one may make the "shehechiyanu" blessing at the time that his obligation to perform the commandment is fulfilled and similarly for like cases.