Bartenura on Mishnah Niddah
ברטנורא על משנה נדה
Bartenura on Mishnah, trans. by Rabbi Robert Alpert, 2020
http://sefaria.org

Bartenura on Mishnah Niddah



Chapter 1



Mishnah 1

שמאי אומר כל הנשים דיין שעתן- since Rabbi Eliezer states (see Mishnah 3 of this chapter): “Four women [fall into the category of those for whom the] time [of first seeing blood] suffices,” it is also taught [here]: “Shammai states: For all women [it is] sufficient for them [to reckon uncleanness from] their time [of discovering a flow],” to exclude from [the statement] of Rabbi Eliezer.
דיין שעתן – women who see blood know their time to make unclean/defile people who were pure who came in contact with them at the time of their seeing [blood] and onward, and we don’t say from before this also there was blood and the sides/walls of the womb preserved it and that she was [ritually] impure beforehand, for all women defile in the vagina and even though blood did not come outside, as it is written (Leviticus 15:19): “[When a woman has a discharge,] her discharge being blood from her body, [she shall remain in her menstrual impurity seven days; whoever touches her shall be impure until evening,],” even though it is in her body and did not come outside, she is impure. And the reason of Shammai is that he was not concerned that perhaps before this there was blood, for if you say that certainly he (i.e., the husband) may always have scruples at the time of sexual intercourse and separate himself entirely from his wife (see Tractate Niddah 3b) and it is found that he would make the daughters of Israel idle from [the commandment] of “being fruitful and multiplying.”
מפקידה לפקידה (from the present examination to the last one) – she examined herself today and found herself to be [ritually] pure, but she examined herself at the end of the week and found herself to be [ritually] impure. We are concerned about her contact from the first examination and onwards, lest at the moment she removed her hands, he saw her and the sides of the womb preserved it. But regarding being idle from engaging from “being fruitful and multiplying” we are not concerned, for specifically for [ritually] pure women is that we make them unclean from the present examination to the last one, but not for her husband. But Shammai states, that we also don’t make [ritually] pure women unclean, for if so, he (i.e., the husband) may always have scruples at the time of sexual intercourse and separate himself also from sexual relations [with his wife].
לא כדברי זה – Shammai who is more lenient and doesn’t make a fence for his words.
ולא כדברי זה – Hillel who is much too stringent, for certainly all those many days, we don’t maintain the sides/walls of the womb with blood.
מעת לעת ממעטת על יד מפקידה לפקידה (the term of twenty-four astronomical hours – of retrospective uncleanness – reduces the term of the interval from one examination to the other – i.e., we go by the shorter term whichever it may be) – two times that were mentioned regarding a woman to defile those who are pure retroactively, and we go according to the more lenient that is in both of them. If the period from the present examination to the last one is greater than the period of twenty-four astronomical hours, follow after the period of twenty-four astronomical hours and she does not defile other than those pure individuals that she came in contact with from yesterday at this time. But if the period of twenty-four astronomical hours is greater than from the present examination to the last one, as for example, she examined herself in the morning and found herself to be pure and in the evening, she found herself to be impure, we do not defile any other than those pure people that were from the examination in the morning and onward. And the reason of the Rabbis, is because the Sages ordained for the daughters of Israel would examine [themselves] I the morning and the evening, in the morning to permit/make fit the purity of the night, and in the evening to permit/make fit the purity of the morning. But if she examined [herself] in the morning and found herself to be pure, and in the evening and found herself to be impure, she lost the purity of the day, and this one [woman] who sat many days and did not examine herself according to the ordinance of the Sages, she lost one additional period, because of a fine, and in order to make the standards of the Sages consistent, so that there will be no dispute between whether she examined herself in the morning and where she examined herself in the afternoon, they did not want to distinguish or to eliminate or to add at the time. And they provided a fixed time, a period of twenty-four astronomical hours, to not have a rule that would vary according to circumstance [and not be the same for all. And the Halakha is according to the Sages (see Talmud Niddah 4b).
על יד – after, like )Nehemiah 3:8 – and not as it states, Chapter 3 of Ezra): “Next to them”/ועל ידו החזיק [Uzziel son of Harhiah, of the smiths repaired],” which is like “and after him.”
וסת (regular date/symptoms of menstruation) – fixed , that it was established for her the times of menstruation, and she examined herself at the time of menstruation and found herself to be impure.
דיה שעתה – but we are not concerned that perhaps it was before this time, for certainly menstruation comes at its [set] time.
והמשמשת בעדים – she examined herself with “witnesses,” which are with a sheet prior to sexual intercourse, and after sexual intercourse.
הרי זה כפקידה – In the Gemara (Tractate Niddah 5a) it establishes that our Mishnah teaches two things, and this is what it said: and a piece of cloth used by women for ascertaining their condition of cleanness or uncleanness, that is to say, it is a Mitzvah upon the woman that she should use two pieces of cloth (i.e., literally, two witnesses), one prior to sexual intercourse and one following sexual intercourse. And that is like an examination. And it reduces the term of the interval from one astronomical period of twenty-four hours and through a present examination to a past examination. For you might have thought lest she see a drop of blood like a grain of mustard and it will release an effusion of semen and it will not be like an examination. Therefore, it comes to teach us that this is not the case. But if she had sexual intercourse in the afternoon with “testimony” (i.e., a piece of cloth that she used to examine herself beforehand), and she examined herself afterwards in the evening and found herself to be impure. We do not defile those with purity from her examination in the morning until her sexual intercourse, for behold, at the time of her sexual intercourse she examined herself and found herself to be pure. But even though that she examined herself prior to sexual intercourse it is not considered to be a good examination, for in the midst that she was hurrying to engage in sexual intercourse, she doesn’t bring in/pas the cloth/sheet (i.e., the “witness”) to the holes and slits, an examination with a “witness” (i.e., the cloth or sheet) is a good examination, and is considered like an examination that we mentioned.

Mishnah 2

היתה יושבת במטה ועסוקה בטהרות – but that it doesn’t teach [in the Mishnah] that she was engaged with [ritual] purity and she arose/turned aside and saw it (i.e., a drop of blood). And it (i.e., the Mishnah) teaches that she was sitting on the bed, to inform/teach us that because she has regular premonitory systems of menstruation and she know her regular date, the bed is also pure, as it is taught, “and all of them are pure.” But if she doesn’t have a premonitory system of menstruation, that we declare her unclean from one astronomical period of twenty-four hours to another, the bed would also be impure, like the uncleanness of a menstruant woman that defiles a more serious uncleanness to defile a man and to defile the clothing that is upon him.
אע"פ שאמרו – that a woman who does not have a premonitory system of menstruation renders unclean [whatever she has touched] during the preceding twenty-four hour period.
אינה מונה – [she doesn’t count] the days of her being a menstruating woman other than from the time that she saw it (i.e., the drop of blood).

Mishnah 3

ארבע נשים דיין שעתן – that the don’t regularly see blood.
אבל הלכה כרבי אליעזר – and this is what comes out from the Gemara (Tractate Niddah 7b) that the Halakha is according to Rabbi Eliezer.

Mishnah 4

משיוודע עוברה – at the end of three months from the day that she became pregnant.
עד שתגמול – until will be completed for her son twenty-four months (i.e., two years). And even if he died within twenty-four months, sufficient for her is her time, for the woman who gives birth (and has been in confinement), her limbs are loose/shaky and her full strength (literally, “her blood”) doesn’t return until after twenty-four mouths (see Talmud Niddah 9a). But from then and onward, behold she is like all the women and becomes defiled in the time of twenty-four astronomical hours or from one examination to a previous examination, and even though she is continually nursing four or five years.
וגמלתו או מת ר' מאיר אומר מטמאה מפקידה לפקידה – for he (i.e., Rabbi Meir) holds that blood is disturbed (i.e., decomposed) and turns into milk (see Talmud Niddah 9a). But when she is not nursing, even prior to twenty-four months, the blood returns to its place and returns to be menstruating.

Mishnah 5

כל שעברו עליה שלש עונות – an intermediate-size period is thirty days. And since that these three intermediate-sized periods have gone by for her following her arrival at being close to old age, sufficient for her is her time. And she is called being close to old age, for all who call her: “Mommy, Mommy,” on account of her old age but she does mind.
כל אשה – [every woman] and even one who is not old and for whom three periods have passed and she did not see it (i.e., a drop of blood), sufficient for her is her time.
מעוברת ומניק שעברו עליהן שלש עונות – but not if for whom they have not passed, for it is not like the first Tanna/teacher who said (see Mishnah 4): “Once it is known that the fetus is present,” and a nursing mother once he has been born. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer nor according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 6

ובמה אמרו – that four women [fall into the category of those for whom the] time [of first seeing blood] suffices (see Mishnah 3).
בראיה ראשונה - that she saw it (i.e., blood) as a virgin, and the pregnant woman [once it is known that the fetus is present] and the nursing mother [when her son is weaned], and the old woman after three periods have gone by for her on account of her old age.
אבל בשניה מטמאה מעת לעת – that she has returned to her previous condition that her blood would be found in her.
מאונס – as for example that she got excited and saw it (i.e., blood) or on account of fear, or that she consumed something which stirs up the blood.

Mishnah 7

אע"פ שאמרו – a woman who has regular premonitory symptoms of menstruation sufficient for her is time.
צריכה להיות בודקת – on every day in the morning and in the evening like the other women.
חוץ מן הנדה – from when she saw it (i.e., blood) on day, she is unclean for seven days and does not need an examination all seven [days], for without an attack she is unclean all seven [days].
והיושבת על דם טוהר – for why should there be an examination for her, for even if she would sight it (i.e., blood), it is h blood of purity (i.e., vaginal bleeding experienced by a woman from eight to forty days after giving birth to a boy and from fifteen to eighty days after giving birth to a girl. This blood does not render a woman ritually impure, according to the Torah, even though current Halakhic practice renders a woman ritually impure).
ומשמשת בעדים – even though she has premonitory symptoms of menstruation , she needs to examine [herself] before sexual intercourse and after sexual intercourse [with her husband]. And especially if she was engaged with [ritual] purity, for since requires examination for [ritual] purity, she requires examination also for her husband. But a woman who is not engaged with [ritual] purity, for her husband she does not require examination.
ובתולה שדמיה טהורים – four nights according to the School of Shammai, but according to the School of Hillel until the wound of sexual intercourse should heal, and she does not have to use pieces of cloth (literally, “witnesses”), for her blood is pure, and if the appearance of her blood has changed, for since she engaged in sexual intercourse, for on account of sexual intercourse, it changed, but in the morning and in the evening , she requires examination where she didn’t engage in sexual intercourse after the first coition, lest the appearance of her blood changed from her first coition. But if her blood changed in appearance, she is impure/unclean, for we are accustomed to speak where this is not the blood of a virgin.
שחרית ובין השמשות – in the morning to pronounce fit/kosher the purities of the night, that if she would find herself to be pure, she would know that she didn’t see it (i.e., blood) in the night, and when she minds in the evening that she is impure/unclean, these leave the realm of doubt, and similarly at twilight to pronounce fit/kosher the purities that she was engaged in during the daytime.
ובשעה שהיא עוברת לשמש את ביתה - when she prepares herself to engage in sexual relations with her husband.
רבי יהודה אומר אף בשעת עברתן מלאכול מתרומה – even after they have consumed heave-offering/the priest’s due (i.e., if her husband is a Kohen), she needs to examine herself, to repair the remnants of heave-offerings that are before her that if she finds now as [ritually] pure., when she examines in the evening according to her appropriate manner and she finds that she is impure, there will not be remnants of the heave-offering at all that were retroactively impure, for she examined herself after finishing. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Chapter 2



Mishnah 1

כל היד המרבה לבדוק – that always examines [herself] lest she see it (i.e., blood).
ובאנשים – [a man] who always examines himself in his membrum virile (see Tractate Niddah 13a), lest his emission went out from him.
תקצץ (should be cut off) – who warms himself and feels his membrum virile when he warms himself (i.e., masturbates), and removes/spills semen in vain.
וסומא – but it is not Mishnah and is inoperative/suspended, but rather, she examines herself and shows it to her friends.
ושנטרפה דעתה (confused, not fully conscious) – on account of illness.
מתקינות אותן – they examine them (i.e., those who are confused/not fully conscious) and immerse them [as needed].
And this is the reading: הצנועות מתקנות להן שלישי לתקן את הבית – that is to say, to examine before sexual intercourse and to prepare herself for her husband, and the same law applies for all women as is taught in the first chapter [of Tractate Niddah] and at the time that she passes to passes to have intercourse with her husband, for it (i.e., the Mishnah) took [the terminology], "צנועות"/modest (i.e., pious) the cloth (literally, “the witness”) that she examines herself before this intercourse she does not examine herself with it for another intercourse because it is soiled/filthy and dull/shaded in its white appearance with the first examination, and furthermore, the drop [of blood] like mustard is not seen.

Mishnah 2

נמצא על שלו – even if he waited a long time after coition prior to wiping, it is known that there was blood at the time of sexual intercourse.
טמאין – both of them (i.e., the husband and the wife) are defiled for seven days, like the law of someone who has intercourse with a menstruant woman.
אותיום – immediately, and there is no [term] similar to this in the Mishnah.
טמאים מספק – both of them are impure for seven days. But however, it is a doubtful impurity [in that she doubtfully saw blood at the time of intercourse and/or didn’t see blood at the time of intercourse, but only after the sexual intercourse) leaves it in abeyance but not to burn [a sin-offering].
ופטורים מן הקרבן – from a regular sin-offering, but they are liable for an uncertain guilt-offering [brought by one who is uncertain as to whether he committed a sin that requires a sin-offering; it was also called the guilt-offering of the pious].

Mishnah 3

ותדיח את פניה – wiping that of her face, i.e., her pubic area.
ואח"כ – meaning to say, if she delayed more than this measure [of time] (see Talmud Niddah 14b).
מטמאה מעת לעת- [ritually] pure things that she was engaged with. Like the law of checking every astronomical period of twenty-four hours as we stated in the first chapter (Mishnah 1).
ואינה מטמאה את בועלה –[she does not impart uncleanness to him who had sexual relations with her] for a defilement of seven days, but rather, the defilement of one evening, according to the law of anyone who comes in contact with a menstruant woman.
ר' עקיבא אומר אף מטמאה את בועלה – that Rabbi Akiva holds that every astronomical period of twenty-four hours she defiles the person who had sexual relations with her a doubtful seven day period of defilement. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Akiva.
ומודים חכמים לר' עקיבא ברואה כתם (a blood stain on part of her clothing where it is attributable to uterine bleeding) – and even though that in the defilement of an astronomical period of twenty-four hours the Sages stated that she does not defile the person who had sexual relations with her because the defilement of an astronomical period of twenty-four hours is not other than only from the Rabbis, they agree with regard to seeing a blood stain on her clothing, that even though the defilement of a blood stain is according to the Rabbis, it defiles the person who had sexual relations with her a seven day period of [ritual] defilement.

Mishnah 4

כל הנשים בחזקת טהרה לבעליהן – and he doesn’t need to ask her if she is [ritually] pure. And these words [apply], when he left her in a presumption/state of [ritual] purity.
הבאין מן הדרך נשיהן להן בחזקת טהורה – When they come from the road, their wives are presumed to be in a state of purity. You might have thought that this applies only when the husband is in the city with his wife, as she can check herself and verify her status; but when the husband is not in the city and she cannot check herself, maybe the presumption would not apply. This teaches us that even in such a situation, her status is still presumed to be pure.
Two pieces of cloth for every sexual intercourse. One before and one afterwards, and on the morrow, she will examine them (see Tractate Niddah 15a).
או תשמש לאור הנר – and she will heck after sexual intercourse until she wipes herself with it (i.e., the cloth).
דיה בשני עדים כל הלילה – one prior to the first sexual intercourse, and one after the final sexual intercourse. But even though that she did not know if she had seen blood between one and the other [act of sexual intercourse], whether according to the School of Shammai or whether according to the School of Hillel, it does not matter to us, for it was not needed other than for matter of [ritual] purity.

Mishnah 5

החדר והעליה והפרוזדור – the inner part of the female genitals/upper end of the vagina/uterus {חדר) from within, and the forepart of the female genitals/lower end of the vagina/uterus(פרוזדור) from without, both of them are one next to the other, with the inner part of the female genitals/upper end of the vagina/uterus(חדר) to the side in back of it, and the lower end of the vagina/uterus in front of it, and an upper chamber (עליה) built o top of both of them, and there is an hole/perforation (נקב) between it and the lower end of the vagina/uterus called a לול/a passage from the vestibulum vaginae, and sometimes blood comes from the upper chamber to the lower end of the vagina/uterus (פרוזדור) via the passage from the vestibulum vaginae (לול) . And the sides/walls of the womb are below in the middle of the lower end of the vagina/uterus (פרוזדור) and through there the blood exits.
דם החדר טמא – that is the interior of the womb from where the menses are discharged (המקור) .
ספיקו טמא – it is [ritually] impure from doubt of a definite impurity/defilement.
שחזקתו מן המקור – but we don’t say that perhaps it (i.e., the blood) comes from the upper chamber (עליה) for the blood of the upper chamber is pure, but they made it as if it definitely comes from the interior of the womb where the menses are discharged(המקור) . But these words [apply] when it is found from the vestibulum vaginae (לול) and internally to the side of the upper end of the vagina/uterus(חדר) , but if it (i.e., the blood) is found from the vestibulum vaginae (לול) and outwards, it is not impure a definitive defilement to burn it - but it is a doubtful defilement to hold it in abeyance, for two [types] of blood go out through that passage – the blood of the upper end of the vagina/uterus (חדר) and the blood of the upper chamber (עליה) – and we don’t know which comes (see also Maimonides’ Mishneh Torah, Hilkhot Issurei Biah, Chapter 5, Halakhot 3-5).

Mishnah 6

חמשה דמים טמאים – in Scripture it is written "דמיה"/her blood - twice regarding the defilement of the blood that is in a woman (Leviticus 20:18): “and she has exposed her blood flow”/והיא גלתה את-מקור דמיה" and (Leviticus 12:7): “she shall then be pure from her flow of blood”/וטהרה ממקר דמיה and the limitation of her blood is two, which makes four bloods: red, the color of bright-colored crocus, and [blood] which is like water mixed with earth and [blood] which is like water mixed with wine. But the black [color] is included within red, and this we state in the Gemara (Tractate Niddah 19a) this black is red but that it was afflicted by disease.
וכקרן כרכום – like the appearance of the splendor of crocus/saffron, the language of (Exodus 34:29): “that the skin of his (i.e., Moses’) face was radiant.”
וכמימי אדמה – all of them our Mishnah explains further on (see Mishnah 7).
וכמזוג - like red wine that is mixed in water.
וכמימי תלתן – water that they steep in it fenugree. PINKEERIKO in the foreign language.
וכמימי בשר צלי – thin secretion that comes out from roasted meat.
ובית הלל מתירין – There are three disputes in the matter. The first Tanna/teacher who stated that there are five impure bloods and nothing more. He holds that the waters of fenugreek and the waters of waters of roasted meat are suspended, we don’t eat nor do we burn them. But the School of Shammai defiles them, and burns upon them heave-offering and holy things. But the School of Hillel makes them completely pure. And the Halakha is according to the first Tanna/teacher, who suspends them/holds them in abeyance.
עקביא בן מהללאל מטמא (see also Tractate Eduyot, Chapter 5, Mishnah 6) – that he holds that this green is like the color of the bright-colored crocus, but that it was afflicted with disease. But the green that Akavya ben Mehalalel defiles this is like the appearance of the Etrog, but not like the appearance of leek-green stuff, which does not turn to a reddish color at all.
וחכמים מטהרין – and there are three disputes also regarding the green. The first Tanna/teacher holds that we hold it in suspense/abeyance we don’t consume it nor do we burn it. But Akavya ben Mehalalel defiles it and burns it. And the Sages purify it and consume it. But the Halakha is according to the first Tanna/teacher.
אם אינו מטמא משום כתם(if I does not impart uncleanness because it is a bloodstain) – to be considered from among the bloods that defile a woman.
מטמא משום משקה – and considered as blood to make seeds susceptible to receive ritual impurity like all the rest of blood. And it is one of the seven liquids that make the seeds susceptible (see Tracttae Makhshirin, Chapter 6, Mishnah 4).
לא כך ולא כך – it does not defile because of being a bloodstain, nor does it make seeds susceptible [to receive ritual impurity]. But the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yossi, and he is “the Sages” that dispute against Akavya [ben Mehalalel].

Mishnah 7

כדם המכה – like the blood of slaughtered bull which is very red. And at the beginning of the striking/assault of a knife, but not like the blood of all of the slaughtering [process], for the blood of the slaughtering continually changes. And there are those who say, like the blood of the wound of opening of the vein (i.e., the splashing blood).
כחרת (sediment of ink) – like the drop of ink that is at the bottom of the vessel/printer, which is very black, and not like the appearance of the ink at the top of the vessel which is thin/weak and not so black. Another explanation: חרת is ADARMONDIT in the foreign tongue, where they color the leather skins like the blacking used by shoemakers (see Tractate Shabbat 104b), that is deeper than this, which is deep like the appearance of blackness, meaning to say, blacker than sediment of ink.
דיהה (fainter) – that its appearance is faint and not so black. And the same law applies for all the impure bloods, that in all of them, if deeper than this, it is impure, but fainter than this, it is pure, except for mixed wine, that whether deeper or whether fainter, is pure.
כברור שבו (like the brightest shade in it)– that has bright leaves in a reddish appearance more than their andp examine other than in the middle row, and the middle leaf that is in the middle row is more praiseworthy of them all for examination.
מבקעת בית הכרם – a [well -] known place in the Land of Israel whose name is Bet Kerem (see Tractate Middot, Chapter 3, Mishnah 4).
ומציף מים – places water on the dirt, until the water floats on top of the dirt [from Bet Kerem] and we estimate them as turbid, but we don’t estimate them as clear-flowing.
וכמזוג – how?
שני חלקים מים ואחד יין מן היין השרוני – that comes from the land of Sharon, a place well-known place in the Land of Israel. Another explanation: wine that is made from the vines planted in the group of fields/plain and in the valley. It is the language of (Song of Songs 2:1): “A rose of Sharon.” But in this time, all that you see in a woman from the same place, is [ritually] impure, except from the white and the green. And from our days, we did not hear of he who declared pure any appearance of blood, other than only the white and the green of leeks.

Chapter 3



Mishnah 1

מפלת. אם יש עמה דם טמאה – [impure blood] of a menstruant woman.
ואם לאו טהורה – for the first Tanna/teacher holds, that is possible for the opening of the uterus (to pass the embryo) without discharging blood (see Talmud Niddah 21a). And even if blood is found with in the piece (of a shapeless object), it is pure, for it is the blood of the piece and not the blood of a menstruant woman.
רבי יהודה אומר בין כך ובין כך טמאה – for Rabbi Yehuda holds that it is impossible for the opening of the uterus without blood. And since she aborted a piece (i.e., a shapeless object) – it is definitely blood that was there but that it was lost in its limitation, and was not seen. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 2

כמין שערה – hair.
יבחושין (looking like a mass of red insects) – mosquitos or gnats.
תטיל למים – [let her place them into water] – that is tepid, and have them remain in that tepid water for twenty-four hours.
אם נמוחו טמאה (if they dissolve [into blood] – because she is a menstruant woman, that it is blood.
אם יש עמהן דם טמאה – our Mishnah is like the Sages who argue with Rabbi Yehuda above (i.e., in Mishnah 1) that it is possible for the opening of the uterus without blood.
וחכמים אומרים כל שאין בו מצורת אדם אינו ולד – everyone agrees that when it’s body is born in the form of a wild animal, and its face is that of a human, it considered a [human] fetus; its body like that of a human but its face like that face of wild animal, it is a wild animal and this is not a [human] fetus, for we go after the form of the face. They didn’t disagree other than with one for whom part of the face was like that of a human and part of like the face of an animal, and even if most of the face is like that of a human, but one eye that is in his head alone is like that of an animal, Rabbi Meir states that one requires the entire form of a human being, for since it has the eye like an animal, this is not a [human] fetus. But the Rabbis hold, that which lacks the form of a human being at all and even doesn’t have part of a human form, is not a [human] fetus, but if he has part of a [human] form, it is a [human] fetus. But the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 3

שפיר (sac of a fetus) – a piece of flesh. If it has the form of a human being, it is called a fetus having an articulated shape. But I heard that it is like an egg-shell, therefore it is called a sac.
מלא גנינים ( see Tractate Niddah 24b) – [an abortion consisting of] a bag full of many-colored substance. Another explanation: גנינים are worms, that the piece of flesh is cut into many thin pieces similar worms.
אינה חוששת לולד – she is not defiled by giving birth. But if there is no blood with them, she should not worry even because of being a menstruating woman.
תשב לזכר ונקבה impure for two weeks like a woman who gives birth to a female. But she doesn’t have blood of purity (i.e., vaginal bleeding experienced by a woman from eight to forty days after giving birth to a boy and from fifteen to eighty days after giving birth to a girl), other than thirty-three days like a woman who gives birth to a male, for since it is not known/recognized if it is a male or a female, we place upon her the stringencies of the male and the stringencies of a female.

Mishnah 4

סנדל – a piece of flesh made like the shape of the tongue of a bull. And because it has the form of a sandal, we call it a sandal. And it customarily comes with the fetus. But there are those who explain, "סנדל" that it is becoming [as] a fetus [one must say, and poor}.
שליא – like a skin/membrane that was fetus is lying within it. And its beginning is like the thread of woof [which is thicker than that of the warp – see Tractate Niddah 35a] (i.e., the latitudinal direction), but when it expands wider like a lupine and hollowed like a trumpet. But the placenta is not less than a handbreadth.
הבית טמא – because of the tent of the deceased, for a [human] fetus was in it and died.
נימוק הולד (the fetus was mashed) – and the it became blood and was combined with the blood of birth and was nullified in the majority. But the house is not impure. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.

Mishnah 5

תשב לזכר ונקבה – she is [ritually] impure for two weeks like [the birth of] a female, and her days of purity are only thirty-three like [the birth of] a male.
טומטום וזכר – as for example that she gave birth, one whose sexual organs are concealed or a hermaphrodite, and the other is a definite male.
תשב לזכר ולנקבה – but we don’t say that from this definite male [child], this other one is also a male.
תשב לנקבה בלבד – and even if it is one whose sexual organs are concealed is a male, we follow after the females, for all the days of a male, whether for [ritual] impurity or whether for purity they are absorbed within that of the female.
מחותך – limb by limb.
מסורס – the language of opposite, like [Tractate Bava Batra 119b]: “invert the order in which the persons are mentioned in that verse (in reference to Numbers 27:2) and interpret it.
משיצא רובו הרי הוא כילוד – and his head is like the majority. Therefore, when the head of someone who is cut up by limbs comes out, even though all the rest of the body is inside, it is like it is born.
פחדתו – his forehead.

Mishnah 6

ואין ידוע מה הוא – if it is a male or a female.
תשב לזכר ולנקבה – the days of purity of a male, and the days of [ritual] impurity of a female.
לזכר ונקבה ולנדה – meaning to say, that when you see that she is a menstruant woman, that she doesn’t have the days of purity, for perhaps it is not a fetus. And she immerses [in a Mikveh] at the conclusion of forty days like when she gives birth to a male [child] according to the one who states that ritual immersion at its appropriate time is a Mitzvah. And she immerses a long day, she needs another ritual -immersion at the end of the fortieth [day], and this is needed for immersion at the conclusion of forty days like one who gives birth to a male [child], even though this immersion does not have any effect upon her whatsoever, for she is not pure for Holy Things and for the Temple until her fulfillment of eighty days like giving birth to a female [child],

Mishnah 7

המפלת ליום ארבעים – of her ritual immersion.
אינה חוששת לולד – that she did not cause his formation until the completion of all forty days.
ולנדה - when she sees [blood], she will be a menstruant woman, for perhaps there isn’t a [human] fetus [after all], and there aren’t the days of purity.
יום ארבעים ואחד תשב לזכר – seven days of impurity. Even with her giving birth dried up/withered she is not a menstruant woman. But two weeks [after giving birth to] a female [child], she does not sit, as the reason is taught that the formation of a female is [after] eighty-one days. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yishmael.
וחכמים אומרים כו' – The Sages are the first Tanna/teacher, but because that the reason of Rabbi Ishmael makes more sense than the first Tanna/teacher, Rabbi [Judah the Prince] retracted and taught it in the language of the Sages, to teach us that the Halakha is according to the first anonymous teaching, and even though there is the dispute of Rabbi Yishmael at its side.

Chapter 4



Mishnah 1

בנות כותים נדות מעריסתן – from their youth, when they are placed in the cradle, the Rabbis decreed concerning them that they defile on account of being menstruating women, as it is written (Leviticus 15:19): “When a woman has a discharge”/ואשה כי-תהיה זבה. And it is taught in a Baraita: I do not have [from this verse] anything other than a woman when she is an adult, from where do I learn that a baby one-day old is a menstruant woman? The inference teaches us: "ואשה"/when a woman. But the Cutheans (i.e., Samaritans) do not expound upon [the difference between]"אשה" "ואשה" - a woman, when a woman, for when they see them as minors (i.e., babies), they do not separate/set them aside, therefore, the Rabbis decreed concerning it that all of them [at whatever age] defile.
מטמאין משכב התחתון כעליון (they convey uncleanness to a couch beneath as to a cover above-see also Tractate Kelim, Chapter 1, Mishnah 3) – what is below that of someone who has sexual intercourse with a menstruating woman is unclean/impure just as that which is above a person with gonorrhea/זב, that just as what is above a person with gonorrhea does not defile anything other than foods and liquids, even that which is below the person having sexual intercourse with a menstruating woman does not defile anything other than foods and liquids. And that which is above the person with gonorrhea is that which is removed from upon the person with gonorrhea, we derive from Scripture that he does not defile a person and/or utensils but only food and liquids, as it is written (Leviticus 15:10): “whomever touches anything that was under him shall be impure [until evening],” what is תחתיו/under him? If you were to say that which is underneath the person with gonorrhea/זב – he derives from everything that he would touch when lying down, but the person who comes in contact with anything where the person with gonorrhea is below him becomes defiled, and since we do not combine them and write, “and anyone who comes in contact with everything that is below him and who carries them should wash his clothing,” and we make the religious ruling concerning him that he defiles, it follows that this, “and he defiles,” does not speak of people and utensils, but rather [only] foods and liquids. But Cutheans who engage in having sexual relationships with menstruating women, defile food and liquids that are lying underneath them , but not humans or utensils, like as to a cover above of a person with gonorrhea that he also defiles food and liquids but not a person or utensils. And all of these things were not stated other than at the time when the Cutheans uphold the Torah and are punctilious in many of the commandments like Israelites. But after they (i.e., the Rabbis) examined and found with them [things] like the image of a pigeon at the top of Mount Gerizim that they worship, they made them like complete heathens for all of their things, whether for matters of [ritual] impurity and purity or for the rest of the laws of the Torah, there is no difference between them and between heathens at all.
והן יושבות על כל דם (continue unclean for any sort of blood) – meaning to say, therefore, the Cuthians engage in sexual intercourse with menstruating women, therefore, they continue [to be] unclean for any sort of blood, for all blood that she sees, whether red whether green, she continues unclean for it the days of the menstruant woman, and this is a snare/stumbling block for them, that if she sees green blood today, she begins to count from today seven days of menstrual uncleanness , but if she sees during those actual days of menstrual uncleanness red blood, she does not count other than from the first sighting, but that blood was pure, and from the second sighting she needs to count.
ואין חייבין עליהן - a person who wears or covers [himself] with those clothing and enters into the Sanctuary, is exempt from a sacrifice. Or if those clothing of their couch came in contact with heave-offering, we suspend them.
מפני שטומאתן ספק – for we don’t know if she is a menstruating woman or not. But in the Gemara (Tractate Niddah 33b) it raises an objection on our Mishnah from that which is taught inTractate Tohorot, Chapter 4 (Mishnah 5): “On account of six matters of doubt do they burn the heave-offering,” [and one of them is] “because of a doubt concerning the clothing of a common, uneducated person [who is not punctilious in the observance of the laws of ritual purity],” that is to say on the clothing of a common, uneducated person if they came in contact with it (i.e., heave-offering), it is burned, because perhaps it was [ritually] impure, and this Cuthean also, we derive it that if his couch came in contact with heave-offering, it would be burned, because he is a common, uneducated person, and he has the clothing of a common, uneducated person. And it (i.e., the Talmud) responds that our Mishnah speaks regards a Cuthean who immersed [in a ritual bath] in our presence and came up [from the Mikveh] and tread upon the clothing of a member of the group dedicated to the precise observance of the Mitzvot (i.e., a חבר) who is naked, or that he wore the clothing of a member of the group dedicated to the precise observance of the Mitzvot, or immersed his clothing in his presence (i.e., of the member of the group dedicated to the precise observance of the Mitzvot) in a manner whereby the clothing of the Cuthean when they are trodden upon [from a person with gonorrhea immediate treading, leaning against] did not come in contact with the clothing of the member of the group dedicated to the precise observance of the Mitzvot when he treated upon him, and afterwards, the clothing of the member of the group dedicated to the precise observance of the Mitzvot that the Cuthean tread upon them with heave-offering, we don’t burn the heave-offering on their account. For if it was because of the ritual impurity of the common, uneducated person, he would immerse himself. But if it was because of someone engaging in sexual intercourse with a menstruating woman, perhaps he did not engage in close sexual contact, and the days of his [ritual] impurity had already passed and the ritual immersion is effective. But if you wish to say that he engaged in close sexual contact, perhaps his wife was not continuing unclean for any sort of blood, but rather only on pure blood, and this is a compound uncertainty, and we on a compound uncertainty, we don’t burn the heave-offering.

Mishnah 2

פירשו ללכת בדרכי ישראל הרי הן כישראליות – but undefined, they are like Cuthean women.
ר' יוסי אומר לעולם הן כישראל – but undefined, they are like Israelite women. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 3

דם מכרית וכו' בית שמאי מטהרין – but even though that [regarding] her spit and her urine, the School of Shammai agrees with the Sages that decreed upon them to be like those with gonorrhea for all their matters, even so, her blood is pure, for the Rabbis reserved for her that it would be a means of recognition of their Rabbinic [ritual] impurity, in order that they would not burn heave-offering or Holy Things upon them.
ודם טהור של מצורעת – but even though that the discharges of a woman leper such as her spit and urine are primary sources of ritual impurity like that of someone with gonorrhea, even so, her blood of purity (i.e., the vaginal bleeding experienced by a woman from eight to forty days after giving birth to a boy and from fifteen to eighty days after giving birth to a girl) is pure, for it is not a discharge, for we require that which is similar to spit (i.e., secretion of the mouth) which is formed in globules on being discharged (see Tractate Niddah 56a).
כרוקה וכמימי רגליה – that defile while moist but do not defile while dry. But this recognition is what is used regarding the blood of a heathen woman which defiles according to the Rabbis who decreed upon them that they would be like those with gonorrhea for all their matters, whereas the Israelite women (i.e., Jewish women) blood defiles moist and dry, and that of the heathen [which defiles] moist but not dry, like her spit and her urine that do not defile dry. But the blood of a woman leper also, even though her blood is not an issue/spring, she has the law of a spring upon her, for the All-Merciful included her from Scripture as it is written for a male, to include the leper to his discharge/issue and for the female, to include the female leper to her discharge/issue, and we state that her discharge/issue is suspicious, for if you wish you can say the rest of the discharges, we derive it from the male, and since we include the [male] leper to his discharges, we include the female leper with her discharges, for there is something analogous to it in the male, but to her blood, there is nothing [like it] in the male, for since the All-Merciful included her blood, that it would be like her spit and like her urine, if so, just as her spit and her urine defile moist and don’t defile when dry, so too her blood is like this.
דם היולדת- that passed the days of [ritual] defilement of a menstruant woman who did not immerse [as yet in the Mikveh].
בית שמאי אומרים כרוקה וכמימי רגליה - it defiles when moist but does not defile when dry. But even though it is blood of purity, the All-Merciful ties it to days but these were filled, but not to make it defiled also because of a discharge because it doesn’t form globules on being discharged, nevertheless, the Rabbis decreed [ritual] defilement upon her, for since she did not immerse [in a Mikveh], she is [ritually] impure/defiled, as a decree that after seven [days] is like within seven [days]. But however, it was not decreed that that it would be defiled [both] moist and dry like before the seven [days], for just as there is recognition that they knew that his defilement is according to the Rabbis.
ובית הלל אומרים מטמא לח ויבש – for his [ritual] impurity is from the Torah all the time that he didn’t immerse [in the Mikveh]. For the School of Hillel holds that the All-Merciful ties days and ritual immersion, all the while that she didn’t immerse, her blood after the seven [days] is like that of before the seven days.
ומודים ביולדת זוב – it at the time of her giving birth she had a flux, she would need to count seven clean days prior to becoming [ritually] pure, but if she gave birth and didn’t count [seven clean days], the School of Shammai agrees with the School of Hillel that her blood is impure moist and dry even though the seven days following her giving birth to a male had passed or two weeks for a female, for the blood of a woman with a flux always remains in its impurity from the Torah until she counts seven clean [days].

Mishnah 4

המקשה נדה – this is what it says: A woman having difficulties in her giving birth during the days of her menstruating period and saw blood during her labor, she is a menstruant woman/Niddah, for the Torah did not purify the blood of her protracted labor other than during the eleven days of her days of protracted menstruation/זיבה, but the All-Merciful did not purify it during her days of being a menstruant woman/נדה .
קשתה- on account of the fetus for three days during the eleven days of her protracted menstruation/ימי זיבה, and she saw it (i.e., blood) for three consecutive days.
ושפתה (and she was relieved)- that she stood in relief and in comfort from her throes of birth agony for an astronomical period of twenty-four hours on the fourth day.
וילדה (and she gave birth) – and the matter was revealed that the blood that she saw did not come on account of the fetus, therefore, this [woman] gives birth while having a flux. But if she did not have relief close to her giving birth, all of the blood that she saw, was on account of the fetus and the All-Merciful purified her from the blood of flux, as it is written (Leviticus 15:25): “When the woman had a discharge of blood/זוב דמה [for many days, not at the time of her menstrual impurity, she shall be impure, as though at the time of her menstrual impurity, as long as her discharge lasts],” her blood is on account of herself but not her blood on account of her fetus.
לילה ויום – that if she had relief for half of Tuesday and she gave birth during the middle of Wednesday, for she had a period of relief for an astronomical period of twenty-four hours, this is not comfort/relief, unless her relief was for a night and a day after the night, 
like Friday night and its day. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Eliezer.
ששפתה מן הצער – meaning to say, that she was relieved that we stated [in the Mishnah], that she had relief from the pain even though she didn’t have relief from the blood, it is relief.

Mishnah 5

כמה הוא קשויה – that she does not come to being a woman with a flux with all of the blood that she will see.
אפילו ארבעים וחמשים יום – if she did not have one day of relief near the birth, she didn’t come to protracted menstruation, and she doesn’t give birth while being a woman in flux.
דיה חדשה – it is enough for her if the labor is purified in one month, that is during the ninth month [of pregnancy], for she gives birth while with a flux on account of three days during the eighth [month].
אין קשוי יותר שבתות -that she was not in labor and saw [blood] for three days prior to two weeks, and then had continuous hard labor all of the [two] weeks after that, this is a woman giving birth while in flux on account of the three days that came prior to the two weeks [of hard labor]. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yossi and Rabbi Shimon.

Mishnah 6

המקשה בתוך שמונים של נקבה – as for example, that she engaged in sexual intercourse [after immersing in a Mikveh] fourteen days after giving birth [to a female] and became pregnant and then aborted [the fetus] within eighty days.
כל דמים שהיא רואה טהורים – for all of it is within the completion [of her period of purification], which is the blood of purity.
ור' אליעזר מטמא – [she is defiled as] a menstruant woman/Niddah. For since it (i.e., the blood) came through hard labor, it is not the blood of purity, but rather on account of the fetus that is in her womb. But the All-Merciful (i.e., God) purifies it from her being in flux on account of her labor, but not from being a menstruant woman.
שהחמיר בדם השופי - as for example, the other women giving birth who see three days of relief and then gave birth, is a woman who gives birth with a flux.
היקל בדם הקושי – to purify her from her flux.
מקום שהיקל בדם השופי – to purify her from all defilement, as for example, within her completion [of the period of purification].
אינו דין שנקל בדם הקושי – to purify the blood from all defilements and even from being a menstruating woman.
דיו לבא מן הדין [להיות כנדון] – as for example the labor that is within the completion that [of the period of purification following the birth of a child] that you learn from the undefined period of labor, it is enough to be like that which is judged to be like an undefined period of labor, for just as an undefined period of labor – the woman is defiled as a menstruating woman, so the labor that is within the completion [of that period of purification following the birth of a child] is defiled with the status of being a menstruating woman/Niddah.

Mishnah 7

כל אחד עשר יום – after the seven days of menstruation/Niddah.
בחזקת טהרה – and she doesn’t have to examine herself, for it is a Halakha transmitted to Moses at Sinai (albeit not written down) that there is no distinction between one menstruating cycle to another that is less than eleven days.
ישבה לה ולא בקדה – our Mishnah is deficient and should be read as follows: During the days of her menstruating period it requires examination. If she sat and did not examine herself inadvertently, or she was under constraint, or willfully didn’t examine herself, she is [ritually] pure/clean.
הגיעה שעת וסתה ולא בדקה – even though she examined herself afterwards and found herself to be pure/clean, since she didn’t examine herself at the time of her period, that she is impure/unclean, for her menstruation comes at its [appropriate] time.
במחבא (in hiding) – on account of robbers or an army that comes came to the city. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Meir.
אבל ימי הזב והזבה – the seven clean days that she needs to count.
ושומרת יום – as for example, that she sees [blood] one day or two days during the days of her flux, she does not count other than one day in cleanliness and she ritually immerses [herself] in the evening and is pure/clean to her husband.
הרי אלו בחזקת טומאה – since her fountain was opened up and she saw it (i.e., blood) today, even though it is within the eleven [days], she is on the morrow in the presumption of impurity/uncleanness.

Chapter 5



Mishnah 1

יוצא דופן – a woman [whose womb] they opened through a drug and they removed the fetus and then she healed.
אין יושבין עליו ימי טומאה – seven [days] for [the birth of] a male and fourteen [days] for a female.
וימי טהרה – she does not have blood of purity.
ואין חייבין עליו קרבן – of a child-bearing mother, as it is written (Leviticus 12:2): “When a woman at childbirth bears a male, [she shall be impure seven days; she has be impure as at the time of her menstrual infirmity],” until she gives birth from the place where she emits a secretion at coition.
רבי שמעון אומר הרי זה כילוד (like one born naturally) – as it states (Leviticus 12:5): “ If she bears a female, [she shall be impure two weeks as during her menstruation, and she shall remain in a state of blood purification for sixty-six days],” to include that which goes for from the side (i.e., delivered by Caesarean section). But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.
כל השנים מיטמאות – as a menstruating woman/נדה from when the blood goes out from the interior of the womb where the menses are discharged and reached the vagina/בית החיצון , but even though the enclosures of the womb preserved it and it did not pass outwards. As it is written (Leviticus 15:19): “[When a woman has a discharge,] her discharge being blood from her body/דם יהיה זבה מבשרה,” it teaches that she defiles even though it is still within her body,” and the vagina/בית החיצון is called the place where the limb threshes (i.e., euphemism for sexual contact) at the time of sexual intercourse.
אינן מטמאין עד שתצא טומאתן לחוץ – as is written concerning a person with gonorrhea/בזב (Leviticus 15:2): “When any man has a discharge issuing from his member/איש איש כי יהיה זב מבשרו, [he is impure],” until his flux leaves from his flesh, but regarding someone with a [nocturnal] emission, it is written (Leviticus 15:16 – the printed edition incorrectly lists chapter 22): “When a man has an emission of semen/ואיש אשר תצא ממנו שכבת זרע, [he shall bathe his whole body in water and remain impure until evening].”

Mishnah 2

שנזדעזעו איבריו – that semen was removed from his body.
אוחז באמה – and even though that whomever grabs hold of his membrum virile and urinates it is as if he brings a flood to the world, here since semen was removed, it does not return and he warms himself (i.e., masturbates) to immediately remove more at that time.
ומטמאין – flux and semen,
At a miniscule amount, to a person that it comes out from. But coming into contact [through touching], that person is not impure until he touches a lentil’s bulk (i.e., usually, the standard size, which is the Egyptian lentil. See Tractate Kelim, Chapter 17, Mishnah 8).

Mishnah 3

מיטמאה בנדה – if she (i.e., a one-day-old girl) saw blood.
בת עשרה ימים מיטמאה בזיבה – if she saw it (i.e., blood) on three consecutive days after the seven [days of Niddah menstruation]. For all blood that she sees within seven days is the blood of Niddah/menstruating woman, therefore, it is impossible for her to become defiled through her flux – that is, to become having a large flux until ten days [have passed].
תינוק בן יום אחד מיטמא בזיבה – as it is written (Leviticus 15:2): “When any man has a discharge issuing/איש איש כי יהיה זב [from his member, he is impure],” that teaches about a one-day-old male child that becomes unclean through contact with gonorrhea.
ומיטמא בנגעים – for concerning plagues it is written (Leviticus 13:2): “When a person has on the skin of his body/אדם כי-יהיה בעור-בשרו [a swelling, a rash, or a discoloration, and it develops into a scale affection on the skin of his body],” but a male baby who is one-day-old is a person, for implies a person of any sort [of age].
ומיטמא בטמא מת – as it is written (Numbers 19:18): “and people who were there/ועל-הנפשות אשר היו-שם,” a person of any sort [of age].
וזוקק ליבום (and imposes requirement of levirate marriage) – if he was born one day prior to the death of his brother. But if he was born after the death of his brother, he does impose the requirement [of levirate marriage], as it is written (Deuteronomy 25:5 – though the printed edition lists Chapter 28): “When brothers dwell together/כי-ישבו אחים יחדיו [and one of them dies and leaves no son, the wife of he deceased shall not be married to a stranger, outside the family.],that they had one dwelling [together] in the world.
ופוטר מן היבום (and frees [a sister-in-law from the requirement of levirate marriage) – if he was born after the death of his father and lived one day and die. But all the time that she is pregnant, she is not permitted to marry.
ומאכיל בתרומה – a Jewish daughter that married a Kohen and [he died], and a son was born after his death, she consumes [heave-offering] for him on the day that he was born, as it is written (Leviticus 22:11): “and those that are born into his household may eat of his food”/ויליד ביתו הם יאכלו בלחמו , and we expound upon it that they feed their mother. But if she was left pregnant [when he died], she does not eat for him (i.e., the unborn fetus) until he is born.
ופוסל מן התרומה – as for example a Kohen that had two wives, one who was divorced that he transgressed and married when she was a divorcee and one who was not divorced, and he has children from the one who was not divorced, but servants that fell to them through inheritance consume heave-offering for them, as it is written (Leviticus 22:11): ‘but a person who is a priest’s property by purchase may eat of them”/וכהן כי-יקנה נפש קנין כספו הוא יאכל בו, and he has a son one day from the woman who was divorced [at the time of their marriage] and he is a חלל/son born to a priest and a woman whom the priest is forbidden to marry [and that child is considered an Israelite – and his daughter or widow may not marry a priest], but he has a portion in the servants, but he invalidates all of them from [consuming] the heave-offering, for there is no choice to know to which of them gets his portion, and especially a child who is one-day old who is worthy of inheritance. But all the while that he is not [yet] born, everyone consumes [heave-offering], for there is no claim/possession for a fetus.
ונוחל ומנחיל – and he inherits the mother. If his mother died on the day that he was born, he inherits her. But when he dies, his brothers from his father and inherit from him the property of his mother, but the fetus that is her womb, if she dies pregnant, he does not inherit his mother to transmit by legal succession/inheritance to his brothers from his father, for he died prior to his mother, and a son does not inherit his mother in the grave to transmit succession to his brothers from his father.
וההורגו חייב – as it is written (Leviticus 24:17): “If anyone kills any human being/ואיש כי-יכה כל-נפש אדם, [shall be put to death],” in any case.
כחתן שלם - that they are obligated to mourn over him, and these words, that I am sure about this person that he completed his months [of being alive beyond pregnancy], but if he is not certain about this person that he completed his months [of being alive beyond pregnancy], they are not obligated to mourn over him until he will be thirty-one days old.

Mishnah 4

מתקדשת בביאה – if her father handed her over for this.
ואם בא עליה יבם קנאה – to be his wife for every matter, and he inherits her and defiles her and takes possession of the property of his brother.
וחייבין עליה משום אשת איש – if her father received her betrothal for her from one, and another person came upon her [through an act of sexual intercourse], he is put to death on her account, for her act of sexual intercourse is sexual intercourse.
ומטמאה את בועלה – if she was a menstruating woman/Niddah. But less than this (i.e., three-years and one-day old), even though she dies through contact, she does not defile the person who had intercourse with her because of [the transgression of] a person who has intercourse with a menstruating woman would lead to seven-days of defilement [which does not apply], but because of contact it is defilement for an evening.
תחתון – of a person who has intercourse with a menstruating woman.
כעליונו – of a person who has gonorrhea, which defiles food and liquids, but not persons or utensils.
מן הפסולין – as for example, a heathen and a slave and a descendant of the Gibeonites (see Joshua 9:27) and a Mamzer or the child of a Kohen who married a divorcee.
פסלה – from [consuming] the heave-offering of her father, if she is the daughter of a Kohen.
מכל העריות – such as her father or her father-in-law.
והיא פטורה – because she is a minor and is not liable for punishments.
כנותן אצבע בעין – that he sheds tears and returns to the status that he was, even here, she returns to being a virgin like she was.

Mishnah 5

שבא על יבמתו קנאה- and he takes possession of the property of his brother. But even though it is not a complete acquisition/purchase, it is different here for it is from Heaven (i.e., from the Torah) that it was acquired by him.
ואינו נותן גט עד שיגדיל – if he comes to divorce her, for the betrothal of his brother is a complete betrothal/Kiddushin, but the divorce of this one (i.e., the levir of nine years of age) is not a complete divorce. And especially when he came upon her (i.e., in terms of sexual intercourse) after he had grown up (i.e., reached the age of thirteen years and one day), it is enough for her with a Jewish bill of divorce. But if he had not come upon her after he had grown up, she needs a Jewish bill of divorce and Halitzah (i.e., the removal by he widow of a special sandal from the foot of one of the deceased husband’s brothers).
ומטמא בנדה – if he came upon her while she was in her menstruating state (i.e., Niddah), for his act of sexual intercourse/coition is an act of sexual intercourse/coition in all manners.
ופוסל – as for example, a heathen and/or a slave or the son born to a Kohen and a woman to whom the Kohen is forbidden to marry who is nine years of age who comes upon the daughter of a Kohen , has invalidated her [from partaking] from the heave-offering of her father.
ואינו מאכיל – if he is a Kohen and married an Israelite woman, he does not feed her heave-offering, because his acquisition [of her] is not a complete acquisition. And even if he a levir whose acquisition through this act of coition is as we stated, even so, he does not feed her heave-offering/Terumah.
ופוסל את הבהמה – if the beast copulates with her (i.e., a human) through the testimony of one witness.
נסקלת על ידו – if there are two witnesses.

Mishnah 6

נדריה נבדקין (her vows are examined) – if she knew in the name of whom she took a vow and in the name of whom she dedicated [something to the Temple], her vow is a [legitimate] vow.
נדריה קיימין – as long as she brought forth two [pubic] hairs. And similarly, a male who is thirteen years and one day old, his vows are confirmed, especially if he brought forth two [pubic] hairs.
ובודקין כל שתים עשרה – that you might have though since that as the Master stated, thirty-days in a year is considered a [full] year, where she was that she was examined thirty days prior to [her becoming] twelve [years of age and one day], and she didn’t know how to explain in the name of whom she had vowed, further we don’t examine [her] and she has the presumption of being a minor, this comes to teach us that this is not the case.
קודם לזמן הזה – prior to the beginning of the twelfth year of a female child and [prior to the beginning of the] thirteenth [year] of a male child.
אין נדריהם נדר – for they are minors.

Mishnah 7

פגה – סמדר/in the budding stage, like (Song of Songs 2:13): “The green figs form on the fig tree/התאנה חנטה פגיה, [The vines in blossom/סמדר give off fragrance] Such is the young female child that lacks a sign, neither in the breasts nor in the hair.
בוחל – the fruit that is close to ripening. And it is the language of the Sages. The figs are subject to tithes when they are in that state of ripening called בוחל (see Tractate Maaserot, Chapter 1, Mishnah 2 and Tractate Niddah 47a – which is defined as when their heads grow white). Such is the case when she (i.e., the woman) has the sign of breasts slightly = when it is known that she has brought forth two [pubic] hairs, and she is a young woman/נערה.
צמל – it is the language of an abbreviation/acrostic, that she has fully blossomed/come forth completely. That she has a clear sign in her breasts that she is an adult woman.
בזו ובזו – even when she is a young woman, her father is in possession of everything, as it is written (Numbers 30:4): “while still in her father’s household by reason of her youth.”

Mishnah 8

איזו הוא סימניה (what are her signs of puberty) – it is referring to צמל/the stage of complete puberty in a woman.
קמט – her breasts grew until they are folded a bit upon the chest and they appear as a fold.
משיטו דדיה (that her breasts hang down) – they are larger than a fold.
הפיטומת (when the surroundings of the nipple begin to grow dark) – the top of the breast, like (Tractate Sukkah, Chapter 3, Mishnah 6): ניטלה פטמתו/if the pestle-lie protuberance of an Etrog is taken out.
על העוקץ -point of the nipple that the baby sucks on. And the surroundings of the nipple which is around the point, and all of these signs of puberty when they are appear in a woman, she is an adult. The one in accordance in with the opinion he holds (i.e., for example, Rabbi Akiva) and the other in accordance with the opinion he holds (i.e., for example, Rabbi Yossi), but furthermore, the father has no authority/control over her. But the Halakha is according to the words of all of them in the strictest opinions. Therefore, it one of these signs of puberty appear on her, we judge concerning her the law of an adult woman stringently. But not for a lenient decision, that if she betrothed herself, she needs a Jewish bill of divorce for perhaps she was an adult woman. But if her father betrothed her, she also needs a Jewish bill of divorce, lest she was a young woman/נערה, until there will be in her all of these signs of puberty entirely and then she will be considered an adult woman, whether for leniency or for stringency.

Mishnah 9

והיא אילונית – meaning to say, and it is necessary that they will see I her signs of being a sexually undeveloped woman. For if signs of being a sexually undeveloped woman are not seen in her even though she is twenty-years of age and has not brought forth yet two [pubic] hairs she is still a minor, until she will be thirty-five years and one day old. But if she did not bring forth two [pubic] hairs, then, even though the signs of being an undeveloped woman have not appeared in her, this [woman] is a sexually undeveloped woman. And we explained the signs of a sexually undeveloped woman [at the beginning] of the first chapter of [Tractate] Yevamot (Mishnah 1).
לא חולצת ולא מתיבמת – and she is permitted to marry to any in the market/street, for the All-Merciful freed her, as it is written (Deuteronomy 25:6): “The first son that she bears [shall be accounted to the dead brother, that his name not be blotted out in Israel],” excluding the sexually undeveloped woman, who does not give birth.
והוא סריס – meaning to say, that there appeared in him the sins of being a eunuch/impotent. For if there hadn’t appeared in him the signs of being a eunuch, he is still a minor, until he will be thirty-five years and one day old, for then, even if there didn’t appear in him signs of being impotent, it is known/assumed that he is impotent, since he did not bring forth two [pubic] hairs. But a eunuch does not perform Halitzah, as it is written (Deuteronomy 25:7): “to establish a name in Israel for his brother,” for this one is not the offspring of this one.
רבי אליעזר אומר הזכר כדברי בית הלל – age twenty, if there appeared in him the signs of a eunuch, behold this is a eunuch/someone impotent.
והנקבה – who is eighteen years old, if there appeared in her signs of a sexually impotent woman, according to the words of the School of Shammai. But the Halakha is not according to the Rabbi Eliezer.

Chapter 6



Mishnah 1

בא סימן התחתון - two [pubic] hairs which is the sign of being a young woman.
עד שלא בא העליון – the sign of breasts, and this is בוחל/the [intermediate] stage of female puberty between childhood and full womanhood.
או חולצת או מתיבמת – because she is an adult. That the [pubic] hairs are a prominent/distinguished sign, and we rely upon them.
אע"פ שאי אפשר – [even though it is impossible] for the Rabbis for the upper sign (i.e., breasts) to come without the lower one (i.e., the two pubic hairs), but from when the upper sign comes, even though they examined and did not find the lower one, we state the word that the lower sign definitely came but that it fell off, nevertheless, according to Rabbi Meir, she does not perform Halitzah nor does she engage in levirate marriage. For Rabbi Meir holds that it is possible that the upper sign comes without the lower one, but we rely upon the lower one, therefore she is still a minor and she doesn’t perform Halitzah nor does she engage in levirate marriage. But Rabbi Meir according to his rationale who stated that a male child and a female child do not perform Halitzah neither do they engage in levirate marriage. A male child, perhaps he will be found to be a eunuch, and a female child, perhaps she will be found to be a sexually impotent woman.
או חולצת או מתיבמת – and even if she is a minor, she engages in levirate marriage according to the Rabbis, for they do not concern themselves to the limitation/narrowing qualification that perhaps she will be found to be a sexually impotent woman, for most women are not sexually impotent. However, regarding Halitzah (i.e., the removal of the shoe of her dead husband’s brother who refuses to engage in levirate marriage and spitting in his face), we require that she is an adult, even according to the Rabbis, because it is written (Deuteronomy 25;7), “But if the man/איש does not want to marry his brother’s widow,” in the portion, and we make an analogy of [the situation of the] woman to that of the man. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
מפני שאמרו אפשר לתחתון לבוא וכו' – even though it (i.e., the Mishnah) teaches it in the first clause, it returns and teaches it another time, because it needs to give support to [Mishnah 2 where it states], “similarly, etc.” which is akin to it.

Mishnah 2

כל כלי חרס שהוא מכניס – liquid, when he places it on the water there is in a large incision that the water enters into it, all the more so that if he places the water into it, the liquid departs outside. But there is a small incision that lets it out but does not let it in. And we derive from this that which we hold – that a completely earthenware utensil that was perforated it is not invalid to sanctify in it the waters of the sin-offering [of the Red Heifer], that is, to place within it the water of the ashes of the Red Heifer, until he makes a large incision where the liquid goes in. But if he made a small incision where the liquid goes out, it does leave the category of a utensil and not find fault in this. But always a small incision is not like removing liquid that removes it from the category of being a utensil other than a large vessel which turned out to be defective/unwieldy alone (as for example, its handles being broken off or being cracked, and therefore used as a receptacle for refuse, as a pickling pot or as a receiver of drippings from a leaking vessel), that is broken vessel that is was designated to fill up with water and to use it, if it has a perforation/hold through letting liquid out, it is invalidated from the category of a utensil, for we don’t say, bring another large defective vessel and we will place it underneath this defective vessel to receive the liquid that departs. But a complete vessel that has been perforated while removing liquid is not invalidated from anything, because a person is concerned about it and doesn’t break it, and uses it and he brings the shard of a vessel and places it underneath to receive the liquid that comes out from it. And from here this is the explanation of our Mishnah: All earthenware utensils that are invalidated for the waters of the sin-offering [of the Red Heifer] is invalid for a large defective vessel, but there are those which are invalid for a large defective vessel but are fit/kosher for the waters of the sin-offering.
כל אבר שיש בו צפורן – as for example, an extra claw/finger that are on the fingers of the hand, if it has a fingernail/talon, it is considered a limb. And it defiles through contact and by carrying and in a tent, like a limb that has a bone that defiles in a tent, and even if it lacks an olive-bulk of flesh, for we hold that limbs have no [distinct] measurement.
ויש שיש בו עצם – but it is not considered a limb if it is extra, since it doesn’t have a nail/talon, and it defiles through contact and carrying, but does not defile in the tent all the while that there isn’t on it an olive’s-bulk of flesh. But if it is not extra, it definitely defiles in a tent because of being a limb, even though it doesn’t have a nail/talon and even though there isn’t an olive’s-bulk of flesh (see also Talmud Niddah 49b).

Mishnah 3

כל המיטמא במדרס – the person with gonorrhea. All utensils that is worthy of becoming a primary source of ritual impurity through the Levitical uncleanness arising from a person with gonorrhea’s immediate contact by treading on/leaning against something, as for example a utensil that is designated for lying and/or sitting if a person came in contact with the dead or was defiled in the tent of a corpse. And there is a utensil that completely becomes susceptible to receive all defilements and becomes a primary source of ritual impurity through [contact with] the dead corpse but does not become a primary source of ritual impurity through the person with gonorrhea through lying and/or sitting, as for example, if the person with gonorrhea bent over/turned upside down a Seah and sat upon it, or a field requiring a Tarkav (i.e., a dry-measure, three Kabs) and sat upon it, that very utensil is not impure through treading to become a primary source of ritual impurity, but rather first-degree ritual impurity through its contact with a person with gonorrhea, as it is written (Leviticus 15:4): “[Whoever sits on an object] on which the one with a discharge has sat [shall wash his clothes, bathe in water], and remain impure [until evening],”he who is designated for sitting, excluding this one that they say to him: “Stand and let us our work.” But if he came in contact with a dead corpse, he becomes a primary source of ritual impurity, for we don’t say with someone who is defiled through contact with the dead, “Stand and let us do our work.”

Mishnah 4

כל הראוי לדון דיני נפשות – all the more so is appropriate/fit to judge monetary matters.
ויש שראוי לדון דימי ממונות – as for example, a Mamzer, who is fit/kosher to judge monetary matters but is invalid to judge capital crimes (see also, Tractate Sanhedrin, Chapter 4, Mishnah 2 and the Bartenura commentary on the concluding clause of that Mishnah).
ויש שכשר להעיד ואינו כשר לדון – as for example, a person who is blind in one of his eyes. But our - Mishnah is according to Rabbi Meir who expounds on Scripture, as it is written (Deuteronomy 21:5): “and every lawsuit and case of assault is subject to their ruling/ועל-פיהם יהיה כל-ריב וכל-נגע. He makes an analogy between ריב/lawsuit and נגע/case of assault – that just as a case of assault is not with a blind person, as it is written (Leviticus 13:12): “whatever the priest can see/לכל-מראה א=עיני הכהן,” even a lawsuit is not with a blind person. But the Halakha is not like this anonymously taught [Mishnah], for the Sages dispute on that of Rabbi Meir and state that just as we find that the closing of legal proceedings is at night, even though we can’t see נגעים/people afflicted by plagues/suspected leprosy at night, that is so that a blind person in one of his eyes is fit to judge even though he is not kosher/fit to see plagues/suspected leprosy.

Mishnah 5

כל שחייב במעשרות מיטמא טומאת אוכלים – for there isn’t a thing that is obligated in tithing that isn’t food (see also Tractate Maaserot, Chapter 1, Mishnah 1).
ויש שמיטמא טומאת אוכלים ואינו חייב במעשרות – as for example meat, and fish and eggs, which do not grow in the ground (note: but it should be pointed out that cattle are tithed – see Tractate Rosh Hashanah, Chapter 1, Mishnah 1).

Mishnah 6

כל שחייב בפאה חייב במעשרות – for concerning the corner of the field/פאה, they (i.e., the Rabbis) stated a general principle in [Tractate] Peah (Chapter 1, Mishnah 4): “All that is edible, privately owned, grown in the ground, harvested as a crop all at once (not singly as they become ripe) and can be preserved in storage is subject to [designation as] Peah.” Whereas regarding tithes/מעשר it is taught in the Mishnah [Tractate Maaserot, Chapter 1, Mishnah 1]: “All that is food, cultivated and which grows from the earth is subject to [the law of] tithes.” But, “preserved in storage and harvested as a crop all at once” is not taught. It is found that a vegetable is not preserved in storage and a fig and things similar to them are not harvested as a crop all at once, are subject to the laws of tithes but they are exempt from Peah.

Mishnah 7

כל שחייב בראשית הגז – ewes/sheep and rams alone.
חייב מתנות – the shoulder, the cheeks and the stomach (see Deuteronomy 18:3).
ויש שחייב במתנות – that the obligation of [priestly] gifts is for bulls and goats and sheep (at least one year old).

Mishnah 8

ויש שיש לו שביעית ואין לו ביעור – as for example the things whose roots remain in the ground whether during the months of heat/summer or during the rainy season, like the LOF (i.e., a plant similar to Colocasia, with edible leaves and root, and bearing beans – it is classified with onions and garlic, leaves of the wild LOF and the mint (see Tractate Niddah 51b), which they call NANA in Arabic, and MINTA in the foreign tongue, for since they do not ever cease from the field, there is no obligation to remove them from the house, as it is written (Leviticus 25:7): “and our cattle and the beasts in your land [may eat all its yield],” that all the time that beasts eat in the field, your cattle eats from the house, if the beasts cease from the field, the cattle cease from the house. And all of these that did not cease for the beasts from the field, there is no need to remove them from the house.

Mishnah 9

קשקשת – the clothing of the fish that is attached to it (i.e., scales).
סנפיר- wings that it flies with them, and whatever has scales, it is known that it has fins and there is no need to examine after it further, for it is a pure fish.
ויש שיש לו סנפיר – but it is an impure fish, for it lacks scales.
יש לו טלפים - its hoofs are cloven, for there are no horns other than for pure cattle and beasts.
ואין לו קרנים – as for example, swine, whose feet are cloven but they don’t have horns.

Mishnah 10

ויש שטעון ברכה לפניו ואין טעון ברכה לאחריו – such as ritual fringes/Tzizit, and Tefillin/phylacteries and Mezuzah, Shofar, Sukkah and Lulav, that we recite a blessing upon them before doing/performing them, but they don’t require a blessing afterwards.

Mishnah 11

תינוקת שהביאה שתי שערות – after [reaching] twelve years of age and one day.
וחולצת או מתיבמת – even though that it teaches [in the Mishnah] that she is obligated in all of the commandments that are stated in the Torah, it was necessary to teach, [either] she performs Halitzah or engages in levirate marriage, for you might have thought that [only] "איש"/a man – is written in the portion (Deuteronomy 25:7): “But if the man/איש does not want [to marry his brother’s widow,” therefore a male who is a minor does not perform Halitzah, but a woman, who is not written in the portion other than as (Deuteronomy 25:7): “his brother’s widow/יבמתו” – whether she is an adult or whether a child, performs Halitzah or engages in levirate marriage. It comes to teach us that if she produces/brings forth two [pubic] hairs, it is so, but if not, it is not so. What is the reason? That we make an analogy between a woman to a man.
וכן תינוק שהביא שתי שערות – after thirteen years and one day. And we establish twelve years for a female and thirteen for a male, is not a definitive sign, but rather an estimation/mark.
וראוי להיות בן סורר ומורה משיביא שתי שערות עד שיקיף זקן התחתון – but prior to his bringing forth two [pubic] hairs, he is not liable for punishment. But after he has grown an encircling beard, he is worthy of giving birth (i.e., engaging in sexual intercourse for purposes of reproduction) and the All-Merciful stated (Deuteronomy 21:18): “If a man has [a wayward and defiant] son/בן,” but not one worthy of being a father.
התחתון ולא העליון – meaning to say, which encircling beard did they mention, with the one of the bottom, but not the one of the top (i.e., the beard of the face).
עד שירבה השחור (until the dark [hair] predominates) – that this place becomes darkened from man hairs. And the legal decision is, that the daughter may [express] refusal until she is twelve years of age and one day. But after this time, if she brought forth signs [of her young womanhood], she is not able to refuse. But if she did not bring forth signs, she can continue to refuse and even until she is twenty-years of age and she will demonstrate signs in her of being a sexually undeveloped woman. But these words [apply] when he did not come upon her [sexually] when she was twelve-years and one-day old, but if he came upon her after this time, she is not able to refuse any longer. But even though signs of [her womanhood] had not appeared in her, we are concerned that perhaps she brought forth the two [pubic] hairs and they fell off.

Mishnah 12

שתי שערות האמורות בפרה – for we hold (Tractate Parah, Chapter 2, Mishnah 5) that two black hairs invalidate her (i.e., the Red Heifer).
ובנגעים – a white hair, for we hold in the Torah of the Priests (The Midrash Halakha of Sifra) (see also Tractate Negaim, Chapter 4, Mishnah 4) that the minimum limitation [of the word] שער/hair is [at least] two.
האמורות בכל מקום – regarding a young male child and a young female child.
לקרוץ (to cut, make an incision) - to hold a bit.
שיהו ניטלות בזוג – of scissors, this is the greater measure. And the Halakha is according to all of them for stringency, and when it is cut with a fingernail, it is the smallest measure of all of them, but she does not complain, lest she is an adult woman, but regarding Halitzah, she does not engage in it, until there is the greatest measure of all of them (see Talmud Niddah 52b).

Mishnah 13

הרואה כתם (she sees a dark-red stain [on her clothing or body as an indication of uncleanness]) – that she found a drop of blood on her garment.
הרי זו מקולקלת (she is disarrayed) – she doesn’t know an opening to her menstruating to know when will begin the eleven days that are between one Niddah and the next one (the days of protracted menstruation/flux), for she doesn’t know when it appears.
וחוששת משום זוב -if the three days of [consecutive] blood flow have passed from when she wore this garment, and she found upon it a large blood stain the measure of three pounded beans and more, meaning to say, a bit more than three pounded beans, they were doubtful that perhaps each one of them came on one day, and it would be from doubt a large protracted menstruation/flux, and even though there were found in one place.
וחכמים אומרים אין בכתמים משום זוב (bloodstains are not subject [to the laws of uncleanness] because of Zivah) – In the Gemara (Tractate Niddah 52b) it establishes the matter of the Sages here, as an individual opinion, and stated that it is [the statement] of Rabbi Hanina ben Antigonos. But Rabbi Hanina ben Antigonos admits that if she wore three dresses for girls on three days of her days of flux/protracted menstruation, a dress per day, and she found on each of them a blood stain, that she worries about flux. But one does not have to say that if she saw two days of blood from her body, but on the third day wore a dress that was examined for her and she found on it a blood stain, that it is obvious that she worries about protracted menstruation/flux. But it is not disputed that Rabbi Hanina ben Antigonos is the “Sages” of our Mishnah, other than when she wears one dress for three days from the days of her protracted menstruation/flux and at the end found a large bloodstain the measurement of three pounded beans and more in one place, or even in three [different] places, for he holds that in this case she is not concerned/worried about protracted menstruation, since she did not have blood stains on three dresses. But Rabbi Meir and the Rabbis dispute upon him, holding, that when she found the measurement of three pounded beans and more on one dress, whether in one place or whether in three places, she worries about protracted menstruation/flux. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Hanina ben Antigonos.

Mishnah 14

הרואה יום אחד עשר – which is at the end of the days of protracted menstruation/flux and on the morrow begins the days of Niddah.
בין השמשות – it is doubtfully day which is the blood of protracted menstruation/flux, doubtfully the night and the beginning of Niddah.
תחלת נדה וסוף נדה – in the Gemara (Tractate Niddah 53b) it explains that this is what it teaches: the beginning of Niddah and the conclusion of the days of protracted menstruation/flux. But on the seventh day of her menstruation/Niddah and the beginning of her protracted menstruation/flux. That is to say, at twilight of the eleven [days], if it is night, it is the appearance of the beginning of Niddah, but if it is day time, the blood is the blood of the end of flux. But if she say it (i.e., blood) two days prior to this, she worries because of flux. And similarly, if she saw it (i.e., blood) on the seventh day of her Niddah at twilight, we are doubtful also, if it is night, for the blood is the blood of the beginning of flux/protracted menstruation, but if she saw it two days afterwards she worries because of flux. But if it is day time, her seeing it [i.e., blood) is the end of the days of Niddah/menstruation , and even though she sees [blood] two days afterwards it is not flux.
יום ארבעים לזכר ויום שמונים לנקבה. בין השמשות לכולן – meaning to say on which of these that she should see [blood] at twilight, it is doubtful that it is [ritually] impure blood and doubtful if it is pure/clean blood,, but if she sees [blood] two other days outside of this, it is blood of protracted menstruation/flux from doubt, and she brings a sacrifice which is not consumed, for all who err bring a sacrifice and it is not consumed.
השוטות (the foolish) – to the foolish who do not know when are the days of Niddah/menstruation and when are the days of flux, they are fools.
עד שאתם מתקנים את השוטות – these foolish women who saw [blood] at the doubtful time period.
בואו ותקנו את הפקחות = that see [blood] at the certain hour and they need repair and to explain/separate the days of their watchfulness and their [days of] sexual intercourse, as for example these that we brought in the Baraita (Tractate Niddah 54a): She who sees [blood] one day is [ritually] impure and one day pure all of her days, and she always sees [blood] during the day but not at night, she engages in sexual intercourse on the eight day from when she saw [blood] for the first time, for she is pure, for behold that on the seventh [day] in the evening she immersed [in the Mikveh] and she didn’t see [blood] until the ninth day, therefore, she engages in sexual intercourse the complete eighth day night and day and the night afterwards which is the morning of the ninth day. And she engages in sexual intercourse for four nights out of eighteen days of her first sighting [of blood], for behold this woman will not be ever be a woman with flux/protracted menstruation, since she doesn’t see [blood] for three consecutive [days]. But when she sees [blood] on the ninth [day], she would observe the tenth [day in abstinence from sexual intercourse] and engage in sexual intercourse at night. And then she would see [blood] on the eleventh [day], and would observe the twelfth [day in abstinence from sexual intercourse] and then engage in sexual intercourse at night, that is two. And she would see [blood] on the thirteenth [day] and observe the fourteenth [day in abstinence from sexual intercourse] and engage in sexual intercourse at night, that is three [days]. And then she would see [blood] on the fifteenth [day] and she would observe the sixteenth [day in abstinence from sexual intercourse] and engage in sexual intercourse in the evening, that is four [days]. And on the seventeenth [day] she would see [blood], and she would observe the eighteenth [day in abstinence from sexual intercourse], behold the eighteen days have been completed and she engaged in sexual intercourse for only four nights. Except for the eighth day and its night, the last act of sexual intercourse is not within the eighteen [days]. And on the morrow on the nineteenth [day], when she sees [blood], this is the beginning of her Niddah/menstrual cycle, for the eleven days between one menstrual period and the other have been completed, and she returns to her count as we have stated. But there is more that requires amendment for the days of their sexual relations, and all of it is brought in the Baraita (Tractate Niddah 54a) in the Gemara in our chapter.

Chapter 7



Mishnah 1

דם נדה. מטמאין לחין – as it is written (Leviticus 15:33): “And concerning her who is in menstrual infirmity, [and concerning anyone, male or female, who has a discharge, and concerning a man who lies with an impure woman],” just as a male has flux from her is impure like her, and at the time he has a flux, it is moist.
ומטמאין יבשין – as it is written (Leviticus 15:19): “[When a woman has a discharge], her discharge being blood from her body, [she shall remain in menstrual impurity seven days],” he will be in his condition/status , and even though it dried up.
ובשר המת – it defiles dry, as it is written (Numbers 19:16 -the printed text errs in mentioning chapter 12): “or human bone,” a person is similar to a bone; just as a bone [defiles] when dry, also the flesh [of a dead person] defiles when dry.
והניע (the phlegm) -soft spittle that comes out through shaking. But I heard, secretion that descends from the nose. But they are from the discharges of the man with a flux/gonorrhea which are the primary sources of [ritual] impurity.
והשרץ – as it is written (Leviticus 11:31): “whoever touches them when they are dead [shall be impure until evening],” like they are dead, that is, when they are moist as they were at the time of their death. But all the time that the spinal column exists and the bones are attached to the spinal column, since its form is recognized, it is considered as moist.
והנבלה – as it is written (Numbers 19:14): “[This is the ritual:] When a person dies [in a tent],” similar to death.
והשכבת זרע – that it needs to be appropriate to emit semen.
מטמאין לחין ואין מטמאין יבשין – the flux [of someone with gonorrhea] defiles moist but not dry, as it is written (Leviticus 15:3): “[The impurity from his discharge shall mean the following ] whether his member runs with the discharge [or is stopped up so that there is no discharge],” it is similar to discharge/spittle which is moist. It is like (I Samuel 21:14): “and let his saliva run down his beard.”
והניע והרוק – as it is written (Leviticus 15:8): “If one with a discharge spits [on one who is pure],” and at the time that he spits, it is moist.
וכמה היא שירייתן, (and how long must they be soaked?) – that let us say, it retracts in this measurement that they are moist [once again].
בפורשים מעת לעת – but if more hot water is needed, or more than an astronomical period of twenty-four hours, they are dry (see Talmud Niddah 58a).
ר' יוסי אומר בשר המת יבש – it is pure from defiling with an olive’s bulk. But it defiles a mass of earth from a grave containing a spoonful of parts of a decayed human body which causes uncleanness. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi (see also Tractate Ahilot, Chapter 2, Mishnah 1).

Mishnah 2

מטמא למפרע – all of the pure things that were found in the alleyway [are considered] the private domain concerning [ritual] impurity, and where there is a doubt, it is impure.
או עד שעת כיבוד – because it is the presumption that the Children of Israel (i.e., Jews) examine their alleyways at the time that they are cleaning, and if there had been creeping thing there, he would see it.
וכן כתם שנמצא בחלוק מטמא למפרע – all of the purities that the woman made from the day of . not those that were prior to washing, because it is the presumption that the daughters of Israel examine their garments at the time of their being washed (see Tractate Niddah 58b).
היבש מטמא למפרע – until the time of sweeping. For it is possible to state that after the sweeping it fell.
אבל הלח אינו מטמא למפרע – but until the time that we are able to state that if if fell on that day it is still able to now be moist. But not until the hour of sweeping, if it is a long time, for it is moist, and if from that time it fell, it became dry. And especially with a creeping thing that Rabbi Shimon disputes between moist and dry. But regarding a bloodstain, even moist defiles retroactively until the hour of washing, for one can say that it was dry and water fell upon it. But regarding a creeping thing, one cannot state this, for if blood were to fall upon it, it would have been dismembered (see Tractate Niddah 56b).

Mishnah 3

כל הבאים מרקם – (see Tractate Gittin, Chapter 1, Mishnayot 1-2) – that they are heathens and their blood is pure. But even though the Rabbis decreed on the heathens that they would be like those with gonorrhea/flux for all their matters, they did not make this decree on their bloodstains.
מרקם – between Kadesh and Shur, and we translate in Aramaic: between Rekem and Hagra (a town and province in the desert of Shur).
שהן גרים- and their blood is impure.
וטועים – meaning to say, that they are not that chaste/modest, and they don’t hide their bloodstains. Therefore, we are concerned lest the bloodstains of women [indicate] that they are menstruating/Niddah.
הבאים מבין הגויים טהורים- that the Rabbis did not decree on their bloodstains, since their blood is certainly pure from the Torah.
מבין ישראל ומבין הכותים ר' מאיר מטמא - Our Mishnah is deficient and should be read as follows: From those among the Israelites and the Cutheans are unclean/impure, for Cutheans are true converts and their blood is unclean/impure. Bloodstains that are found in the cities of Israel, that is in an open place are pure, for they are not suspected on their bloodstains and they certainly are reserved/private. Those that are found in Cuthean cities – Rabbi Meir defiles as the Cutheans were suspect on their bloodstains. But the Sages declare pure, for they were not suspected on their bloodstains and were modest/reserved, and we attach/assign this bloodstain to the blood of a wild beast or animal, for if it had been the blood of a menstruating woman, it would not be found in an open/revealed place, for they also are modest/refined like Israel. And the Halakha was already decided for at this time period, they (i.e., the Rabbis) decreed regarding the Cutheans to be considered as heathens for all their matters, and their bloodstains are pure like the bloodstains of heathens.

Mishnah 4

בכל מקום – in an Israelite place.
טהורים – that their presumption is that they are not from the blood of a menstruating woman/Niddah, for they are modest/chaste.
בית הטומאות – the room that the woman use during the days of their menstruation.
קוברין שם – according to hour, in order that they can remove them for another time. And because we don’t know if they removed them or not, they defile in the tent through overshadowing.

Mishnah 5

מאמנים לומר קברנו - for defilement by the dead is from the Torah. And for example, that a Cuthean priest stands there with heave-offering in his hand and consumes it, that we don’t have to be concerned that perhaps it is impure heave-offering. But without this they are not believed, for they lack (Leviticus 19:14): “or place a stumbling-block before the blind,” and they don’t care if we end up sinning through their mouths.
אם בכרה – and that we see [him] working and shearing it (i.e., the cattle), for if he didn’t know that it is not a firstling, he didn’t transgress that which is in the Torah, as it is written (Deuteronomy 15:19): “you must not work your firstling ox or shear your firstling sheep.”
נאמנים על ציון קברות – to put up a mark to indicate the place of the grave and we rely on them and even though it is from the Rabbis, since it is written, we are careful, as it is written (Ezekiel 39:15): “any one of them who sees a human bone shall erect a marker beside it.”
לא על הסככות – a tree (with a seat of uncleanness on one of its boughs throwing a shadow (forming a tent) over the ground and its branches/foliage are separated and it is known that there is definitely a grave under one of the tents, but it is not known which it is, and a Cuthean comes and testifies on one that this is pure, he is not believed, because he is not concerned with that which is doubtful.
ולא על הפרעות – large protruding stones from the fence and a grave is under one of them and we don’t know which of them, and a Cuthean comes and testifies on part of them that they are pure.
אינו נאמן – because he is not concerned about something doubtful.
בית הפרס (an area in which uncertainty exists concerning the location of a grave or a corpse)- a field in which a grave is plowed there. And all one hundred cubits surrounding the grave the Rabbis established as having the presumption of [ritual] impurity, lest perhaps the plough rolled and dragged a bone like the size of a barley from the corpse. And [the word] פרס is the language of split and broken, that the bones of the dead person were split there. And from others I heard, that on account of the fact that feet of human beings are prevented from walking there because of the defilement.
זה הכלל – to include the [Sabbath] limits and wine poured as a libation/יין נסך. For a Cuthean is not believed to state that the Sabbath limit extends to here, for the [Sabbath] limits are Rabbinic [ordinances] and the Cutheans do not hold by them. And similarly, they are not believed on wine poured as a libation, for they are not careful from contact with a heathen. And all of these things were not stated other than during the early generations, but at this time, they are considered as heathens for all their matters.

Chapter 8



Mishnah 1

הרואה כתם. כנגד בית התורפה (A woman who sees a bloodstain, corresponding to her pudenda) – place of nakedness/lewdness..
טמאה - for one cans ay that the blood from that place fell.
על עקבה – that at times that by chance and it touched that place.
ועל ראש גודלה – that while she stepped, it happened to be that the big toe that is on her foot was under that place and blood dripped upon it.
על שוקה ועל פרסותיה מבפנים טמאה (on her thigh or on her foot) – when a person stands and fastens his legs and thighs one to the other, all that is attached one with the other from them is called “on the inside.”
מבחוץ – from here and from there.
ועל הצדדין – behind the thigh all of their height corresponding to the ankle, and in front of it all its high corresponding to the leg, are called “the sides.”

אם מגיע כנגד בית התורפה – as for example, that it (i.e., the bloodstain) is found at the top of the sleeve near the hand, that sometimes she stretches them from the arm and it correspondingly falls corresponding downwards.
ואם לאו – that it does not correspond with the pudenda, as for example, that it (i.e., the bloodstain) is found near the shoulders.
שהוא חוזר – sometimes that the top of he garment is reversed opposite her face below.
וכן בפוליון (and similarly a pallium/a sheet worn as a cloak and used for a bed-cover) -towel/apron that she covers herself with.

Mishnah 2

ותולה (she hangs it/blames it) – the bloodstain that she found.
בכל דבר שהיא יכולה לתלות – to state that it (i.e., the bloodstain) was not from here.
מאכולת (louse) – vermin.
עד כמה הוא תולה – with the blood of a louse/vermin.
עד כגריס (the size of a bean/split bean) – but more than this, the blood of a louse is not that great. And in this, however, she blames, and even though she didn’t know that she killed it. But Rabbi Hanina [ben Antigonos] disputes the first Tanna/teacher who stated, that yes (i.e., she may place the blame upon it), if she killed it, but not, if she didn’t. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Hanina ben Antigonos.
ותולה בבנה ובבעלה – that lie next to her, if they have a wound, to state that this bloodstain was from them.
ואם יש בה מכה – that the skin/membrane lifted off [the wound].
והיא יכולה להתגלע (and she is able to scratch it open) – to be revealed. From the language (Proverbs 17:14): “Before a dispute flares up/לפני התגלע הריב [drop it]," that is to say, that he should the skin/membrane and peel it and the wound will be revealed and blood comes out from it, she may blame it (i.e., rely upon it).

Mishnah 3

דם ולא כתם – but it is the Sages who decreed on the bloodstains, therefore, we follow them for a lenient ruling.

Mishnah 4

עד שהוא נתון תחת הכר – the clothing that uses to clean/wipe herself at the time of sexual intercourse is called a “testing or examining rag”/piece of cloth used by women for ascertaining their condition of cleanness or uncleanness
דם עגול טהור – for it is the blood of a louse.
משוך טמא – but if it is an elongated drop, it is impure, for the presumption is that it (i.e., the bloodstain) is from it, and at the time that she wiped herself, she blames this blood on the examining rag.
דברי ר' אליעזר בר ר' צדוק – and such is the Halakha.

Chapter 9



Mishnah 1

האשה שהיא עושה צרכיה - urinates.
אם עומדת טמאה – since we say that urine that returns to the interior of the womb [from where the menses are discharged] and blood comes from the interior of the womb together.
יושבת טהורה – In the Gemara (Tractate Niddah 59b in the words of Rabbi Abba) we establish that while she is siting on the edge of the bowl/basin and the urine splashes/brings forth an uninterrupted jet into it with power, but there is no path for the blood of the interior of the womb to go out with the urine, but if after the water has stopped, this blood comes from the interior of the womb, the blood was not found within the bowl /basin, but on the edge, for the blood that comes from the interior of the womb flows gently/comes down slowly and does not splash/bring forth an uninterrupted jet, but this blood that is found within the bowl/basin perforce comes from the place of the urine and there is a force there, but not from the interior of the womb. But while she is standing at the edge of the basin and splashes an uninterrupted jet within the bowl, it was not possible to straighten her up, for when she is standing it is impossible for her to splash/bring forth an uninterrupted jet, for this reason it was necessary for the Tanna/teacher [of the Mishnah] to hold [the tradition] of “sitting.”
רבי יוסי אומר בין כך ובין כך טהורה – and the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 2

שעשו צרכיהם – that they urinated.
רבי יוסי מטהר – for even for a woman alone for which there is only one doubt, that is the doubt of whether it (i.e., the blood) comes from the interior of the womb or whether it comes from the place of the urine, Rabbi Yossi declares her pure above (see previous Mishnah), and all the more so if here if it comes from a man. But the Tanna/teacher here does not repeat that Rabbi Yossi declares her pure but rather to teach us from an extraneous Mishnah that even ab initio, Rabbi Yossi declares pure a woman who performed her needs (i.e., urination) and saw blood, that she should occupy herself in purity, and not state specifically that post-facto Rabbi Yossi declares her to maintain her purity that she was engaged with, but ab initio we state that she is not occupied in purity, this comes to teach us that the opposite is true.
ר' שמעון מטמא – even here where there is a compound uncertainty, as the reason is taught.
שחזקת דמים מן האשה – and above (i.e., in the previous Mishnah), we determined that the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yossi who declares her to be pure with one doubt, and all the more so here when there is a compound uncertainty.

Mishnah 3

השאילה חלוקה – and afterwards she herself wore it and found upon it a bloodstain.
לנכרית או לנדה – to a heathen woman that she sees blood, that she is an adult and we knew about her that she had already seen it (i.e., blood), similar to a menstruating woman/Niddah.
הרי זו תולה בה – but she [herself] is pure. For since she (i.e., the woman who had borrowed it) was a menstruating woman, it did not put her into disarray at all. And a heathen woman also is impure and she receives blame for it. But an Israelite is pure that borrowed a garment from her pure female friend, and afterwards, her friend wore it, both of them are impure, as it is taught [further on in our Mishnah]: three women, etc. for since if she had not blamed it, it would disarray/upset her, for what good is something that upsets this one (i.e., woman) more than that one?
של אבן – that is not susceptible to receive [ritual] impurity. But the bench [that we are speaking of] in the first clause [of the Mishnah] is made of wood and it is appropriate to be defiled through the sitting of a person with gonorrhea or the menstruating woman.
אין מקבל כתמים – meaning to say that they (i.e., the Rabbis) did not make a decree on the bloodstains that are found on it. And the reason of Rabbi Nehemiah, as it is written (Isaiah 3:26): “[And her gates shall lament and mourn,] And she shall be emptied, shall sit on the ground/ונקתה לארץ תשב (see also Lamentations 2:8), since she sat on the ground that is not susceptible to receive [ritual] uncleanness, she shall be emptied/cleaned. And the same law applies to all things that are not susceptible to receive [ritual] uncleanness. And similarly, if she sat in connection with an earthenware utensil, that is not susceptible to receive [ritual] uncleanness from the outside (see Tractate Niddah 60b), or on a patch/strip of cloth that lacks three [handbreadths] by three [handbreadths] that is not susceptible to receive [ritual] uncleanness, in all of these, they (i.e., the Sages) did not decree on bloodstains that are found on them. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Nehemiah.

Mishnah 4

ותולות זו בזו – that if the one [who saw blood] was pregnant, she blames the blood on the one who is not pregnant, and she is pure.
ואם לא היו ראויות – as for example that all of them were pregnant or all of them were nursing mothers, all of them are impure as if they are apt to see [blood], for nevertheless, blood fell from between them.

Mishnah 5

תחת הפנימית – the one [woman] of the side where the wall is called the “inside,” and the “outer” is called to that one of the side through the path of ascending to the bed. And that which the Tanna/teacher [of the Mishnah] distinguishes here between that which is found underneath the “inside” to that found underneath the “outside,” for above (in the previous Mishnah) where it is taught, “and if blood is found under one of them, all of them are impure,” he doesn’t distinguish between that found underneath the “inside” and that found underneath the “outside,” it explains in the Gemara (Tractate Niddah 61a) that above we are speaking when they are in close contact and attached together. Therefore, one can doubt about the “outer” one even when the blood is found underneath the “inside” one.
אימתי -that they said that [if the blood] is found underneath the “outer” one, the “inner” one is pure.
בזמן שעברו דרך מרגלות המטה (bottom part of bedstead) – and the “inner” one did not pass on the place of finding blood.
אבל עברו שלשתן דברך עליה – that they are treading and passing over the [area of] the “outer” one.
כולן טמאות – and even the “inner” one, for perhaps when the “inner” one passed through there, it (i.e., the blood) fell from her.
לגל טמא (a defiled heap) – that there was an olive’s bulk from the dead person’s corpse there.
עד שמגיע לסלע או לבתולה – virgin soil. If he didn’t find it, the heap is pure. For I could say that a raven came and took the defiling thing. But here, when all three of them examined themselves and found themselves to be pure, the Rabbis agree with Rabbi Meir that all of them are impure, for this blood, from where did it come? Perforce it is from one of them. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 6

שבעה סממנין מעבירין על הכתם (seven substances they pass over the bloodstain) – for the blood is not nullified until all of them pass over it.
רוק תפל ומי גריסין (tasteless spit and water from boiled grits) – It explains them further on (see Mishnah 7) in our Mishnah.
נתר – ALUM in the foreign language. And it is kind of soil that is bright. And in Arabic we call it SHIB.
בורית (a sort of soap) – a kind of plant that cleans and purifies.
קמוניא (Cimolian earth, a clay used in cleaning clothes and also in medicine) – a grass that we dry it and grind it and clean the hands in its dirt to remove the evil smell. And in the language of the Gemara “pull and stick in”/release the debtor and seize the guarantor (see Tractate Shabbat 90a and Tractate Niddah 62a and Tractate Shabbat, Chapter 9, Mishnah 5) – a popular name for Cimolia.
אשלג (a kind of alkali, or mineral used as a soap)– it was not explained to me.
הטבילו – the cloth that has the bloodstain prior to passing over it these substances.
הרי זה צבע – for if it were blood, it would pass away.
שדיחה (that it faded) – that it changed from its redness.

Mishnah 7

שלא טעם כלום מבערב – all that entire night., that is insipid without taste. And he who slept from the last midnight of the night until the morning. And until three hours of the day, he is called tasteless spit regarding this matter. But if he woke up and taught his lesson, it is not tasteless spit.
לעיסת גריסין של פול חלוקת נפש (a chewed mass of grist of beans split to the core) – that the food is separated from the shell, chewed for a mass of grist of beans and they pass it over the bloodstain.
שהחמיצו (urine that has fermented) – that has decayed. And how much is their fermentation? A bit for three days.
וצריך לכסכס (to scour) – to scrub three times over each and every substance, in the manner of laundering clothing that it folds over one side with the other and rubs/brushes them.
כסדרן – in the manner that is taught here.
לא עשה ולא כלום – neither to examine nor to abolish/undo.

Mishnah 8

כל אשה שיש לה וסת דיה שעתה – above in the first chapter [Mishnah 1] this is taught (and also in Tractate Eduyot, Chapter 1, Mishnah 1), but there we are speaking of regular dates of menstruation as for example from the fifteenth day [of one month] to the fifteen day [of the next month], or from [the first day of] the month to [the first day] of the month, but here we are speaking of regular premonitory symptoms of approaching menstruation that are in her body, for whenever that these symptoms will appear in her, it is customary to see them, but there is no fixed time to see them.
מפהקת (open the mouth/yawn) – there are those who interpret/explain that she opens her mouth with all of her strength, ALTHAREI in the foreign tongue, and there are those who explain/interpret that she stretches out her arms and body, ASHTARNE KALAR in the foreign language.
בפי כרסה (at the opening of her stomach)- corresponding to her navel.
שפולי מעיה (lower part of the abdomen) – the womb.
ושופעת– The Gemara (Tractate Niddah 63b) explains that she discharges impure blood within pure blood, as for example, that she is used to seeing pure blood initially, that is blood that is not from the five [kinds] of impure blood (see Tractate Niddah, Chapter 2, Mishnah 6 for the impure types of blood), and afterwards the impure blood And this also is a fixed period. And whenever she sees impure blood after pure blood, her set time is sufficient for her.
צמרמורת (feverish flushes) – it is the language of (Psalms 119:120): “My flesh creeps from fear of You;/סמר מפחדך בשרי [I am in awe of your rulings].” ARITZMINT in the foreign tongue.
אוחזין אותה – she is trained to be at every time that she sees (i.e., experiences) this.
וכן כיוצא בהן – from the rest of the signs that the women who sees blood are turned to be like this, as for example, that her head is heavy upon her, or that trembling or shaking grabs hold of her, or pain in the heart, and similar kinds of things. If she established [the presence of the one of these token symbols of her period] three times, this is a fixed period.

Mishnah 9

היתה למודה להיות רואה בתחלת הוסות – that are in her body. As for example, at the beginning of the sneezing and the yawning and similar things.
אף ימים ושעות וסתות – the hours are also fixed periods. And we follow after them. For if she was accustomed to see [signs] from the twentieth day [of the month] to the twentieth day [of the month] and from the sixth hour to the sixth hour, she is permitted to engage in sexual relations on the twentieth day [of the month] until the sixth hour, but she worries/suspects only at the sixth hour. If the sixth hour passed and she didn’t see [any signs], she is permitted to engage in sexual relations all that entire day.
היתה למודה להיות רואה עם הנץ החמה – the conclusion of this matter of Rabbi Yossi.
אינה אסורה אלא עם הנץ החמה – but all night she engages in sexual relations. But if sunrise had passed and she didn’t see [any signs], she engages in sexual relations the entire day, for especially the hour of her period is when she worries, but not further.
רבי יהודה אומר כל היום שלה – that is to say, she is permitted to engage in sexual relations all throughout the day, from when sunrise had passed and she didn’t see [any signs], but the entire night that is prior to sunrise of her period, she is forbidden to engage in sexual relations. But with sunrise, as it is taught, that is that she is used to seeing sat the end of the night prior to the arrival of the beginning of the day, but we prohibit her [from sexual relations] the entire time of her period. It is found that she is prohibited all the night which is the time of her period. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 10

ושאינה מיטהרת מן הוסת – that stopped from her, that one should not be concerned about it.

Mishnah 11

יש גפן שיינה אדם ויש גפן שיינה שחור – such as that there is a woman that her blood is red, there is a woman whose blood is black.
כך גפן יש בה יין – every woman has blood of menstruation and blood of virginity.
ושאין בה הרי זה דורקטי (a woman who has no menstruation – also grape used for dessert -fit only for eating) – [the word is made up of two words]: דור קטוע/a cut-off race (bound to die out – see Tractate Niddah 64b), meaning to say, cut off from [bearing] children, barren, who does not give birth.

Chapter 10



Mishnah 1

תינוקת. נותנין לה ארבעה לילות – and even if she sees [blood], we state that it is blood of virginity and pure.
עד שתיה המכה – that the wound of [the first] sexual intercourse will be cured. And all the while that the blood flows gently from her while she stands, but when she sits it (i.e., the blood) does not flow gently, or it flows gently when she is sitting on top of something hard, but when she sits on something soft, as for example, on top of pillows and cushions, it is known that the wound [from her first sexual intercourse] has not healed, and on account of the blood of virginity the blood came. But if the blood flows gently whether she stands or whether she sits or whether she is sits on a soft thing or whether she sits on a hard thing, this is not blood of the wound but rather menstrual blood.
הגיע זמנה לראות – but she didn’t see it (i.e., blood) and she got married.
עד מוצאי שבת ארהעה לילות – for she got married on Wednesday (see Tractate Ketubot, Chapter 1, Mishnah 1), for a virgin gets married on Wednesday and has intercourse on the night of [the beginning of] Thursday.
בעילת מצוה the first act of marital duty/the first act of coition.
כל הלילה כולה = and even if he has sexual intercourse/performs his marital duty [with her] many times. And all these things are in the early generations only, but after the stringency spread that the daughters of Israel placed upon themselves that even if they see a drop of blood like a mustard seed, they sit upon it (i.e., and not engage in sexual intercourse) for seven clean [days], anyone who marries a virgin woman even a minor whose time had not yet come to see [blood] and she had never seen it (i.e., blood), after he (i.e., the husband) performed his marital duty [for the first time], he is not permitted to come upon her [for another act of sexual intercourse] until she counts seven clean [days] after the bleeding stops, according to the law of other women who see blood.

Mishnah 2

לא הפרישה – she did not examine herself to separate/abstain [from sexual intercourse] in [ritual] purity.
ולאחר ימים – after she had immersed [in a Mikveh] on the eighth night.
הרי זו בחזקת טהורה – on the days that are between her ritual immersion and her finding defilement , and those pure things that she came in [physical] contact with are pure, that I could say now that she sees.
המטמאה מעת לעת – this refers to the first clause [of the Mishnah], as it states, “and after some days she examined herself and found herself unclean, she is in the presumption of purity, but she defiles from one astronomical period of twenty-four hours [to the previous twenty-four hours] of this sighting [of blood] or from one examination to a previous examination.
אפילו בשניה לנדתה – she examined [herself] in the morning and found herself to be pure, but at twilight she did not mark her separation [and examine herself], and at the conclusion of the seventh [day] she immersed [in a Mikvah], but after some days, she examined herself and found that she is impure, this was until now in the presumption of being pure. And there are three disputes in this matter: According to the first Tanna/teacher [of the Mishnah], her examination in the morning of the seventh [day] is what makes her pure, but not on the second day of her menstruation. And according to Rabbi Yehuda even her examination in the morning of the seventh [day] does not purify her until she separates herself at twilight. But according to the Rabbis, even on the second [day], for since [the bleeding] stopped, it stopped. And especially on the second [day] is when the Rabbis declare her pure, but on the first [day] she found herself to be pure and she didn’t examine herself further, and immersed on the night of the eighth [day] and engaged in purity, and afterwards found herself to be impure, the Rabbis do not make her pure, because on the first day, she is under the presumption of being an open source (see Talmud Niddah 68b), and because of this it is taught [in the Mishnah]: “and even [if she examined herself] on the second day of her menstrual period” specifically, but not on the first. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 3

הזב והזבה – who are required to count seven clean [days] and they ceased from their sightings [of blood] and began o count, and they counted on the first [day] and on the seventh [day], etc.
אין להם אלא יום הראשון ושביעי בלבד- - [according to Rabbi Yehoshua], and they need to count another five clean days, in order to complete the seven [clean days].
ר' עקיבא אומר אין להם אלא שביעי – lest they saw [blood during the days] in-between and it nullified their first count. But the Halakha is according to Rabbi Eliezer [that they are under the presumption of ritual purity – when examining only on the first and seventh days].

Mishnah 4

מטמאים במשא – The Gemara (Tractate Niddah 69b) raises an objection: Does not every corpse convey uncleanness through carrying (i.e., why did the Mishnah restrict to only the cases mentioned)? But rather, carriage means through a stone used for closing a pit (i.e., the corpse was put on a closing – immovable-stone). That is to say, a large and heavy stone that is not carried. But if it (i.e., the stone) is placed upon utensils and the corpse is upon it, this is not carrying, for appropriate to be carried with it, and the rest of the corpses do not defile but thee define according to the Rabbis. For since according to the Torah, when a living person [who is impure] defiles with a stone used for closing a pit for they defile while sitting anything that is underneath them, they [the Rabbis for those individuals after death] decreed lest they faint and it is similar to death, but if one should say that a dead person with gonorrhea does not defile, a living person with gonorrhea who faints would lead to defiling.
עד שימוק הבשר – that from now, the person is certainly dead.
נכרי שמת – even though while he is alive, he is like a person with gonorrhea for -all matters and defiles with a stone used for closing a pit, once he dies, he is pure from defiling with a stone used for closing a pit, for the defilement of flux is upon him while alive, but [his defilement] is only from the words of the Scribes.
כל הנשים- they are under the presumption of being menstruant women, and we immerse utensils that were upon them near the time that their souls departed even though they didn’t touch them after death. Because at first they would immerse utensils that are upon all menstruant women that died, but the living menstruant women were embarrassed, for even in their deaths they were different from other women, [the Rabbis] enacted that they would immerse that which is upon all women, because of the honor of the living menstruating women.
ובית הלל אומרים אין נדה שלא שמנצה נדה – The School of Hillel does not hold by this enactment.

Mishnah 5

מטמאה משום כתם – [the bloodstain] of menstrual blood with a little bit, for if it was because of defilement with the dead , it does not defile other than with a quarter [of a LOG] (See also Tractate Ohalot, Chapter 2, Mishnah 2 – where it states: “A quarter LOG of blood and a quarter-LOG of blood that flows from a person at the time of his death or afterward/דם תבוסה which is a primary source of ritual impurity, even though it is possible that some of the blood flowed from the body before death).
ומטמאה באוהל – if all of the one-quarter [of a LOG] is together.
שמטמא משום כתם = with a little bit, that it was uprooted/detached from [the body after death] while living. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda nor according to Rabbi Yossi. Therefore, it doesn’t make a difference if she was sitting on the travailing chair [when she died] or regarding other dead women, all of them defile because of a bloodstain and defile through overshadowing in a tent.

Mishnah 6

מערה למים לפסח (to pour water from vessel to vessel for purposes – to wash the Passover meat without touching the water) – from one vessel to another to wash/rinse in it the Passover meat, but she does not touch/come in contact with the water, as she is [considered] a טבולת יום/the period following immersion in a ritual bath and the nightfall, who immersed at the conclusion of two weeks [following the birth of a baby girl] but she does not have הערב שמש/her “sunset” until the eightieth day (i.e., sixty-six days after the first fourteen days have been completed) which is immediately prior to her bringing of the atonement offering and Scripture made her as one who immersed herself that day, as it is written (Leviticus 12:4): “[She shall remain in a state of blood purification for thirty-three days:] she shall not touch any consecrated thing, [nor enter in the sanctuary until her period of purification - sixty-six days for the birth of a girl -see the next verse – is completed].” And we hold that “any consecrated thing/בכל קודש [לא תגע] “ includes the heave-offering (if her husband is a Kohen) , and a person who is in this period between immersion and “nightfall,” is considered [as being in the status of] שני/second degree ritual impurity [as a result of contact with first degree ritual impurity status], so that when she pours [water from one vessel to another] she does not touch the water, but only the utensil [itself], and a person of second degree ritual impurity does not defile a utensil, but she cannot come in contact with the water, for since they are used to rinse the Passover sacrificial meat, for non-sacrificial meat that was prepared through the sanctification of something holy is considered like it is holy. {Note: If this woman touched heave-offering/Terumah, she would make the heave-offering something with a third degree of ritual impurity.)
חזרו לומר – a person who immersed him/herself that day/טבול יום – his/her law is like someone who came in contact/touched someone who is unclean with corpse uncleanness, which is first degree of ritual impurity especially regarding Holy Things. But for non-sacrificial/sacred meat, the person who has immersed him/herself that day is not regarded as someone who had come in contact with someone unclean with corpse uncleanness which is first degree of ritual impurity, but rather second degree ritual impurity, therefore, she can touch even water, for the water is non-sacrificial/sacred, and the person who has immersed that day is [considered as having only] second-degree ritual impurity, and someone with second-degree ritual impurity does not make contact with non-sacred meat third-degree ritual impurity. But even though that these waters became through the ritual purification of the Holy Things, for they were designed for the rinsing of the Passover [sacrifice] meat, they do not have legal effect on second-degree ritual impurity for them, for non-sacrificial/non-sacred meat that was made on the purity of the Holy Things is not like that which is Holy.
בית שמאי אומרים אף כמטמא מת – which is a primary source of ritual impurity and makes what it comes in contact with first-degree of ritual impurity. Such is the contact of someone who has immersed that day/טבול יום – makes it first-degree ritual impurity.

Mishnah 7

ומודים שאוכלת במעשר – according to the law regarding the one who immersed herself that day/טבול יום, who immersed [In a Mikveh] and came up, he eats [Second] tithe (see Tractate Negaim, Chapter 14, Mishnah 3).
וקוצה לה חלה (she may separate the priest’s share of the dough) – but does not name it/designate it and she places it in a utensil, and even though she comes in contact/touches with non-sacred foods that are subject to sacred gifts for Hallah, it is not like Hallah for someone who is of second-degree ritual impurity does not invalidate them.
ומקפת - she brings the utensil that she placed the Hallah near the started dough, because it is a Mitzvah to make a heave-offering/Terumah out of mass which is near, that which is close to the thing that he is making the heave-offering upon.
ואם נפל מרקה ומדם טהרה – which are two of the liquids that exit from a טבול יום/someone who immersed herself that day, and they are pure.
צריכה טבילה באחרונה – on the night of the eightieth day, she needs a ritual immersion to eat Terumah/heave-offering if she is a כהנת/the wife of a Kohen. But if she is an Israelite woman, she requires ritual immersion to enter into the Sanctuary/Temple, because her period as someone who immersed herself that day is long and she has diverted her attention from the Terumah/heave-offering and from the Sanctuary/Temple (according to the School of Shammai)
ואינה צריכה טבילה באחרונה – [according to the School of Hillel] she relies upon her ritual immersion at the conclusion of two weeks. And specifically, for Terumah/heave-offering and entering into the Temple, but regarding the consumption of Holy Things, the School of Hillel agrees [with the School of Shammai] that she requires another ritual immersion at the conclusion of eighty days, for we hold that the person who suffered a loss but has not yet buried his/her loved one/אונן – a person in acute mourning and someone lacking atonement (i.e., a woman after childbirth, a person with a flux and a healed offering, who must bring offerings in order to complete their purification processes) need ritual immersion for access to Holy [Things] . Therefore, after she has brought her atonement, she immerses [in order to have access] for Holy Things (see also Tractate Hagigah, Chapter 3, Mishnah 3).

Mishnah 8

הרואה יום אחד עשר – which is the end of the days of flux, and the day that is afterwards does not combine with it for flux. For if she saw [blood] on the twelfth day and on the thirteenth [day], she is not a woman with a large flux for this, because they are beginning of the days of her menstrual period and do not combine with the days of flux.
בית שמאי אומרים מטמאין משכב ומושב – and even a man (i.e., the husband) who has sexual intercourse defiles/imparts uncleanness to things he lies down upon or sits on to impart uncleanness to food stuffs and liquids, because he is like someone who comes upon a woman who observes a day [after having any sort of sighting of blood] for a day [without blood flow before she immerses herself in a Mikveh to regain ritual purity], for the School of Shammai holds that the eleventh day requires guarding, but the School of Hillel exempts from a sacrifice, for they hold, the eleventh day, since the day that is after it does not combine with it for flux and doesn’t require guarding, however in regard to defilement they (i.e., the School of Hillel) admits that the man who had sexual relations with her (i.e., her husband) defiles according to the Rabbis, as a decree that the eleventh day Is because of within the eleven day period that the one who had sexual intercourse with her (i.e., the husband) defiles from the Torah, but regarding a sacrifice, but not to bring non-sacrificial meal to the Temple courtyard.
טבלה בום שלאחריו – for she observed guarding a bit, and it is a valid guarding, but that within the eleven days it is prohibited to do so, that she should not come to any doubt, lest she sees that [blood] after sexual intercourse and combines the days to flux.
מטמאין משכב ומושב - according to the Rabbis he defiles by lying and sitting even the one who has sexual intercourse with her (i.e. the husband), as a decree because of it being within the eleven days.
ופטורין מן הקרבן – for she had performed guarding. But even though she went back and saw it (i.e., blood), they don’t combine for flux, for this is the beginning of her menstrual period.
גרגרן (glutton/ of one unable to control his sexual appetite) – he hurries to sin. Perhaps he will be accustomed to this within eleven [days]. But regarding uncleanness, he is pure.
וחייבין בקרבן – even if she doesn’t see [blood] on the morrow, for it requires guarding and this one (i.e., woman) didn’t guard at all and she is found to be a woman with a small flux.
טבלה יום שלאחריו – for she performed a bit of guarding, and then she engaged in sexual intercourse.
הרי זו תרבות רעה (this is bad conduct) – lest she see [blood] afterwards and it will combine with what is before that, and her ritual immersion is not a [proper] immersion.

ובעילתן – regarding [the obligation to bring] a sacrifice.
תלוין – that if she sees [blood], her physical contact is the contact of a woman with a flux and they (i.e., the husband and the wife) are obligated for the a sacrifice by their engaging in sexual intercourse. But if she doesn’t see [blood], their contact is pure, and there are exempt from [bringing] a sacrifice on their sexual intercourse.