Book of Tobit
מעשה טוביה
The Book of Tobit, English translation by A. Neubauer, 1878
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL01&doc_number=001972652

Book of Tobit



Chapter 1

This is the book of Tobi, the son of Tobiel, the son of Hananel, the son of Ariel, the son of Gabael, the son of Asael, the son of Nenathiel, of the tribe of Naphthali, who was led captive from Samaria with the captivity which was taken away in the days of Hoshea, the son of Elah, who was led captive in the days of Shalmaneser, king of Assyria. And he was of the inhabitants of a city of Naphthali, which is in Galilee, on the western boundary.
And Tobi said, Remember me, my God, for good, for as much as I have walked before thee all the days of my life in an upright way, and for the many alms deeds and great kindnesses which I have done to my brethren and my nation in the captivity at Nineveh in the land of Assyria.
And it came to pass when I was but young in the land of Israel, that all the tribe of Naphthali rebelled against the house of David, and refused to go to Jerusalem, the city which the Lord chose out of all the tribes of Israel, wherein was the altar of the Lord that was sanctified for all the tribes of Israel, and the temple of the Lord was built in the midst thereof for offering up the burnt-offerings and the thank-offerings to the Lord three times a year. And all the brethren of the tribe of Naphthali offered sacrifices and burnt-offerings to the golden calves, which Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, king of Israel, had made in Bethel and Dan. But I went to Jerusalem at the feasts, according as it is written in the law of the Lord for Israel, with the first fruits and the tithes and the firstlings for the priests, the sons of Aaron; and corn and new wine and oil and figs and pomegranates and of every fruit of the land for the sons of Levi that ministered before the Lord in Jerusalem; and the second tithe and the third tithe for the stranger, the orphan, and the widow; and I went every year with all these things to Jerusalem, according to the commandment of the Lord, and as Deborah, my father’s mother, commanded me, for I was left an orphan by my father and my mother. 
And when I grew up, I took a wife of my family, whose name was Hannah, and she bare me a son, and I called his name Tobiyyah. Now when I was carried captive from the land of Naphthali, I dwelt in Nineveh the great city, and all my brethren and kinsmen did eat the bread of the Gentiles, but I defiled myself not with their dainties, because I feared the Lord, and remembered the Lord with all my heart and with all my soul. So God gave me grace and favour in the eyes of Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, and he appointed me over all that he had unto the day of his death. And I committed to the hand of my brother Gabael, who was in the land of Media, at the city Eages, ten talents of silver.
And it came to pass, when Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, died, that Sennacherib his son reigned in his stead, and the highways of Media were closed because of the wars which were in the land, and I could not go to the land of Media to receive my money. And after this I gave many alms to the poor of my nation, who were orphans and widows, and when I saw the slain of my nation cast forth outside the wall of Nineveh, I kept not quiet, and rested not until I had buried them.
Now it came to pass, when Sennacherib, king of Assyria, returned from Judah to Nineveh with confusion of face, because that the Lord God of Israel had smitten him in the land of Judah for the reproach wherewith he reproached and blasphemed the God of Israel, that therefore he was wroth with all the congregations of Israel throughout his kingdom, and he killed exceeding many of them. And I sought to know the truth of the matter, why this calamity came upon the tribe of Israel, for I know of a truth that the Holy One (blessed is he) is a God of truth and without iniquity, and I found that the tribes of Israel did not lay to heart the destruction of their brethren, which Sennacherib, king of Assyria, had brought on them ; their strongholds he set on fire, and their young men he slew with the sword, and their women with child he ripped up.
For instead of mourning and afflicting themselves before the Lord concerning the persecution of their brethren, and because that he was wroth with them, they were eating and drinking and making merry, delighting themselves with instruments of song and harps and psalteries, and were not grieved for the destruction of Judah for our wickedness and the wickedness of our fathers, as it is written concerning Judah, ‘That drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments ; but they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph.’ Even for this was wrath from the Lord upon Judah and Jerusalem, and he brought against them the king of Babylon, until he cast them out from his presence, and he carried Judah away from his land. 
And when I saw the slain of Israel cast forth outside the wall, I many times stole their corpses and buried them, and I said, O Lord God of Israel, thou art righteous in all that hath come upon us, for thou hast dealt truly, and we have done wickedly.
And when Sennacherib, king of Assyria, sought the slain of my nation, the corpses of the men who were killed, and found them not, then went the men of Nineveh and told the king, saying, Thy servant Tobi, whom thou hast appointed over all that thou hast, he sendeth his men over all the streets of Nineveh to seek the slain of his nation, and he burieth them privily, and feareth thee not.
And it came to pass when Sennacherib heard this, that his anger was greatly kindled against me, and he commanded them to seize me, and Hannah my wife, and Tobiyyah my son, and he sought to slay me in his wrath, and when this matter was known to me I fled from his presence; and he commanded them to spoil all that I had, and I hid from his presence, until that the widows and orphans of Israel cried out for me in the bitterness of their soul with fasting and weeping, and his judgment reached unto heaven, and was lifted up even to the skies, and the God of Israel delivered him into the hand of his two sons, and they slew him with the sword. For he asked his counsellors and his elders why the Holy One (blessed is he) had been jealous for Israel and Jerusalem, and the angel of the Lord destroyed the host of Pharaoh and all the firstborn of Egypt, and the young men by whose hand the Lord always gave them salvation. And his wise men and his counsellors said to him, Abraham, the father of Israel, led forth his son to slay him, peradventure he might thereby obtain the favour of the Lord his God; therefore hath he been jealous for his children, and hath executed vengeance upon thy servants.
Then the king said, I will slay my two sons for the Lord’s sake, peradventure I may obtain by them God’s favour, and he will help me. And the saying came to Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons, and they laid in wait for him, and killed him with the sword, at the hour when he went in to pray before his idol Dagon, as it is said, ‘And Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons smote him with the sword, and they escaped into the land of Ararat.’ And it came to pass when Sennacherib, king of Assyria, was dead, that Esarhaddon his son reigned in his stead. And Esarhaddon appointed Akikar, the son of my brother Hananel, over all that he had, and he ruled over all the land of Assyria. And Akikar spake kind  words for me to the king, so that he brought me back to Nineveh, for Akikar was my friend and kinsman. And they restored me my wife Hannah and my son Tobiyyah, for the king of Assyria had commanded them to be seized in his rage against me.

Chapter 2

Now the same year at the feast of weeks I prepared in my house a great feast, and I sat at my table to eat. Then I said to my son Tobiyyah, Go and bring one of our poor brethren to eat with us, and I and all who sit with me will not eat until thou comest.
So my son Tobiyyah went to seek of the poor, and he returned in bitterness of soul, and said to me, My father, one of our brethren hath been slain, and cast out in the street of the city.
And when I heard it I was troubled and in sore distress, and I left my table, and went, and lifted him up from the street, and took him in my keeping until the going down of the sun, that I might be able to bury him. Then I returned to my house, and ate my bread with tears and lamentation, and I remembered the word which the prophet Amos uttered in Bethel, saying, ‘And I will turn your feasts into mourning,’ etc. And I wept very sore.
And it came to pass when the sun went down, that I went and buried him that was slain. But my kinsmen and my family mocked me, saying, This man feareth not for his soul, and he burieth the slain!
And on that night after I had buried him who was dead I washed, but was not able to purify myself in an unclean land, as it would have been meet in the land of Israel, according as the prophet Jeremiah said of us, ‘Thou shalt not be made clean any more.’ Then I went and laid down by the wall, and my face was uncovered, and I knew not that there were birds above me on the wall. And their dung fell upon mine eyes, and there came a whiteness in mine eyes. And I went in the morning to the physicians to heal me, but they could not, and I was blind four years. And all my brethren and kindred were grieved at my blindness, and Akikar my kinsman did nourish me.
Now at that time my wife Hannah did work for women, and weaved curtains for others, and received her wages. And there was a day when they gave her a kid for her wages. And I heard the voice of the kid crying out. Then I said to her, Whence cometh this kid? Beware lest it be stolen.
And she said to me, It is not so, but it hath been given to me for my wages. But I did not believe her, and exclaimed against her, saying, Go and restore it to its owner. And we quarrelled together concerning the matter of the kid.
And Hannah answered and said to me, Where are thy kindnesses and thine alms, which profit thee not in the day of thy trouble? but thy reproach is known to all the world.

Chapter 3

And I was grieved, and fainted, and was sick at my affliction, and prayed before the Lord, and said, Righteous art thou, O Lord, and thy judgment is upright, for all thy works are might, and all thy ways are kindness and truth, and thou art the judge of the earth, and thou art righteous in all that cometh upon me, for thou hast dealt truly, and I have done wickedly. Now therefore, O Lord, father of mercy, Lord of forgiveness, remember me, I pray, and visit me after thy mercy and kindness, and reward me not according to my sin and wickedness, and according to the wickedness of my fathers, who kept not thy commandments, but cast thy law behind their back, so that thou hast given us to be a reproach, a proverb, and a by-word among all the nations, and that the nations should mock us, amongst whom thou hast cast us out, as it is this day; and except the Lord of hosts had left unto us a very small remnant, we should have been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah. Now therefore, O Lord, thy judgments are many and true, reward me not after my wickedness and the wickedness of my fathers, for we have sinned before thee, and have not walked in thy ways. Now therefore deal with me according as it is good and right in thine eyes, and take my soul from me, for it is better for me to die than live, and I shall no more hear my reproach. 
And on that same day it happened to Sarah, the daughter of Reuel, who lived at Agbatanis, a city in the land of Media, that her father’s maidservants were reproaching her and mocking her, saying to her, It is not meet to call thee Sarah, but Zarah [trouble]. For she had been given to wife to seven husbands, and not one of them had approached her, but Asmodeus, the king of the demons, had killed them before they approached her after the way of all the earth. And the maid said to her, Why dost thou kill thine husbands, and beat us because of this evil matter? It would be good for thy parents that thou shouldest die for them, and that they see not of thee either son or daughter for ever.
And it came to pass when Sarah heard this reproach, that she was grieved sore. And she wept, and went up to her father’s upper chamber, and cried before the Lord with a bitter voice, and said, O Lord God, thou hast given me to my parents, who are old and well stricken in age, and thou hast sent against my husbands that married me the king of the demons, for thou art the God of all the spirits and all the demons, and the maker of all creatures, and in thy hand are all the kinds of evil spirits which are in the world. Now therefore, O Lord, is it good in thine eyes that I should bring down the old age of my father and my mother in sorrow to the grave? For if the sentence of judgment hath gone forth from before thee against me in this matter, destroy me utterly, I pray, and let me see no longer my exceeding trouble and my great reproach. Thou knowest, O Lord, that I am pure from all pollution with man, and that I have not polluted my name nor the name of my parents in the land of my captivity. And I am the only child of my father and my mother, neither hath he son to possess his inheritance, nor hath he a kinsman who may possess me. And behold seven husbands are dead for my sake, and what profit have I in being any longer in the world? But if it be not good in thine eyes to kill me, look and answer me, and have mercy on me, that I may hear my reproach no more. 
At that time the prayer of them both was heard before the throne of glory, the prayer of Tobi concerning his blindness, and the prayer of Sarah concerning the humiliation of her parents. And the Lord sent the angel Raphael, the prince who is appointed over healing, to heal them twain, to heal Tobi, the father of Tobiyyah, of the disease in his eyes, and to give Sarah, the daughter of Reuel, to Tobiyyah, the son of Tobi, to wife, and to take away from her Asmodeus, the king of the demons. 

Chapter 4

And when Tobi had finished his prayer he returned to his house. And Sarah, the daughter of Reuel, came down from her father’s upper chamber, when she had made an end of praying to the Lord.
At that time Tobi remembered the money which he had committed to the hand of Gabael in the city Rages in the land of Media. And he said in his heart, Behold I ask every day to die; now therefore I will call my son Tobiyyah, and will signify him of the matter of the money before I die.
So Tobi called his son, and said to him, When I am dead, bury me with honour, and honour thy mother, and forsake her not all the days of her life, and oppose not her desire. And make not her life bitter, for remember, my son, what troubles passed over her when thou wast in her womb; and when she is dead, bury her by me with honour in one grave. And remember thy Creator all thy days, and sin not before him, and transgress not his commandments. And withhold not thy hand from giving alms of all which the Lord giveth thee, and keep not company with violent men. Hide not thine eyes from the poor of Israel, so shall the Lord not hide his eyes from thee in the time of thy trouble. And if thou art not able to make riches, cease not to give alms of that which is found in thine hand, so shalt thou acquire for thyself riches and treasures of silver and gold by almsgiving, for the treasures of the wicked shall not profit, and alms doth deliver from death; and every one who occupieth himself in alms shall behold the face of God, as it is written, ‘I will behold thy face by almsgiving,’ and in heaven they pay special regard to him.
And thou, my son, withdraw thyself from all uncleanness and from all whoredom, and take thee a wife of thy family, and not of any stranger, which is not of the seed of thy fathers, for we are of the sons of the prophets. And remember, my son, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who took wives of their own family, and would not make marriages with the strangers, and they were blessed with sons and daughters.
And thou, my son, give thine heart to all thy work, and that which thou hatest to be done to thee, do not thou to others. And let not the wages of him that is hired abide with thee all night on the day when thou dost agree with him, and thy work God will repay thee. And withdraw thyself from drunkenness, and there shall no evil happen unto thee. And give of thy bread to the hungry, and with thy garments cover the naked, and of all which remaineth over give alms, and let it not be hard in thine eyes. 
Spend freely thy bread and wine on the burial of the righteous, and hearken and attend to every one who giveth thee good counsel. And at all times ask of the Lord, and he shall direct thy paths and  thy counsel, for there is no counsel in the power of man, but in the hands of the Holy One (blessed is he) alone, for he doeth whatsoever pleaseth him, one he bringeth low, and another he lifteth up. And keep my words, and all that I have commanded thee, and let them not depart from thine eyes. And be strong and of good courage, for the Lord will be with thee a help and profit, if thou seek him with all thy heart and all thy soul. 
And now, my son, I will signify to thee the matter of the money which I have in the hand of Gabael my brother and kinsman, ten talents of silver in the city Rages in the land of Media, for I know not the day of my death. And thou, my son, if thou fear the Lord and keep thyself from all sin, he will give thee great riches.

Chapter 5

Then Tobiyyah answered his father and said, All that thou hast commanded me, my father, I will do.
Now therefore, my father, give me counsel how I can receive the money from the hand of Gabael, for he will not know me, and I shall not know him; and what sign shall I give him so that he may give me the money; and I know not either the ways by which they go to Media.
Then Tobi answered and said to Tobiyyah, This is the sign that thou shalt give him. He gave me his bag, and took from my hand mine, when I put the money in his hand this day twenty years ago.
Now therefore go and seek thee a man who may be trusty to go with thee, and we will give him his wages; and go, my son, while I yet live, and receive the money, and may the Lord God of Israel keep thee in all thy journey, and grant thee favour, kindness, and mercy in the man’s eyes, and in the eyes of all that see thee, and may he send thee away in honour and peace, and bring thee back to us in peace before I die.
So Tobiyyah went forth to seek a man to go with him to Media, and he found Raphael, an angel of the Lord, standing over against him, but Tobiyyah knew not that he was an angel of the Lord of hosts.
Then the angel said to Tobiyyah, From whence art thou, young man? And Tobiyyah answered and said, I am of the children of Israel. Then Tobiyyah said, My lord, knowest thou how to go with me to Media. And the angel said, Yea, I know all the ways, and in Media I have been a guest in the house of our brother Gabael, who dwelleth at Rages, a city of Media, and it is a two days’ journey from Agbatanis to Rages, and Rages is built on a mountain, but Agbatanis is built on the plain. Then Tobiyyah said to him, Stay of thy kindness a moment, and I will go and declare the matter to my father, for I desire greatly that thou shouldest go with me, and I will give thee the wages of the journey. And he said to him, Go in haste, for behold I wait until thou comest back to me, and tarry not.
Then Tobiyyah came and told his father, saying, I have found a good man of our brethren to go with me. And Tobi said, Call him to me, that I may know of what place he is, and whether he be trusty to go with thee. So Tobiyyah went  forth and called him.
And the angel came to Tobi, and said to him, Peace be unto thee, thou man of God. But Tobi said, If it is peace to me, why then hath all this befallen me, for I see not with mine eyes, but I sit blind in darkness? Then the angel said, He who hath deprived thee of light, the same shall heal thee, for thou art a righteous man. And Tobi answered and said, Let the Lord say so. Then Tobi said to him, My brother, my son Tobiyyah seeketh to go to Media, canst thou go to Media canst thou go with him, and I will give thy wages. And the angel said, Yea, I can, for I know all the ways, and have traversed all the boundaries, and know the mountains. Then Tobi said, Of what place art thou, and of what tribe art thou, and of what city art thou. And the angel said, Dost thou still enquire, when thou hast a hired man to go with thy son according to thy wish. Then Tobi said, My brother, I wish to know thy name, and of what family thou art. And the angel said, I am Azaryah,  the son of Hananel, of the family of the great Shelomith, of thy brethren. 
Then Tobi said, Life and peace to thee! Now therefore, my brother, be not provoked with me for that I enquire to know the matter of the ancestors of thy family, for, behold, my brother, thou art of a good and honourable family, and also thou knowest Hananel and Nathan, the two sons of the great Shelomith, and it was they who went with me to Jerusalem, when we dwelt in the land of Israel, and worshipped with me there, and these did not stray after the strange gods of the land, like our brethren. Now therefore, my brother, go in peace with my son, and come ye back in peace with the help of God, and I will give thy wages, a drachm every day, and thy food as for my son, and, if the Holy One (blessed is he) bring you back in peace, I will yet add to thy wages. And the angel said, Fear not, for I will go with thy son, and we shall go in peace, and we shall return in peace.
 Then Tobi called his son, and said to him, Prepare thee what thou needest for the journey, and go with thy brother, and may God Almighty lead you in peace, and bring you back in peace, and send his angel with you, and prosper your journey.
And Tobiyyah kissed his father and his mother, and they said to him, Go in peace. And they set out to go. 
Then his mother began to weep, and said to her husband, How didst thou not fear to send away the young man, for he is the son of our old age, who goeth out and cometh in before us And without that money our God will keep us alive. And Tobi said to her, Fear not, my sister, for he will go in peace and will come back to us in peace, and thine eyes shall see him.  And the Lord our God will send his angel with him, and will prosper his journey, and he will return in peace. But she wept yet more.

Chapter 6

So the young man went on his way, and the angel Raphael with him. And he came in the evening to the river Tigris, and they passed the night there. And Tobiyyah went down to the river to wash his feet.
And a fish came suddenly out of the river, and devoured the young man’s bread. And he cried out. Then the angel said to him, Lay hold of the fish, and do not let it go. So the youth laid hold of the fish. Then the angel said to the young man, Open the fish in the middle, and take the heart and the gall, and put them by thee, for they are good for healing. And the young man did so. And he cooked the fish, and ate, and the remainder he left.
And they went on till they came to Media. Then Tobiyyah said to the angel, My brother Azaryah, what healing wilt thou perform with the heart and gall of the fish. And he said to him, The heart is good to smoke thereof before a man in whom is an evil spirit or the spirit of demons, and it will flee from him. And the gall is good for anointing therewith the eyes in which is whiteness, and they will be healed.
And they came to Agbatauis, and the angel said to Tobiyyah, My brother, we shall pass the night in the house of Reuel, for he is an old man, and hath an only daughter, fair of form, whose name is Sarah, and I will speak to him that he may give her to thee to wife. And she is of good understanding, and her father loveth her. Now therefore hear me, and speak for her, and when we shall return from Rages, we will celebrate the marriage. For I know that the man will not oppose thy desire, and that he will not give her to a stranger, but thou shalt marry her, according to the law of Moses, and we shall lead her to thy father. 
Then Tobiyyah said to the angel, I have heard, my brother, that she hath already been given to seven husbands, who died before they came in unto her, and I have heard that Asmodeus, the king of the demons, killed them. Now therefore I am greatly afraid lest Asmodeus kill me, and I bring the old age of my parents in sorrow to the grave, for they have no other son, neither daughter, to bury them when they die.
Then the angel said to him, Fear the Lord, and remember him, and remember the commandments of thy father which he commanded thee, that thou shouldest take a wife of the family of thy father. Now therefore hear me, and be not afraid of the demon. For I know that thou shalt take her this night to wife. And when thou shalt enter the chamber with her, take the heart of the fish, and smoke thereof under her garments, and the demon shall smell it, and flee, and return to her no more. And when thou shalt desire to approach her, rise ye from the bed, and pray, and supplicate the Lord that he would command his kindness and healing upon you, and heal her. And then thou shalt approach her, and shalt beget of her sons; and fear not, for for thee was she meet before the world was created, and by thine hand the Lord shall save her from the hand of the demon.

Chapter 7

And it came to pass when Tobiyyah heard all these sayings, that his soul was knit to the soul of Sarah. And they came to Agbatanis to the house of Reuel, and found him by the door of his house, and they saluted him. And he saluted them again.
And he said to them, Go into the house in peace. And they went into the house. Then Reuel said to Ednah his wife, How like is this youth to Tobi my brother! And Ednah asked them, My brethren, whence are ye. And they answered her, Of the captivity, which is in Nineveh, of the tribe of Naphthali. Then she said to them, Know ye our brother Tobi? And they said, Ye know him. Then she said to them, Is he well? And they said, He is well. Then Tobiyyah said, Your brother Tobi, of whom ye speak, is my father. 
And Reuel ran to meet him, and embraced him, and kissed him, and wept with him. And Reuel said, Blessed art thou, my son, of the Lord, for thou art the son of a righteous and upright man. And Reuel and Ednah his wife and Sarah his daughter wept yet more with him. And he killed a ram, and they prepared a feast with a glad heart, and they ate and drank.
Then Tobiyyah said to the angel, Speak with Reuel concerning the matter of Sarah his daughter, that he give her to me to wife. And it came to pass when Reuel heard this matter, he said to Tobiyyah, I know, my son, that it is better that I give her to thee than that I give her to another husband, but I will tell thee the truth. My son, know that I have already given her to seven husbands, who all died before they came in unto her. But now eat and drink, and leave the matter alone.
But Tobiyyah said, I will neither eat nor drink before thou hast given her to me to wife. Then Reuel said, Take her, for she is thy sister, and thou art her brother. Behold, I give her to thee to wife, according to the law of Moses and Israel, and may the Lord God of heaven make you dwell this night in peace, and command upon you his kindness and his peace.
Then Reuel took Sarah his daughter, and gave her to Tobiyyah to wife, and he blessed them, and bade Ednah his wife bring him a tablet, and he wrote thereon the deed of marriage, and he sealed it before witnesses. And they ate and drank and were merry.
And Reuel said to Ednah his wife, Prepare the chamber, and put them therein. And Ednah embraced Sarah her daughter, and wept with her, and said to her. My daughter, may the Lord God of Israel shew thee kindness this night, and grant thee mercy, and have pity on thee because of the sorrow which hath passed over thee unto this day.

Chapter 8

And it came to pass when they had finished preparing the chamber and the bed, that Tobiyyah and Sarah arose and went to the chamber. And Tobiyyah remembered the words of Raphael, and took the heart of the fish, and put it upon the pan, and smoked under Sarah’s garments. And Asmodeus received the smell, and went out thereat, and fled to the end of the land of Egypt, and the angel Raphael bound him there. And he went out of the chamber and they shut the door on them twain. 
Then Tobiyyah rose from the bed, and said to Sarah his wife, My sister, arise, and let us present our supplication before God, that he would deal with us after the abundance of his mercy and kindness. And Tobiyyah entreated the face of the Lord, and Tobiyyah said, O Lord God of Israel, thou art Lord alone in heaven and on earth. And thou didst create Adam, and gavest him Eve his wife for a helper like unto him. Now therefore, O Lord, it is manifest and known to thee that I take not this my sister for lust, but in uprightness of heart, according to the law of Moses and Israel. And thou, O Lord, have mercy upon us, and have compassion on us, and join us together in peace, and give us sons who may be a blessing, occupying themselves in thy law. And Sarah answered and said, Amen. 
And he went in unto her that night. Now Reuel arose in the night and bade his servants dig a grave by night, saying, If the youth is dead, we will bury him in the night, so that no man know it, and there will be no reproach to us. And Reuel called Ednah his wife, and said to her, Send one of the maids to the chamber, that she may see whether he be alive; for if not, we will bury him before the light of morning, and no man shall know it.
So Ednah sent the maid to the chamber, and she looked, and behold they were both of them asleep together in peace and joy. And she came forth and told them, and said to them, He liveth. Then they blessed the Lord the great God; and Reuel said, Blessed art thou, O Lord God of our fathers, who hast shewn us this great kindness, for it is thou, O Lord, who smitest and healest, and killest and makest alive, who hast wrought this wonder with these twain, and thou livest and art established for ever and ever. Then Reuel said to his servants, Cover the grave before the morning, so that no man know it. And he bade them prepare a great feast with joy, for God had made them glad with the abundance of his mercy and kindness. 
And Reuel ran to the flocks, and brought calves and rams, and bade them prepare them. And he said to Tobiyyah, Thou shalt not depart from my house before fourteen days, but gladden my forsaken daughter. And thou shalt take half of all that I have, and shalt go to thy father with joy, and when I and my wife he dead, thou shalt take the whole.

Chapter 9

Then Tobiyyah called Raphael, and said to him, My brother Azaryah, take with thee hence four servants and two camels, and come, go to Rages, to Gabael my uncle, and give him his bag, and he will give thee the money; and invite him to come to my wedding, for I cannot go thither, because of the oath which Reuel hath sworn to me, that I shall not depart from his house before fourteen days. But my father and my mother count the days, and if one day exceed the time, I shall grieve my parents’ soul.
So Raphael arose, and took two camels and four servants, and went to Rages to the house of Gabael, and gave him his bag, and told him that Tobiyyah, the son of Tobi, was married to Sarah, the daughter of Reuel, and Raphael invited him to come to Tobiyyah’s wedding. Then Gabael laded the camels with the money, and came to the wedding. And he found Tobiyyah sitting at the table, and embraced him, and kissed him, and wept with him from exceeding joy, and blessed him, saying, Blessed is the Lord God of Israel, who hath joined thee in joy to the woman, and may he in his mercy give thee sons by her, who occupy themselves in the law of the Lord. 

Chapter 10

Now Tobi and his wife were counting the days and the nights, and sorrowing that they had sent him away, and weeping and afflicting themselves for him. And Tobi comforted Hannah his  wife, saying, Be silent, for he will return in peace and in joy. But she refused to be comforted, and went out every day on the roads to see whether her son would come, and she tasted nothing but tears for days and nights. And it came to pass when the fourteen days of the wedding were expired, Tobiyyah said to Reuel, Let me go, for my father and my mother are counting the days, and they look no more to see me. But Reuel said, Tarry with me yet awhile, and I will send to declare to thy father all that thou hast done. And Tobiyyah said, Detain me not, let me go, that I may go to my father.
Then Reuel gave Tobiyyah Sarah his daughter, and half his riches, and servants, and maidservants, and sheep, and cattle, and asses, and camels, and garments of fine linen and purple, and vessels of silver and gold, and he sent them away, and blessed them, saying,  May God, the Lord God of our fathers, bless you, and let me see of you sons who occupy themselves in the law of the Lord. And he kissed them, and embraced them, and said to Sarah his daughter, Honour greatly thy father and thy mother-in-law, and go in peace, and may we hear while we live good report of thee with joy and gladness. And he kissed them, and embraced them, and let them go. And he said to Tobiyyah, My son, may the Lord God of heaven lead thee in peace, and let me see of thee and of Sarah my daughter children good in the sight of the Lord before I die. Behold now, Sarah my daughter is in thine hand, entreat her not evil all thy days; go ye in peace. So he blessed and kissed them, and sent them away.  

Chapter 11

And Tobiyyah went away rejoicing and glad in heart. And he blessed the Lord, who had made him glad, and who had shewn him many wonders and great kindness. Then he went on, and came to the city Akris, which is over against Nineveh. And Raphael said, My brother Tobiyyah, thou knowest how thou didst leave thy father and thy mother. Now therefore I and thou will go first, and thy wife shall go behind us with the servants and our men. So they went on both of them. And Raphael said to Tobiyyah, Take with thee of the gall of the fish. And he took it.
And behold his mother was sitting on the highway to see whether her son would come. And she saw him afar off and knew him, and said to Tobi her husband, Behold, my son Tobiyyah cometh, and the man that went with him. Then Raphael said to Tobiyyah, I know that thy father is blind, but with this gall shall his eyes be opened, and he shall be healed.
And Hannah his mother ran to meet him, and she fell upon his neck, and said, Now will I die, now that I have seen thy face. And she wept on his neck yet more.
And Tobi arose, and went to meet his son, and he stumbled as he went, for he did not see. And Tobiyyah ran to his father, and put the gall on his eyes, and his eyes were cleared, and the whiteness fell from his eyes, and he was healed. And he saw his son, and fell on his neck, and said, Blessed is the Lord God of Israel, who openeth the eyes of the blind, for he hath opened mine eyes. Blessed is he, and blessed is his name for ever and ever, who hath shewn this great kindness to me, for he smiteth and healeth, and killeth and maketh alive; and blessed, yea, blessed is he who hath prospered thy journey, and who hath brought thee back to us in peace and quietness. 
Then Tobi went forth, and Hannah his wife, to meet Sarah, the daughter of Reuel, their daughter-in-law. And they rejoiced with her with great joy, and it seemed an exceeding marvellous thing in the eyes of all that saw and heard that Tobi’s eyes were healed. And Tobi blessed Sarah his daughter-in-law, saying, Blessed art thou, my daughter, of the Lord, and blessed is the Lord, who hath brought thee to us with joy. And they and all the Jews who were in Nineveh rejoiced with great joy at this great kindness which the Lord had shewn to Tobi and his son. And they gave Tobiyyah many precious gifts.

Chapter 12

Then Tobi said to Tobiyyah his son, My son, let us give the man who went with thee his wages, and we will further add thereto. And Tobiyyah said, My father, let us give him the half of the silver which I have brought thence. For he led me in peace, and hath brought me back in peace, and hath healed my wife, and hath obtained the money from the hand of Gabael, and hath healed thine eyes. What now ought we to give him for all this?
So Tobiyyah called Raphael, and said to him, My brother Azaryah, come and take thy wages, half of the money which thou hast brought thence, for it is thy wages, and go in peace.
Then Raphael said to Tobi and to Tobiyyah his son, Sing to the Lord a new song, and bless him, and sing praise to his name for all the goodness which he hath done unto you. And continue before him in prayer and supplication and alms all the days of your lives, for it is better in the sight of the Lord to give alms always than to heap up treasures of silver and gold. For alms doth deliver from death. And I will not hide from you any of the truth. Know that at the time when thou and Sarah thy daughter-in-law did pray and make supplication before the Holy One (blessed is he), on account of the tribulation of your soul, I offered your prayer before the throne of glory; and at the time when thou wast burying the dead I was with thee; and at the feast of weeks, when thou didst leave thy table, and go to bury the dead man, I was with thee. And God hath tried thee by the blindness of thine eyes, for the Lord trieth the righteous. And at the time of thy tribulation theLord sent me to heal thee and Sarah thy daughter-in-law. Now I am the angel Raphael, one of the princes who minister before the throne of glory. And it came to pass when they heard all these sayings, they were sore afraid, and they fell on their faces. 
And Raphael said to them, Peace be unto you; fear not; bless the Lord for these great and wonderful things which he hath done unto you. Now as to myself, all the time I was with you ye saw me eat and drink, for so it appeared to your eyes, yet I did neither eat nor drink. Now therefore write you all these things in a book, and it shall be for a witness between you and your God all the days of your lives, and this thing shall be for a sign and a witness amongst all generations. And bless the Lord, and praise the remembrance of his holiness. And now let me go, and I will go to the God who sent me to you. So they sent him away, and blessed the Lord for all this. And the angel of the Lord went up to heaven, and appeared no more to Tobi and his son Tobiyyah.

Chapter 13

At that time Tobiyyah wrote down all these things with joy. And Tobi said, Blessed is the Lord the great God, who doeth marvellous things to his people and his servants. He smiteth and healeth, and killeth and maketh alive, and bringeth down to hell and lifteth up. Who hath dispersed us among the Gentiles; we are bound to publish all these marvellous works among the nations. And ye, O children of Israel, be strong, and let your heart be of good courage, and let not your hands be weak, for your work shall be rewarded, and he will wait that he may be gracious unto you, and will be exalted that he may have mercy upon you. For the Lord is a God of judgment; blessed are all they that wait for him. And ye, my children, continue in alms, prayer, and supplication before the lord of all the world, for alms and prayer drive back the decree, for it is said, ‘And alms do deliver from death.’
And blessed is the Lord, who hath shewn to me and my father and my forefathers, and every one who hath trusted in him, wonders, and marvels, and great and terrible things. O lord of the world, shew us in our days salvation and redemption by the coming of the Redeemer and the building of Ariel before the eyes of all Israel, as it is said, ‘In his days Judah shall be saved and Israel shall dwell safely;’ and it is written, ‘And the ransomed of the Lord shall return;’ and again, ‘The Lord doth build up Jerusalem, he gathereth together the outcasts of Israel.’
Blessed is the Lord for ever, Amen and Amen.