Devarim Nichumim on Lamentations
דברים ניחומים על איכה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Devarim Nichumim on Lamentations

Introduction

<b>The nations will hear and hearts will rejoice.</b> In our explanation of this scroll (Lamentations), we have set out to bring light to the people who walk in darkness. Not by might nor by power will they find rest when they see their suffering and troubles, as they bring to mind their afflictions in their sitting and rising, with sorrows bound in their garments. And this will be their consolation in the depths of their poverty and exile—that this is our God, and in all their distress, He is distressed, and that is enough for us. To see the comfort in the many good deeds the Lord has done for us, for He is the Lord our God.<br> Even in this, in the midst of our deep lowliness, suffering, and the destruction of our holy and glorious Temple—on the day He remembered our sins and crushed us under the weight of our iniquities, hastening the evil and bringing it upon us—nevertheless, He has not ceased to cherish us with an extraordinary love, and our eyes see the greatness of His love for us. For He does not grieve for Himself but for the suffering of the daughter of Jerusalem. Therefore, I have called this explanation to the attention of the many.
<b>Words of comfort, for with them we can find solace from the pain of loss.</b> All Israel are friends, and they will rejoice with gladness, and sorrow and sighing will flee, and there will be relief. Just as happened with Naomi and Boaz, after descending through sorrowful paths, they rose again through the stairway of elevation. By grasping the divine throne through Ruth, David was born. So too, may Israel be strengthened and return to hope, for their Merciful One will guide them, lift them up, and carry them to His holy house. He will build His sanctuary on high, and from the dust of the earth, He will raise us. He will once again have compassion on us, subdue our iniquities, and like a man comforted by his mother, so will He comfort us. He will speak to our hearts, rebuild our ruins, restore the fallen sukkah, and spread the garment of peace over us, Amen, may it be His will.





Chapter 1



Verse 1

<b>How...</b> We should praise the Master of all, who chose us from all the nations with an extraordinary love known to all the worlds, and desired us above all the holy ones in the heavens, those who do His will. For He desired to work with our ancestors, to bless them in His name, to perfect the world under the sovereignty of Shaddai. For they are the holy vessels that pour out blessings from above onto the earth and dwell upon it, bringing endless blessings to work and protect it, to prepare and sustain it until the throne of God's glory is established in it, and He builds a house to honor His name among us.<br> Yet we sinned greatly and accumulated numerous iniquities and transgressions, with no end in sight—not one day, nor two days, not one year, nor two years—until we worshipped other gods, and seven courts of justice followed one after another. Even then, He did not cease to love us until His anger and fury were exhausted in His house and in Zion, the city of His inheritance. Despite the destruction of His house, His temple, and the removal of His presence, He did not grieve as much for all this as He did for Israel, His people, who were struck down by the sword and ravaged by famine and scorching heat.<br> As it is said, "Who will give me a head of water... and I will weep day and night...," and even though the songs of His angels did not soothe Him on that day, as our sages will explain when it comes to pass. The reason for this praise is that the people of Israel are the pillars upon which the earth and heavens stand. If their pillars falter, and their hands grow weak in serving God, the earth will tremble and the heavens will not be pleasing to Him.<br> This is illustrated by the statement in Lamentations 1:1, as follows: Rabbi Nachman said in the name of Samuel, according to Rabbi Yehuda bar Ilai, that God called the ministering angels and asked them, "A king whose son has died and who is mourning, what should he do?" They replied, "He should put on sackcloth at the entrance." God said, "I also do this," as it is written, "I will clothe the heavens with blackness and make sackcloth their covering." The angels then said, "A king should extinguish the lamps." God responded, "I do this as well," as it is written, "The sun and the moon are darkened..." They continued, "A king should overturn the beds." God replied, "I do this as well," as it is written, "Until the heavens are above...," and so on.<br> Finally, the angels said, "A king should walk barefoot." God responded, "I do this as well," as it is written, "The Lord rides on the storm and the clouds are the dust of His feet." They added, "A king should tear his purple garments." God said, "I do this as well," as it is written, "The Lord has done what He planned against Zion." Rabbi Yaakov, who was known as Hananel, explained that when it says "He tears His purple garments," it means that God, too, tears His garments. Finally, they said, "A king should sit and be silent." God replied, "I do this as well," as it is written, "He sits alone and is silent." But what about the king sitting and weeping? God said, "I do this as well," as it is written, "The Lord God of Hosts calls for weeping on that day..." And so it is."<br>
And it is appropriate to pay attention to the fact that just as it is considered unusual for God to call upon the ministering angels for His questions and requests, how could it be that anything would be too difficult for Him, even to inquire of the angels? Additionally, why would He relate to them in such a trivial manner?<br> Moreover, in their response, why did they not elaborate on the essence of mourning, such as God walking barefoot and tearing His purple garments? And why did it occur to them that God would put sackcloth on the entrance? How could they think that He would place sackcloth on the entrance, and why did He respond by saying, "I do this as well"?<br> It seems that His actions were beyond their suggestions. If God said, "I do this as well," and His actions were more fitting, why is there a discrepancy? Why did He act in a manner that was different or more fitting than what they suggested?<br> Additionally, the text does not mention the entrance at all, so how could this be brought from there, since it was said that sackcloth was placed on the entrance? According to our understanding, we should consider what this means in comparison to other statements.<br> Also, why did they question the act of extinguishing lamps and not mention the extinguishing of candles? It is unreasonable to think that a king would extinguish his lamps and dwell in obscurity, and it is noted that He only extinguished the lamps that illuminate the earth, which is not a fitting analogy.<br> Finally, when it is said that He "goes barefoot," how can this be appropriate for God, may it not be? And there is no evidence from the verse to support this claim.