Shulchan Arukh, Orach Chayim
שולחן ערוך, אורח חיים
Mishnah Berurah
Feldheim Mishnah berurah Hebrew to English

Shulchan Arukh, Orach Chayim



Siman 1

1. THE LAW AS REGARDS RISING IN THE MORNING. (contains 9 paragraphs) One should strengthen himself like a lion to get up in the morning for the service of his Creator. He should rise early enough to usher in the dawn Gloss: One should at any rate not get up too late to pray the morning prayer service at the time that the community pray it. Gloss: "I have placed the Lord before me always." This is an important rule in the Torah and among the virtues of the righteous who walk facing God. For the manner in which a person sits, moves about, and pursues his business when facing a great king. Neither is his speech and his expansive uninhibited talkativeness when he is with the members of his household or his relatives as his speech would be where the king sits. Consequently, if a person will impress upon his mind that the Great King, the Holy One, Blessed be He, Whose glory fills the entire universe, is standing over him and sees his actions (as it is stated "' If a person will hide in hideouts will I not see him' says the Lord"), the fear and the submission which derives from awe of Ha-sheym may He be blessed, will certainly reach him immediately and he will always be apprehensive of his actions because of him (...) One should not be embarrassed because of people who mock him for his service of Ha-Sheym, may He be blessed. Even when one is in a state of seclusion and when one is lying on his bed, he should be conscious of before Whom he is lying. As soon as he awakes from his sleep, he should raise himself briskly to serve his Creator may he be blessed and exalted(...)
2. If one wishes to rise early to supplicate before his Creator, he should see that the time corresponds with one of the times when the guards of the ministering angels change. These are, after a third of the night has passed, at the end of two-thirds of the night and at the end of the night. The prayer that one prays at these times over the destruction of the Beys Ha-Mikdash (Holy Temple) and the exile is favorably received.
3. It befits every Heaven-fearing4. person to be distressed and concerned over the destruction of the Beys Ha-Mikdash.
4. Saying a small amount of supplicatory prayers with application is preferable to saying more without application.
5. It is desirable to say the passage describing the binding of yitzchak (Isaac), the passage describing the provision of the manna, the ten commandments, and the passages dealing with the burnt-offering, the cereal-offering, the peace-offering, the sin-offering, and the guilt offering. Gloss: It is only permissible to say the ten commandments daily if one says them as an individual, but it is forbidden to say them as a congregation.
6. The passages dealing with the sacrifices may only be said by day (see below in Sec. 47 Par. 13).