Chidushei Chatam Sofer on Pesachim
חידושי חתם סופר על פסחים
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Chidushei_Chatam_Sofer_on_Pesachim
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Chidushei Chatam Sofer on Pesachim



Daf 1a



Daf 1b



Daf 2a



Daf 2b



Daf 3a



Daf 3b



Daf 4a



Daf 4b



Daf 5a



Daf 5b



Daf 6a



Daf 6b




And we write at the beginning of the first month, etc. According to what was previously mentioned, it is possible that the main point of the section was stated only because of the commandment of Pesach Sheni (the second Passover). If so, there is no difficulty with the Talmud's question that this section’s primary purpose is related to a commandment applicable on the fourteenth of the second month, whereas the section at the beginning of the book pertains immediately to the first day of the second month, and therefore its law takes precedence despite being stated earlier. Perhaps this indicates that the entire section was primarily stated to awaken these individuals and not because they failed to observe Passover more in the wilderness, but for the reason mentioned above. This is evident. And it could be said that according to what is stated in the discussion by Rabbi Shimon ben Gamliel, we also learn from it that questions and inquiries are made, as he stood on the first of Nisan, etc. And according to what was mentioned above by the Tanna Kamma, we also learn from it thirty days for Rabbi Levi, as the section about the impure ones was stated on that day according to Rashi’s opinion. It turns out that the laws of that section were immediately applicable on that day, and it is proper to precede the laws of the first of Nisan to the laws of the first of Iyar, and it is properly questioned. And it writes, etc. The continuation of this question to the discussion is understandable, and it is clear.
This means that there is no chronological order in the Torah. According to Rashi’s commentary on the Chumash, where he explains the principle of "there is no chronological order in the Torah" and also mentions the reasoning of the Sifrei, which is due to the disgrace of Israel. I have already explained this at length in the pamphlet "Leviyat Chen" for the festival of Pesach and in the pamphlet "Kavod Hashem" on the parsha of Behaalotcha. However, I need to be brief now and say that the interpretation of the Sifrei is difficult because it actually increases their disgrace by saying that the reason this section was not opened with is due to their disgrace. If it had opened with this, it could have been explained as I mentioned earlier that many Passovers were observed in the wilderness, and this one is mentioned because of a new matter. But now, the disgrace is prominent. Therefore, it is written that even now it is not prominent, and they will say that this is the reason it was not opened due to the principle of "there is no chronological order in the Torah."