Noda BiYehudah II
נודע ביהודה מהדורא תנינא
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Noda BiYehudah II

Orach Chaim



Yoreh Deah



Even HaEzer



Choshen Mishpat



Teshuva 1



Teshuva 2



Teshuva 3



Teshuva 4



Teshuva 5



Teshuva 6



Teshuva 7



Teshuva 8



Teshuva 9



Teshuva 10



Teshuva 11



Teshuva 12



Teshuva 13



Teshuva 14



Teshuva 15



Teshuva 16



Teshuva 17



Teshuva 18



Teshuva 19



Teshuva 20



Teshuva 21



Teshuva 22



Teshuva 23



Teshuva 24



Teshuva 25



Teshuva 26



Teshuva 27



Teshuva 28



Teshuva 29



Teshuva 30



Teshuva 31



Teshuva 32



Teshuva 33



Teshuva 34



Teshuva 35



Teshuva 36



Teshuva 37



Teshuva 38



Teshuva 39



Teshuva 40



Teshuva 41



Teshuva 42



Teshuva 43



Teshuva 44



Teshuva 45



Teshuva 46



Teshuva 47



Teshuva 48



Teshuva 49



Teshuva 50



Teshuva 51



Teshuva 52



Teshuva 53



Teshuva 54



Teshuva 55



Teshuva 56



Teshuva 57



Teshuva 58

Prague, Wednesday, 10th of Av 5544 (1784), ...
an answer
to three who stand as one, knowledgeable and of understanding, the honorable and great rabbis, impressive in Torah, the honorable Rabbi David, head of the Bet Din of the community of Serda, and the honorable Rabbi Sender, head of the Bet Din of the community of Sardhel, and the honorable Rabbi Ber, he should be well.
I received their letter at the beginning of this month, yesterday on the fast day, and they locked the gates of repentance on that day, forbidden to learn Torah, and only now have I seen their actual question, regarding one who had a burglary in the city, and after some days they found two maidens who said that they saw the stolen item in Ploni Almoni’s house, and that man denied it. And their [the questioner’s] argument regarding this is, some say that this is similar to what the Rama wrote in Choshen Mishpat, at the end of siman 35, in the name of the Terumat Hadeshen, that sometimes for the good [of society] their testimony is effective, and some say that the comparison is not the same, since there the subject was regarding seats in the women’s section of the synagogue where the men are not, or in regard to women’s clothing, from the reasoning that it is not the way of men to look much [at the clothes], as is explained there. This was the language of their question.
Behold, know that because of our many sins, God has pained me for many months, and I am not healthy, and I cry out, “My head, my head!”, and because of this the doctors have decreed I must cease my learning, and I cannot look into any matter which needs a bit of investigation, and therefore I cannot answer any person who asks me a question regarding something elsewhere [from what I have on my mind at the moment]. But I saw that you three were chosen to be the judged for this case, and you were gathered, each man from his place, to come together and judge the matter. I had mercy that you shouldn’t struggle for nothing. I say that each side was not careful enough in the language [of his position]. 
He who wants to believe the testimony of the women write that this is similar to what the Rama wrote in the name of the Terumat Hadeshen, as if this is a great proof. But why did he not look into the Terumat Hadeshen 353, where he writes, “Since we learn from the Tanna the rationale that in cases where the invalid [witnesses] are more common that the kosher ones, one could validate the invalid [witnesses], even though the Tanna concludes that they should not be validated, one could say that that is distinct for damages, since if we believe them, life couldn’t continue for anyone, for anyone who is suspected of being a thief could pay slaves or gentiles or induce women or slaves to testify on his behalf that his fellow, or his fellow’s animal, damaged him 100 dollar’s worth every day.” See there in the Terumat Hadeshen. And if so, so too here one could say that we could not continue to live, for anyone could induce women to testify on his behalf that his fellow stole 100 dollars from him. 
And one could not respond that here it is different because this is a case of burglary in the city, for if so, regarding damages where a cow who damages is right in front of us should women or invalid witnesses be believed? But the Tanna decided that it can only be through free, Jewish, witnesses, and there is no distinction in the matter. And one shouldn't bring [an argument] from the words of the Terumat Hadeshen that the Terumat Hadeshen was dealing with the law of the Talmud, but he should have brought the end of the Rama's words who wrote there in the name of the Maharik that a woman, even just one, or a relative, or a minor, are believed when it comes to the striking or insulting of a Torah scholar, and other squabbles, and handing people over [to the government], for just as men are not commonly present, so too women aren't commonly present, and even so women are believed. But the root of the matter is that in a place where women are commonly present, and men are not commonly present, then one should believed women, not just from the perspective of the good [of society] alone. And there is even support for this from the Talmud that a midwife is believed to say that this one is the firstborn, but regarding squabbles and strikings and handing people over [to the government], which there is just like [a case where] men aren't commonly present, so too women aren't commonly present, and it is just a takkana of the earlier sages, since the matter itself isn't common, and is something that happens suddenly, and there isn't enough time to have kosher witnesses, the earlier sages made a takkana that women could be believed. But nevertheless, it is clear there at the end of the Rama's words, and these are his words, "And it [is when] he makes a claim with certainty." And here the claim is not with certainty [as the testimony is circumstancial], and even if this case was that the burglary occurred in the city, and he can make a certain claim that it was stolen, but he cannot claim he knows for certain that the stolen object was in the hand of Ploni Almoni. That's first of all.
And furthermore, I say that were it true that it was a claim of certainty that he saw the stolen object in the house of Ploni Almoni, and the maidens testified according to his words, money is not capable of being removed through the testimony of women, for it seems in my humble opinion that it must be that they didn't say that regarding an uncommon matter, they made a takkana to believe the invalid kinds of witnesses, but rather a matter that occurs suddenly, and is over completely, such as a strike or handing over, that one who wasn't there at the time of the strike or the time of the handing over can no longer testify about it. But he who wants to compare this case to that, his reasoning certainly is that theft is also not common, for those who burglar do so in hiding. There is some place for his words, were it so that the maidens were testifying that they saw Ploni Almoni steal. But they did not testify that he stole, but they only testified that they saw the stolen object in his possession, and that is not a one-moment matter, and it’s quite possible the stolen object had been in his possession for a long time, and it’s also possible that men will the stolen object in his possession, but it happens that men didn’t see it [yet]. Regarding this they did not make a takkana that women or invalid witnesses could be considered kosher. It is better not to add to the takkana. And even if the maidens testify that they saw the theft, I am not absolutely sure that they should be believed, rather I say that there is what to consider regarding it. But this case, certainly they cannot be believed, and it seems in my humble opinion what I have written.