Mishneh Torah, Repentance
משנה תורה, הלכות תשובה
Maimonides' Mishneh Torah, edited by Philip Birnbaum, New York, 1967
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH002108864

Mishneh Torah, Repentance



Chapter 1

If a person has transgressed any one of the Torah precepts, affirmative or negative, willfully or unintentionally, he must confess before God, blessed be he, when repenting and turning away from his sin; for it is written: "If a man or woman commits any of the sins into which men fall … they must confess their sinful act" (Numbers 5:6-7); this means verbal confession.— — How does one confess? He says: "O Lord, I have sinned, I have done evil, I have rebelled against thee and have done this… I regret now and am ashamed of my acts; I will never do it again." This represents the essential part of confession. The more anyone confesses the more praise he deserves. Similarly, those who have to bring sin-offerings, or guilt-offerings, are not forgiven through those offerings for sins committed unintentionally or willfully unless they repent and confess, as it is written: "He must confess the sin he has committed" (Leviticus 5:5). So too, those sentenced to death by the court and those sentenced to lashes are not forgiven through death or lashes unless they repent and confess. Furthermore, one who has injured a person or damaged his property, even though he pays what he owes him, is not pardoned unless he confesses and resolves never to commit such an offense again, as it is written: "If a man or woman commits any of the sins…" (Numbers 5:6).

At this time, when the Temple no longer exists, and we have no atonement altar, there is nothing left but repentance. Repentance atones for all transgressions. Even if a man was wicked throughout his life and repented at the end, we must not mention anything about his wickedness to him, as it is written: "A wicked man's wickedness shall not bring about his downfall when he gives up his wickedness" (Ezekiel 33:12). <i>Yom Kippur</i> itself atones for those who repent, as it is written: "Atonement shall be made for you on this day" (Leviticus 16:30).

Chapter 2

Perfect repentance is where an opportunity presents itself to the offender for repeating the offense and he refrains from committing it because of his repentance and not out of fear or physical inability.— — If, however, one repents only in his old age, when he is no longer able to do what he used to do, his repentance, though not the best, will nevertheless do him some good. Even if a person transgressed all his life and repented on the day of his death and died during his repentance, all his sins are pardoned, as it is written: "Before the sun grows dark, and the light goes from moon and stars, and the clouds gather after rain" (Ecclesiastes 12:2), that is, the day of death. This implies that if he remembers his Creator and repents before death, he is forgiven.

Anyone who makes a verbal confession without resolving in his heart to abandon his sin is like one who takes a ritual bath while grasping a defiling reptile. The bath is useless unless he first casts the reptile away.— —





Repentance and <i>Yom Kippur</i> effect atonement only for sins committed against God, as when one has eaten forbidden food;— — sins committed against a fellow man, as when a person either injured or cursed or robbed his neighbor, he is never pardoned unless he compensates his neighbor and makes an apology. Even though he has made the compensation, the wrongdoer must appease the injured person and ask his pardon. Even if he only annoyed him with words he must apologize and beg his forgiveness.— —
One must not show himself cruel by not accepting an apology; he should be easily pacified, and provoked with difficulty. When an offender asks his forgiveness, he should forgive wholeheartedly and with a willing spirit. Even if he has caused him much trouble wrongfully, he must not avenge himself, he must not bear a grudge. This is the way of the stock of Israel and their upright hearts.— — Concerning the Gibeonites who refused to forgive and be appeased, it is written: "The Gibeonites did not belong to the people of Israel" (II Samuel 21:2).

Chapter 3

Every human being has virtues and sins. One whose merits exceed his sins is a good man; one whose sins exceed his merits is an evil man. If they are fifty-fifty in a person, he is intermediate [between the good and the bad]. So it is with a city. If the merits of all its citizens exceed their iniquities, it is good; if their iniquities exceed their merits, it is bad. And so it is with the entire world.

Anyone who has regretted his good deeds and merits, saying to himself: "What have I accomplished by practising them? I wish I had not performed them," has forfeited all of them, and none of his merits is recalled in his favor, as it is written: "A good man's goodness shall not save him on the day of his rebellion" (Ezekiel 33:12)—this verse refers to one who is sorry for his good deeds in the past. Just as a man's good and bad deeds are balanced when he is dying, so are the good and bad deeds of all individuals weighed annually during the festival of <i>Rosh Hashanah:</i> whoever is found innocent is marked for life; whoever is found guilty is marked for death; the intermediate individual [neither very good nor very bad] is held in suspense till <i>Yom Kippur</i>. If he repents he is marked for life; if not, he is marked for death.
Even though the sounding of the <i>shofar</i> on <i>Rosh Hashanah</i> is a biblical decree, it has an intimation, as if to say: "Arise from your slumber, you who are asleep; wake up from your deep sleep, you who are fast asleep; search your deeds and repent; remember your Creator. Those of you who forget the truth because of passing vanities, indulging throughout the year in the useless things that cannot profit you nor save you, look into your souls, amend your ways and deeds. Let everyone give up his evil way and his bad purpose." Everybody should, therefore, regard himself throughout the year as half innocent and half guilty; so too, he should consider the entire world as half innocent and half guilty. If then he commits one additional sin he presses down the scale of guilt against himself and the entire world, and causes his destruction; if, on the other hand, he performs a good deed he presses down the scale of merit in his favor and that of the entire world, and causes salvation and deliverance to reach him and his fellow men, as it is written: "The just man is the foundation of the world" (Proverbs 10:25); that is, he who acts justly presses down the scale of merit in favor of the world and saves it. For this reason, the whole house of Israel has formed a custom to engage in the performance of charity and good deeds between <i>Rosh Hashanah</i> and <i>Yom Kippur</i> to a much larger extent than during the entire year. Besides, during these ten days, they are all accustomed to rise in the night and to pray and supplicate in the synagogue until daylight.


Five types of persons are termed infidels: 1) he who says that there is no God and the world has no Ruler; 2) he who says that there is not one Ruler but two or more; 3) he who says that there is one Lord, but he has body and form; 4) he who says that God is not the First Cause and Creator of all things; and so too, 5) he who worships some other god that should function as an intercessor between him and the Lord of the universe. Each of these five is called infidel.
Three types of persons are termed epicurean heretics: 1) he who says that there is no prophecy at all and that there is no knowledge which emanates from the Creator and reaches the hearts of men; 2) he who denies the prophecy of Moses; 3) he who says that the Creator is not aware of human actions. Each of these three is an epicurean heretic.


Anyone who stands aloof from the community, even though he commits no crimes but only separates himself from the Jewish people and does not perform religious duties as one of them, nor does he project himself into their distress nor share their fasts, but proceeds on his own way, as if he were a non-Jew and not one of them,— — such an individual has no share in the world to come. Anyone who, like Jehoiakim, commits crimes impudently, whether these are light or grave crimes, has no share in the world to come. Such a person is called a shameless sinner, because he exhibits effrontery and shows himself unashamed by the words of the Torah.
There are two types of informers: one who turns over a fellow Jew into the power of pagans to kill him or to beat him; and one who turns over the property of a fellow Jew into the hands of a terrorist, who is like a pagan. Both types of informers have no share in the world to come.

— — All wicked individuals, criminals, apostates, and the like, who repent publicly or secretly are accepted, as it is written: "Turn back, you faithless children" (Jeremiah 3:22); even though he still appears faithless, since he has repented only secretly and not publicly, he is accepted as a repentant.

Chapter 4

Twenty-four things hinder repentance. Four of these are grievous offenses. If one commits any of them, God gives him no opportunity to repent because of the gravity of the offense. Offenders of this type are: 1) he who leads the people to sin; this includes one who prevents them from doing a good deed; 2) he who diverts another from the good to the evil, such as a seducer or enticer; 3) he who sees that his son is falling into bad ways and does not stop him; being under his control, the son would desist if checked by the father; hence, it is as if he actually led him to sin;— — 4) he who says: "I will sin and then repent." This includes one who says: "I will sin and <i>Yom Kippur</i> will atone."
Five of the twenty-four misdeeds shut the ways of repentance to those who commit them. They are: 1) he who stands aloof from the community; since he is not among them when they repent, he does not share the merit they attain; 2) he who opposes the rulings of the sages; since his opposition induces him to stand away from them, he remains ignorant of the ways of repentance; 3) he who makes a mockery of the divine precepts; since they are held in contempt by him, he does not eagerly obey them, and if he does not obey how can he attain merit? 4) he who insults his teachers;— — 5) he who hates rebukes, because he leaves himself no way of repentance; for it is reproof that induces repentance.— — All the prophets rebuked Israel until they repented. It is therefore necessary to engage in every Jewish community a great elderly scholar, God-fearing from his youth and well-liked by the people, to preach to them and lead them to repentance. But he who hates reproof does not come to listen to the preacher; hence he persists in his faults which seem good to him.
Five of the twenty-four misdeeds are of such nature that anyone who commits them cannot attain complete repentance, because they are sins against a fellow man without knowing who it is in order to compensate him and ask his pardon. Offenders of this category are: 1) he who curses the people and not an individual, of whom he might ask to forgive him; 2) he who shares with a thief;— — 3) he who finds lost property and does not announce it, that he may restore it to its owner; when he repents after some time, he does not know to whom he should restore it; 4) he who despoils the poor, orphans and widows; these people are wretched and not well known, they migrate from town to town and have no acquaintance, whereby to ascertain how to refund what he has robbed; 5) he who takes bribes to tamper with justice,— — thus encouraging the bribing litigant and leading him to sin.
Five of the twenty-four offenses are such that the person who commits them is not likely to repent, because they are regarded by most people as trivial, with the result that the sinner imagines that it is no sin. Offenders of this class are: 1) he who shares a meal that is insufficient for its owner; since this is a tinge of robbery, he imagines that he has not done any wrong, saying: "I did not eat without his consent"; 2) he who makes use of a poor man's pledge; since a poor man's pledge happens to be only an axe or a plow, and the user says to himself: "The articles have not depreciated, and I have not robbed him"; 3) he who gazes at women lustfully supposes that there is nothing wrong in it,— — and does not realize that the lustful look is a grave sin, as it is written: "You shall not follow the desires of your heart and your eyes" (Numbers 15:39); 4) he who elevates himself at the expense of another's degradation thinks to himself that this is no sin, since the other person is absent and has not endured shame; nor has he actually shamed him by comparing his own good deeds and wisdom with the other man's deeds or wisdom, implying that he is honorable while the other is contemptible; 5) he who suspects honest men says to himself that it is no sin. "What have I done to him?" he says; "is there anything more in it than a mere suspicion that maybe he has done it and maybe not?" He does not realize that it is sinful to regard a worthy person as a transgressor.
Five of the twenty-four misdeeds are such that anyone who commits them will always be attracted to them, and they are hard to be given up. One should therefore be careful lest he become addicted to them, for they are all extremely obnoxious traits. Here they are: gossip, slander, wrath, evil thought, keeping bad company.— — In the rules concerning ethical behavior we have explained the traits that all men should ever cultivate, and so much the more one who repents.
All these and similar misdeeds do not prevent repentance, even though they hinder it. If a person is sincerely remorseful over them and repents, he is a repentant indeed and has a share in the world to come.

Chapter 5

Free will is granted to every human being. If a man wants to follow the good path and be good, he has the power to do so; if he wants to follow the evil way and be wicked, he is free to do so. It is written: "Indeed, man has become like one of us, knowing good and evil" (Genesis 3:22). That is to say, the human species is unique in the world, there being no other species like it in this respect, namely that man by himself, using his own intelligence and reason, knows what is good and what is evil, without anyone preventing him from doing good or evil as he pleases; in view of this, "he will perhaps put forth his hand and take also from the tree of life…"
Let it not occur to your mind that God decrees at the birth of a person that he shall be good or evil, a notion expressed by foolish non-Jews and most of the stupid individuals among the Jews. It is not so. Every human being is capable of becoming righteous like Moses or wicked like Jeroboam, wise or foolish, merciful or cruel, niggardly or generous; and so with all other traits. There is no one to compel him or to decree what he is to do, no one to pull him in either direction; it is he who directs himself deliberately toward any course he desires. This is what Jeremiah means when he says: "It is not from the mouth of the Most High that good and evil comes" (Lamentations 3:38); that is to say, the Creator does not decree that a man shall be either good or evil. In view of this, it follows that the sinner causes his own ruin; he should therefore weep and lament because of his sins and the resulting evil he has brought upon himself.— —

If God were to decree that a person should be either good or bad, or if there were in the very essence of man's nature anything that irresistibly draws him to a particular course, or to a special branch of knowledge, to special characteristics or actions, as the foolish stargazers invent in their own minds, how could God have commanded us through the prophets: "Do this and you must not do that, improve your ways, and do not follow your wicked impulse," if a man's destiny had already been decreed from his very birth, or his innate makeup draws him to something from which he cannot escape? ! What room would there be for the entire Torah?— —<br>Do not wonder, saying: How can man do all that he pleases and be in control of his actions? Is there anything in the world that can be performed without the Creator's authority and against his wish?— — Know, indeed, that God performs everything according to his wish, even though we are in control of our actions. For example, just as the Creator willed that fire and air should ascend upward and that water and earth should descend downward, and that the sphere should revolve in a circle — — so he willed that man should have freedom to act and that all his actions should be within his power. — — Hence, he is judged according to his deeds: if he has behaved well, he receives a good reward; if he has misbehaved, he is punished.— —

Chapter 6



Chapter 7


A man should always consider himself as if he is about to die; he may die when his time is up while still behaving sinfully. He should therefore repent of his sins immediately. Let him not say: "When I grow old I shall repent," since he may die before getting old. Solomon in his wisdom said: "Let your garments be always white" (Ecclesiastes 9:8).
Do not say that repentance is limited to sinful acts, such as fornication, robbery and theft. Just as a man must repent of these, so he must scan and search his evil traits, repenting of anger, hatred, envy, scoffing, greed, vainglory, excessive desire for food, and so on. One must repent of all these failings. They are worse than sinful acts; when a person is addicted to them, he finds it hard to get rid of them. The prophet says: "Let the guilty man give up his way, and the evil man his thoughts" (Isaiah 55:7).
Let not the repentant person imagine that he is far removed from the merit of the righteous on account of the iniquities and sins he committed. This is not so. He is tenderly loved by the Creator as if he had never sinned. Besides, his reward is great, since he had tasted sin and got rid of it by suppressing his evil impulse. The sages said: "Where repentant sinners stand the thoroughly righteous cannot stand" (Berakhoth 34b); that is, their merit is superior to that of persons who never committed a sin, because the repentant had to exert greater effort in suppressing their impulse.



Those who repent should be exceedingly humble in their behavior. If ignorant fools insult them by mentioning their past deeds and saying to them: "Last night you were doing this and that; last night you were saying this and that," they should pay no attention to them, but upon hearing this they should rejoice, knowing that this is their merit. As long as they feel ashamed of their past deeds and are disgraced because of them, their merit and worth are enhanced. It is a flagrant sin to say to a repentant person: "Remember your past deeds," or to mention them in his presence so as to embarrass him, or to recall similar incidents that are reminiscent of what he did. All this is forbidden along with all kinds of insulting words against which the Torah warns us, as it is written: "You must not vex one another" (Leviticus 25:17).

Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10

Let no person say: "I perform the precepts of the Torah and study its wisdom, so that I may receive all the blessings written in it, or that I may attain life in the world to come; I keep away from the sins against which the Torah has warned us, so that I may be saved from the curses written in the Torah, or that I may not be cut off from life in the world to come." It is unworthy to serve God in this manner; anyone who serves in this manner does so out of fear. — — Only illiterate men, women, and children serve the Lord after this fashion. Children are trained to serve out of fear until they grow in knowledge and serve out of love.


The ancient sages said: "You will perhaps declare: "I study Torah so that I may become rich, that I may be called Rabbi, that I may receive a reward in the world to come." It is therefore written: <i>To love the Lord</i> (Deuteronomy 11:13), whatever you do you must do only out of love" (Sifré).
Whoever studies Torah in order that he may receive a reward, or that he may escape misfortune, is not studying Torah for its own sake; whoever studies it neither out of fear nor for the sake of a reward, but only out of love for the Lord of the entire world who has commanded us to do so, studies Torah for its own sake. The sages declared: "One should under all circumstances study Torah, even if not for its own sake; though he does not study the Torah for its own sake now, he will end up by studying it for its own sake" (Pesaḥim 50b). Hence, when we instruct the young, the women, and the illiterate, we teach them to serve out of fear and in order to receive a reward, until they become much wiser. Then we reveal to them this secret gradually, training them gently in this matter, until they have grasped it, and will serve out of love.