Mishneh Torah, Repentance
משנה תורה, הלכות תשובה
The Mishneh Torah by Maimonides. trans. by Moses Hyamson, 1937-1949
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH002108865

Mishneh Torah, Repentance



Chapter 1

<sup class="footnote-marker">***</sup><i class="footnote">*** The Roman numerals in the following chapters correspond to the Hebrew numerals at the beginning of the paragraphs in the manuscript which do not follow the same division as in the printed editions. The first paragraph in each of the following chapters is not marked by a numeral in the manuscript. The Arabic numerals correspond to those in the printed editions.</i> With regard to all the precepts of the Torah, affirmative or negative, if a person transgressed any one of them, either wilfully or in error, and repents and turns away from his sin, he is under a duty to confess before God, blessed be He, as it is said, "When a man or woman shall commit any sin that men commit, to do a trespass against the Lord, and that person be guilty, then they shall confess their sin which they have done" (Num. 5:6-7); this means <i>confess in words</i>; and this confession is an affirmative precept.<sup class="footnote-marker">****</sup><i class="footnote">**** There is no numeral (<span>ב</span>) there in the Hebrew Manuscript; the new paragraph is indicated by an empty space.</i> How does one confess ? The penitent says "I beseech thee, O Lord, I have sinned, I have acted perversely; I have transgressed before Thee, and have done thus and thus, and lo, I repent and am ashamed of my deeds, and I will never do this again". This constitutes the essence of Confession. The fuller and more detailed the confession one makes, the more praiseworthy is he.  And so, those who were under an obligation to bring sin-offerings and trespass-offerings, when they bring their sacrifices for sins committed in error or wilfully, are not forgiven through those offerings, till they have repented and made confession in words, as it is said, "….he shall confess that wherein he hath sinned" (Lev. 5:5).  So too, those who incurred the judicial penalty of death or punishment of stripes, do not obtain forgiveness by suffering death or receiving stripes unless they repent and confess. Similarly, one who inflicted a wound on another person, or caused him monetary damage, even though he pays what is due to the injured party, does not obtain pardon till he confesses and penitently resolves never to commit the same offence again, as it is said, "(when a man or woman) shall commit any sin that men commit …. then they shall confess" (Num. 5:6-7).
Since the scapegoat, was an atonement for all Israel, the High Priest made confession over it in the name of all Israel, as it is said "and he shall confess over it all the iniquities of the children of Israel" (Lev. 16:21).  The scapegoat atoned for all transgressions mentioned in the Torah, both light and grave, whether committed presumptuously or in error, whether the offender became aware of his transgression, or did not become aware of it; for all sins the scapegoat atoned, provided that the offender repented. But if he did not repent, then the scapegoat only secures forgiveness for the light transgressions.  Which are the light, and which the grave transgressions ? The grave transgressions are those which make the offender liable to a judicial sentence of death or to excision. Likewise, oaths taken in vain or to support a falsehood, though not involving the penalty of excision, are classed among the grave transgressions. Violations of other prohibitions and of affirmative precepts, the neglect of which is not punished by excision, constitute the light transgressions.
At the present time, when the Temple no longer exists, and we have no altar for atonement, nothing is left but repentance. Repentance atones for all transgressions. Even if a man was wicked all the days of his life and repented at the end, nothing of his wickedness is recalled to him, as it is said "And as for the wickedness of the wicked, he shall not stumble thereby in the day that he turns from his wickedness" (Ezek. 33:12). The Day of Atonement itself atones for the penitent, as it is said, "For on this day, shall atonement be made for you" (Lev. 16:30).
Although Repentance atones for all offences and the Day of Atonement serves as atonement, still there are some transgressions that are forgiven immediately, while others are pardoned only after a time. For example, if a person transgressed an affirmative precept, the neglect of which is not punished by excision, and repented, he is forgiven straightway. Of those who commit this class of offences, it is said, "Return ye backsliding children, I will heal your backsliding" (Jerem. 3:22).  A person violated a prohibition, the penalty for which is neither excision nor a judicial sentence of death and repented, the repentance stays the punishment and the Day of Atonement secures pardon. Of this class of offences, it is said, "For on this day shall atonement be made for you" (Lev. 15:30).  A person committed transgressions for which the penalty is excision or a judicial sentence of death, and repented; repentance together with the Day of Atonement stay the punishment, and afflictions that come upon him complete the expiation; and indeed, till he has suffered afflictions, the expiation is not completed. Of this class of offence, it is said, "Then will I visit their transgressions with the rod and their iniquity with strokes" (Ps. 89:33).  This is only so if, at the time when he transgressed, he had not profaned the Name of God. But if one profanes God's Name, even though he repents, even though the Day of Atonement comes and he is still penitent, even if he suffers afflictions, his atonement is not completed till he dies. Repentance, the Day of Atonement and afflictions—all of them together—serve to stay punishment, and death secures forgiveness, as it is said, "And it was revealed in mine ears by the Lord of Hosts, surely this iniquity shall not be expiated by you till ye die" (Is. 22:14).

Chapter 2

What is perfect repentance ? It is so when an opportunity presents itself for repeating an offence once committed, and the offender, while able to commit the offence, nevertheless refrains from doing so, because he is penitent and not out of fear or failure of vigour. For instance, if a man had sinful intercourse with a woman, and after a time was alone with her, his passion for her persisting, his physical powers unabated while he continued to live in the same district where he had sinned, and yet he refrains and does not transgress, he is a sincere penitent. And so Solomon said, "Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth before the evil days come, and the years draw nigh, when thou shalt say 'I have no pleasure in them'" (Eccles. 12:1).  If however, a person only repented in old age, at a time when he is no longer capable of doing what he had done—although this is not an excellent mode of repentance, it nevertheless avails him and he is accepted as a penitent. Even if one transgressed all his life and only repented on the day of his death and dies penitent, all his iniquities are pardoned to him, as it is said "Before the sun and the light and the moon and the stars are darkened and the clouds return after the rain" (Eccles. 12:2)—which is an allusion to the day of death. Hence the inference that if one remembers his Creator and repents before death, he is forgiven.
What is Repentance ? It consists in this, that the sinner abandon his sin, remove it from his thoughts, and resolve in his heart never to repeat it, as it is said, "let the wicked forsake his way, and the man of iniquity his thoughts" (Is. 55:7); that he regret the past, as it is said, "Surely, after that I turned I repented, after that I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh" (Jer. 31:19); that he calls Him who knows all secrets to witness that he will never return to this sin again, as it is said, "neither will we call any more the work of our hands our God, for in Thee the fatherless findeth mercy" (Hos. 14:4). It is also necessary that he make oral confession and utter the resolutions which he made in his heart.
He who confesses in words and has not in his heart resolved to forsake his sin is like one who baptizes himself and keeps in his hand a creeping thing. Unless he casts it away, his baptism is useless. And thus it is said, "but whoso confesseth and forsaketh (them) shall obtain mercy" (Prov. 28:13). Moreover it is necessary to specify the sin, as it is said, "O, this people have sinned a great sin, and have made them a god of gold" (Ex. 32:31).
Some of the modes of manifesting repentance are that the penitent cries continuously before the Lord with tears and supplications; gives charity according to his means; keeps far away from that wherein he sinned; changes his name, as much as to say: "I am another individual and not the one who committed those deeds"; changes all his activities for a better course, for the righeous way; and exiles himself from his former place of residence, since exile atones for iniquity, inducing, as it does, humility, meekeness and lowliness of spirit.
It is highly praiseworthy in a penitent to make public confession, openly avow his transgressions and discover to others his sins against his fellow-men; he should say to them: "Truly, I have sinned against so and so, and did thus and thus to him; and 10, this day, I repent and feel remorse". He, however, who is proud and does not publish his trespasses but conceals them, has not achieved complete repentance, as it is said, "He who covereth his transgressions shall not prosper" (Prov. 28:13).  This only applies to transgressions in matters between man and man. But sins committed against God, the penitent need not publish. Indeed, it is a mark of effrontery on his part if he does so, but he should repent of them before the Almighty, blessed be He, declaring in detail his sins before Him, and make public confession in general terms; and it is well for him that his iniquity has not become known, as it is said, "Happy is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered" (Ps. 32:1).
Although repentance and supplication are always good, they are particularly so and are immediately accepted during the ten days intervening between the New Year and the Day of Atonement, as it is said, "Seek the Lord while He may be found" (Is. 55:6). This only applies, however, to an individual. But as for a community, whenever its members repent and offer supplications with sincere hearts, they are answered, as it is said, "For what great nation is there that hath God so nigh unto them, as the Lord, our God, whensoever we call to Him" (Deut. 4:7).
The Day of Atonement is the time of repentance for all, for the individual as well as for the multitude. It is the goal of the penitential season, appointed unto Israel for pardon and forgiveness. Hence, all are under the obligation of repenting and making confession on the Day of Atonement. The duty of confession, on the Day of Atonement, requires that a person should begin to make his confession already on the previous day, before he takes his meal, lest he choke (while he is eating) without having confessed. And notwithstanding that he had already made confession, he confesses again on the night of the Day of Atonement, during the evening service, and again in the morning service, additional, afternoon and concluding services. At which part of the service is the confession made ? It is recited by the individual after the <i>Amidah;</i> by the reader of the congregation, during the <i>Amidah</i>, in its fourth blessing.
The formula of confession adopted by all Israel is the sentence "Verily we have sinned". This is the essence of the confession. Transgressions, confessed on one Day of Atonement, are again confessed on the next Day of Atonement, even if one has continued penitent, as it is said, "For I know my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me" (Ps. 51:5).
Repentance and the Day of Atonement only secure forgiveness for transgressions against God; as, for example, when one has partaken of forbidden food or indulged in illicit intercourse, and so forth. But transgressions against one's fellow-men, as for instance, if one wounds, curses or robs his neighbour or commits similar wrongs, are never pardoned till the injured party has received the compensation due to him and has also been appeased.  Even though he has made the compensation, the wrongdoer must also appease the one he has injured and ask his forgiveness. Even if a person only annoyed another in words, he has to pacify the latter and entreat him till he has obtained his forgiveness.  If however, the injured party is unwilling to forgive, he should bring three of his friends at one time, and they should entreat the person offended, and solicit his pardon. If they fail, he should take with him a second and even a third group. If the offended person continues obdurate, he leaves him alone and goes away. The one who refused to forgive is now the sinner. But if the offended person was the offender's teacher, the pupil has to go to him again and again, even a thousand times, till pardon has been granted.
It is forbidden to be obdurate and not allow oneself to be appeased. On the contrary one should be easily pacified and find it difficult to become angry. And, when asked by an offender for forgiveness, one should forgive with a sincere mind and willing spirit. Even if one had been much vexed and grievously wronged, he is not to avenge nor bear a grudge. Forgiveness is natural to the seed of Israel, characteristic of their upright heart. Not so are the hard-hearted heathens. "His resentment keeps for ever" (Amos 1:11). Thus, of the Gibeonites who did not forgive and refused to be appeased, it is said, "Now the Gibeonites were not of the children of Israel" (II Sam. 21:2).
If a person sinned against another and the latter died before pardon was sought, the sinner should bring ten men, station them at the grave of the deceased, and, in their presence, make the declaration: "I sinned against the Lord, God of Israel and against this individual, having committed such and such a wrong against him". If he owed the deceased money, he should pay it to the heirs. If he did not know of any heirs, he should deposit the amount in Court, and make confession.

Chapter 3

Every human being has merits and iniquities. One whose merits exceed his iniquities is righteous. He whose iniquities exceed his merits is wicked. If the two balance in an individual, he belongs to the intermediate class.  So it is with a country. If the merits of all its inhabitants exceed their iniquities, the country is righteous. If their iniquities preponderate, it is a wicked country. So too is it with regard to the whole of the world.
A person whose iniquities exceed his merits perishes forthwith in his wickedness, as it is said, "For the multitude of thy iniquity" (Hosea. 9:7). So too, a country, the iniquities of whose inhabitants preponderate, perishes forthwith, as it is said, "the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah, because it is great" (Gen. 18:20). So, with the entire world, if the iniquities of its human population exceed their merits, they are destroyed forthwith, as it is said, "And the Lord saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth" (Gen. 6:5).  This valuation takes into account not the number but the magnitude of merits and iniquities. There may be a single merit that outweighs many iniquities, as it is said, "Because in him there is found some good thing" ( Kings 14:13). And there may be one iniquity that counterbalances many merits, as it is said "But one sinner<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* In the sense of <i>one sin.</i> <span>חֵטא</span></i> destroyeth much good" (Eccles. 9:19). The valuation is according to the knowledge of the Omniscient God. He alone knows how to set off merit against iniquities.
Whoever regrets the precepts that he had fulfilled and wonders at his meritorious deeds, saying to himself, 'What profit have I of them ? Would that I had not done them', forfeits the credit for all of them, and none of his meritorious deeds is ever remembered in his favour, as it is said„ "The righteousness of the righteous shall not deliver him on the day of his transgression" (Ezek. 33:12); that is, if he regrets his former good deeds.  And even as a man's meritorious deeds and iniquities are balanced at the hour of death, so are the iniquities of every single inhabitant of the Earth weighed against his merits annually on the New Year Feast. He who is found righteous is sealed unto life; he who is found wicked is sealed unto death. If one belongs to the intermediate class, sentence on him is suspended till the Day of Atonement. If he repents, he is sealed unto life; if he does not do so, he is sealed unto death.
Although the Sounding of the Shofar on the New Year is a decree of Holy Writ<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* To be obeyed without question as to its purpose.</i>, still it has a deep meaning, as if saying, "Awake, awake, O sleepers, from your sleep; O slumberers, arouse ye from your slumbers; and examine your deeds, return in repentance, and remember your Creator. Those of you who forget the truth in the follies of the times and go astray, the whole year, in vanity and emptiness, which neither profit nor save, look to your souls; improve your ways and works. Abandon, everyone of you, his evil course and the thought that is not good".  It is necessary therefore that every one, throughout the year, should regard himself as if he were half innocent and half guilty; and should regard the whole of mankind as half innocent and half guilty. If then he commits one more sin, he presses down the scale of guilt against himself and the whole world and causes his destruction. If he fulfills one commandment, he turns the scale of merit in his favour and in that of the whole world, and brings salvation and deliverance to all his fellow-creatures and to himself, as it is said, "the righteous man is the foundation of the world" (Prov. 10:25); that is to say, that he who acts justly presses down the scale of merit in favour of all the world and saves it.  And because of these considerations, the whole house of Israel have the custom to increase their charities and other good deeds from the New Year to the Day of Atonement and engage in religious duties at this period to a larger extent than during the rest of the year. So too, during these ten days, all rise up while it is still night, and pray in the synagogues till dawn, with fervent entreaties and supplications.
When a person's iniquities and merits are weighed, the first offence that he committed is not counted, nor yet the second. The reckoning starts from the third offence. And if his iniquities, from the third onwards, are found to exceed his merits, the first two sins are also included in the demerits and he is judged for all of them.  But if his merits and iniquities—counting from the third offence—are found to balance, then all his iniquities are cancelled, one after another. The third is regarded as if it had been the first, the first two having already been forgiven. Then the fourth is regarded as if it had been the first, the third having been forgiven; and so on to the last.  This applies to an individual, as it is said, "Lo, all these things does God do; twice, yea, thrice with a man" (Job. 33:29). As to a community, (punishment for) their first offence as will as for their second and third, is suspended, as it is said "For three transgressions of Israel,—yea, for four, I will not reverse it" (Amos. 2:6). When account is taken of the merits and demerits of a community, their sins are reckoned from the fourth onwards, after the manner already described.  As to those who belong to the intermediate class, if among half of an individual's deeds which constitute offences there is included the sin of never having put on phylacteries,<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* Wilfully and in a spirit of contempt.</i> he is judged according to his sins but will have a portion in the world to come. So too, all wicked persons whose iniquities exceed their merits are judged according to their sins and have a portion in the world to come; for all Israelites, notwithstanding that they have sinned, have a portion in the life hereafter, as it is said, "Thy people shall all be righteous, they shall inherit the land for ever" (Isaiah. 60:21). The expression <i>land</i> is a metaphor for the land of life, that is, the world to come. And so too, the saints among the gentile peoples have a portion in the world to come.
The following have no portion in the world to come, but are cut off and perish, and for their great wickedness and sinfulness are condemned for ever and ever. Heretics and Epicureans;<sup class="footnote-marker">**</sup><i class="footnote">** <span>,אפיקורום</span> literally a follower of the freethinking school of Epicurus; extended scoffing sceptics.</i> those who deny the Torah, the resurrection of the dead or the coming of the Redeemer; apostates; those who cause a multitude to sin, and those who secede from the ways of the community; any one who commits transgressions like Jehoiakim, in high handed fashion and openly; informers; those who terrorise a community, not for a religious purpose; murderers and slanderers, and one who obliterates the physical mark of his Jewish origin.
Five Classes are termed Heretics; he who says that there is no God and the world has no ruler; he who says that there is a ruling power but that it is vested in two or more persons; he who says there is one ruler, but that He is a body and has form; he who denies that He alone is the First Cause and Rock of the Universe; likewise, he who renders worship to any one beside Him, to serve as a mediator between the human being and the Lord of the Universe. Whoever belongs to any of these five classes is termed a heretic.
Three Classes are called Epicureans:<sup class="footnote-marker">**</sup><i class="footnote">** <span>,אפיקורום</span> literally a follower of the freethinking school of Epicurus; extended scoffing sceptics.</i> he who denies the reality of prophecy and maintains that there is no knowledge which emanates from the Creator and directly reaches the human mind; he who denies the prophecy of Moses, our teacher; and he who asserts that the Creator has no cognizance of the deeds of the children of men. Each of these classes consists of Epicureans.  Three Classes are deniers of the Torah; he who says that the Torah is not of divine origin—even if he says of one verse, or of a single word, that Moses said it, of himself,<sup class="footnote-marker">***</sup><i class="footnote">*** Without divine authority.</i>—is a denier of the Torah; likewise, he who denies its interpretation, that is, the Oral Law, and repudiates its reporters, as Zadok and Boethus did; he who says that the Creator changed one commandment for another, and that this Torah, although of divine origin, is now obsolete, as the Nazarenes and Moslems assert. Everyone belonging to any of these classes is a denier of the Torah.
There are two classes of apostates—an apostate with respect to the violation of a single precept, and an apostate with respect to the whole Torah. The former is a person who has determined to violate a certain precept, commits the transgression habitually and has become notorious for it. Even if it is one of the lighter sins, as, for instance, if a person wears garments "of diverse sorts" (a mixture of wool and flax) (Deut. 22:11) or "rounds the corner of his head" (Lev. 19:27), doing so habitually, so that it appears that the precept is regarded by him as no longer binding, he is an apostate in regard to that particular observance, provided that he acted in a provocative spirit. An apostate with respect to the whole Torah is one, for example, who at a time of religious persecution becomes converted to the idolaters' religion, clings to them, saying, "what advantage is it to me to adhere to the people of Israel, who are of low estate and persecuted. Better for me to join these nations who are powerful." A person who acts thus is an apostate in respect to the whole Torah.
Those who cause the multitude to sin, include one who induces others to sin, whether in a great matter, like Jeroboam, Zadok and Boethus, or in a light matter, even if he only induces them to nullify the observance of an affirmative precept; and any one who coerces others to sin, like Manasseh who put Israelites to death and so forced the people into idolatry; or deceives others and leads them astray.
One who separates himself from the Community, even if he does not commit a transgression but only holds aloof from the congregation of Israel, does not fulfill religious precepts in common with his people, shows himself indifferent when they are in distress, does not observe their fast, but goes his own way, as if he were one of the gentiles and did not belong to the Jewish people—such a person has no portion in the world to come.  He, who, like Jehoiakim, commits transgressions arrogantly, whether these are light or grave offences, has no portion in the world to come. Such a one is called a shameless transgressor, because he exhibits effrontery and shamelessness and is unabashed by the words of the Torah.
There are two classes of informers: one who delivers a coreligionist into the power of a heathen, who will put him to death or assault him; and one who delivers the property of a coreligionist to a heathen or to a despot, who is like a heathen. Both classes of informers have no portion in the world to come.
The terrorisers of a community, not for the sake of God, are those who rule a congregation arbitrarily so that all fear and are afraid of them—their aim, like that of the heathen kings, being to advance their own glory and interests but not to promote the glory of God.
All these twenty four classes which we have enumerated, even if they are Israelites, have no portion in the world to come. There are transgressions less grave than those mentioned, concerning which, however, the sages said that whoever habitually commits them will have no portion in the world to come. One should therefore avoid, and beware of such transgressors.  They are one who gives another a nickname, calls another by his nickname, puts him to shame in public, seeks honour by another person's humiliation, contemns scholars or one's teachers, treats the festivals with contempt, desecrates things sacred.  When it is said that one who commits any of these sins has no portion in the world to come, the statement is to be understood as only applying to the sinner who dies impenitent. But if he repented of his wickedness and expired while still penitent, he is of those who will have a portion in the world to come; for there is nothing that stands in the way of repentance. Even if a person, throughout his life, denied the essential principle of religion and repented at the end, he will have a portion in the world to come; as it is said "Peace, Peace to him that is far off and to him that is near, saith the Lord, and I will heal him" (Is. 57:19).  All wicked persons, transgressors, apostates and the like, who come back penitent, whether openly or secretly, are accepted, as it is said, "Return, ye backsliding children" (Jer. 3:22). Even if one is still a backslider—since he only returns in secret and not openly—he is accepted if he repents.

Chapter 4

Twenty-four things hinder repentance. Four of them constitute grave offences. If one commits any of them, the Holy One, blessed be He, does not give him an opportunity to repent because of the enormity of his sin. Such sinners are the following: 1) He who leads a community to sin, and under this category comes one who prevents a community from fulfilling a religious duty; 2) he who turns his fellow-man from the good to the evil way, as, for instance, the seducer and the enticer (Deut. 13:3); 3) he who sees his son falling into vicious courses and does not check him. As the son is under his father's control, had the latter checked him, he would have renounced his evil course; hence, the father is considered to have induced his son to sin. Included in this category is any one who is able to check others,—an individual or a community—and does not do so, but permits them to stumble; 4) he who says, "I will sin and then repent". Included in this category is he who says, "I will sin, and the Day of Atonement will secure my forgiveness".
Among those (twenty-four things), there are five offences which close the ways of repentance to those who commit them. Such sinners are the following: 1) He who separates himself from the community, because, when they repent, he will not be with them, and will therefore have no part in the merit they acquire; 2) he who opposes the <i>dicta</i> of the sages, because his opposition induces him to separate himself from them and he will consequently remain in ignorance of the ways of repentance; 3) he who makes mock of the divine precepts, for, since in his eyes they are contemptible, he will not eagerly seek them nor fulfil them; and if he does not fulfil them, how can he acquire merit ? 4) He who contemns his teachers; for such conduct will lead to his being thrust forth and expelled, as happened to Gehazi ( Kings 5:27); and when he is expelled, he will find no one to teach him and show him the way of truth; 5) he who hates rebukes, since he does not leave himself a way to return, for it is rebuke that brings about repentance. When a person is told of his faults and is put to shame on their account, he repents, as it is written in the Torah, "Remember, do not forget…. ye have been rebellious" (Deut. 9:7); "But the Lord hath not given you a heart to understand" ((Deut. 29:3); "O foolish people and unwise" (Deut. 32:6). I<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* The Hebrew Manuscript has <span>ד</span> at the beginning of this paragraph and also of the next paragraph, and heads the following paragraph with <span>ו</span> instead of <span>ה</span>.</i> Thus too, Isaiah rebuked Israel and said, "O sinful nation"….. (Is. 1:4); "The ox knoweth his owner……" (Is. 1:3); "Because I know that thou art obstinate" (Is. 48:4). And indeed God commanded him to rebuke sinners, as it is said, "Cry aloud, spare not" (Is. 58:1). Thus too, all the prophets rebuked Israel till they repented. Hence it is necessary to appoint in every community a great scholar, advanced in years, God-fearing from his youth and beloved by the people, to rebuke the multitude and cause them to repent. But he who hates rebukes will not go to the exhorter nor hear his words, and will therefore persist in his sins which seem good in his eyes.
Among those (twenty four things), there are five offences of such a nature that he who commits them cannot possibly return in perfect repentance, because they are sins against one's fellow-man and the sinner does not know to whom he has to make restitution, or of whom he has to ask pardon. Sinners of this class are the following: 1) He who curses a multitude, and not an individual of whom he might ask forgiveness; 2) he who shares with a thief, since he does not know who is the owner of the stolen property, the thief stealing from many persons and bringing him the stolen articles which he receives; furthermore, because the receiver encourages the thief and induces him to sin; 3) he who finds lost property and does not proclaim it, so as to restore it to its owner; after a time, when he repents, he does not know whom to restore it to; 4) he who despoils the poor, orphans or widows; for these people are in a pitiable condition, they are not well known, they emigrate from one city to another where they have no acquaintance, so that the wrongdoer cannot ascertain to whom the despoiled goods belong and should be restored; 5) he who takes bribes to prevert judgment; since he does not know how far his judgment has been perverted, nor the full extent of the consequences, so that he might make amends, for he will find excuses<sup class="footnote-marker">**</sup><i class="footnote">** The judge will say “I have decided justly” (so explained in the Keseph Mishnah).</i> for his conduct; furthermore, because he encourages the bribing ligitant and causes him to sin.
Among those (twenty-four sins), there are five, concerning which it may be assumed that he who commits them will not repent of them; the reason being that they are regarded by most people as trivial, with the result that one sins and imagines that it is no sin. Offenders coming under this category are the following: 1) He who partakes of a meal that is insufficient for its owner. This is a minor<sup class="footnote-marker">***</sup><i class="footnote">*** Literally: “dust of robbery”.</i> form of robbery; yet the guest imagines that he has not sinned and says (to himself) "Did I eat aught without the owner's consent ?" 2) he who uses a poor man's pledge. A poor man's pledge consists only of such articles as an axe or a plow, and the user says to himself: "the articles have not been diminished; I have not robbed him". 3) he who gazes at women whom it would be unlawful for him to marry, thinks that there is nothing wrong in it, and says to himself, "Have I cohabited with her, or even drawn near to her ?"—and does not realise that the (lustful) look is a grave sin, for it leads to actual inchastity, as it is said, "And that ye seek not after your heart and after your eyes" (Num. 15:39). 4) he who seeks to obtain honour by disparaging another person and thinks to himself that this is no sin, since the other person is not present and has not suffered any shame. Moreover, the speaker did not actually shame him but only compared his own good deeds and wisdom with the other person's deeds or wisdom, so that it might be inferred that he himself is an honourable man, while the other is a contemptible fellow. 5) he who suspects the innocent, thinks to himself that he is not comitting a sin, and says, 'what have I done to him? Is there on my part anything more than a suspicion as to whether that person has done something or not ?' He does not however, realise that it is an iniquity, to regard a blameless man as possibly a transgressor.
<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* In the Hebrew Manuscript, this is numbered</i> Belonging to the group, are five offences of such a nature that he who commits them will always be addicted to them and will find it hard to break away from them. Hence, a person should be on his guard lest he become habituated to them, seeing that they are all exceedingly pernicious habits. They are as follows: "Tale-bearing, Evil Speech, Choleric Temper, Evil Thoughts; keeping company with a wicked person, for thus one learns his ways which become impressed on the heart. So Solomon said: "But the companion of fools shall be broken" (Prov. 13:20). In the laws dealing with moral dispositions, we have put together the qualities that all men should cultivate; how much more then, should the penitent do so.
All offences enumerated above and their like, though they hinder repentance, do not prevent it. If a person repents of them, he is accepted as a penitent, and will have a portion in the world to come.

Chapter 5

Free Will is bestowed on every human being. If one desires to turn towards the good way and be righteous, he has the power to do so. If one wishes to turn towards the evil way and be wicked, he is at liberty to do so. And thus is it written in the Torah, "Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil" (Gen. 3:22)—which means that the human species had become unique in the world—there being no other species like it in the following respect, namely, that man, of himself and by the exercise of his own intelligence and reason, knows what is good and what is evil, and there is none who can prevent him from doing that which is good or that which is evil. And since this is so (there is reason to fear) "lest he put forth his hand etc." (ibid.).
Let not the notion, expressed by foolish gentiles and most of the senseless folk among Israelites, pass through your mind that at the beginning of a person's existence, the Almighty decrees that he is to be either righteous or wicked. This is not so. Every human being may become righteous like Moses, our teacher, or wicked like Jeroboam; wise or foolish, merciful or cruel; niggardly or generous; and so with all other qualities. I There is no one that coerces him or decrees what he is to do, or draws him to either of the two ways; but every person turns to the way which he desires, spontaneously and of his own volition. Thus Jeremiah said, "out of the mouth of the Most High, proceedeth not evil and good" (Lam. 3:38); that is to say, the Creator does not decree either that a man shall be good or that he shall be wicked.  Accordingly it follows that it is the sinner who has inflicted injury on himself; and he should therefore weep for, and bewail what he has done to his soul—how he has mistreated it. This is expressed in the next verse, "Wherefore doth a living man complain, a strong man, because of his sins" (Lam. 3:39). The prophet continues: since liberty of action is in our hands and we have, of our free will, committed all these evils, it behoves us to return in a spirit of repentance, and forsake our wickedness, for we have the power to do so. This thought is expressed in the next verse, "Let us search and try our ways, and return to the Lord" (Lam. 3.40).
This doctrine is an important principle, the pillar of the Law and the Commandment, as it is said, "see, I set before thee this day life and good, and death and evil" (Deut. 30:15); and again it is written, 'Behold, I set before you this day, a blessing and a curse" (Deut. 11:26). This means that the power is in your hands, and whatever a man desires to do among the things that human beings do, he can do, whether they are good or evil; and, because of this faculty, it is said, "O that they had such a heart as this always" (Deut. 5:26), which implies that the Creator neither puts compulsion on the children of men nor decrees that they should do either good, or evil, but it is all left to their discretion.
If God had decreed that a person should be either righteous or wicked, or if there were some force inherent in his nature which irresistibly drew him to a particular course, or to a special branch of knowledge, to special views or activities, as the foolish astrologers, out of their own fancy, pretend, how would the Almighty have charged us, through the prophets: 'Do this and do not do that, improve your ways, do not follow your wicked impulses', when, from the beginning of his existence, his destiny had already been decreed, or his innate constitution irresistibly drew him to that from which he could not set himself free ? What room would there be for the whole of the Torah ? By what right or justice could God punish the wicked or reward the righteous ? "Shall not the Judge of all the earth act justly?" (Gen. 18:25).  Do not, however, wonder: how can a man do whatever he desires, and act according to his discretion? Can aught in the world be done without the Master's Will and pleasure ? The Scripture itself says, "Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that hath He done in heaven and on earth" (Ps. 135:6). Know then that everything takes place according to His pleasure, notwithstanding that our acts are in our power.  How so ? Just as it was the pleasure of the Creator that fire and air shall ascend, earth and water descend, and that the sphere shall revolve in a circle, and all other things in the Universe shall exist in their special ways which He desired, so it was His pleasure that Man should have liberty of will, and all his acts should be left to his discretion; that nothing should coerce him or draw him to aught, but that, of himself and by the exercise of his own mind which God had given him, he should do whatever it is in a man's power to do.  Hence, he is judged according to his deeds. If he does well, good is done to him; and if he does ill, evil is done to him. So the prophet says, "This hath been of your doing" (Mal. 1:9): "Yea, they have chosen their own ways" (Is. 66:3). On this theme Solomon said, "Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth…. but know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into judgment" (Eccles. 11:9); that is to say, realise that what you do is in your power, and that you will have to render an account.
Perchance you will say, "Does not the Almighty know everything that will be before it happens"? He either knows that this person will be righteous or wicked, or He does not know. If He knows that he will be righteous, it is impossible that he should not be righteous; and if you say that He knows that he will be righteous and yet it is possible for him to be wicked, then He does not know the matter clearly.  As to the solution of this problem, understand that "the measure thereof is longer than the earth and wider than the sea" (Job. 11:9), and many important principles of the highest sublimity are connected with it. You, however, need only to know and comprehend what I am about to say.  In the Second Chapter of the laws relating to the fundamental principles of the Torah, we have already explained that God does not know with a knowledge external to Himself, like human beings whose knowledge and self are separate entities, but He, blessed be His Name, and His knowledge are One. This, the human intellect cannot clearly apprehend. And just as it is not in human power to apprehend or discover the Creator's Real Essence, as it is said, "For there shall no man see Me and live" (Ex. 33:20), so it is not in human power to apprehend or discover the Creator's knowledge. So the prophet said, "For My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways My ways" (Is. 55:8). This being the case, we lack the capacity to know how God knows all creatures and their activities.  Yet we do know beyond doubt that a human being's activities are in his own hands and the Almighty neither draws him on, nor decrees that he should act thus or not act thus. It is not religious tradition alone by which this is known. It is also supported by clear proofs furnished by science. Hence, it is said in the Prophetic writings that a man will be judged for all his deeds, according to his deeds, whether they be good or evil. And this is the principle on which all the words of Prophecy depend.

Chapter 6

There are many verses in the Pentateuch and in the Prophets which seem to contradict this fundamental doctrine. And they lead most people astray and make them think that God decrees that a person shall do good or evil, and that a man's heart is not under his control, to incline him in whichever direction he pleases. I will therefore expound an important principle by which you will learn the meaning of those verses.  When an individual sins or the inhabitants of a country sin, and the sinner commits an offence, consciously and voluntarily, as above stated, it is proper that he be punished. God knows the way in which punishment should be exacted. In the case of some sins, justice requires that the sinner should be punished for his sin in this world, corporally or pecuniarily or through his little children; for a man's little children, who have as yet no understanding and have not arrived at the age of religious obligation, are their father's quasi-property, and the text "Every man<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* Every <i>man</i> but not a child.</i> shall be put to death for his own sin" (Deut. 24:16) implies that one is not personally liable till he is an adult. I Again, there are sins where justice requires that the punishment be inflicted in the life hereafter and the transgressor suffers no hurt here on earth. Other sins again there are, for which the penalty is exacted here and hereafter.
The foregoing only applies in case the sinner has not repented. But if he repented, repentance serves as a shield against punishment. And as one sins, prompted by one's own mind and of his free will, so one repents, prompted by one's mind and will.
A man may commit so great a sin or such numerous sins that justice requires of the true judge, as the penalty to be exacted from this particular sinner for the sins, committed by him voluntarily and of his own mind, that repentance shall be withheld from him and liberty to turn from his wickedness shall not be accorded him, so that he may die and perish in the sins which he committed. So God saith through Isaiah, "Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and close their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and turn and be healed" (Is. 6:10); and thus it is said, "But they mocked the messengers of God, and despised His words, and scoffed at His prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against His people, till there was no remedy" ( Book of Chron. 36:16). This means that they sinned, of their own will, and multiplied transgressions to such an extent that they incurred the penalty of having repentance, which is the remedy for sin, withheld from them.  Hence also, it is written in the Pentateuch, "And I will harden Pharaoh's heart" (Ex. 4:21). Because Pharaoh sinned on his own impulse and ill-treated the Israelites who sojourned in his land, as is said "Come let us deal wisely with them…." (Ex. 1:10), justice required that repentance should be withheld from him till retribution had been visited upon him. The Holy One, blessed be He, accordingly hardened his heart.  But why did He send him a message through Moses, bidding him 'release the Israelites and repent', when He had already told him 'thou wilt not release them', as it is said, "But as for thee and thy servants, I know that ye will not fear the Lord God" (Ex. 9:30), "But in very deed for this cause have I made thee to stand, (to show thee my power, and that my name may be declared throughout all the earth)" (Ex. 9:16)? The purpose was to instruct the inhabitants of the world<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* This purpose is indicated in the verse last quoted (Ex. 9:16).</i> that when the Almighty withholds repentance from the sinner, he cannot return, but will die in his wickedness which he had originally committed of his own will. V So Sihon, because of his iniquities, incurred the penalty of having repentance withheld from him, as it is said, "for the Lord thy God hardened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate, that He might deliver him into thy hand, as appeareth this day" (Deut. 2:30). Thus too, because of the Canaanites' abominations, God withheld repentance from them till they waged war against Israel, as it is said, "For it was of the Lord to harden their hearts, to come against Israel, in battle, that they might be utterly destroyed" Josh. 11:20). So with the Israelites in the days of Elijah; because they transgressed much, God withheld repentance from those who multiplied their transgressions, as it is said, "For thou didst turn their heart backward" ( Kings 18:37); this means 'Thou has withheld repentance from them'. VI To sum up, God did not decree that Pharaoh should ill-treat Israel, or Sihon sin in his land, or that the Canaanites should commit abominations, or that Israel should worship idols. All of them sinned by their own volition; and all accordingly incurred the penalty that repentance should be withheld from them.
And thus the prophets and the righteous beseech the Almighty, in their prayers, to help them to the way of truth, as David said, "Teach me, O Lord, thy way", (Ps. 86:11); that is, 'May my sins not keep the way of truth from me, that I may learn from it Thy way and the Unity of Thy Name'. So also his prayer, "let a noble spirit uphold me" (Ps. 51:14) means, 'Suffer my spirit to accomplish its desire, and may not my sins cause repentance to be withheld from me, but let me have liberty, till I return and understand and know the way of truth'. Every text similar to the above can be explained in the same way.
What is meant by David's utterance, "Good and upright is the Lord; therefore He will teach sinners in the way; He will guide the meek in judgment and will teach the meek His way" (Ps. 25:8)? It refers to the fact that God sent them prophets to teach them the ways of the Lord and bring them back in repentance; furthermore, that He endowed them with the capacity of learning and understanding. For it is characteristic of every human being that, when his interest is engaged in the ways of wisdom and righteousness, he longs for these ways and is eager to follow them. Thus the sages say, "Whoever comes to purify himself receives aid"; that is, he will find himself helped in his endeavour.  But is it not written in the Torah "And they shall serve them, and they shall afflict them" (Gen. 15:13)? Did not then the Almighty decree that the Egyptians should do evil ? It is also written, "And this people will rise up and go astray after the foreign gods of the land" (Deut. 31:16). Did He not decree that Israel should worship idols ? Why then did He punish them ? (The answer is) that He did not decree concerning any particular individual that that individual should be the one to go astray. Any one of those who went astray and worshipped idols, had he not desired to commit idolatry, need not have done so. The Creator only instructed Moses as to what the future course of history would be, as one might say, 'This people will have among them righteous and wicked persons'. A wicked man has no right, on that account, to say that it had been decreed that he should be wicked, because the Almighty had informed Moses that among Israel there would be wicked men, just as the text, "For the poor shall never cease out of the land" (Deut. 15:11) (does not imply that any particular individual is destined to be poor).  So too with the Egyptians: Every one of those Egyptians who oppressed and ill-treated the Israelites could have refrained from doing so, had he not wished to hurt them. For God did not make a decree concerning any specific individual but only informed Abraham that his seed would be subjected to servitude in a land that was not theirs. We have already stated that it is beyond human power to understand the way in which God has cognizance of future events.

Chapter 7

Since every human being, as we have explained, has free will, a man should strive to repent, (make verbal confession of his sins<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* The Hebrew of the phrase in brackets <span>ולהתודות בפיו טִחטאיו</span> is not in the Manuscript, but in the printed editions.</i>) and renounce them, so that he may die penitent and thus be worthy of life in the world to come.
A man should always regard himself as if his death were iminent and think that he may die this very hour, while still in a state of sin. He should therefore repent of his sins immediately and not say, 'When I grow old I shall repent', for he may die before he becomes old. So Solomon, in his wisdom, said, "Let thy garments be always white, and oil on thy head not be lacking" (Eccles. 9:8).
Do not say that one need only repent of sinful deeds such as fornication, robbery and theft. Just as a man needs to repent of these sins involving acts, so he needs to investigate and repent of any evil dispositions that he may have, such as hot temper, hatred, jealousy, quarrelling,<sup class="footnote-marker">**</sup><i class="footnote">** <span>התחתרו</span> Omitted in printed editions.</i> scoffing, eager pursuit of wealth or honours, greediness in eating, and so on. Of all these faults one should repent. They are graver than sinful acts; for, when one is addicted to them it is difficult to give them up. And thus it is said, "Let the wicked forsake his way and the man of iniquity his thoughts" (Is. 55:7).
Let not the penitent suppose that he is kept far away from the degree attained by the righteous, because of the iniquities and sins that he had committed. This is not so. He is beloved by the Creator, desired by Him, as if he had never sinned. Moreover his reward is great; since, though having tasted sin, he renounced it and overcame his evil passions. The sages say, "Where penitents stand, the completely righteous cannot stand". This means, that the degree attained by penitents is higher than that of those who had never sinned, the reason being that the former have had to put forth a greater effort to subdue their passions than the latter.
All the prophets charged the people concerning repentance. Only through repentance will Israel be redeemed, and the Torah already offered the assurance that Israel will, in the closing period of his exile, finally repent, and thereupon be immediately redeemed, as it is said, "And it shall come to pass, when all these things are come upon thee, the blessing and the curse, which I have set before thee, and thou shalt take it to heart among all the nations, whither the Lord, thy God hath driven thee, and shalt return unto the Lord, thy God, and hearken to His voice according to all that I command thee this day, thou and thy children, with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, that the Lord thy God will turn thy captivity, and have mercy upon thee, and will return and gather thee from all the nations, whither the Lord, thy God, hath scattered thee" (Deut. 30:1-3).
Great is repentance, for it brings men near to the Divine Presence, as it is said, "Return, O Israel, unto the Lord, thy God" (Hos. 14:2). Again, it is said, "And ye have not returned unto Me, saith the Lord" (Amos 4:6). Further, "If thou return, O Israel, to Me shalt thou return" (Jer. 4:1), which means 'If thou returnest in repentance, thou wilt cleave to Me'.  Repentance brings near those who are far away. But yesterday this person was odious before God, abhorred, estranged, an abomination. To-day he is beloved, desirable, near (to God), a friend. So you find that the same expression with which God thrusts sinners away from Him, He employs to bring the penitent near to Him, whether they are individuals or communities, as it is said, "And instead of that which was said unto them: 'Ye are not my people', it shall be said unto them: 'Ye are children of the living God' " (Hos. 2:1). Of Jeconiah, while he was wicked, it was said, "Write ye this man childless, a man that shall not prosper in his days" (Jer. 22:30); "Though Coniah, the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, were a signet upon my right hand, (yet would I pluck thee thence)" (Jer. 22:24). But after he had in his exile repented, it is said of his son, Zerubbabel, "In that day, saith the Lord of Hosts, will I take thee, O Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, my servant, and will make thee as a signet, saith the Lord of hosts" (Haggai 2:23).
How exalted is the degree of repentance ? But last night a certain individual was separated from the Lord, God of Israel, as it is said, "Your iniquities were making a separation between you and your God" (Is. 59:2). He cries aloud and is not answered, as it is said, "Yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear" (Is. 1:15). He fulfils religious precepts and they are flung back in his face, as it is said, "who hath required this at your hand to tread my courts?" (Is. 1:12); "Oh that there were even one among you that would shut the doors, that ye might not kindle fire on my altar in vain; I have no pleasure in you, saith the Lord of hosts, neither will I accept an offering at your hand" (Malachi 1:10); "Add your burnt offerings unto your sacrifice and eat flesh" (Jer. 7:21).  Today, the same individual (having repented) is closely attached to the Divine Presence, as it is said, "And ye that cleave unto the Lord, your God, are alive, everyone of you this day" (Deut. 4:4). He cries and is immediately answered, as it is said, "And it shall come to pass that before they call I will answer" (Is. 65:24). He fulfils religious precepts tnd they are accepted with pleasure and with joy, as it is said, "For God hath already accepted thy works" (Eccles. 9:7). Yet more, they are eagerly desired, as it is said, "Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant to the Lord as in the days of old and as in ancient years" (Malachi 3:4).
The right way for penitents is to be exceedingly humble and meek. If fools taunt them with their former deeds and say to them, 'But last night thou didst act thus and thus; last night, thou wast saying this and that', they should not be unpleasantly affected by them, but should listen and rejoice, realizing that this will be accounted a merit unto them. For when they are ashamed of their past deeds and humiliated because of them, their merit is increased and their worth enhanced.  It is however a grievous sin to say to a penitent 'Remember thy former doings', or to recall them in his presence, so as to shame him, or refer to similar incidents or topics, in order to remind him of what he had done. All this is forbidden and comes under the category of vexing another in words, against which the Torah warns us in the text "Ye shall not vex one another" (Lev. 25:17).

Chapter 8

The good reserved for the righteous is life in the world to come,—a life which is immortal, a good without evil. Thus is it written in the Torah "that it may be well with thee and that thou mayest prolong thy days" (Deut. 22:7); the traditional interpretation of which is as follows: "that it may be well with thee", in a world altogether good; "that thou mayest prolong thy days", in a world unending, that is, the world to come.  The reward of the righteous is that they will attain this bliss and abide in this state of happiness; the punishment of the wicked is that they will not attain this life but will be cut off and die. He who does not attain this life will be dead, in the sense that he will never live again but will be cut off in his wickedness and perish like the brute beast. This is the penalty of <i>excision,</i> referred to in the Torah, as it is written, "That soul shall utterly be cut off, his iniquity shall be upon him" (Num. 15:31): which has been traditionally interpreted as follows: "'cut off', in this world; "utterly cut off', in the world to come". This means that that soul, after its separation from the body (at the close of its existence) on earth, will not attain life in the world to come but will be cut off from that life also.
In the world to come, there is nothing corporeal, and no material substance; there are only souls of the righteous without bodies,—like the ministering angels. And since in that world there are no bodies, there is neither eating there, nor drinking, nor aught that human beings need on earth. None of the conditions occur there which are incident to physical bodies in this world, such as sitting, standing, sleep, death, grief, merriment, etc. So the ancient sages said, "In the life hereafter, there is no eating, no drinking, no connubial intercourse, but the righteous sit with their crowns on their heads and enjoy the radiance of the Shechinah"<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* Divine Presence.</i>.  This passage clearly indicates that as there is no eating or drinking there, there is no physical body hereafter. The phrase "the righteous sit"—is allegorical and means that the souls of the righteous exist there without labour or fatigue. The phrase "their crowns on their heads" refers to the knowledge they have acquired, and for the sake of which they have attained life in the world to come. This is their crown, in the same sense as where Solomon says "with the crown wherewith his mother hath crowned him" (Song of Songs 3:11). And just as in the text "Everlasting joy shall be upon their heads" (Is. 35:10), joy is not to be understood as a material substance that actually rests on the head, so 'the Crown', of which the sages here speak, is not to be taken literally but refers to knowledge.  And what is the meaning of the sages' statement: "they enjoy the radiance of the Shechinah"<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* Divine Presence.</i>? It means that the righteous attain to a knowledge and realisation of the truth concerning God to which they had not attained while they were in the murky and lowly body.
The soul, whenever mentioned in this connection, is not the vital element requisite for bodily existence, but that form of soul which is identical with the intelligence which apprehends the Creator, as far as it is able, and apprehends other abstract concepts and other things. It is the psychic form, which we expounded in the Fourth Chapter of the Laws concerning the fundamental principles of the Torah. And it is this which, in this connection, is called Soul.  That life, as it is immortal,—death being only incidental to the body, which does not exist in the hereafter—is called 'the bond of life', as it is said, "but the soul of my lord shall be bound in the bond of life; and the souls of thine enemies, them he shall sling out….." ( Sam. 25:29). And this is a recompense than which there is none higher; a bliss beyond which there is nothing more blissful. And for this, all the prophets yearned.
How many names have been metaphorically applied to it: 'The mountain of the Lord', 'His holy place', 'the way of holiness', 'the holy way', 'the courtyards of the Lord', 'the tent of the Lord', 'the beauty of the Lord', the temple of the Lord', 'the house of the Lord', 'the gate of the Lord'! The sages metaphorically call this bliss, destined for the righteous, 'the Banquet'. Its general name is 'the World to Come'.
The severest retribution beyond which punishment can no further go, is that the soul shall be cut off and not attain the life hereafter, as it is said, "That soul shall be utterly cut off; his iniquity shall be upon him"<sup class="footnote-marker">**</sup><i class="footnote">** Literally “her iniquity shall be upon her”—referring to the soul.</i> (Num. 15:31). This destruction it is to which the prophets metaphorically apply the terms 'the Pit of destruction', 'Abaddon', 'Tophet', 'Leech'; and all other expressions which connote cessation and destruction are applied to it, because it is a ruin that is irreparable and a loss which is irrecoverable.
Possibly you may esteem this boon (of life hereafter) lightly, and imagine that the only reward for fulfilling religious precepts and walking consistently in the ways of truth is to enjoy good food and drink; to have intercourse with 'beautiful forms'; to wear fine linen and brocade; to dwell in palaces of ivory; to be served on gold and silver plate and enjoy similar things, as indeed those foolish and silly Arabs, who lead dissolute lives, imagine.  The wise and intelligent know, however, that all these pleasures are exaggerated and inane, and there is no profit in them. They are regarded by us as a great boon because we are beings with physical bodies and material frames which have need of all these things. The soul only desires and longs for them because they are necessary to the body, and enable it to attain its needs and maintain its health; and when the body ceases to exist, all these things become null and void.  As to the blissful state of the soul in the world to come, there is no way on earth in which we can comprehend or know it. For in this earthly existence we only have knowledge of physical pleasure; and it is for this that we long. But the bliss of the life hereafter is exceedingly great, and can only metaphorically be compared with earthly enjoyments. In reality, however, there is no comparison between the bliss of the soul in the life hereafter and the gratification afforded to the body on earth by food and drink. That spiritual bliss is unsearchable and beyond compare. So David said, "How great is Thy goodness which Thou hast laid up for them that fear Thee" (Ps. 31:19).
How David yearned and longed for the life in the world to come, as it is said, "Had I not believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living'…. (Ps. 27:13).  The ancient sages taught us that a clear comprehension of the bliss in the life hereafter is unattainable to any man. None but God knows its grandeur, beauty and power. All the boons which the prophets prophesied to Israel only refer to material things that Israel will enjoy in the days of King Messiah, when sovereignty will be restored to Israel.  But as for the bliss in the world to come, nought can be compared with, or likened to it. And the prophets did not depict it, so as not to depreciate it by their imaginary picture. Thus Isaiah said, "Eye hath not seen beside Thee, O God, what He prepareth for him that waiteth for Him" (Is. 64:3); that is, the bliss which neither the eye of the prophet nor any one else but God, hath seen, He hath prepared for the man who waits for Him. The sages say, "All the prophets only prophesied concerning the days of the Messiah. But the world to come, "no eye hath seen but Thine, O God".
The reason why the sages styled it 'The World to Come' is not because it is not now in existence and will only come into being when this world shall have passed away. That is not so. The world to come now exists, as it is said, "which Thou hast treasured up (for them that fear Thee), which Thou hast wrought (for them that trust in Thee before the children of men") (Ps. 31:19-20). It is called the World to Come, only because human beings will enter into it at a time subsequent to the life of the present world in which we now exist with body and soul,—and this existence comes first.

Chapter 9

It is known that the reward for the fulfilment of the commandments and the good to which we will attain if we have kept the way of the Lord, as prescribed in the Law, is life in the World to Come, as it is said, "That it may be well with thee, and that thou mayest prolong thy days" (Deut. 22:7), while the retribution exacted from the wicked who have abandoned the ways of righteousness prescribed in the Torah is excision, as it is said, "that soul shall be utterly cut off; his iniquity shall be upon him" (Num. 15:31). What then is the meaning of the statement found everywhere in the Torah that 'if ye obey, it will happen to you thus; if ye do not obey, it will be otherwise'; and all these happenings will take place in this world, such as war and peace; sovereignty and subjection; residence in the Promised Land, and exile; prosperity in one's activities and failure, and all the other things predicted in the words of the Covenant (Lev. ch. 26. Deut. ch. 28)?  All those promises were (once) truly (fulfilled) and will again be so. When we fulfil all the commandments of the Torah, all the good things of this world will come to us. When however we transgress the precepts, the evils that are written in the Torah will befall us. But nevertheless, those good things are not the final reward for the fulfilment of the commandments, nor are those evils the last penalty exacted from one who transgresses all the commandments. These matters are to be understood as follows: I The Holy One, blessed be He, gave us this Law—a tree of lfie. Whoever fulfills what is written therein and knows it with a complete and correct knowledge will attain thereby life in the World to Come. According to the greatness of his deeds and abundance of his knowledge will be the measure in which he will attain that life. He has further promised us in the Torah, that, if we observe its behests joyously and cheerfully, and continually meditate on its wisdom, He will remove from us the obstacles that hinder us in its observance, such as sickness, war, famine, and other calamities; and will bestow upon us all the material benefits which will strengthen our ability to fulfil the Law, such as plenty, peace, abundance of silver and gold.  Thus we will not be engaged, all our days, in providing for our bodily needs, but will have leisure to study wisdom and fulfil the commandment, and thus attain life in the World to Come. Hence, after the assurance of material benefits, it is said in the Torah, "And it shall be righteousness unto us, if we observe to do all this commandment before the Lord, our God, as He hath commanded us" (Deut. 6:25).  So too, He taught us in the Torah that if we deliberately forsake it and occupy ourselves with temporal follies, as the text says, "But Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked" (Deut. 32:15),—the true Judge will deprive the forsakers of all those material benefits which only served to encourage them to be recalcitrant, and will send upon them all the calamities that will prevent their attaining the life hereafter, so that they will perish in their wickedness. This is expressed by the Torah in the text: "Because thou didst not serve the Lord, thy God, with joyfulness and with gladness of heart, by reason of the abundance of all things, therefore shalt thou serve thine enemy whom the Lord shall send against thee"<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* The order of the sentences in this text, correctly given as it is in the Torah, is reversed in the Hebrew manuscript, possibly not to end with calamitous maledictions.</i> (Deut. 28:47-48).  Hence, all those benedictions and maledictions are to be explained as follows: If you have served God with joy and observed His way, He will bestow upon you those blessings and avert from you those curses, so that you will have leisure to become wise in the Torah and occupy yourselves therewith, and thus attain life hereafter, and then it will be well with you in the world which is entirely blissful and you will enjoy length of days in an existence which is everlasting. So you will enjoy both worlds,—a happy life on earth leading to the life in the World to Come. For if wisdom is not acquired and good deeds are not performed here, there will be nought meriting a recompense hereafter, as it is said, "for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge nor wisdom in the grave" (Eccles. 9:10). V But if you have forsaken the Lord and have erred in eating, drinking, fornication, and similar things, He will bring upon you all those curses and withhold from you all those blessings till your days will end in confusion and terror, and you will have neither the free mind nor the healthy body requisite for the fulfilment of the commandments so that you will suffer perdition in the life hereafter and will thus have lost both worlds,—for when one is troubled here on earth with diseases, war or famine, he does not occupy himself with the acquisition of wisdom or the performance of religious precepts by which life hereafter is gained.
Hence, all Israelites, their prophets and sages, longed for the advent of Messianic times, that they might have relief from the wicked tyranny that does not permit them properly to occupy themselves with the study of the Torah and the observance of the commandments; that they might have ease, devote themselves to getting wisdom, and thus attain to life in the World to Come.  For in those days, knowledge, wisdom and truth will increase, as it is said "For the earth will be full of the knowledge of the Lord" (Is. 11:9), and it is said, "They will no more teach everyone his brother and everyone his neighbour" (Jer. 31:34), and further, "I will remove the heart of stone from your flesh" (Ezek 36:26).  Because the King who will arise from the seed of David will possess more wisdom than Solomon and will be a great prophet, approaching Moses, our teacher<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* In the M.S. “nearer than our teacher Moses”. <span>ונביא גדול הוא קרוב ממשה</span> This may be a scribal error, and should be corrected to <span>קרוב למשה</span></i>, he will teach the whole of the Jewish people and instruct them in the way of God; and all nations will come to hear him, as it is said, "And at the end of days it shall come to pass that the Mount of the Lord's house shall be established as the top of the mountains" (Micah 4:1, Is. 2:2).  The ultimate and perfect reward, the final bliss which will suffer neither interruption nor diminution is the life in the world to come. The Messianic era, on the other hand, will be realized in this world; which will continue in its normal course except that independent sovereignty will be restored to Israel. The ancient sages already said, "The only difference between the present and the Messianic era is that political oppression will then cease.

Chapter 10

Let not a man say, 'I will observe the precepts of the Torah and occupy myself with its wisdom, in order that I may obtain all the blessings written in the Torah, or to attain life in the world to come; I will abstain from transgressions against which the Torah warns, so that I may be saved from the curses written in the Torah, or that I may not be cut off from life in the world to come.'  It is not right to serve God after this fashion for whoever does so, serves Him out of fear. This is not the standard set by the prophets and sages. Only those serve God in this way, who are illiterate, women or children whom one trains to serve out of fear, till their knowledge shall have increased when they will serve out of love.
Whoever serves God out of love, occupies himself with the study of the Law and the fulfilment of commandments and walks in the paths of wisdom, impelled by no external motive whatsoever, moved neither by fear of calamity nor by the desire to obtain material benefits; such a man does what is truly right because it is truly right, and ultimately, happiness comes to him as a result of his conduct.  This standard is indeed a very high one; not every sage attained to it. It was the standard of the patriarch Abraham whom God called His lover, because he served only out of love. It is the standard which God, through Moses, bids us achieve, as it is said, "And thou shalt love the Lord, thy God" (Deut. 6:5). When one loves God with the right love, he will straightway observe all the commandments out of love.
What is the love of God that is befitting ? It is to love the Eternal with a great and exceeding love, so strong that one's soul shall be knit up with the love of God, and one should be continually enraptured by it, like a love-sick individual, whose mind is at no time free from his passion for a particular woman, the thought of her filling his heart at all times, when sitting down or rising up, when he is eating or drinking. Even intenser should be the love of God in the hearts of those who love Him. And this love should continually possess them, even as He commanded us in the phrase, "with all thy heart and with all thy soul" (Deut. 6:5). This, Solomon expressed allegorically in the sentence, "for I am sick with love" (Song of Songs 2:5). The entire Song of Songs is indeed an allegory descriptive of this love.
The ancient sages said; Peradventure, you will say, 'I will study Torah, in order that I may become rich, that I may be called Rabbi, that I may receive a reward in the world to come'. It is therefore said, "To love the Lord". Whatever you do, do is out of love only.  The text: "(Happy is the man that feareth the Lord), that delighteth greatly in His commandments" (Ps. 112:1) has been thus explained by the sages—"<i>In His commandments</i>—not in the reward for His commandments". So too, the greatest sages were wont specifically to exhort those among their disciples who were understanding and intelligent "Be not like servants who minister to their master, upon the condition of receiving a reward" (Ethics of the Fathers 1:3). But it is proper to be like servants who serve their master not for the sake of receiving aught; but only because he is the master, it is right to serve him; that is, serve him out of love.
Whoever engages in the study of the Torah, in order that he may receive a reward or avoid calamities is not studying the Torah for its own sake. Whoever occupies himself with the Torah, neither out of fear nor for the sake of recompense, but solely out of love for the Lord of the whole Earth who enjoined us to do so, is occupied with the Torah for its own sake. The sages however said, "One should always engage in the study of the Torah, even if not for its own sake; for he who begins thus will end by studying it for its own sake".  Hence, when instructing the young, women or the illiterate generally, we teach them to serve God out of fear or for the sake of reward, till their knowledge increases and they have attained a large measure of wisdom. Then we reveal to them this mystic truth, little by little, and train them by easy stages till they have grasped and comprehended it, and serve God out of love.
It is known and certain that the love of God does not become closely knit in a man's heart till he is continuously and thoroughly possessed by it and gives up everything else in the world for it; as God commanded us, "with all thy heart and with all thy soul" (Deut. 6:5). One only loves God with the knowledge with which one knows Him. According to the knowledge, will be the love. If the former be little or much, so will the latter be little or much.  A person ought therefore to devote himself to the understanding and comprehension of those sciences and studies which will inform him concerning his Master, as far as it lies in human faculties to understand and comprehend—as indeed we have explained in the Laws of the Foundations of the Torah.
<small>The first book is completed with the help of the Almighty. The number of chapters in this book are forty-six; namely, laws of the fundamental principles of the Torah, ten chapters; laws of Moral Dispositions, seven chapters; laws of the Study of the Torah, seven chapters; laws of Idolatry, twelve chapters; laws of Repentance, ten chapters.</small>