Kad HaKemach
כד הקמח
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Kad HaKemach

Introduction



Faith



Love



Guests



Mourning



Trust



Blessing



Synagogue



Theft



Arrogance



Convert



Redemption



Laws



Submission



Providence



Shaming



Confession



Straying of Heart and Eyes



Flattery



Desecration of God's Name



Desire



Groom



Purity of the Heart



Fear of God



God's Unity



Evil Inclination



Honoring Parents



Atonement



Slander



Lulav



God's Existence



Mezuzah



Circumcision



Rain



Section 1





When sufferings of chastisement come upon a person, he returns to the good. As the sages interpreted the Song of Songs, "Behold, you are beautiful, my beloved, and pleasant" - even when You bring upon me sufferings of chastisement, it is pleasant. Why? Because You return me thus to the good. Human repentance is never complete without suffering. Repentance is improving one's actions and character. It is not fasting and wearing sackcloth and wallowing in the dust and immersing in water while remaining soiled on the inside with sins and evil thoughts. And so said the prophet (Isaiah 58): "Do you call that a fast, A day when the LORD is favorable?" "No, this is the fast I desire: To unlock fetters of wickedness, And untie the cords of the yoke." [...] The intent of the Torah is that one should first cleanse oneself on the inside, casting out from one's heart the impurities of sin, and then return what one has taken unfairly or by violence, and ask forgiveness from one's friend. After immersing one's heart inwardly and doing all kinds of purification and cleansing oneself from sin, one should purify oneself also outwardly by fasting and immersing the body, and so on...

Consolation



Chanukah Lights



Joy



Sukkah



Wanton Hatred



Willow



Shemini Atzeret



Humility



Wealth



Sustenance



Passover



Section 1





... And on this the Torah says (Exodus 13:7) "there will not be seen and there will not be found" - it will not be seen b'maaseh (in action) and will not be found b'machshava (in thought), rather one should anul it in his heart. The mitzvot have 3 categories: mitzvot of speech, of the heart and of action, as it is written (Deuteronomy 30:14) "in your mouth and in your heart to do it". Comes the Torah (instructing us) to anul it in the heart, corresponding to the mitzvot which are dependent on the heart. Comes the 'kabbalah' (instructing us) to eradicate it from the house or to burn it, corresponding to the mitzvot of action. And to say 'kol chamira', corresponding to mitzvot of speech. In this way the 3 categories of mitzvot are fulfilled through the prohibition of chametz, teaching you that the prohibition of chametz incorporates all the mitzvot... Just as the 'kabbalah' comes (instructing us) to eradicate chametz and (livdok) to check the house in nooks and in cracks, so too we are obligated to search and check the chambers of our inner being for bad (machshavas) intentions and bad (hirhurim) thoughts. Just as bedikat chametz (checking for chametz) is not valid by sunlight, nor by moonlight, nor by the light of a torch, but only by the light of a candle, so too the bedikah (checking) of the yetzer hara must be by the light of the neshama (soul) which is called 'ner' (candle), this is what is written (Proverbs 20:27) "the candle of Hashem is the soul of man, which searches the chambers of one's inner being.

Purim



Charity



Fringes



Holiness



Jealousy



Reshut (Permission)



Rosh HaShanah



Oath



Shabbat



Peace



Shavuot



Torah



Prayer



Repentance



Fasting



Tefillin

