Sefer Mitzvot Gadol
ספר מצוות גדול
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Sefer_Mitzvot_Gadol
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Sefer Mitzvot Gadol

Negative Commandments

Introduction



Remazim















































































Not to eat something that has a mixture of chametz, as it is stated (Exodus 112:20), “You shall eat nothing leavened.” In these laws, we have explained the laws of chametz, its mixture and the purging of vessels that have absorbed chametz.





Negative Mitzvah 1



Negative Mitzvah 2



Negative Mitzvah 3



Negative Mitzvah 4



Negative Mitzvah 5



Negative Mitzvah 6



Negative Mitzvah 7



Negative Mitzvah 8



Negative Mitzvah 9



Negative Mitzvah 10



Negative Mitzvah 11



Negative Mitzvah 12



Negative Mitzvah 13



Negative Mitzvah 14



Negative Mitzvah 15



Negative Mitzvah 16



Negative Mitzvah 17



Negative Mitzvah 18



Negative Mitzvah 19



Negative Mitzvah 20



Negative Mitzvah 21



Negative Mitzvah 22



Negative Mitzvah 23



Negative Mitzvah 24



Negative Mitzvah 25



Negative Mitzvah 26



Negative Mitzvah 27



Negative Mitzvah 28



Negative Mitzvah 29



Negative Mitzvah 30



Negative Mitzvah 31



Negative Mitzvah 32



Negative Mitzvah 33



Negative Mitzvah 34



Negative Mitzvah 35



Negative Mitzvah 36



Negative Mitzvah 37



Negative Mitzvah 38



Negative Mitzvah 39



Negative Mitzvah 40



Negative Mitzvah 41



Negative Mitzvah 42



Negative Mitzvah 43



Negative Mitzvah 44



Negative Mitzvah 45



Negative Mitzvah 46



Negative Mitzvah 47



Negative Mitzvah 48



Negative Mitzvah 49



Negative Mitzvah 50



Negative Mitzvah 51



Negative Mitzvah 52



Negative Mitzvah 53



Negative Mitzvah 54



Negative Mitzvah 55



Negative Mitzvah 56



Negative Mitzvah 57



Negative Mitzvah 58



Negative Mitzvah 59



Negative Mitzvah 60



Negative Mitzvah 61



Negative Mitzvah 62



Negative Mitzvah 63



Negative Mitzvah 64

[1]"Beware (a) lest you forget the Lord your God." [Deuteronomy 4:23] This is a warning for the Israelites not to become arrogant when God blesses them with prosperity. They should not claim that all their success is due to their own efforts and hard work, thereby neglecting to acknowledge God's goodness due to their pride. This is what the verse addresses, as it also says in the portion of Va'etchanan, "Houses filled with all good things that you did not fill..." [Deuteronomy 6:11] and continues, "And you will eat and be satisfied, beware lest you forget the Lord your God." This interpretation is further explained nearby, "Lest you eat and be satisfied, and build good houses and live in them, and your cattle and sheep increase, and you gather silver and gold in abundance, and your heart becomes haughty, and you forget the Lord your God who brought you out of the land of Egypt..." and "You will say in your heart, 'My strength and the power of my hand made me all this wealth,' but you shall remember the Lord your God, for it is He who gives you the strength to make wealth." From here (b), there is a warning not to be arrogant about what God has granted, whether it is wealth, beauty, or wisdom. Rather, one should be very humble and lowly before the Lord, their God, and before people, and give thanks to their Creator for granting them these qualities. It is written in the ethics of the song, "Do you thus repay the Lord?... Is He not your Father, your Creator? He made you and established you." The scripture praises humility, as it says, "Now Moses was very humble," and it is said in the Jerusalem Talmud in Shabbat (chapter 1, halacha 3, brought in Tosafot Yevamot 103:3): "What wisdom made a crown for its head, humility made a heel for its sandal," as it is said, "The beginning of wisdom is the fear of the Lord..." and it is said, "The reward of humility is the fear of the Lord." The Shechina (Divine Presence) dwells with the humble, as it says, "I dwell with the contrite and humble of spirit." In Sota (5a), it is taught that anyone who humbles himself is regarded as if he has offered all sacrifices, as it says, "The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit." Furthermore, his prayer is accepted, as it says, "A broken and contrite heart, O God, You will not despise." I have further interpreted that God listens to the desires and wishes of the humble, even if they have not prayed for it, as it says, "The desire of the humble You have heard, O Lord; You will prepare their hearts; You will listen with Your ears." It does not say "the prayer of the humble," but rather "the desire." "Prepare their hearts" means what they think in their hearts. Consider what David means by "But I am a worm and not a man, a reproach of men and despised by the people." This means that one should liken oneself to a worm that is under the dust, in disgrace, so when a person dies, the dust is above their head. Therefore, he was humble before God, dancing and whirling before his Creator, as he said to Michal, "I will be humble in my own eyes." When Shimei ben Gera cursed him, he said, "Leave him alone." All of this was caused by his great humility. Our sages elaborated on the disgrace of the arrogant in Sota, where they are called an abomination, as it is written, "Every haughty heart is an abomination to the Lord," and they will not see the comfort of Zion, as it is written, "I will remove from among you the proudly exultant ones, and you shall no longer be haughty on My holy mountain. But I will leave within you a meek and humble people, and they will take refuge in the name of the Lord." This does not mean a literally poor people, for it is written, "The islands will wait for Me, and the ships of Tarshish will come first, to bring your sons from afar, their silver and gold with them," but rather it refers to a humble people, as Yonatan translates it as "a humble people." It is also written in Proverbs, "A man's pride will bring him low, but the humble in spirit will retain honor." Our sages said in Pirkei Avot, "Be exceedingly humble, for the hope of man is worms." And what distinguishes man from the animal, except for the service of the Creator, who made everything to give Him pleasure? I taught this lesson of humility to many, but it was not my intention to include this as a negative commandment or count it among the prohibitions. Even Rabbi Moshe did not include it or mention it in the count of prohibitions. When I reached the completion of the prohibitions and saw in a dream at night that I had forgotten the principal, "Beware lest you forget the Lord," I considered it in the morning, and behold, it is a great foundation in the fear of the Lord. Therefore, I decided to include it, with the help of the One who grants wisdom to the wise. Then, I reviewed the text in Sota (5a) and found it stated explicitly, "Where is the warning for the arrogant?" Rabbi Nachman bar Yitzchak said, "From here, 'And your heart will become haughty, and you will forget the Lord.'" And it is written, "Beware lest you forget the Lord," as Rabbi Avin said in the name of Rabbi Ilai: "Whenever it says 'beware,' 'lest,' and 'do not,' it refers to a prohibition.

Negative Mitzvah 65



Negative Mitzvah 66



Negative Mitzvah 67



Negative Mitzvah 68

Leyes de Yom Kippur
Cualquier persona que realice trabajo en Yom Kippur está transgrediendo un mandamiento negativo explícito en el Libro de las Mitzvot Positivas, mandamiento 31, y viola un mandamiento negativo, como está escrito: "Y en el diez de este mes... ninguna obra de trabajo se hará". Y aprendimos [en el Tratado] Meguilá que no hay diferencia entre Shabat y Yom Kippur, excepto que la intención de violar el trabajo en Shabat [lleva a la] pena de apedreamiento, y en Yom Kippur a la extirpación. Aquí, en cuanto a todo lo que enseñan, ambos son iguales en cuanto a la persona que realiza trabajo por error, que debe ofrecer una ofrenda de pecado fija, tanto en el caso de la prohibición de trabajo de la Torá como en la de los Sabios, tanto en el caso de la prohibición de traslado, y en el cuarto [capítulo del Tratado de] Yoma concluye que no hay interdicción alguna, ya que se dice que no hay eruv y está prohibido sacar en Yom Kippur, y mucho más en Yom Tov.

Negative Mitzvah 69



Negative Mitzvah 70



Negative Mitzvah 71



Negative Mitzvah 72



Negative Mitzvah 73



Negative Mitzvah 74



Negative Mitzvah 75



Negative Mitzvah 76



Negative Mitzvah 77



Negative Mitzvah 78



Negative Mitzvah 79



Negative Mitzvah 80

Laws of Marriage
(1) There shall not be a prostitute among the daughters of Israel. The plain meaning of the verse is a woman who has relations for the sake of prostitution without betrothal, like the prostitute mentioned in the story of Judah and Tamar. However, Onkelos translated in the Parashat Ki Tetzai, “There shall not be a male prostitute among the sons of Israel, etc., and a daughter of Israel shall not be a wife to a male slave.” From this, you learn that these prohibitions are meant to indicate that an Israelite should not marry a female slave, and a daughter of Israel should not be married to a male slave. A slave and a maidservant are considered as one of the nations sold to an Israelite, whose body is owned by the Israelite. But those sold to idolaters are not called slaves and maidservants, as their bodies are not owned by the purchasers and they are acquired only for their labor, as stated in Gittin [38]: “From them, you shall buy male and female slaves,” meaning you buy from them, but they cannot buy from you, nor can they buy each other’s bodies, only their labor. A Hebrew slave is permitted to a maidservant, as it is said in Kiddushin [16], “If his master gives him a wife,” from which we learn that his master can give him a Canaanite maidservant. And a mamzer (a child born from certain forbidden relationships) is permitted to a maidservant, as it is taught there [Kiddushin 69 and later in Negative Commandment 117]: Rabbi Tarfon says that mamzerim can become purified. How? A mamzer marries a maidservant, the child becomes a slave, he frees the slave, and the child becomes a free person. And we conclude that, according to Rabbi Tarfon, it is initially permissible to do so. And Rav Yehuda said in the name of Shmuel [there], the law follows Rabbi Tarfon. The reason is that it is written, “There shall not be a male prostitute,” excluding a mamzer who is already considered a prostitute.

Leyes del Matrimonio
(1) No habrá prostituta entre las hijas de Israel. El significado llano del versículo es una mujer que tiene relaciones sexuales con fines de prostitución sin compromiso matrimonial, como la prostituta mencionada en la historia de Judá y Tamar. Sin embargo, Onkelos tradujo en la Parashat Ki Tetzai: "No habrá prostituto entre los hijos de Israel, etc., y una hija de Israel no será esposa de un esclavo varón." De esto, aprendes que estas prohibiciones están destinadas a indicar que un israelita no debe casarse con una esclava, y una hija de Israel no debe casarse con un esclavo varón. Un esclavo y una esclava son considerados como parte de las naciones vendidas a un israelita, cuyo cuerpo es propiedad del israelita. Pero aquellos vendidos a idólatras no son llamados esclavos y esclavas, ya que sus cuerpos no son propiedad de los compradores y son adquiridos solo por su trabajo, como se afirma en Gittin [38]: "De ellos comprarás esclavos y esclavas," es decir, tú compras de ellos, pero ellos no pueden comprar de ti, ni pueden comprarse entre sí los cuerpos, solo su trabajo. Un esclavo hebreo tiene permitido estar con una esclava, como se dice en Kiddushin [16], "Si su amo le da una esposa," de lo que aprendemos que su amo puede darle una esclava cananea. Y un mamzer (un hijo nacido de ciertas relaciones prohibidas) tiene permitido estar con una esclava, como se enseña allí [Kiddushin 69 y más adelante en el Mandamiento Negativo 117]: Rabí Tarfon dice que los mamzerim pueden purificarse. ¿Cómo? Un mamzer se casa con una esclava, el hijo se convierte en esclavo, él libera al esclavo y el hijo se convierte en una persona libre. Y concluimos que, según Rabí Tarfon, es inicialmente permisible hacerlo. Y Rav Yehuda dijo en nombre de Shmuel [allí], la ley sigue a Rabí Tarfon. La razón es que está escrito, "No habrá prostituto," excluyendo a un mamzer que ya es considerado un prostituto.

Negative Mitzvah 81



Negative Mitzvah 82



Negative Mitzvah 83



Negative Mitzvah 84



Negative Mitzvah 85

Do not profane your daughter to make her a harlot: It is taught in the Sifra in Parashat Kedoshim [Chapter 7, and it is brought in Sanhedrin 76b]: this refers to one who hands over his daughter not for the purpose of marriage, and likewise, a woman who gives herself over not for the purpose of marriage, meaning she designates herself for prostitution to everyone. And it is taught in the latter part of the Baraita: One might think it applies to a single act, meaning if he handed over his daughter to one person to be a concubine, and likewise she, who was seduced by a seducer, violated this prohibition; therefore, it is stated, "lest the land become lewd," not a single act. This was expounded by our teacher Moses son of Maimon [in Mishneh Torah, Virgin Maiden 2:17], that which is written in the Torah, "Do not profane your daughter to make her a harlot," so that the father should not say, "Since the Torah only obligates the seducer and rapist to give money to the father, I will rent out my virgin daughter to whomever I want, or I will let this one come upon her for free, since a person can waive and give his money to whomever he wants." Therefore, it is said, "Do not profane your daughter to make her a harlot," because the Torah's obligation of money for the rapist and seducer and not lashes is only when the matter happened incidentally, without the father's knowledge, and she did not prepare herself for it, as this does not happen constantly and is not common. But one who permits his virgin daughter to be ready for whomever wants to come upon her causes the land to be filled with lewdness, and it results in the father marrying his daughter and the brother marrying his sister, for if she becomes pregnant and gives birth, no one will know whose child it is. One who prepares his daughter for this purpose makes her a harlot, and both the one who cohabits with her and she herself receive lashes for "there shall be no harlot." However, he is not fined, as the Torah only fines for rape and seduction. But this one who prepared herself for this, whether with her consent or her father's consent, is a harlot. The prohibition of harlotry applies equally to both a virgin and a non-virgin. Therefore, the Sages said [Ketubot 36b] that one about whom there was a bad report during her youth has no fine, as we wrote in Positive Commandment 54, for she is presumed to have abandoned herself to this willingly.

No profanes a tu hija haciéndola una prostituta: Se enseña en el Sifra en Parashat Kedoshim [Capítulo 7, y se menciona en Sanedrín 76b]: esto se refiere a quien entrega a su hija no con el propósito de matrimonio, y de igual manera, una mujer que se entrega no con el propósito de matrimonio, es decir, se designa para la prostitución con todos. Y se enseña en la parte final de la Baraita: Podría pensarse que se aplica a un solo acto, es decir, si entregó a su hija a una persona para ser concubina, y de igual manera ella, que fue seducida por un seductor, violó esta prohibición; por lo tanto, se dice, "no sea que la tierra se llene de lujuria," no un solo acto. Esto fue expuesto por nuestro maestro Moisés hijo de Maimón [en Mishné Torá, Doncella Virgen 2:17], lo que está escrito en la Torá, "No profanes a tu hija haciéndola una prostituta," para que el padre no diga, "Ya que la Torá solo obliga al seductor y al violador a dar dinero al padre, alquilaré a mi hija virgen a quien yo quiera, o dejaré que este venga sobre ella gratis, ya que una persona puede renunciar y dar su dinero a quien quiera." Por lo tanto, se dice, "No profanes a tu hija haciéndola una prostituta," porque la obligación de la Torá de dinero para el violador y el seductor y no de azotes es solo cuando el asunto sucedió incidentalmente, sin el conocimiento del padre, y ella no se preparó para ello, ya que esto no sucede constantemente y no es común. Pero quien permite a su hija virgen estar lista para quien quiera venir sobre ella causa que la tierra se llene de lujuria, y resulta en que el padre se case con su hija y el hermano se case con su hermana, porque si ella queda embarazada y da a luz, nadie sabrá de quién es el hijo. Quien prepara a su hija para este propósito la convierte en una prostituta, y tanto el que cohabita con ella como ella misma reciben azotes por "no habrá prostituta." Sin embargo, no es multado, ya que la Torá solo multa por violación y seducción. Pero esta que se preparó para esto, ya sea con su consentimiento o el consentimiento de su padre, es una prostituta. La prohibición de prostitución se aplica igualmente tanto a una virgen como a una no virgen. Por lo tanto, los Sabios dijeron [Ketubot 36b] que una sobre la que hubo un mal reporte durante su juventud no tiene multa, como escribimos en el Mandamiento Positivo 54, porque se presume que se abandonó a esto voluntariamente.


Negative Mitzvah 86



Negative Mitzvah 87



Negative Mitzvah 88



Negative Mitzvah 89



Negative Mitzvah 90



Negative Mitzvah 91



Negative Mitzvah 92

No revelar la desnudez de su madre, incluso si no es la esposa de su padre, sino que fue violada o seducida, como está escrito: "La desnudez de tu madre no descubrirás, ella es tu madre; no descubrirás su desnudez" (Levítico 18:7). Y del término "tu madre" se deduce que no es necesario escribirlo como una advertencia, sino que aprendemos para el castigo de lapidación en el caso de su madre, que no es la esposa de su padre, como la madre que es la esposa de su padre.

Negative Mitzvah 93

He prohibited us from having intercourse with the daughter-in-law, whether during the lifetime of the son or after the death of the son, whether from betrothal or from marriage, as we have learned in Sanhedrin [53a], as it is stated, "The nakedness of your daughter-in-law you shall not uncover; she is your son's wife, you shall not uncover her nakedness." And we received from our Rabbis [there] that "you shall not uncover her nakedness" was not needed to be written for the prohibition of the daughter-in-law; we learn that it comes to include even after the death of his son. And the punishment of stoning is stated in the portion of Kedoshim, as it is stated, "And a man who lies with his daughter-in-law, both of them shall surely be put to death; they have committed perversion; their blood is upon them." And the punishment after the death of his son we learn through a verbal analogy of "their blood is upon them" from his father's wife. And we also learn in Torat Kohanim that "your son's wife" excludes the maidservant and the gentile, as well as the raped or seduced woman by his son, as I do not call them "your son's wife."

Él nos prohibió tener relaciones sexuales con la nuera, ya sea durante la vida del hijo o después de la muerte del hijo, ya sea del compromiso o del matrimonio, como hemos aprendido en Sanedrín [53a], como está escrito: "No descubrirás la desnudez de tu nuera; ella es la esposa de tu hijo, no descubrirás su desnudez." Y recibimos de nuestros rabinos [allí] que "no descubrirás su desnudez" no necesitaba ser escrito para la prohibición de la nuera; aprendemos que viene a incluir incluso después de la muerte de su hijo. Y el castigo de lapidación está indicado en la porción de Kedoshim, como está escrito: "Y el hombre que se acueste con su nuera, ambos serán ejecutados; han cometido perversión; su sangre está sobre ellos." Y el castigo después de la muerte de su hijo lo aprendemos a través de una analogía verbal de "su sangre está sobre ellos" de la esposa de su padre. Y también aprendemos en Torat Kohanim que "la esposa de tu hijo" excluye a la sirvienta y a la gentil, así como a la mujer violada o seducida por su hijo, ya que no las llamo "la esposa de tu hijo."
```


Negative Mitzvah 94



Negative Mitzvah 95



Negative Mitzvah 96



Negative Mitzvah 97



Negative Mitzvah 98



Negative Mitzvah 99



Negative Mitzvah 100



Negative Mitzvah 101



Negative Mitzvah 102



Negative Mitzvah 103



Negative Mitzvah 104



Negative Mitzvah 105



Negative Mitzvah 106



Negative Mitzvah 107

The sister of the mother, from where [is this derived]? As it is stated: “The nakedness of your mother’s sister you shall not uncover; she is your mother’s near kinswoman.” And it is taught [in Yevamot 54]: I only know the sister of his father from the father’s side and the sister of his mother from the father’s side, as the family of the father is called family. From where do we derive the sister of his father from the mother’s side and the sister of his mother from the mother’s side? The Torah states in the section of Kedoshim, “The nakedness of your mother’s sister and your father’s sister you shall not uncover,” to warn us that even [if they are] from the mother’s side. And their punishment is excision, as stated in the section of Acharei Mot at the end of all the sexual prohibitions: “And the souls that perform [these acts] shall be cut off.”
.La hermana de la madre, ¿de dónde se deriva esto? Como está escrito: "La desnudez de la hermana de tu madre no descubrirás; ella es pariente cercana de tu madre". Y se enseña [en Yevamot 54]: Solo sé de la hermana de su padre por parte del padre y de la hermana de su madre por parte del padre, ya que la familia del padre se llama familia. ¿De dónde derivamos la hermana de su padre por parte de la madre y la hermana de su madre por parte de la madre? La Torá dice en la sección de Kedoshim: "La desnudez de la hermana de tu madre y la hermana de tu padre no descubrirás", para advertirnos que incluso [si son] por parte de la madre. Y su castigo es excisión, como se afirma en la sección de Acharei Mot al final de todas las prohibiciones sexuales: "Y las almas que realicen [estos actos] serán cortadas"...

Positive Commandments

Introduction



Remazim







Positive Mitzvah 1



Positive Mitzvah 2



Positive Mitzvah 3



Positive Mitzvah 4



Positive Mitzvah 5



Positive Mitzvah 6



Positive Mitzvah 7



Positive Mitzvah 8



Positive Mitzvah 9



Positive Mitzvah 10



Positive Mitzvah 11



Positive Mitzvah 12



Positive Mitzvah 13



Positive Mitzvah 14



Positive Mitzvah 15



Positive Mitzvah 16



Positive Mitzvah 17



Positive Mitzvah 18



Positive Mitzvah 19



Positive Mitzvah 20



Positive Mitzvah 21



Positive Mitzvah 22



Positive Mitzvah 23



Positive Mitzvah 24



Positive Mitzvah 25



Positive Mitzvah 26



Positive Mitzvah 27



Positive Mitzvah 28



Positive Mitzvah 29



Positive Mitzvah 30



Positive Mitzvah 31



Positive Mitzvah 32



Positive Mitzvah 33



Positive Mitzvah 34



Positive Mitzvah 35



Positive Mitzvah 36



Positive Mitzvah 37



Positive Mitzvah 38



Positive Mitzvah 39



Positive Mitzvah 40



Positive Mitzvah 41



Positive Mitzvah 42

Laws of Shofar - It is a positive commandment to sound the shofar on Rosh Hashana, as the Torah states "A day of Teruah it shall be for you".

Rabbinic Commandments

Laws of Eruvin



Laws of Mourning



Laws of Tisha B'Av



Laws of Megillah



Laws of Chanukah

