Rambam on Mishnah Bava Metzia
רמב"ם על משנה בבא מציעא
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Rambam on Mishnah Bava Metzia



Chapter 1



Mishnah 1

Two are holding a tallis, this one says I found it and this one says etc..
This is the law when each one of them are holding the fringes at the edge of the tallis, however if each one of them is holding a portion of it for himself, there is for each one of them what they are holding and have a claim in it.  And the remainder of the tallis will be divided equally after they both swear as was mentioned before.  And what was said (next in the mishneh) that this one says 'all of it is mine' this is discussing when a seller sells the tallis to one of two people that was found in front of him for a known price and each one of them gave to him the specified amount, and he (the seller) took from one of them willingly and from the second unwillingly- and he took it from him with intent that he would return it.  And the seller was unsure, that he did not know which one of them he sold to, and each one of the buyers claim to me it was sold willingly.  They will both swear according to how the rabbis have established so that it will not be that everyone will grab his friends tallis. And they will split the tallis and one of the payments, which the seller had returned to them.  *And if the seller knows who was the buyer, and he says to this one I sold it, he (the seller) will be believed in his testimony and even though the tallis is being held by both of them and they both claim 'I bought it', and his testimony will be like the law of a single witness in general.  And then the oath will be from the torah because of the witness (the seller) and not because of the institution of the rabbis as we have said.   And he won't be entitled to the tallis one more than the other, unless another witness joins together with the seller.  And from our general rules that the one who swears who is taking something with his oath, he should not swear about more than he will be allowed to take with that oath, therefore he swears he doesn't he have less than half, he does not swear that all of it belongs to him, since he is only taking half of it. And on all of these laws you can ask and you can judge.

Mishnah 2

2 were riding on the back of an animal or one was etc...
this teaches you that riding and leading are equal.  And it is only when he shakes his legs on the animal so that it will go.  And if it was not som rather he was only sitting on it, it will be that the guide leading it will require the animal and it belongs to the leader.  And (the mishneh) lets you know that if they admitted or witnesses came, and even after they adjudicated the ruling upon them with an oath.  They divide without an oath.
(the following appears in other versions of Rambam's commentary)
It appears to me furthermore what the mishneh means to say is that if they admitted that the tallis was originally both theirs in a partnership or if witnesses testified as such and they each claim that I bought my partner out or my partner gave it to me as a present and now I am the full owner they divide without an oath and afterwards they can each go to court and claim he owes me half of it.  Because the main point of this oath is that people should not go and grab their friends tallis and take it without an oath, however once they both admit they were partners in this tallis or if there are witnesses as such, this rule of the rabbis is nullified, and they divide it without an oath.  And this opinion goes after the main rules.

Mishnah 3

He was riding on the back of an animal and he finds an object etc...
If the riding says to the walker, "acquire it for me" he cannot say when he takes it that I acquired it for myself, rather his friend who is riding acquired it.  However he is able to say I acquired it when the rider says 'give it to me' as is mentioned (in the mishneh).

Mishnah 4

If one sees a lost object and falls on it and another comes and seizes it etc..  : If you sees them running after a lost object, after a disabled deer...
That when he will be standing in a field, everything within his 4 amos he acquires, it is as if it can to his hand, and there is not to anyone else a right to it.  However this law which was said in this halakah, is someone who is standing in the public domain, or in the field of his friend, that it is not normal for people to stand there.  Therefore his 4 amos do not acquire for him, even if he falls on the lost object and someone else comes and takes possession of it, this acquires it for him.  And this that we said that the field acquires it for him, this is possible with 2 conditions, the first is that he is standing inside (on the side (in other versions)) his field, and the second that those pigeons or the dear are walking slowly and they are staggering in a way that they are able to reach them if he runs.

Mishnah 5

The found object of his son or daughter who are minors, the found object of his slave or maidservant (who are canaanite)...
All who rely on their fathers table, their found object belongs to their father, even if they are 40 years old.  And any child that does not rely on his fathers table and he is from 6 years or older, his found object belongs to himself.  And this is what was intended in the mishneh when they said 'big' or 'small'.  However a daughter all the time that she is a 'naarah' (or younger) her found objects belong to her father, even if she is not relying on his table, even if she was sold, implying she was sold as a slave, her found objects belong to her father, because all of the profits of naarus belong to the father as is explained in the 4th section of kesuvos.

Mishnah 6

Found promissory notes, if there is in them a property guarantee, he does not return etc...
The sages say [omission of] property guarantees are a scribes error.  Thus there is not a difference in them between a document that has a guarantee or a plain document that does not mention a guarantee, as it is collected from encumbered properties.  Therefore he should not return it. And even if the the one mentioned in the document acknowledges that he is obligated in it and has not repaid any of it he should not return it because there is concern that there is an agreement between them to collect from encumbered properties and he will unjustly collect from buyers.  And the law is like the sages who say [omission of] property guarantees are a scribal error.  But if it was explicitly in the document 'that there is no guarantee on me', he should return it when the one who has the debt admits it.

Mishnah 7

One who finds divorce documents, emancipation documents for slaves, wills, gift documents etc...
"Deitika" is a compound word and it's meaning is this shall stand and be.  And it is a document that transfers moveable property or land or anything customary among people for conditions and obligations.
And "shovrin" are release documents that lenders make for borrowers from the repayment they receive from them and the like.

Mishnah 8

One who finds documents of appraisal or documents of food allocations, documents of release (chalitzah) etc...
Appraisals (agoros) are called documents of appraisal and this is because a creditor requires appraisal and announcement, and at this time he takes possession of the debtors land in the place of what was appraised for him, which is equivalent to what he owes him after the announcement, as will be explained.  And documents of food allocations imply food for the wife and children that judges wrote for them, transferring the land to sell it for sustenance, as will be explained in Ketubot.  And documents of arbitration, these are documents of arbitration when the litigants agree on the judges who will adjudicate between them on any claim as will be explained in Sanhedrin, 'this one chooses one for himself and that one chooses one for himself'.  And a bundle of documents is three documents wrapped together or more than this. And a roll is three documents or more tied together as one roll.  Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says if one person borrowed from three, he should return to the borrower, provided that the three documents are validated in court, However if they are not validated he should not return them to anyone because one might say that each one brought his document to court for validation, and they all ended up in the hand of the judge or his agent and fell from his hand, and the one who has the three debts upon him found them.  And similarly it's said if three borrowed from one, he should return to the lender, provided that the writings are different, but if they written by one person, there is to say they fell from the hand of the scribe and not from the hand of the creditor.  And a note of terms written in a slip amongst the documents, they should do with those documents as is written on the slip found with the documents, provided that these documents are amongst torn documents or found with the documents in the hand of a third party.  If the slip is not tied with the documents they should do according to what is written in it, because it is in the hands of a third party and the documents are also in the hand of the third party.  And the law is like Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel. 

Chapter 2



Mishnah 1

These are the found items that belong to him, and these he must announce, etc.
Rabbi Yehudah says, anything that has a distinguishing mark, he must announce, because it is possible for the owner to state that distinguishing mark and have his item returned to him.
And "new vessels" (kelei anforiah) are new vessels that the owners have not used in a manner that would allow them to recognize them; if they had used them until they could recognize them, they must show them to the one who claims to have lost them. If he recognizes them, they should be returned to him if the person is trustworthy, as they said that for a respectable scholar, they would return his lost item based on visual recognition.
And since these have not been used enough for the owner to recognize them visually, he is not required to announce them.
And if he finds two or more of them, like two needles or two skewers, or similar items, their number is a distinguishing mark, and he must announce them.
And all of this applies when he finds them in a private domain where few people pass. But someone who finds an item in a street or a large plaza, even if the item has a distinguishing mark, it belongs to him, provided the place is mostly populated by Canaanites. But if it is mostly populated by Israelites, he must announce it.
And the law follows Rabbi Yehudah and Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar.


Mishnah 2

And these one must announce: If he found fruits in a vessel, etc.:
A vessel as it is and a pouch of money as it is – that he finds them alone without anything in them because the owners can give a distinguishing mark on them.
And three coins one on top of the other or more of them indicates that they were placed there by hand and the owner can give a distinguishing mark and say that they were placed one on top of the other.


Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Mishnah 1



Mishnah 2

If a person hires artisans to harvest his field - for example - for two denarii and he gives them one denarius, if they change their minds [about performing the task], if they wish they can return the denarius to him or they can say to him, we will do [the portion of the job] that you have already paid us for. But - if [the workers] have already harvested half the field and they want to change their minds - [the field's owner] can make an evaluation of the value of their labor and if it exceeds one denarius, he does not need to give them more than the denarius that he has already given to them. And he can say to them, finish the job of harvesting the field and I will pay you your wage. And this is the meaning of "if they change their minds - they are in the weaker position." And if the owner changes his mind, he is in the weaker position. And he must give to [the workers] the value of their labor, if they should be paid more than one denarius. And [the Mishnah] said "whoever alters the agreement is in the weaker position": This is as we explained it, if a person purchases land and makes partial payment, if the seller is the one who changed his mind, the purchaser has the choice. If he wishes,  he can take the amount of land that corresponds to his payment from the best land in the field that he bought. And if the purchaser is the one who changed his mind about the purchase - the situation is reversed. So long as [the purchaser] said "my earnest money acquires [the field]," he acquires the amount that corresponds to the money. And if the seller demands what remains of the money [to be paid for the field] and [the purchaser] delays payment - the sale is not complete until [the purchaser] pays the [full amount].

Chapter 7



Mishnah 1



Mishnah 2



Mishnah 3



Mishnah 4



Mishnah 5

Mishnah: "One who eats while working, even during a meal, and one who writes, even during a meal, etc." Commentary: "The first Tanna (authority) holds that one should not teach him (the person who eats or writes during a meal), while the sages say that one should teach him, and the halacha follows the opinion of the sages."