Targum Sheni on Esther
תרגום שני על אסתר
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Targum Sheni on Esther





Chapter 1



Verse 1



Verse 2









So the matter was good for the king. And the scribes of the king read it out and wrote a letter and tied the letter to the wings of a wild bird. So it arose and flew to the heavens above and flew away. And when it flew among the birds, they flew behind it and they reached the city, Kitor, in the country of Sheba. And it was during the morning when the queen of Sheba came to bow down to the day. But the birds darkened the sun, so she took her hand to her garment and tore it and was dumbfounded. And while she was dumbfounded, the wild bird descended to her. And she saw that it had a letter tied to its wings. She opened it and read it. And this is what was written in it: It is from me, King Solomon. Peace be unto you, peace be unto your officers! As you know, the Holy One, blessed be He, crowned me over the wild animals, over the birds of the sky, over the demons, over the spirits, over the liliths; and all the kings — east, west, south, and north — come and ask of my welfare. Now, if you listen and come and ask of my welfare, I will send you more honor than all those who bow down before me. But if you do not listen and do not come and do not inquire of my welfare, I will send kings, soldiers and horsemen against you. As King Solomon had wild animals as kings,  birds of the sky as riders, and spirits, demons, and liliths as soldiers. They will strangle you in your beds inside your homes. The wild animals will kill you in the field; the birds will eat your flesh from you. And when the queen of Sheba heard the matter of this letter she again took her hand to her garment and tore it. She called to her elders, to her officers, and said to them, "Do you not know what King Solomon sent to me?" They answered and said to her, "We do not know King Solomon and we do not consider his kingdom important." But she did not pay attention to them and did not listen to their words, but sent and called to all the ships of the sea and loaded them with gifts, pearls, and precious stones. And she sent him six thousand boys and girls, and they were all [from] the same time, all of the same height, all of the same style, and they were all dressed in a garment of purple. And she wrote a letter and sent it to King Solomon in their hands: From the city of Kitor to the land of Israel is a seven-year journey. Now due to your prayer and due to your request that I should come before you, I will come to you at the end of three years.