The Book of Maccabees I (Kahana Translation)
ספר מקבים א (תרגום כהנא)
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/The_Book_of_Maccabees_I_(Kahana_Translation)
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

The Book of Maccabees I (Kahana Translation)



Chapter 1

And after the defeat Alexander son of Philippus the Macedonian, who came out of the land of the Hittites [the Persian army] and defeated Darius the king of Persia and Media and reigned under him first in the land of Ione.
And he will wage many wars and capture fortresses and slaughter the kings of the land.
And he will come to the ends of the earth and take the spoils of many nations, and the earth will be silent before him, and he will lift up his heart.
And he will gather a very heavy army and rule over the lands of the Gentiles and Counts, and they will have for him.
And after these words he fell into bed and knew that he would die.
And he called his honorable servants who grew up with him from his youth and distributed his kingdom to them while we were still alive.
And Alexander will reign twelve years and die.
And his servants ruled each in his place,
And they will all put royal crowns on their heads after his death and their sons after them for many years and increase evil in the land.
And from them came the root of evil, Antiochus Epiphanes, the son of Antiochus the king, who was a mixed race in Rome and reigned in the one hundred and thirty-seventh year of the kingdom of the Greeks.
In those days, the sons of Belial came out from among Israel and drove away many, saying, "We will go and make a covenant with the nations that are around us, because from the day that we separated from them, many evils have found us.
And it is better in their eyes:
And people from the people volunteered and went to the king, and the king ordered them to do according to the laws of the Gentiles,
And they built a gymnasium in Jerusalem according to the laws of the Gentiles.