Ahavat Chesed
אהבת חסד
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Ahavat_Chesed
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Ahavat Chesed

Foreword



Introduction



Part I

Laws of Loans



Laws of Pledges



Laws of Wages

Introduction







Part II



Part III



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



2. If a person is angry with his friend because of someone else, and he can remove it from him through his speech, this is considered an act of kindness. As it is written concerning Joseph (Genesis 40:14): <b>"Only remember me, when it is well with you, and please do me the kindness to mention me to Pharaoh, and get me out of this place."</b> Similarly, if through his speech he can prevent harm from coming upon his friend, this is also considered an act of kindness. In a similar manner, if a situation arises where some individuals are suspected of theft, and he considers them suspicious and hears rumors about their situation, it is a mitzvah (commandment) for him to conceal it from them and say that he is poor, even though he knows that he is not. All of this falls under the category of kindness. We find a similar example with Abraham and Sarah (Genesis 20:13): <b>"This is the kindness that you must do to me: to every place we come, say of me, 'He is my brother.'" </b> And certainly, if he can inform his friend of a piece of advice that will protect him from harm, he is obligated to do so according to the law, as stated in the end of Choshen Mishpat (Code of Jewish Law, Section 426, Subsection 1). Similarly, if he speaks favorably to another person and does him a kindness, all of this is considered an act of kindness, and he receives a blessing from God for it. As stated in the Tosefta (Daughter of Mishnah, Peah Chapter 4, Halacha 17), even if he only says to others, "Give," he will be rewarded for this, as it is written (Deuteronomy 16:10): "Because of this word [speech], the Lord your God will bless you." For a more detailed discussion on the great reward for performing a mitzvah (commandment) through speech, refer to the earlier section in Part 2 of the Halachic code, regarding the magnitude of reward for the performance of a mitzvah, specifically related to speech.

Epilogue



Addenda

