Mishneh Torah, Offerings for Unintentional Transgressions
משנה תורה, הלכות שגגות
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Mishneh_Torah,_Offerings_for_Unintentional_Transgressions
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Mishneh Torah, trans. by Eliyahu Touger. Jerusalem, Moznaim Pub. c1986-c2007
-https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH001020101/NLI

Mishneh Torah, Offerings for Unintentional Transgressions



Chapter 1

Whenever a person inadvertently violates one of the negative commandments that involve a deed and for which one is liable for <i>karet</i>, he is obligated to bring a sin-offering. It is a positive commandment for him to offer a sin-offering for his inadvertent transgression.
All transgressions for which one is liable for <i>karet</i> for their willful violation, one is liable to bring a sin-offering for their inadvertent violation except for three transgressions: blasphemy, negating circumcision, and negating the Paschal sacrifice. Negating circumcision and the Paschal sacrifice does not require such an offering, because they are positive commandments and a sin-offering is brought only for the inadvertent violation of a negative commandment, as Leviticus 4:27 states that the offering should be brought for violating: "one of the commandments of God that forbids an act to be performed." And blasphemy does not involve a deed. Thus a sacrifice is not necessary, because Leviticus 4:27 states: "Acting in violation of one."
With regard to all the transgressions punishable by <i>karet</i> in the Torah except for the three which were mentioned, if a private individual violated one of these prohibitions inadvertently, he must bring a fixed sin-offering with the exception of an impure person who partook of sacrificial meat and an impure person who entered the Temple. These two do not bring a fixed sin-offering, but rather an adjustable guilt-offering, as will be explained.
Only an animal is brought as a fixed sin-offering. In contrast, an adjustable guilt-offering is a sacrifice whose object is not fixed. If one is rich, he must bring an animal as a sin-offering. If he is poor, he brings a fowl or a tenth of an <i>ephah</i> as a meal-offering, as will be explained. Thus all the sins for which a private person brings a fixed sin-offering are 43. They include:<br>a) one who is intimate with his mother,<br>b) one who is intimate with his wife's mother,<br>c) one who is intimate with his maternal grandmother,<br>d) one who is intimate with his paternal grandmother,<br>e) one who is intimate with his daughter,<br>f) one who is intimate with his daughter's daughter,<br>g) one who is intimate with his son's daughter,<br>h) one who is intimate with his wife's daughter,<br>i) one who is intimate with the daughter of his wife's daughter,<br>j) one who is intimate with the daughter of his wife's son,<br>k) one who is intimate with his sister,<br>l) one who is intimate with his sister who is the daughter of his father's wife,<br>m) one who is intimate with his father's sister,<br>n) m) one who is intimate with his mother's sister,<br>o) one who is intimate with his wife's sister,<br>p) one who is intimate with his father's wife,<br>q) one who is intimate with the wife of his father's brother,<br>r) one who is intimate with his son's wife,<br>s) one who is intimate with his brother's wife,<br>t) one who is intimate with another man's wife,<br>u) one who is intimate with a woman in the <i>niddah</i> state,<br>v) one who is intimate with a male,<br>w) one who is intimate with his father,<br>x) one who is intimate with his father's brother,<br>y) one who is intimate with an animal,<br>z) a woman who has an animal engage in relations with her. Thus all the prohibitions involving forbidden relations punishable by <i>karet</i> are 26.<br>Among other sins, there are seventeen. They are: a) one who serves a false deity by performing a deed,<br>b) one who gives his descendants to <i>Molech</i>,<br>c) one who divines through an <i>ov</i>,<br>d) one who performs a deed while divining with a <i>yidoni</i>,<br>e) one who desecrates the Sabbath,<br>f) one who performs forbidden labor on Yom Kippur,<br>g) one who eats or drinks on Yom Kippur,<br>h) one who eats <i>chametz</i> on Pesach,<br>i) one who partakes of fat,<br>j) one who partakes of blood,<br>k) one who partakes of sacrificial meat after the time for eating it passes,<br>l) one who partakes of sacrificial meat that was disqualified, because of an undesirable intent concerning time,<br>m) one who slaughters a sacrificial animal outside the Temple Courtyard,<br>n) one who offers a sacrifice outside the Temple Courtyard,<br>o) one who prepares anointing oil like that used in the Temple,<br>p) one who prepares incense like that used in the Temple,and<br>q) one who anoints himself with the anointing oil of the Temple. These are the 43 transgressions for which one brings a fixed sin-offering for their inadvertent violation.<br>What is the sacrifice that a person who inadvertently violates one of these transgressions should bring? If he inadvertently violated the prohibition against worshiping a false deity, he must bring a female goat in the first year of its life. This is the sacrifice mentioned in the portion <i>Shelach Lecha</i>. This applies whether the transgressor is an ordinary person, a king, a High Priest, or the priest anointed to lead the people in war. Every one is equal with regard to the inadvertent transgression of the worship of false divinities.<br>If, however, one inadvertently violated one of the other 42 transgressions mentioned above, different rules apply. If the transgressor was an ordinary person, he should bring a she-goat or a ewe. This is the sin offering of one of the common people mentioned in the portion <i>Vayikra</i>. If the king inadvertently violated one of these trangressions, he should bring a male goat as a sin-offering. If the transgressor is an anointed priest, he should bring a bull, the offspring of an ox as a sin-offering. It is burnt, as described there.
The same laws apply whether one person inadvertently violates one of these transgressions or many do, as implied by Numbers 15:29: "There will be one law for those who transgress inadvertently."<br>What is implied? If the people of a city inadvertently transgressed and thought the day was an ordinary day, but it was Yom Kippur. As a result, they all ate and performed work, each one of the transgressors should bring two sin-offerings, ewes or she-goats. Similarly, if they all inadvertently transgressed and offered incense to a false deity, each one of the transgressors must bring a goat in its first year of life as a sin-offering.

Chapter 2

A person is not liable for a sin-offering for an inadvertent transgression unless he acts inadvertently from the beginning to the end. If, however, he acted inadvertently at the beginning, but acted willfully at the end or began acting willfully, but acted inadvertently at the end, he is exempt from the obligation to bring a sin-offering.<br>What is implied? A person transferred an article from one domain to another on the Sabbath. If one lifted up the article willfully, but placed it down inadvertently or lifted it up inadvertently, but placed it down willfully, he is exempt. To be liable for a sin-offering, he must lift it up inadvertently and place it down inadvertently. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.
If a person violated a transgression knowing that involved violation of a negative commandment, but he did not know that he is liable for <i>karet</i> for its violation, he is considered to have transgressed inadvertently and he must bring a sin-offering. If, however, he did know that it was punishable by <i>karet</i>, but was unaware of the obligation for a sacrifice, i.e., he did not know whether or not he was liable for a sacrifice for the transgression, he is considered to have acted willfully. For the lack of knowledge concerning a sacrifice is not considered as a lack of knowledge concerning these transgressions for which one is liable for <i>karet</i>.
When a person does not know the nature of the transgression that he violated, even though he definitely knows that he violated a negative commandment punishable by <i>karet</i>, he is exempt from bringing a sin-offering, as implied by Leviticus 4:23: "that he transgressed with regard to it," implying that he must know the transgression that he violated.<br>What is implied? There was a piece of forbidden fat and meat from a sacrifice left beyond its permitted time before him and he partook of one of them, but did not know which he ate; his wife who was in the <i>niddah</i> state and his sister were at home, he inadvertently was intimate with one of them, but did not know with whom he had relations; the Sabbath and Yom Kippur passed, he performed a forbidden labor on one of them, but did not know on which, he is exempt from the obligation to bring a sin-offering.
If a person transgressed, became aware of the transgression, and then forgot which transgression he violated, he should bring a sin-offering for whichever transgression he violated. This offering should be eaten, like the other sin-offerings that are eaten.
If one inadvertently committed one transgression, but there are two persons involved and he is unaware of the one with whom he committed the transgression, he is liable.<br>What is implied? There were two women in the <i>niddah</i> state. Inadvertently, he was intimate with one of them, but he did not know with whom. He had two sisters. Inadvertently, he was intimate with one of them, but he did not know with whom. In these instances, he is liable for a sin-offering. To what can this be compared? To two lamps that are burning and one extinguished one of them on the Sabbath without knowing which one he extinguished or two pots of forbidden fat from which he ate one and yet, he did not know the identity of the one from which he ate.In these instances, he is liable. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.
In all situations when a person is obligated to bring a fixed sin-offering for his inadvertent transgression and he transgressed inadvertently and he becomes aware of the transgression after violating it, he is liable for a sin-offering, even though initially, he was not aware that this act is a a transgression.<br>What is implied? A child was captured by gentiles and raised by them without knowing who are the Jewish people or what their faith is. He performed labor on the Sabbath, ate forbidden fat, blood, and the like. When he discovers that he is Jewish and commanded to eschew all of the above, he is obligated to bring a sin-offering for every particular sin. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.
When a person transgresses unintentionally by engaging in forbidden sexual relations or partaking of forbidden foods, he is liable for a sin-offering. If he does so with regard to the Sabbath, he is exempt from the obligation of a sin-offering.<br>What is implied? If he was acting casually with a woman and engaged in relations with her without intending to engage in relations and she is forbidden to him as an <i>ervah</i>, he is liable for a sin-offering. This ruling also applies if he thought that what was in his mouth was spittle and he swallowed it without the intent of eating at all and then he discovered that it was forbidden fat. If, by contrast, his intent was to lift up produce that was already cut and instead, he cut off a plant that was growing without intending to cut it off, he is exempt from a sin-offering, for the Torah forbade only the performance of purposeful labor, as explained in the appropriate place.
Whenever one performs one of the mitzvot and while he was performing it, a transgression punishable by <i>karet</i> was violated inadvertently, he is not liable for a sin-offering, because the person was acting with license.<br>What is implied? A man engaged in intimacy with his <i>yevamah</i>. She was in the <i>niddah</i> state, but he was unaware. He is exempt from a sin-offering, for he acted with license. If, by contrast, one was intimate with his wife when she was in the <i>niddah</i> state, he is liable, because he did not ask her before engaging in relations. With regard to his <i>yevamah</i>, however, he is not familiar with her, so that he might ask her.<br>Similarly, if a person had two infants to circumcise, one, on the Sabbath, and one on Friday or on Sunday, should he have forgotten and circumcised them both on the Sabbath, he is exempt from bringing a sin-offering. For he was licensed to circumcise one of them on the Sabbath, the Sabbath laws are suspended in his regard, and he performed a mitzvah. Even though two bodies are involved, since it is a pressing time, he is not precise. If, however, neither of the children was scheduled to be circumcised on the Sabbath and on the Sabbath, he circumcised a person who was not fit to be circumcised on the Sabbath, he is liable for a sin-offering.
The following rules apply when a proficient expert comes to circumcise a child before sunset on the Sabbath and he is told: "There is not enough time in the day left to perform the circumcision. If you begin circumcising, you will not be able to complete the act before the Sabbath departs. Thus you will have made a wound on the Sabbath without performing a mitzvah." If he says: "I am familiar with the task and deft and I will circumcise him speedily," should he not complete the circumcision until after the conclusion of the Sabbath, he is liable for a sin-offering, for they warned him.
When a person takes a <i>lulav</i> out to the public domain on the first day of Sukkot which falls on the Sabbath in order to fulfill his obligation or carries it four cubits in the public domain inadvertently, he is exempt from a sin-offering, because he acted with license.<br>Similarly, if one slaughters an animal for a Paschal sacrifice on the fourteenth of Nisan which fell on the Sabbath and afterwards, he discovered that the owners removed their connection from it, they died or became impure before it was slaughtered, or it became <i>tereifah</i> in a hidden place, e.g., its intestines or lungs were perforated, he is exempt, because he slaughtered it with license. If, however, it was discovered to be blemished or there was a readily apparent factor that caused it to be deemed <i>tereifah</i>, he is liable for a sin-offering, since he should have checked it before slaughtering. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.
If one slaughtered a Paschal sacrifice on the Sabbath for the sake of another sacrifice in error, he is exempt, because the sacrifice is acceptable. For supplanting the designation of a sacrifice in error is not considered of consequence, as explained in <i>Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim</i>.
The following rules apply if, on the Sabbath, one slaughtered animals designated for other sacrifices for the sake of a Paschal sacrifice in error. If they are fit to serve as a Paschal sacrifice, he is free from the obligation of bringing a sin-offering, because he slaughtered with license. If they are not fit to serve as a Paschal sacrifice, e.g., the animal was female or in its second year of life, he is liable for a sin-offering, because they are not fitting for this sacrifice.<br>Similarly, one is liable for a sin-offering if he slaughtered an animal as a Paschal sacrifice on the Sabbath for the sake of individuals who cannot partake of it, for those who were not enumerated on it, for the uncircumcised, or for the ritually impure. If, however, he slaughtered it on the Sabbath for the sake of individuals who can partake of it and for those who cannot partake of it, for those enumerated on it and for those who were not enumerated on it, for the circumcised and for the uncircumcised, or for the pure and for the impure, he is exempt from bringing a sin-offering, because the Paschal sacrifice is acceptable. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.
When a person slaughters an animal designated for a communal sacrifice on the Sabbath for an intent other than that for which it was designated, he is obligated to bring a sin-offering. Nevertheless, the fats and the organs from the sacrificial animal should be offered on the altar's pyre on Saturday evening. Similarly, if on the Sabbath one slaughtered other animals besides those required as the day's obligations, he is liable for a sin-offering for the additional animal.
A person who slaughters animals for individual sacrifices whose offering does not supersede the Sabbath prohibitions on the Sabbath inadvertently is liable for a sin-offering. One is, however, permitted to benefit from the meat of those sacrifices and the blood should not be cast on the altar. If he transgressed and cast the blood on the altar for the intent of those sacrifices whether without knowing it is a transgression or knowingly, the owner is considered to have fulfilled his obligation, the organs and fats may be offered on the altar's pyre, and the meat should be eaten. The one who slaughtered the animal should bring a sin-offering for his inadvertent violation.
The following laws apply when, on the Sabbath, there were two animals designated for communal offerings before a priest, one lean, and one stocky, and the sacrificial obligation of the day required - as either a sin-offeringor a burnt-offering - the offering of only one of them and he inadvertently slaughtered them both. If he slaughtered the lean one first and afterwards, slaughtered the stocky one, he is exempt from the obligation to bring a sin-offering. Indeed, he is told: "Bring the stocky animal and slaughter it as an initial preference." If, however, he slaughtered the stocky animal initially and then the lean one, he is liable for a sin-offering for the additional slaughter.<br>Nevertheless, in the latter instance, there is room for leniency if the stocky animal was slaughtered first and discovered to be <i>tereifah</i> because of a disqualifying factor in its intestines. Even though he did not know that the stocky one was <i>tereifah</i> when he slaughtered the lean one and he did not have that intent, since the last one was slaughtered as required by law, he is exempt from a sin-offering for its slaughter.<br>A similar law also applies if one spreads out a net to catch fish at sea on the Sabbath unknowingly and lifts up a child with the fish, he is exempt from bringing a sin-offering. Even though his intent was only to catch fish, since he acted unknowingly and lifted up a child with the fish, he is exempt whether he heard that a child had fallen into the sea or not, he is exempt. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.
When, on the night of Pesach, a person had roasted meat from the Paschal sacrifice and meat that was left over from other sacrifices before him and intended to partake of the roasted meat which is a mitzvah and inadvertently partook of the leftover meat, he is liable for a sin-offering, since he did not perform a mitzvah when eating. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.

Chapter 3

When witnesses testify that a person violated a transgression that is punishable by a fixed sin-offering, but they did not warn him, instead, they told him: "We saw that you performed forbidden labor on the Sabbath" or "...that you partook of forbidden fat" and he replied: "I know that I did not perform that act," he is not liable for a sin-offering. The rationale is that since he would be exempt from bringing the sacrifice if he said: "I acted intentionally," when he says: "I did not eat" or "I did not perform," it is as if he said: "I did not eat inadvertently, but rather intentionally," in which instance, he is exempt from bringing the sacrifice and did not contradict the witnesses.
If the alleged transgressor remained silent and did not contradict the witnesses - indeed, even if a woman told him: "You partook of forbidden fat" or "...performed forbidden labor on the Sabbath" and he remained silent - he is liable to bring a sin-offering. If one witness told him: "This is forbidden fat" and he remained silentand then he partook of it inadvertently, he must bring a sin-offering. If he warned him, he is liable for lashes, even though the essence of the testimony depends on one witness.
We already explained in <i>Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim</i> that a person who set aside a sin-offering for eating forbidden fat should not bring it for the desecration of the Sabbath or for partaking of blood, as implied by Leviticus 4:28 which states: "And he shall bring his sacrifice, a she-goat... for the transgression that he committed." The sacrifice must be for the sake of the particular sin; one should not offer one designated for one sin for another. If he offered it, he disqualifies it.<br>In addition, our Sages said that if one set aside a sin-offering for forbidden fat that he ate on the previous day, he should not bring it for fat that he eats on the present day. Nevertheless, if he brings it for that purpose, he finds atonement. Needless to say, if a father sets aside a sin-offering and dies and the son was liable for that same transgression, the son should not bring his father's sacrifice for his transgression, as explained there.
When a person brings an animal as a sin-offering for two transgressions, it should be left to pasture until it contracts a disqualifying blemish and be sold. Half of the proceeds should be used to bring a sin-offering for one transgression and half for a sin-offering for the second transgression.<br>Similarly, if two people bring one animal as a sin-offering for two transgressions, it should be left to pasture until it contracts a disqualifying blemish and be sold. One should bring his sin-offering with half of the proceeds and the other should bring his sin-offering with the other half.
If one brings two animals as sin-offerings for one transgression, he should sacrifice whichever one he desires. The second should be left to pasture until it contracts a disqualifying blemish and be sold. A freewill offering should be brought with the proceeds.
If, however, a person brings two animals for sin-offerings for two transgressions without specifying the transgression for which each sacrifice is being brought, he should make that determination and slaughter one for one transgression and the other for the second.
We already explained in <i>Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot</i>, that no sacrifices at all are accepted from an apostate who worships idols or desecrates the Sabbath in public. When a person is an apostate with regard to a particular sin, we do not accept a sin-offering for him for that sin.<br>What is implied? If a person was an apostate with regard to partaking of forbidden fat and then he inadvertently partook of fat and brought a sin-offering for this transgression, it is not accepted until he repents.<br>Even if he was an apostate with regard to partaking of forbidden fat to fulfill his desires and once he accidentally partook of forbidden fat instead of permitted fat and he brought a sacrifice in atonement, it is not accepted from him. Since he partook of the forbidden fat willfully, whether to purposefully anger God or merely to fulfill his desires, he is considered as an apostate with regard to that transgression.<br>If a person was an apostate with regard to partaking of forbidden fat and then he inadvertently partook of blood, we accept a sin-offering he brings for partaking of blood, as we explained.
When a person committed a transgression punishable by <i>karet</i> inadvertently and set aside an animal as a sin-offering, and afterwards, became an apostate and then repented or he lost control of his intellectual or emotional faculties and then regained control, that animal may be brought as a sacrifice even though there was a time when it was not to be offered. The rationale is that living animals are not deemed unacceptable forever, as we explained in <i>Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim</i>. Therefore that animal itself should be sacrificed. Just like if it contracted a temporary blemish and was healed, it returns to an acceptable state, so too, if the owners became disqualified and then became acceptable, it should be sacrificed.
Those liable for sin-offerings and definitive guilt-offerings remain obligated to bring those offerings even after Yom Kippur passed. Those liable for tentative guilt-offerings, by contrast, are exempt after Yom Kippur passes, as indicated by Leviticus 16:30: "From all of your sins before God will you be purified." According to the Oral Tradition, it was taught: Any sin that only God recognizes will be granted atonement. Therefore if a person enters a situation where he is in doubt of whether he transgressed on Yom Kippur, even at nightfall, he is exempt from the obligation to bring a tentative guilt-offering, for the entire day of Yom Kippur generates atonement.<br>Thus we learn that a conditional guilt-offering is not brought for a situation concerning which one does not know which occurred on Yom Kippur, unless Yom Kippur will not generate atonement for that person, as will be explained.
Yom Kippur, sin-offerings and guilt-offerings do not generate atonement unless one repents and believes in the atonement they grant. If, however, one rebels against them, they do not generate atonement for him.<br>What is implied? A person was in a state of rebellion, but brought a sin-offering or a guilt-offering, saying or thinking in his heart that these will not generate atonement. Accordingly, even though they were offered as commanded, they do not generate atonement for him. When he repents from his rebellion, he must bring another sin-offering and/or guilt-offering.<br>Similarly, when one is in a state of rebellion on Yom Kippur, Yom Kippur does not atone for him. Therefore if he was obligated to bring a tentative guilt-offering and Yom Kippur passed while he was in a state of rebellion, Yom Kippur does not generate atonement for him. When he repents after Yom Kippur, he is obligated to bring all the tentative guilt-offerings for which he is liable.
All of the guilt-offerings required by the Torah hold back atonement with the exception of the guilt-offering of a nazirite. A person who is in doubt whether he or she is required to bring a nazirite offering or an offering brought by one lacking atonement and a <i>sotah</i> who bring an offering because of doubt must bring their offerings after Yom Kippur.
The following laws apply when a person is obligated to bring a sin-offering or a guilt-offering and he is being taken out of the court to be executed. If the animal to be offered had already been slaughtered, we let him tarry until the blood is cast on the altar and then he is executed. If, however, the animal to be offered has not been slaughtered, we do not let him tarry until it is offered on his behalf.

Chapter 4

When a person performs many transgressions for which one is required to bring a sin-offering in one lapse of awareness, he is liable for a sin-offering for every individual transgression. Even if he performs all the 43 transgressions that we listed in one lapse of awareness, he is liable for 43 sin-offerings.<br>Similarly, if a person performed one deed for which he is liable for many transgressions, he is liable for every transgression, provided all of the prohibitions involved take effect at once, the latter prohibition causes the entity to be forbidden to additional people, or the scope of the latter prohibition encompasses other entities together with the entity that was originally prohibited.<br>What is implied? A person who slaughters consecrated animals outside the Temple, on the Sabbath, for the sake of a false divinity is liable for three sin-offerings, one for slaughtering consecrated animals outside the Temple Courtyard, one for desecrating the Sabbath, and one for serving false divinities, for the three transgressions take effect at the same time.<br>When does the above apply? When the person serving the false divinity states that he is serving it at the conclusion of the slaughter of the animal. If, however, this was not his intent, as soon as he performed a portion of the slaughter for the sake of a false divinity, it becomes forbidden. Since he is not liable for slaughtering an animal outside the Temple Courtyard until he slits the two organs, necessary to slit for ritual slaughter or the larger portion of these two organs, when he completed the slaughter, he will have slaughtered an animal that is forbidden to be offered as a sacrifice, in which instance, he is not liable for slaughtering it outside the Temple Courtyard, as we explained.<br>If it was a sin-offering of fowl and half of its windpipe was cut and a person increased the slit even the slightest amount on the Sabbath for the sake of a false divinity, he is liable for three sin-offerings, for the three prohibitions take effect at the same time.<br>Similarly, a person who performs forbidden labor on Yom Kippur when it occurs on the Sabbath, is liable to bring two sin-offerings, because the two prohibitions take effect at the same time. Also, a person who is intimate with the wife of his brother who is alive while she is in the <i>niddah</i> state, he must bring three sin-offerings: one because he was intimate with a married woman and one, because she was his brother's wife; these are two prohibitions that take effect at the same time; and one, because she was in the <i>niddah</i> state, which is a prohibition that forbids additional entities besides the entity that was originally prohibited. Since this prohibition would apply with regard to her husband, it also applies to her brother-in-law.<br>In the same vein, one who sodomizes his father is liable for two sin-offerings, one because of the prohibition, Leviticus 18:7: "Do not reveal the nakedness of your father" and one because of the prohibition, <i>ibid.</i>:22: "Do not lie with a man." Similarly, one who sodomizes his father's brother is liable for two sin-offerings, one because it is written <i>ibid.</i>:14: "Do not reveal the nakedness of your father's brother" and one because of the general prohibition against sodomy.<br>When one sodomizes a male and has a male sodomize him in one lapse of awareness, he is liable for only one sin-offering, even though there are two bodies involved. This is derived from the prohibition: "Do not lie with a man" which makes both positions equally liable. Similarly, when one sodomizes an animal and has an animal sodomize him in one lapse of awareness, he is liable for only one sin-offering. One is deemed equally liable for either position of intimacy when engaging in relations with an animal or a male.
It is possible that there be an instance where a person engages in a single act of intimacy and he is liable for eight sin-offerings.<br>What is implied? Jacob begat a daughter whose name was Timna from his wife Zilpa. Lavan married Timna and begat a daughter named Serach from her. Lavan does not have any daughters other than Rachel. Thus Serach is the daughter of Jacob's daughter, and his wife's sister on her father's side. These are two prohibitions that take effect at the same time. Serach married Reuven. She became forbidden to Jacob's other sons and thus became forbidden to Jacob as well, as his son's wife. If Reuven died or divorced her and Serach married Jacob's maternal brother, since she became forbidden to Jacob's other brothers through this marriage, she becomes forbidden to Jacob on another count, because she is the wife of his brother. If her husband died or divorced her and Serach married Yishmael, since she becomes forbidden to Yishmael's other brothers, a further prohibition takes effect with regard to Jacob, the prohibition against relations with the wife of his father's brother. If Yishmael died and Serach became eligible to undergo <i>yibbum</i> with Isaac and Isaac transgressed and performed <i>yibbum</i> with her even though she is forbidden to him as a secondary relation, since she became forbidden to Jacob's other paternal brothers, she also became forbidden to Jacob because she is his father's wife and because she is a married woman, for these are two prohibitions that take effect at the same time.<br>Now if Jacob acted inadvertently and was intimate with Serach when she was in the <i>niddah</i> state, during the lifetime of Isaac, her husband, and during the lifetime of Rachel, Jacob's wife, he is liable for eight sin-offerings because of his relations with her. She is his daughter's daughter, his wife's sister, his daughter-in-law, the wife of his brother, the wife of his father's brother, the wife of his father, a married woman, and in the <i>niddah</i> state. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.
In all situations when a woman who is forbidden as a relative becomes forbidden again due a prohibition that causes the entity to be forbidden to additional people, those additional people must be alive at that time, so that she will be forbidden to them. Then, as a result, since she becomes forbidden to them, a prohibition is also added applying to this individual. If, however, they are not alive, we do not say that since, would this man have had brothers or sons, she would have been forbidden to them, hence she is forbidden to the elder person. For at present, he has neither a son, nor a brother. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.
The following laws apply when a man is married to three woman and he is intimate with the mother of one of them, and she is the mother of the mother of his second wife and the mother of the father of his third wife. Even though this elderly woman is his mother-in-law, the mother of his mother-in-law, and the mother of his father-in-law, and these are three distinct prohibitions and they all took effect at the same time, he is liable for only one sin-offering. The rationale is that the Torah uses the same phrase, Leviticus 18:17: "They are close relatives; it is a depraved design" with regard to relations with a woman and her daughter, her son's daughter, and her daughter's daughter. Thus the Torah considered the three as one body. Therefore the three prohibitions are considered as one.
If, however, one is intimate with his sister who is also the sister of his father and the sister of his mother, he is liable for three sin-offerings, as implied by Leviticus 20:17: "He revealed the nakedness of his sister." One might infer that he is liable for relations with his sister independently even though she is also the sister of his mother and the sister of his father.<br>How is such a situation possible? A man was intimate with his mother and begat two daughters with her. He was intimate with one of these daughters and begat a son. If this illegitimate child will be intimate with the other daughter, who is the sister of his illegitimate mother, who is his paternal sister, who is also the maternal sister of his father, he will be liable for three sin-offerings. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.

Chapter 5

When a man is intimate with a woman who is forbidden to him as an <i>ervah</i> many times in a single period of lapse of awareness, it is all considered as one inadvertent violation and he is liable only for one sin-offering. Even though there were many times between each experience of intimacy, since he did not become aware in the interim, and she is only one person, he is only liable once.<br>If, by contrast, one inadvertently engaged in relations with her, the transgression became known to him afterwards, and then he inadvertently engaged in relations with that same woman, the transgression became known to him afterwards, and then he inadvertently engaged in relations with that same woman again, he is liable for a sin-offering for every time he engaged in relations. For his awareness separates between the inadvertent transgressions.
When a man engages in relation with a woman forbidden as an <i>ervah</i> many times in one ongoing state of lapsed awareness, but the woman with whom he engaged in relations became aware of the transgression between each experience of intimacy, thus from her perspective, the relations involved several lapses of awareness, he brings one sin-offering and she brings a sin-offering for every time they engaged in relations.<br>If he had knowledge of the transgressions in the interim and she act in one ongoing state of lapsed awareness, he brings many sin-offerings and she brings one sin-offering.
When a man engages in relations with many women forbidden to him as <i>ariyos</i> in one ongoing state of lapsed awareness, he is liable for a sin-offering for every one of them. This applies even if they are all forbidden because of the same prohibition, because they are separate persons.<br>What is implied? A man was intimate with five women in the <i>niddah</i> state, he was intimate with five of his sisters or five of his daughters in one ongoing state of lapsed awareness, he is liable for a sin-offering for every person.<br>From this ruling, we learned the following interpretation of our Sages' statement that a person who sodomized a male and was sodomized by a male in one state of lapsed awareness is liable for only one sin-offering. When does this apply? When the same male was involved. If, however, there were two other males involved, whether he sodomized both or sodomized one and one sodomized him, he is liable for each person. The same laws also apply when one sodomizes an animal and has an animal sodomize him.
When a women has many animals engage in relations with her in one period of lapsed awareness, she is liable for a sin-offering for every animal, for there are different bodies involved. It is like engaging in relations with many men in period of lapsed awareness in which instance, she is liable for a sin-offering for every man with whom she was intimate.
When a woman's husband went overseas and she heard that he died or witnesses came and testified that he died and she married, whether on her own initiative or according to the counsel of the court, and then she discovered that her first husband is alive, she is liable only for one sin-offering. If she married many men or was promiscuous with many men, she is liable for a sin-offering for every man with whom she was intimate, for they are different persons even though she acted in one state of lapsed awareness.<br>The following rules applies when a man was intimate with a woman in the <i>niddah</i> state inadvertently, then she became purified from her <i>niddah</i> state, immersed herself, then became a <i>niddah</i> again and they were intimate a second time in the same period of lapsed awareness. He is liable for a sin-offering for every span of time in which she is in the <i>niddah</i> state, even though it is in one state of lapsed awareness and only one person is involved. The rationale is that one span of time in which she is in the <i>niddah</i> state is distinct from another span of time in which she is in the <i>niddah</i> state. It is as if he was intimate with two different women in the <i>niddah</i> state.
When a man is intimate with his wife at a time when she is not expected to menstruate and she menstruates in the midst of relations, they are exempt from bringing a sin-offering. This is considered as a situation beyond their control and not an inadvertent transgression. For with regard to an inadvertent transgression, the transgressor carries a certain amount of culpability, for he should have checked and been careful. Had he examined the matter thoroughly and been careful in asking questions, he would not have transgressed. Since he did not take the trouble to examine and research the matter before acting, he requires atonement. In this situation, however, what should the person have done? She was pure and they were intimate at a time when menstruation was not expected. This is considered as a matter beyond their control. Therefore, whether the blood was found on her inspection cloth or his, they are exempt.<br>If, however, the man transgressed and was intimate with her close to the time when she could have been expected to menstruate, thinking that they could be intimate and separate before she would menstruate, and instead, she menstruated in the midst of relations, they are liable to bring a sin-offering, for this is an inadvertent transgression. Therefore, if blood is found on his inspection cloth, they are both impure and are obligated to bring a sacrifice. Slightly more lenient rules apply if blood was found on her examination cloth. If she cleaned herself immediately after separating from her husband, without waiting, they are both impure and are obligated to bring a sacrifice. If, however, she waited long enough so that she could have stretched her hand under the pillow or under the bolster and take an inspection cloth to examine herself and afterwards, she cleaned herself, they are both are considered to have contracted impurity of doubtful status and are exempt from bringing a sacrifice. If she waited long enough so that she could have descended from the bed and washedand afterwards, she cleaned herself and discovered blood, her husband is pure.
When a man transgressed and was intimate with his wife close to the time when she could have been expected to menstruate with the intent that he would complete relations before she began to menstruate and the woman felt that she became impure in the midst of relations and informed her husband of this, he should not withdraw while erect, as we explained in <i>Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah</i>. If he did not know that it is forbidden for him to withdraw immediately and he withdrew while erect, he is liable for two sin-offerings: one for entering, for he was intimate with a <i>niddah,</i> and one, for withdrawing, since withdrawing also afforded him pleasure, as entering did.<br>When does the above apply? When he knew that it was forbidden to be intimate close to the time when she could have been expected to menstruate, but had the intent that he would complete relations before she began to menstruate and did not know that it is forbidden to withdraw while erect. Thus it is as if he has two lapses of awareness regarding two experiences of intimacy. If, however, he did not know that it was forbidden to be intimate close to the time when she could have been expected to menstruate and did not know that it is forbidden to withdraw from an impure woman immediately, he is liable for only one sin-offering even when he withdrew immediately, while erect. The rationale is that his entry and his withdrawal are considered as two experiences of intimacy performed during one lapse of awareness.<br>The same principle applies with regard to other forbidden sexual relations. If one inadvertently was intimate with a woman under the conception that she was permitted and, while in the midst of intimacy, he became aware that she was forbidden, he should not withdraw immediately, for withdrawing also affords him pleasure, as entering does. If he does not know that it is forbidden to separate immediately and separates while he is erect, he is only liable for one sin-offering, for the act is considered as one inadvertent transgression.

Chapter 6

The laws concerning inadvertent consumption of foods are the same as those concerning inadvertent intimate relations. Therefore if one partook of the same type of forbidden food many times in one lapse of awareness, he is only liable for one sin-offering even though there were many days in the interim.<br>What is implied? One partook of forbidden fat on a given day and did so also on the following day, and the day following that in one state of lapsed awareness, he is liable for only one sin-offering, even if they were cooked in different pots. If, by contrast, one inadvertently partook of an olive-sized portion of forbidden fat, he became aware of the transgression and then again inadvertently partook of an olive-sized portion of forbidden fat and became aware of the transgression, he is liable for each time he ate. For gaining awareness causes each inadvertent transgression to be considered as distinct.<br>If one partook of half an olive-sized portion of forbidden fat and then partook of another half of an olive-sized portion of forbidden fat in one state of lapsed awareness, they are joined together, even though they were cooked and served in different pots and he made an interruption between partaking of them. For the different pots do not cause the inadvertent transgressions to be considered as distinct. This applies provided he did not take more than the time to eat three eggs between the two times he ate, as explained in <i>Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot</i>. Just as anything eaten in this time is combined to comprise a minimum measure to make a person who did so willfully liable for lashes, so too, anything eaten in this time is combined to comprise a minimum measure to make a person who did so inadvertently liable to bring a sacrifice.
If a person partook of <i>notar</i> from five different sacrifices, an olive-sized portion from each sacrifice, in one lapse of awareness, he is liable for only one sin-offering, even if he partook of them in five different pots. The rationale is that they are all included in one prohibition and the different pots do not cause the inadvertent transgressions to be considered as distinct. Nor do the different bodies of the sacrifices cause the inadvertent transgressions to be considered as distinct. There is no difference whether one partakes of meat that is <i>notar</i> from one sacrifice or from many sacrifices.<br>Similarly, when one slaughters five sacrificial animals outside the Temple Courtyard in one lapse of awareness, he is only liable for one sin-offering. To what can the matter be compared? To one who bows down to five forbidden images in one lapse of awareness.
If one let the blood of his animal and received it in two cups and drank them both in one lapse of awareness, he is liable for only one sin-offering.
When a person eats foods that are forbidden because of different prohibitions in one lapse of awareness, he is liable for one sin-offering for every type of prohibition.<br>What is implied? One partook of an olive-sized portion of each of the following: forbidden fat, blood, <i>notar</i>, and <i>piggul</i>, in one lapse of awareness must bring four sin-offerings. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.<br>Anyone who eats a single olive-sized portion of food that is forbidden because of many different prohibitions in one lapse of awareness must bring a sin-offering for every prohibition, provided the prohibitions either cause the entity to be forbidden to additional people, the scope of the latter prohibition encompasses other entities together with the entity that was originally prohibited, or the two prohibitions take effect at the same time.<br>For this reason, if a person who is ritually impure partook of an olive-sized portion of forbidden fat that was <i>notar</i> on Yom Kippur, he must bring four sin-offerings and a guilt-offering: one sin-offering, because he was impure and he partook of consecrated food, one, because he partook of forbidden fat, one, because he partook of <i>notar</i>, and one, because he ate on Yom Kippur, provided another food is combined with this olive-sized portion so that it comprises a date-sized portion. And he must bring a guilt-offering for the misappropriation of consecrated property, for he inadvertently derived benefit from consecrated property.
When a person eats and drinks on Yom Kippur in one lapse of awareness, he is only liable for one sin-offering. Eating and drinking is considered as a single act.
When a person performs a forbidden labor on Yom Kippur that falls on the Sabbath, he is liable for two sin-offerings, because they are two prohibitions that take effect at the same time.
When a person eats a half of an olive-sized portion of forbidden fat and half an olive-sized portion of blood in one lapse of awareness, he is not liable for an offering. Just as the prohibitions are not combined to make one liable for lashes, as explained in <i>Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot</i>, so too, they are not combined to make him liable for a sacrifice.
When a person inadvertently partook of half an olive-sized portion of a forbidden substance and then became aware of his transgression, but forgot and partook of another half an olive-sized portion of the same substance in a second lapse of awareness, he is not liable for an offering. The rationale is that he became aware in the interim and awareness causes a distinction to be made even with regard to half the required measure.<br>Similarly, if one wrote one letter on the Sabbath inadvertently and then became aware of the matter and then forgot and then wrote another letter next to the first in a second lapse of awareness, he is not liable for a sin-offering. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.<br>In a like vein, if a person transferred an article two cubits in the public domain on the Sabbath inadvertently, transferred it another two cubits in conscious violation of the Sabbath laws and then transferred it two cubits inadvertently, he is liable if he transferred it by throwing it. The rationale is not that his gaining awareness after half the measure is not significant, but rather that, after throwing the article, he is unable to bring it back. Therefore the awareness he gained in the interim is of no avail. If he transferred the article by passing it, he is exempt, because gaining awareness after half the required measure has been completed is significant.
The following rules apply when a person ate an olive-sized portion of forbidden fat and then a second olive-sized portion of forbidden fat in one lapse of awareness. If he became aware of the first transgression and then became aware of the second, he must bring two sin-offerings, because the difference in his becoming aware of the transgressions creates a distinction even though he did not set a side a sacrificial animal yet. If, however, he became aware of both of them at the same time, he should bring only one sin-offering. Similarly, it appears to me that the law is the same with regard to forbidden sexual relations.
If one ate an olive-sized portion and a half of forbidden fat in a single lapse of awareness, then became aware that he partook of the olive-sized portion and then, partook of another half of an olive-sized portion while he is unaware of partaking of the other half, he is only liable for one sin-offering. The rationale is that the second half of an olive-sized portion is not combined with the first half, even though it was eaten during its lapse of awareness, because he had become aware of part of the transgression performed in the initial lapse of awareness.
A person partook of two olive-sized portions of forbidden fat and then became aware of eating one of them. He then partook of another olive-sized portion while he was unaware of the second transgression and then brought a sin-offering to atone for the first transgression. The first and the second transgressions are atoned for by this sacrifice, but not the third. Instead, when he becomes aware of it, he should bring another sin-offering.<br>If he brought a sin-offering for the third transgression, it secures atonement for the second and the third, because they both were committed during a single lapse of awareness, but atonement for the first is not secured by this sacrifice.<br>If he brought a sin-offering for the middle transgression, atonement is secured for all three. The rationale is that both the first and the third were performed during the same lapse of awareness that involved the second. Hence when he becomes aware of the first and the third transgressions, he does not have to bring an additional sin-offering.
A person ate one of two pieces of fat, one kosher and one forbidden, and he was unsure whether he had eaten the permitted fat or the forbidden fat and then he ate another piece in a similar mixture and again he was unsure whether he had eaten the permitted fat or the forbidden fat. If, afterwards, he gained definitive knowledge that he ate forbidden fat on both occasions, he is only liable for one sin-offering. Although the lack of certainty concerning whether or not he transgressed is sufficient to create a distinction with regard to a tentative guilt-offering, it is not considered as gaining awareness to require a distinction between the sin-offerings brought for atonement.

Chapter 7

When a person prostrates himself to a false deity, poured a libation to it, offers a burnt-offering to it, and slaughters an animal as a sacrifice to it in one lapse of awareness, he is liable for four sin-offerings. Similarly, if he defecated to Peor or threw a rock to Mercury in one lapse of awareness, he is liable for two sin-offerings. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations. The person will be liable for every act of service performed.<br>When does the above apply? When he consciously desired to serve a false deity, but was unaware that these acts constituted service. If, however, he willfully performed these acts, but inadvertently served a false deity, he is liable for only one sin-offering.<br>What is implied? He knew that a particular image was a false deity and that it is forbidden to serve it, but did not know that bowing down to it or pouring a libation constituted a transgression and bowed down and poured a libation, he is liable for two sin-offerings. If, however, he knew that these were ways in which false deities were served and that it is forbidden to perform these acts in service of a false deity, but did not know that a particular image was considered a false deity, because it was not made of gold or silver and he was under the mistaken impression that only images of gold and silver were considered as false deities and hence, performed all these acts of service to it, he is liable for only one sin-offering.
A great general principle was stated with regard to the violation of the Sabbath prohibitions: Anyone who forgets the fundamental principle of the Sabbath, failing to recall that the Jews were commanded to observe the Sabbath or was captured and taken among gentiles while a child or converted in his childhood and remained living among gentiles, he is liable for only one sin-offering even though he performed many forbidden labors on many different Sabbaths, for it is all one lapse of awareness.<br>Similarly, he is liable for one sin-offering for all the forbidden fat that he ate, one sin-offering for all the blood that he ate. Similar laws apply to all analogous situations regarding these sins. Whenever one knows the fundamental principle of the Sabbath, but forgot that a given day was the Sabbath and thought it was an ordinary day, he is liable for only one sin-offering for the entire day, even though he performed many forbidden labors on it. Similarly, he is liable for a sin-offering for every Sabbath that he inadvertently desecrated.
Anyone who knows that a given day is the Sabbath, but inadvertently performed forbidden labors without knowing that these labors are forbidden or knew that they were forbidden, but did not know that one was liable for <i>karet</i> for their violation, is liable for a sin-offering for every general category of forbidden labor. Even if he performed all 39 forbidden labors in one lapse of awareness, he must bring 39 sin-offerings.
If he forgot that the day is the Sabbath and also forgot that these labors were forbidden, he is only liable for one sin-offering.
When a person performs an action that is the primary forbidden activity of a particular category of labor and also a derivative in one lapse of awareness, he is only liable for one sin-offering. Needless to day, if he performs many derivatives of one category of forbidden labor, he is only liable for one sin-offering.
If he performs derivatives of one category of forbidden labor and derivatives of another category of forbidden labor in one lapse of awareness, it appears to me that he is liable for two sin-offerings.
If he performs several activities comprising a single category of forbidden labor in one lapse of awareness, e.g., he sowed, extended a vine by replanting one of its branches, grafted a branch onto a tree, he is liable for only one sin-offering. In <i>Hilchot Shabbat</i>, it has already been explained which activities are primary labors, which are derivatives, and which activities comprise a single category of forbidden labor.
When a person performs activities comprising a single category of forbidden labor on many Sabbaths, whether he was aware that it was the Sabbath, but unaware that he was performing forbidden labors or he was unaware that it was the Sabbath, but aware that the labor he performed is forbidden on the Sabbath, he is liable for a sin-offering for every forbidden labor he performs.<br>What is implied? He knew that it was the Sabbath and sowed on that day, because he did not know that sowing constituted forbidden labor. Similarly, on the following Sabbath, he knew that it was the Sabbath and planted because he did not know that planting constituted forbidden labor. Similarly, on the third Sabbath, he extended a vine, because he did not know that extending constituted forbidden labor, he is liable for a sin-offering for each one, even though they all comprise a single category of forbidden labor, because the different Sabbaths are considered like different bodies.
When a person was unaware that it was the Sabbath and sowed upon it, although he knew that sowing is a forbidden labor, on the following Sabbath, he forgot that it was Sabbath and planted, although he knew that planting is a forbidden labor, and on the third Sabbath, he forgot that it was Sabbath and extended, although he knew that extending is a forbidden labor, he is liable for a sin-offering for every Sabbath. The rationale is that the days between each Sabbath are considered equivalent to gaining awareness of one's transgression and create a distinction.
When a person harvested and ground a dried-fig-sized measure of grain without being aware that it is Sabbath, but knowing that these labors are forbidden on the Sabbath, he is only liable for one sin-offering. Afterwards, he harvested and ground a dried-fig-sized measure of grain while aware that it is the Sabbath, but forgetting that these labors were forbidden, in which instance, he is liable for a sin-offering for every forbidden labor. He then became aware of the harvesting performed without being aware that it is Sabbath, but knowing that these labors are forbidden on the Sabbath. In such an instance, the one act of harvesting draws the other after it and the one act of grinding draws the other after it. Thus it is as if he performed all four acts without being aware that it is Sabbath, but knowing that these labors are forbidden on the Sabbath, in which instance he is liable for only one sin-offering. After he brings that sin-offering, he has secured atonement for all the other forbidden labors he performed. When he later becomes aware of them, he does not have to bring another sin-offering.<br>If, however, he first becomes conscious of the harvesting performed while aware that it is the Sabbath, but forgetting that these labors were forbidden, and brings a sin-offering, he receives atonement for the harvesting that he became aware of and on the harvesting and grinding performed without being aware that it is Sabbath, but knowing that these labors are forbidden, because the two are considered as one labor and the harvesting and grinding are drawn after the harvesting performed when he was aware that it was the Sabbath. Thus there remains without atonement, only the grinding performed when he was aware that it was the Sabbath until he becomes aware of it and brings a second sin-offering.<br>If a person harvested half a dried-fig-sized measure without being aware that it is Sabbath, but knowing that this labor is forbidden and then harvested half a dried-fig-sized measure while aware that it is Sabbath, but not aware that this labor is forbidden, these two activities are combined. One harvesting draws the other after it. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations with regard to the other forbidden labors.
When, on the Sabbath, a person had the intent to cut an object that was already severed from the ground, but instead, cut an object that was connected to the ground, even though he had the intent to cut, since his desired intent was not fulfilled, he is exempt from a sin-offering. He is considered as one who is merely busying himself and the Torah forbade only purposeful labor, as we explained several times.
The following rule applies when a person stirs coals on the Sabbath, in which instance, he extinguishes the upper ones and ignites the lower ones. If he intended to extinguish and ignite, he is liable for two sin-offerings. If he stirred the coals to become warm and they were ignited on their own, he is liable, because one is liable for performing a forbidden labor even if he has no need for the actual labor he performed, as explained in <i>Hilchot Shabbat</i>. Just as he is liable for <i>karet</i> for the intentional performance of forbidden labor, he is liable for a sin-offering for unintentional violation.

Chapter 8

Every transgression for which one is liable for a fixed sin-offering if he transgressed inadvertently carries liability for a provisional guilt-offering if he is unsure whether he violated it.<br>What does being unsure mean? If a person is in doubt whether he inadvertently violated this transgression or not, he is obligated to bring a guilt-offering, as Leviticus 5:17-18 states: "If he was unaware and became guilty, he shall bear his iniquity. He shall bring an unblemished ram from sheep, of the given value, as a guilt-offering." This is referred to as a provisional guilt-offering, for it brings atonement when the person is in doubt, tentatively, until he knows with certainty that he sinned inadvertently, at which time, he brings a sin-offering.
A person is not liable for a provisional guilt-offering unless there is a prohibition that is established. What is implied? A person partook of forbidden fat, but was in doubt whether there was an olive-sized portion or not. There was a piece of forbidden fat and a piece of permitted fat before a person and he partook of one of them, but he did not know which one he ate. His wife and his sister were with him at home. He was intimate with one of them, but did not know with whom. Both the Sabbath and a weekday passed and he performed a forbidden labor on one of them, but did not know the day on which he acted. He performed a deed on the Sabbath, but did not know whether it falls into a category of forbidden labor. In all these and similar instances, he should bring a provisional guilt-offering.<br>If, however, a prohibition has not definitely been established, he is not liable for a provisional guilt-offering. Thus if there was one piece of fat before a person and he was unsure whether it was permitted or forbidden and he partook of it, he is exempt, for there is no established prohibition. Similarly, one who partakes of the fat of a ko'i is exempt from a provisional guilt-offering, for there is not an established prohibition.Similarly, when a man is intimate with a woman who is unsure whether or not she is in the <i>niddah</i> state or we are unsure whether she is an <i>ervah</i> due to family connections, he is exempt from a provisional guilt-offering.<br>Therefore a man who is intimate with a woman is exempt from this sacrifice, if: a) she finds blood on the examination cloth she uses after time has transpired, or<br>b) he married his <i>yevamah</i> within three months of his brother's death and she gave birth and it is not known whether the child was conceived by her first husband and was born after a nine-month pregnancy or he was conceived by her second husband and was born after a seven-month pregnancy.Similar laws apply in all analogous situations, for there is no established prohibition.
An individual can be required to bring a provisional guilt-offering in the following circumstances:<br>a) he who ate a piece of fat and one witness states: "What you ate was forbidden fat," while the other states; "You did not partake of forbidden fat;<br>b) a woman said that he partook of forbidden fat and another woman said that he did not. Since he does not know whether he partook of the forbidden fat or not and the existence of the prohibited substance has been established, he is obligated to bring a provisional guilt-offering.<br>Similarly, if one was intimate with a married woman about whom one witness states: "Her husband died," but another states: "He did not die," he is obligated to bring a provisional guilt-offering. This law also applies when there is a question if a woman is divorced, for the prohibition was established.If, however, there is a doubt whether or not a woman was consecrated, one who is intimate with her is not liable, because the prohibition has not been established.
A person is liable for a provisional guilt-offering in the following situations: There were two pieces of fat before him: one forbidden and one permitted. He ate one inadvertently and a gentile or a dog came and ate the second. The gentile or the dog ate the first and a Jew ate the second. One ate the first intentionally and the second, inadvertently, or he ate the first inadvertently and the second, intentionally. In all these situations, he is liable, because the existence of a prohibited substance had been established.<br>If, however, he partook of both of them intentionally, he is exempt from bringing a sacrifice. And if he ate them both inadvertently, he must bring a sin-offering. If he ate the first inadvertently and another person came and ate the second inadvertently, they are both obligated to bring a provisional guilt-offering. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.
A transgressor is exempt from bringing a sacrifice in the following situations. There was a piece of forbidden fat and piece of <i>notar</i> before him. He ate one of them inadvertently, but did not know which one he ate. His wife who was in the <i>niddah</i> state and his sister were at home with him. He was intimate with one of them inadvertently, but did not know which one. The Sabbath and Yom Kippur followed directly after each other, he performed a forbidden labor in the twilight between them. He does not bring a sin-offering, because he does not know which transgression he performed, as we explained. Nor does he bring a provisional guilt-offering, because he knows with certainty that he transgressed.
Whenever a person performs a deed that obligates him for one fixed sin-offering when he knows with certainty that he transgressed, he is liable for a provisional guilt-offering if he is unsure whether he transgressed. Whenever a person performs a deed that obligates him for many fixed sin-offerings when he knows with certainty that he transgressed, he is liable for many provisional guilt-offerings, matching the number of sin-offerings, if he is unsure whether he transgressed.<br>What is implied? Just as a person who ate forbidden fat, blood, <i>notar</i>, and <i>piggul</i> in one lapse of awareness is liable for four sin-offerings,so, too, if he is uncertain whether he partook of them or not, he must bring four provisional guilt-offerings. Similarly, if he is unsure if the woman with whom he was intimate is his wife or so-and-so, another woman who is forbidden to him as an <i>ervah</i> and for whom he would be liable eight sin-offerings if he was intimate with her, he must bring eight provisional guilt-offerings.
When a person ate one of two pieces of fat and he was unsure whether he ate forbidden fat or permitted fat, and after that doubt arose in his mind, he ate another one of two pieces of fat and he was unsure whether he ate forbidden fat or permitted fat, he must bring two provisional guilt-offerings.
Just as the definitive knowledge that one transgressed creates a distinction with regard to sin-offerings, so too, the awareness that one possibly transgressed creates a distinction with regard to provisional guilt-offerings. Therefore if one partook of five olive-sized portions of forbidden fat in one lapse of awareness and then became aware of the possibility that he sinned with regard to one of them and later, became aware of the possibility that he sinned with regard to a second one, and then with regard to the subsequent ones, he is liable for a provisional guilt-offering for each one.
When there is a piece of permitted fat and a piece of forbidden fat and a person ate one of them without knowing which and thus brought a provisional guilt-offering and then partook of the second piece of fat, he must bring a sin-offering. If another person partook of the second piece, that second person must bring a provisional guilt-offering, as stated.
When there is a piece of forbidden fat and a piece of forbidden fat that is <i>notar</i> and a person ate one of them without knowing which one, he must bring a sin-offering to atone for partaking of forbidden fat and a provisional guilt-offering because of the possibility that he partook of <i>notar</i>. If he ate the second piece in a second lapse of awareness, he must bring three sin-offerings. If the piece of <i>notar</i> was worth a <i>p'rutah</i>, he must also bring a definitive guilt-offering because of the misappropriation of consecrated articles.<br>If he ate one of the two pieces and another person came and ate the second, he should bring a sin-offering and a provisional guilt-offering and the second person should bring a sin-offering and a provisional guilt-offering. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.

Chapter 9

There are five sins for whose violation one must bring a guilt-offering. It is called a definitive guilt-offering, because it is not brought because of a doubt. They are: a) intimacy with a consecrated maid-servant, b) robbery, c) misappropriation of sacred articles, d) the contraction of ritual impurity by a nazirite, and e) purification from the infliction of <i>tzara'at</i>.<br>What is implied by intimacy with a consecrated maid-servant? When a man is intimate with a consecrated maid-servant whether intentionally or inadvertently, he must bring a guilt-offering, provided she is past majority, aware of the transgression, willfully participating, and she had previously engaged in relations in the ordinary manner, and the relations were completed, so that she will also be liable for lashes, as Leviticus 19:20-21 states: "There will be an investigation... and he will bring his guilt-offering," i.e., she receives lashes and he brings a sacrifice.
According to the Oral Tradition, it was taught, in a situation where she is liable for lashes, he is liable for a sacrifice. When she is exempt from lashes, he is exempt from a sacrifice.
When a youth who is nine years old is intimate with a consecrated maidservant, she is liable for lashes and he is obligated to bring a sacrifice. It appears to me that he does not bring the sacrifice until he comes of age and attains intellectual maturity.
We have already explained in <i>Hilchot Bi'ot Assurot</i>, the definition of the term <i>shifchah charufah</i> used in the Torah and that the two are not liable until he is intimate with her in an ordinary manner and the relations were completed. Therefore if two people tell him: "You were intimate with a consecrated maidservant," and he said: "I was not intimate with her," his word is accepted and he does not bring a sacrifice as a result of their statements. For he knows whether or not he completed the relations and his statement: "I was not intimate" can be interpreted as "I did not complete relations."
Although a man is intimate with a consecrated maidservant many times, he is only liable for one guilt-offering. What is implied? A man was intimate with a consecrated maidservant many times intentionally or was intimate with her inadvertently, he became aware of the matter, and then he was intimate with her inadvertently again and became aware of the matter - even if the sequence occurs 100 times in 100 lapses of awareness, he is only liable for one guilt-offering. It atones for him for everything, for both his intentional and inadvertent transgressions with her.<br>When does the above apply? When he was intimate with only one consecrated maidservant. If, however, he was intimate with many consecrated maidservants, even in one lapse of awareness, he is liable for a guilt-offering for every consecrated maidservant.
If a man was intimate with a consecrated maidservant, set aside his guilt-offering and then was intimate with her again afterwards, he is liable for every time they were intimate. Setting aside a sacrifice creates a distinction. Thus it is as if he offered the sacrifice and then was intimate with the consecrated maidservant again.<br>Similarly, if a man was intimate with one consecrated maidservant five times in a single lapse of awareness, he then became aware of one transgression and set aside a guilt-offering and then became aware of the second, he must set aside another one even though both transgression were committed in a single lapse of awareness. Since he did not become aware of the transgression until after he set aside the offering, it is as if he was intimate with her after he set aside the offering. For the laws pertaining to one who acts inadvertently and one who acts intentionally are the same with regard to a consecrated maidservant.
In which instance is one obligated to bring a guilt-offering for robbery? Whenever anyone has in his possession a <i>p'rutah's</i> worth or more of Jewish money, whether he obtained it by robbery or theft, or it was entrusted to him, lent to him, came to him as part of partnership agreement, or in another way, and he denied possession of it, taking a false oath, whether intentionally or inadvertently, he must bring a guilt-offering to atone for his transgression. This is called a guilt-offering for robbery.<br>It is explicitly stated in the Torah that a person will not receive atonement through a guilt-offering until he returned the money in his possession to its owner. The payment of the additional fifth does not, however, hold back the atonement.<br>We already explained in <i>Hilchot Sh'vuot</i> the types of oaths for which a person will be liable to bring this guilt-offering and when he is exempt from it, in which instances one would be liable for many guilt-offerings commensurate with the number of oaths he is obligated to take and in which instances, he would be liable for only one guilt-offering.
In which instance is one obligated to bring a guilt-offering for misappropriating consecrated property? Anyone who inadvertently derives a <i>p'rutah's</i> worth of benefit from consecrated property must make restitution for the benefit he derived, add a fifth, and bring a sacrifice to receive atonement. We already explained in <i>Hilchot Me'ilah</i> that bringing the sacrifice and making restitution for the principal prevent atonement from being granted. The additional fifth does not prevent atonement from being granted.
When a person partakes of food for which one is liable for misappropriating consecrated property in five different dishes in one lapse of awareness, he is liable for a guilt-offering for each one, even though the meat comes from one sacrifice, provided he derives a <i>p'rutah's</i> worth of benefit each time he eats. The rationale is that the different dishes create a distinction and they are considered as different types of food even though they are not considered as different transgressions with regard to the liability for <i>karet</i>. The rationale for this is that there is an added dimension of severity to the prohibition against misappropriating consecrated property, for one who causes others to derive benefit is liable just as one who benefits, the measure for which one is liable can be accumulated over time, and when an agent performs the mission with which he is charged, the principal is liable. These concepts do not apply with regard to other prohibitions.
Whenever a person is obligated to bring a definitive guilt-offering, he must become aware of his transgression beforehand and then offer his guilt-offering. If, by contrast, he offers the sacrifice before he becomes aware of the transgression and afterwards, becomes aware of it, he does not fulfill his obligation with it.<br>A king and an anointed priest bring the same sacrifice as an ordinary person for every transgression for which one is obligated to bring a definitive guilt-offering.
Whenever a doubt arises in a person's mind whether or not he committed a transgression for which he is liable to bring a definitive guilt-offering, he is entirely exempt. Therefore if a doubt arises whether one caused the misappropriation of consecrated property, he is not liable at all, as stated in <i>Hilchot Me'ilah</i>.
When there was a piece of ordinary meat and a piece of sacrificial meat before a person and he partook of one without knowing which one it is, he is exempt. If, afterwards, he partook of the second, he must bring a guilt-offering for the misappropriation of consecrated property. If another person comes and partakes of the second piece, they are both exempt.
When there are a piece of forbidden fat and a piece of sacrificial meat before a person and he eats one of them without knowing which it is, he must bring a provisional guilt-offering, because of the possibility that he partook of the forbidden fat. If he ate the second one as well, he must bring a sin-offering for partaking of the forbidden fat and a definitive guilt-offering for misappropriating consecrated property. If another person came and partook of the second piece, that other person must also bring provisional guilt-offering.<br>When there are a piece of forbidden fat and a piece of sacrificial forbidden fat before a person and he eats one of them without knowing which it is, he must bring a sin-offering. If he ate the second after he became aware that he ate the first, he must bring two sin-offerings and a definitive guilt-offering to atone for misappropriating sacred property. If another person came and ate the second piece, each one should bring only a sin-offering. In <i>Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot</i>, we explained the rationale why the prohibition against benefiting from consecrated property falls on forbidden fat. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations concerning other prohibitions.

Chapter 10

There are six individuals who are commanded to bring an adjustable guilt-offering. They are: one who becomes purified from <i>tzara'at</i>, a woman who gives birth, a person who takes an oath denying the knowledge of testimony whether intentionally or inadvertently, one who takes a false <i>sh'vuat bitu'i</i> inadvertently, an impure person who partook of consecrated food inadvertently and an impure person who entered the Temple inadvertently.
With regard to the sacrifice brought by a woman after childbirth: If she is wealthy, she brings a sheep in its first year of life as a burnt-offering and a young dove or a turtle dove for a sin-offering. If she does not have the means, her obligation for a sacrifice is reduced and she must bring merely two turtle doves or two young doves, one as a burnt-offering and one, as a sin-offering. Even if she has the means to bring a sheep, but does not have the means to bring its accompanying offerings, she should bring the offering of a poor woman.
When a person afflicted by <i>tazara'at</i> becomes purified, he must bring three animals as sacrifices: two sheep, one, as a burnt-offering and one, as a guilt-offering, and a ewe, as a sin-offering. If he does not have the means, he must bring two turtle doves or two young doves, one, as a burnt-offering and one, as a sin-offering, and a sheep, as a guilt-offering.
One who takes a false <i>sh'vuah</i> concerning testimony, inadvertently takes a false <i>sh'vuat habitu'i</i>, or inadvertently enters the Temple or partakes of consecrated food while in a state of ritual impurity must bring a ewe or a she-goat, like other fixed sin-offerings. If he does not have the means, he must bring two turtle doves or two young doves, one, as a burnt-offering and one, as a sin-offering. If he does not have the means to purchase the fowl, he should bring a tenth of an <i>ephah</i> of flour. This is referred to as "the meal-offering of a sinner." The manner in which it is offered has been described in <i>Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot</i>.
All of these sacrifices are explicitly mentioned in the Torah and it is explicitly mentioned that these individuals are obligated to bring them with the exception of an impure person who inadvertently entered the Temple or partook of consecrated food. For it is written in Leviticus 5:1-5: "When a soul will sin and hear a voice of adjuration... or a soul that will touch any impure thing.... or a soul that will take an oath, explicitly stating it with his lips,... and one will be guilty with regard to one of these." According to the Oral Tradition, it was taught that the obligation for an impure person to bring a sacrifice refers to a person who became impure and then entered the Temple or partook of consecrated food without knowing of the prohibition. Although this interpretation was conveyed by the Oral tradition, it is as if it was stated explicitly, for the Torah explicitly obligated an impure person who partook of consecrated food or who entered the Temple for <i>karet</i>. With regard to an impure person who partakes of consecrated food, Leviticus 7:20 states: "And a soul that will partake of meat from a peace-offering brought to God while he is impure will be cut off." And with regard to one who entered the Temple, Numbers 19:20 states: "And the soul shall be cut off from the congregation, because he made the Sanctuary of God impure." Since the Torah obligated one who entered the Temple or partook of consecrated food while impure for <i>karet</i>, it is understood that here it stated the sacrifice that must be brought because of the inadvertent violation of these prohibitions.
Whenever a woman is obligated to bring a sacrifice, her husband is obligated to bring it on her behalf. If he is poor, he brings the offering of a poor person. If he is wealthy, he brings the sacrifice of a wealthy person on her behalf. A person may bring an offering of a poor person on behalf of his son, his daughter, his servant and his maid-servant and have them partake of the offerings.
A king and an anointed priest must bring the same sacrifices for a false oath regarding testimony, a false <i>sh'vuat bitu'i</i>, and for entering the Temple or partaking of sacrificial food while ritually impure as others. For the Torah did not distinguish between the sacrifices brought by a king or an anointed priest and ordinary individuals except with regard to those commandments for which one is obligated to bring a fixed sin-offering for their inadvertent transgression, as we explained. With regard to an adjustable guilt-offering, by contrast, all are equal.<br>We already explained in <i>Hilchot Sh'vuot</i>, when one is liable for a sacrifice for a false oath concerning testimony and a false <i>sh'vuat bitu'i</i> and when one is exempt, in which instances he would be liable for many sacrifices according to the number of oaths he took and in which instances, he would be liable for only one sacrifice. In <i>Hilchot Mechusrei Kaparah</i>, I will explain in which instances a woman who gave birth and a person becoming purified from <i>tzara'at</i> will be liable for many sacrifices and in which instance, they will be liable for only one sacrifice.
With regard to all sins that one must bring a sacrifice whether he transgressed willfully or inadvertently, if a person violates them due to factors under duress, he is exempt from bringing a sacrifice. Needless to say, this applies with regard to other sins for which he is liable for a sin-offering only when he transgresses inadvertently. If he sins under duress, he is exempt.
When a person set aside money for a ewe for a sin-offering and then needed it for another purpose, he may bring a she-goat and transfer the holiness of the money to the she-goat and derive benefit from the money. Similarly, if he set aside money for a she-goat and purchased a ewe, he may derive benefit from the money.
When a person set aside money for an animal and then became poor, he should take two turtledoves or two young doves and transfer the holiness of the money to them. Then he may benefit from the remainder.<br>If one set aside money for young doves or turtledoves and became poor, he should take an tenth of an <i>ephah</i> and transfer the holiness of the money to it. Then he may benefit from the money. Conversely, if he was poor and set aside money for a tenth of an <i>ephah</i> and became wealthier, he should add to that amount and bring a fowl. If he set aside money for a fowl and became wealthy, he should add to it and bring a ewe or a she-goat.<br>Even if a person was fit to inherit money and the testator was on his deathbed, he is still considered as poor until the testator dies and he inherits his estate.
When a wealthy person set aside a ewe or a she-goat and it contracted a blemish and then he became poor, if he desires, he may bring a fowl with the proceeds of its sale. If, however, he set aside a fowl and it was disqualified, he may not bring a tenth of an <i>ephah</i> of meal with the proceeds of its sale. It may not be sold, since there is no concept of redeeming a fowl.
When a person set aside a tenth of an <i>ephah</i> and then became wealthy before the meal was consecrated by placing it in a sacred utensil, it is like all other meal offerings and may be redeemed and eaten. Once it has been consecrated in a sacred utensil, it cannot be redeemed. Instead, it should be left overnight and then taken to the place where sacrifices are burnt.
When a wealthy person set aside a pair of doves to be sold with the intent of using the proceeds of the sale as part of the funds for a ewe or a she-goat and then became poor, he may bring this pair of doves even though they were consecrated only for their worth and thus originally disqualified as sacrifices.<br>Why are these doves not disqualified forever? Because when they were disqualified originally, they were not disqualified in an ultimate sense. For this pair of doves is now fit for sacrifice.<br>When a poor person brings the sacrifice of a rich person, he fulfills his obligation. Conversely, when a rich person brings the sacrifice of a poor person, he does not fulfill his obligation.

Chapter 11

There is a difference with regard to the inadvertent violation of the prohibitions against entering into the Temple and partaking of consecrated food while ritually impure that does not apply with regard to other transgressions punishable by <i>karet</i>. With regard to all the other transgressions punishable by <i>karet</i>, if one transgressed inadvertently and ultimately, became aware that he transgressed, he is liable for a sin-offering, even though he did not have any knowledge of the transgression beforehand. With regard to the prohibitions against entering into the Temple and partaking of consecrated food while ritually impure, by contrast, one does not bring an adjustable guilt-offering unless he was aware of his ritual impurity and aware of the consecrated nature of the Temple or the food at the outset and aware of his ritual impurity and aware of the consecrated nature of the Temple or the food afterwards, and there was a lapse of awareness in the interim.<br>What is implied? He unknowingly contracted impurity and entered the Temple or partook of consecrated food and afterwards, he became aware that he had contracted impurity, that he was impure at the time he ate or entered, and that it was consecrated food that he ate or the Temple that he entered, he is exempt from the obligation to bring a sacrifice. He is not obligated unless he knew that he contracted impurity and that it was consecrated food or the Temple, before he entered or ate.<br>What is implied? He contracted impurity and became aware that he contracted impurity and knew that the building was the Temple or the food was consecrated. Afterwards, he had a lapse of awareness regarding the impurity, forgetting that he had contracted impurity, and entered the Temple or ate consecrated food, knowing that this was the Temple or that this was consecrated food. Alternatively, he had a lapse of awareness and forgot that this was the Temple or that this was consecrated meat, but he was aware that he was ritually impure, and he entered or partook of the meat. Or he acted inadvertently or forgot that he contracted impurity, forgot that this was consecrated meat, or that this was the Temple and entered and ate. Then afterwards, he became aware of the matters of which he had been unaware, he must bring an adjustable guilt-offering in all these six possible instances.<br>How do we know that this is the law regarding the inadvertent violation of the prohibitions concerning the Temple and consecrated food? Because with regard to other inadvertent transgressions, Leviticus 4:27-28 states: "Acting in violation of one of the commandments of God that forbids an act to be performed and he was guilty or if the sin that he committed becomes known to him," implying that he is liable if he ultimately knew of the transgression even if he was not aware of it originally. With regard to entering the Temple or partaking of consecrated food while ritually impure, <i>ibid.</i> 5:3 states: "And it became hidden from him, he became aware, and he became guilty." Since the verse states "And it became hidden from him," the implication is that he had knowledge of the matter beforehand. And since it is written: "he became aware, and he became guilty," he ultimately had knowledge. Thus we have learned that he must have awareness initially and ultimately and a lapse of awareness in the interim.
If a person contracts impurity and knows that he is impure and is aware of the Temple or that food is consecrated, but does not know the type of impurity that he contracted, then forgot that he became impure and entered the Temple or ate consecrated food, and after entering or eating became aware of the type of impurity that he had contracted, he is liable to bring a sacrifice. Although at the outset, he did not know the type of impurity he had contracted, since he knew that he was ritually impure, it is considered as if he was aware of his impurity at the outset.<br>If, however, he suffered a lapse of awareness concerning the laws of ritual impurity, e.g., he became impure because of contact with a lentil-sized portion of the carcass of a crawling animal, and he knew that the carcass of a crawling animal imparted ritual impurity, but did not know the measure that imparts impurity and then forgot entirely that he touched the carcass of a crawling animal and entered the Temple or ate consecrated food, and then became aware that he touched a lentil-sized portion of the carcass of a crawling animal, there is an unresolved doubt whether or not he is liable for a sacrifice.<br>A similar issue arises when a person who never saw the Temple and never was aware of its place, became impure and knew that he was impure, entered the Temple without knowing at the outset that this was its place, since he never saw it, and afterwards, remembered that he had contracted impurity and became aware that this was the Temple. There is an unresolved doubt if the knowledge that there is a Temple in the world is considered as awareness of the Temple or it is necessary for a person to know of the Temple's place.<br>It appears to me that those for whom a doubt exists regarding their obligation to bring a sacrifice should not bring a sacrifice, lest they be bringing a non-consecrated animal into the Temple Courtyard. If one would say: A sin-offering of fowl is brought even in a case of doubt although it is not eaten. There is a difference between the two. A sin-offering of fowl is brought, because the one bringing it is possibly lacking atonement and is forbidden to partake of sacrificial food until he brings a sacrifice as atonement. When, however, one is not lacking in atonement, he should not bring a sacrifice when there is a doubt involved.
When a person contracts ritual impurity in the Temple Courtyard, to be liable for the abovementioned offering, he must initially know that he contracted impurity and that he is in the Temple. Afterwards, if he loses awareness that he contracted impurity, but remembered that he was in the Temple or he lost awareness that he was in the Temple, but did not forget that he was ritually impure, or he lost awareness of both matters, when he regains awareness, he should bring an adjustable guilt-offering. The above applies provided he waits the minimum amount of time, as we explained in <i>Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash</i>.
When a person intentionally made himself ritually impure, but did not remain in the Temple Courtyard for the minimum amount of time specified, there is an unresolved doubt with regard to his obligation. Does the concept of a minimum amount of time apply only to one who contracted impurity due to forces beyond his control or does it also apply to one who willfully contracted impurity? Therefore if such a person loses awareness of his ritual impurity, but nonetheless leaves the Temple Courtyard without tarrying, he should not bring a sacrifice.<br>Similarly, there is an unresolved question if an impure person suspended himself in the space above the Temple Courtyard. It is unresolved whether the space above the Temple Courtyard is considered as the Temple Courtyard or not.
When a person is in doubt whether or not he entered the Temple or partook of consecrated food while ritually impure, he does not bring a provisional guilt-offering. For a person does not bring such a sacrifice unless he is unsure of the violation of a prohibition punishable by <i>karet</i> for which one brings a fixed sin-offering to atone for his inadvertent transgression.
The following rules apply when there where two paths in front of a person, one pure and one impure. and he walked down the first and then walked down the second, and at the time he walked down the second, he forgot that he walked down the first. If he lost awareness of this ritual impurity and entered the Temple or partook of consecrated food, he is liable. Even though originally, he did not have a definitive knowledge of his ritual impurity, but merely a partial knowledge, because he did not know that he walked down both paths so that he would definitely be impure, he is, nevertheless, liable for a sin-offering. For partial knowledge is considered as complete knowledge.<br>If he only walked down the first path and entered the Temple or partook of consecrated food, he is exempt, because it is not certain that he contracted ritually impurity.
If, in the previous situation, he had the ashes of the Red Heifer sprinkled upon him on the third and seventh days and immersed himself after entering the Temple and then walked down the second path and entered the Temple, he is certainly liable, for he has certainly entered the Temple in a state of ritual impurity, either the first time or the second time. Although on each occasion he was in a state of uncertainty, for the status of both paths is a matter of question, here, with regard to the impurity of the Temple and consecrated objects, uncertain knowledge is considered as definite knowledge.
If a person was ritually impure and two witnesses tell him: "You entered the Temple," and he tells them: "I did not enter," his word is accepted and he does not bring a sacrifice. For if he desired, he could have said: "I entered intentionally."<br>The following rules apply if two witnesses tell a person: "You were impure when you entered the Temple. You contracted ritual impurity in our presence and you knew you were impure." Even though there was an interim of many days between the contraction of impurity which they testified about and his entry into the Temple and thus he could have said: "I already immersed myself," since he denies the statement of the witnesses and says: "I never contracted impurity," the statement of the witnesses is accepted and he is required to bring a sacrifice because of them. The rationale is that if two witnesses can cause him to receive as severe a punishment as execution, certainly, they can obligate him for an easier punishment, bringing a sacrifice, for he denied their testimony.
When a person entered the Temple or partook of consecrated food in a state of ritual impurity had a knowledge of the situation at the outset, but ultimately did not have knowledge of the matter, the goat whose blood is sprinkled in the Holy of Holies and Yom Kippur bring about tentative atonement until he becomes aware and brings an adjustable guilt-offering.<br>When he does not have knowledge at the outset, the goat offered in the Temple Courtyard and Yom Kippur bring about atonement. If he did not have knowledge neither at the outset, nor ultimately, the goats offered on the festivals and on Rosh Chodesh, bring about atonement. If one purposefully entered the Temple or partook of consecrated food while ritually impure, the bull offered by the High Priest on Yom Kippur brings about atonement if the transgressor was a priest. If he was an Israelite, the blood of the goat which is sprinkled in the Holy of Holies and Yom Kippur bring about atonement, as Leviticus 16:16 states concerning that goat: "And he shall atone for the holy place, because of the impurity of the children of Israel."

Chapter 12

The following rule applies with regard to every transgression for which an individual is obligated to bring a fixed sin-offering. If the High Court inadvertently erred in their ruling and ruled that a forbidden substance is permitted and as a result of their ruling, the people erred inadvertently and acted in transgression of the prohibition, while relying on the ruling of the court, and afterwards, the court discovered that they had erred, the court is obligated to bring a sin-offering for their erroneous ruling. Even if the judges themselves did not perform a deed in violation of the prohibition, they must bring this sacrifice. For we do not consider the deeds of the judges at all, what they did or did not do, only their ruling. The remainder of the people are exempt from bringing a sacrifice as individuals, even though they performed the transgression, because they relied on the court.<br>Which sacrifice do they bring for this erroneous ruling? If their erroneous ruling concerned the worship of false deities, they must bring a bull as a burnt-offering and a goat as a sin-offering from every tribe. This is the sacrifice referred to in <i>Parshat Shelach Lecha,</i> which states Numbers 15:24: "If due to the seers of the congregation, a transgression was erroneously violated...." According to the Oral Tradition, it was taught that this is referring to an erroneous ruling concerning the worship of false deities.<br>If they ruled erroneously with regard to other transgressions punishable by <i>karet</i> for which a fixed sin-offering is brought for their inadvertent violation, every tribe must bring a bull as a sin-offering. This sacrifice is mentioned in <i>Parshat Vayikra</i> which states Leviticus 4:3: "If the entire congregation of Israel shall inadvertently err...."<br>Thus we have learned that if the High Court rules erroneously with regard to the worship of false deities, the entire congregation bring twelve bulls as burnt-offerings and twelve goats as sin-offerings. They are burnt, because their blood is taken into the inner chamber. They are called the goats offered because of the worship of false deities.<br>If they ruled erroneously with regard to other mitzvot, they bring twelve bulls as sin-offerings and they are burnt, because their blood is taken into the inner chamber. Each one of the bulls is called a bull brought due to a lapse of awareness by the congregation, as <i>ibid.</i>:14 states: "And the congregation shall offer...," i.e., every congregation. Every tribe is referred to as a congregation, as II Chronicles 20:5 states: "And Yehoshefat stood in the congregation of Judah."<br>A bull is brought for every tribe - and for the worship of false deities, a bull and a goat are brought for every tribe whether the entire Jewish people in <i>Eretz Yisrael</i> transgressed because of the ruling of the court, the majority of the Jewish people transgressed even though they comprised only a lesser portion of the tribes, or the majority of the tribes transgressed, even though they comprise a lesser portion of the entire Jewish people. Even those tribes who did not transgress bring because of the transgressors. Even if only one tribe transgressed, but it constituted the majority of the congregation, the entire congregation bring twelve bulls, and for the worship of false deities, twelve bulls and twelve goats.
When the court is in doubt whether or not they ruled erroneously concerning a matter, they are not required to bring a provisional guilt-offering, as implied by Leviticus 4:14: "And the sin becomes known," i.e. only when the matter becomes known to them are they liable for a sacrifice, as will be explained.<br>When does the concept that the court is liable for a sacrifice and those who act upon their ruling are exempt apply? When the following conditions are met:<br>a) when those who deliver the ruling are the High Court of 71 judges;<br>b) when the head of the academy, participates in the ruling with them;<br>c) when they are all fit to deliver rulings;<br>d) when all - or the majority - of them err in the ruling they delivered;<br>e) that they rule explicitly and tell the people: "You are permitted to do this"; similarly those who heard from the court must have told others: "You are permitted to do this"; and the majority of the people or all of them must act because of their ruling;<br>f) those who commit the transgression must act in error because of them, thinking that the court ruled according to law;<br>g) they must rule to negate part of a commandment, but to preserve part of it, but not to displace the entire commandment; h) when they become aware of their error, they must know the precise matter concerning which they ruled erroneously.<br>When all of these conditions are met, the court is liable to bring a sacrifice and those who act upon their rulings are exempt. If, however, one of these conditions is not met, the court is exempt from the sacrifice and anyone who unknowingly performed a transgression must bring a fixed sin-offering for his inadvertent transgression.

Chapter 13

What is meant by the statement that if one of the conditions mentioned the court will be exempt and the transgressors liable?<br>If the court of one of the tribes ruled that the fat of the stomach is permitted and the people of that locale ate it as a result of these statements, that court is exempt and all of those who partook of it must bring a fixed sin-offering for his inadvertent transgression.<br>Similarly, if the High Court ruled that the blood that collects in the heart is permitted, but the head of the academy was not with them one of them was not fit to be appointed to the <i>Sanhedrin</i>, e.g., he was a convert, a bastard, an old man, childless, or the like, and the people acted on their ruling and partook of the blood that collects in the heart, the court is exempt and all of those who partook of it must bring a fixed sin-offering for his inadvertent transgression.<br>What is the source that teaches that the verse is referring only to the High Court? Leviticus 4:13 states: "If the entire congregation of Israel shall inadvertently err...." What is the source that teaches that all must be fit to deliver rules? Numbers 15:40: "If the seers of the congregation....," i.e., you must regard them as seers, and Numbers 35:24 states:"And the congregation shall judge." Just as the term "congregation" used in reference to capital cases must be comprised entirely of judges fit to render judgment, so too, the term "congregation," used in reference to this inadvertent violation must be comprised only of judges fit to render judgment.<br>Similarly, if the court issued a ruling and one of them knew that they erred and protested: "You are making an error," but those who sought to permit the matter outnumbered him and permitted it, the court is exempt and all of those who acted on their ruling must bring a fixed sin-offering for his inadvertent transgression, as Leviticus, <i>op. cit.</i> states: "If the entire congregation of Israel shall inadvertently err...," i.e., the entire <i>Sanhedrin</i>.<br>If one or a lesser part of the <i>Sanhedrin</i> knew that those who sought to permit the matter erred, but he or they remained silent, since the ruling was issued, and there was no dissenting view, and the ruling was disseminated among the entire people, the court is liable and all of those who acted on their ruling are exempt. If those who remained silent act upon the court's ruling, they are liable for a sin-offering, because they did not rely on the court.<br>Similarly, if the court debated the issue and stated "This matter is permitted," but did not issue a ruling and did not explicitly tell them: "You are permitted to act in this manner," and a person heard their decision that the matter is permitted and went and acted according to what he heard, anyone who performs a transgression is liable for a fixed sin-offering, The court is exempt, for it did not issue a specific ruling to act.<br>Similarly, if they issued a ruling and the lesser portion of the congregation acted according to their ruling and the error became known, the court is exempt and the lesser portion of the people who acted upon their directive must bring a sin-offering.
When the members of the <i>Sanhedrin</i> themselves act according to their ruling they are not counted when determining if a majority followed their ruling. Instead, the majority must be comprised of others aside from the members of the <i>Sanhedrin</i>.<br>If the majority of the inhabitants of <i>Eretz Yisrael</i> acted according to the erroneous ruling even if the transgressors were only from one tribe, and, similarly, if the majority of the tribes acted according to the erroneous ruling even if they are the lesser portion of the congregation, the court is liable for this sacrifice and the transgressors are exempt.<br>What is implied? There were 600,001 inhabitants of <i>Eretz Yisrael</i>. Those who acted according to the ruling of the court were 300,001 and they were all members of the tribe of Judah alone - or they were members of seven tribes even if they numbered only 100,000 the court is liable for this sacrifice and the transgressors are exempt.<br>We are not concerned with the inhabitants of the Diaspora, for the term <i>kahal</i> ("congregation") applies only to the inhabitants of <i>Eretz Yisrael</i>. The tribes of Efraim and Menashe are not considered as two tribes in this context. Instead, they are counted as one tribe.
If at the time the transgression was committed, the transgressors constituted the majority of the people, but at the time they became aware that a transgression had been committed, they were the lesser portion of the people, or they were the lesser portion at the time of the transgression, but the majority at the time they became aware, the ruling whether or not the court is required to bring a sacrifice depends on the proportion at the time of the transgression.
The people at large are exempt in the following instance. The court issued a ruling that one of the types of forbidden fat was permitted and the lesser portion of the congregation partook of it because of their ruling. They became aware that they sinned and retracted the ruling. Afterwards, they ruled that a particular form of worship of false deities was permitted and a lesser portion of the congregation performed that form of worship because of their ruling. If a majority of the congregation would be reached when the number of those who partook of the forbidden fat were added to the number were added to those who worshiped the false deity, the two numbers are combined and the people exempted even though the court became aware of their first error in the interim.<br>When does the above apply? When it was one court that delivered the rulings. If, however, the members of the court that issued the ruling died and another court arose and issued the second ruling, the two groups of transgressors are not combined.
Even if two courts issued rulings concerning one matter, e.g., concerning two types of forbidden fat or two types of blood and similarly, if the transgressors did not inadvertently sin because of the ruling, the court is exempt and all of the transgressors are liable.<br>What is implied? The court ruled that it is permissible to partake of that fat of the stomach in its entirety. One of the members of the congregation knew that the court erred and that the fat of the stomach is prohibited. He, nevertheless, partook of the forbidden fat, because he thought that it was a mitzvah to listen to the court even though they erred. This person who partook of the fat is liable to bring a fixed sin-offering for partaking of it. He is not included among the number of those who transgressed inadvertently because of their ruling.<br>When does the above apply? When the person who knew the error was a sage or a student who had attained the knowledge that enables him to issue a ruling. If, however, he is a common person, he is exempt, because his knowledge regarding the Torah's prohibitions is not definitive. He is thus included among those who transgressed inadvertently because of their ruling.<br>Similarly, if one did not know that the court erred and intended to eat permitted fat, but instead ate the fat of the stomach which they erroneously permitted, but he did not know that it was the fat of the stomach, that individual is liable for an individual sin-offering. The rationale is that his eating came as a result of his own inadvertent error, not because of their ruling. He is not included in the number of those who transgressed inadvertently because of their ruling. These concepts are alluded to by Numbers 15:26;: "For the entire nation has erred unknowingly." Implied is that the entire nation committed the same error.<br>Similarly, if the person acted on his own initiative and partook of the fat of the stomach that the court ruled was permitted, not because of their ruling, but because he considered it as permitted, he is obligated to bring a fixed sin-offering individually.<br>This is the general principle: Whenever one relies on the court, he is exempt, provided all of the conditions that were mentioned were fulfilled. Anyone who is individually liable is not included when calculating whether a majority transgressed inadvertently.
When the court intentionally ruled incorrectly and permitted something that is forbidden and the congregation erroneously acted on their ruling, the court is exempt from bringing a sacrifice, because they acted intentionally. Each of the people who acted upon their ruling is obligated to bring a sin-offering individually, because he transgressed inadvertently.<br>If the court delivered an erroneous ruling unknowingly and the congregation knew that they erred and that it is not correct to accept their ruling, and yet they acted in accordance with it, both the people and the court are exempt from bringing a sacrifice. The court is exempt, because the congregation did not act according to their erroneous ruling. And all the transgressors are exempt, because they are considered as having acted willfully, because they knew that the court erred and that it was not correct to act according to their ruling.

Chapter 14

When the court inadvertently err and rule to eliminate one of the Torah's fundamental laws and the entire people acted according to their ruling, the court is exempt and each of the transgressors is obligated to bring a fixed sin-offering, as implied by Leviticus 4:13: "And a matter will lapse...," i.e., a matter, but not an entire fundamental law.
The court is never liable for a sacrifice unless they issue a ruling, nullifying a certain aspect of a prohibition, but maintaining others regarding matters that are not explicitly stated and elaborated upon in the Torah. Only in such a situation will the court be obligated to bring a sacrifice and those who follow their ruling exempt.<br>What is implied? They erred and ruled that it is permitted to bow down to a false deity, that it is permitted to transfer an article from one domain to another on the Sabbath, or that it is permitted to be intimate with a woman who is watching day to day because of <i>zivah</i> bleeding. This is considered as one who stated that there is no prohibition in the Torah against performing labor on the Sabbath, worshiping false deities, or being intimate with a <i>niddah</i>, eliminating the entire prohibition. This is not considered as an erroneous ruling, but rather as forgetting the matter. Therefore the court is exempt from bringing a sacrifice and anyone who acted upon their ruling is liable for a sin-offering individually.<br>If, however, they erred and issued a ruling, saying that one who transfers an article from one domain to another is liable, as implied by Exodus 16:29: "A man should not depart from his place," but it is permitted for one to throw or pass an article from one domain to another - alternatively, they eliminated one of the primary categories of forbidden labor, ruling that it is not considered as forbidden labor - they are liable.<br>Similarly, they are liable if they erred and issued a ruling, saying that someone who prostrates himself, spreading out his hands and feet is liable, as <i>ibid.</i> 34:14 states: "Do not prostrate yourself to a foreign god," but it is permitted for one to kneel on the ground without spreading out his hands and feet.<br>Similarly, they are liable if they erred and issued a ruling, saying that one who is intimate with a woman who is watching day to day because of <i>zivah</i> bleeding, as implied by Leviticus 15:26 "all the days of her flow," but if she discovered bleeding at night, it is permitted to be intimate with her - alternatively, they issued a ruling, saying that one whose wife began to experience menstrual bleeding in the midst of intimacy is permitted to withdraw from her while erect.<br>Similarly, they are liable if they erred and stated that one is liable for partaking of blood which emerges from an animal at the time of ritual slaughter, but one who partakes of blood that collects in the heart is not liable. Similar laws apply with regard to all analogous errors. If they issued such rulings and the majority of the congregation acted because of their ruling, the people are exempt and the court must bring a sacrifice because of their error.
If the court ruled that the Sabbath ended because the sun became covered with clouds and it appeared to have set, and then it shined forth again, this is not considered as a mistaken ruling, but as an error. Any individual who performed a forbidden labor as a result is obligated to bring a sin-offering, but the court is exempt.<br>Similarly, if the court granted a married woman license to remarry, because testimony was delivered in their presence that her husband had died and then her husband appeared this is not considered as a mistaken ruling, but as an error. The woman and her second husband are obligated to bring a sin-offering for their inadvertent transgression. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.
When a court delivers an erroneous ruling and then forgot the nature of the prohibition concerning which they ruled, they are exempt and those who transgressed as a result of their ruling are liable. This applies even if they have definite knowledge that they erroneously caused the violation of a prohibition and even when the people inform them about their ruling, telling them: "You ruled concerning this-and-this." This is derived from Leviticus 4:14: "And the transgression which they caused to be violated became known to them," i.e., they became aware of it on their own, rather than being informed about it by the transgressors.<br>What is implied? The court erred and ruled that the fat on the stomach was permitted and the majority of the people partook of it. Afterwards, they became aware that they issued an erroneous ruling and permitted an entity for which one would be liable for <i>karet</i> had one partaken of it willfully or a fixed sin-offering if one partook of it inadvertently. They were in doubt, however, if they ruled that some forbidden fat was permitted or that some forbidden blood was permitted. In such a situation, the court is exempt and all those who partook of the forbidden fat must bring a fixed sin-offering.
The following rules apply when the court ruled erroneously and then became aware of their error. Whether they already brought a sacrifice as atonement or did not yet bring one, whenever one transgresses because of their erroneous ruling that was disseminated throughout the Jewish people after they became aware of their error, the transgressor must bring a provisional guilt-offering. The rationale is that since he should have continually inquired about the new developments in the court, but failed to do, he is considered like one who is in doubt whether he transgressed or not.<br>To whom does the above apply? To one who is in the same region as the court. If, however, one saw the initial, erroneous ruling and then journeyed to another region, he is exempt even if he transgressed after the court became aware of their error, because he relied upon them and cannot inquire about their rulings in his present place. Moreover, even if a person who is hurrying to depart, but has not yet set out on his journey, acts on their ruling after they became aware of their error, he is also exempt from bringing a provisional guilt-offering.

Chapter 15

We have already explained that for every transgression for which an ordinary person must bring a ewe or a she-goat as a fixed sin-offering, a <i>nasi</i>who violates it inadvertently must bring a he-goat. And if an anointed priest violates it inadvertently, he must bring a bull.<br>When does the statement that an anointed priest brings a bull because of his inadvertent transgression apply? When he errs in issuing a ruling and acts according to his ruling alone. And to be liable he must be a sage of distinction, as implied by Leviticus 4:3: "If the anointed priest will sin, bringing guilt to the nation," i.e., an equivalence is established between the anointed priest and the people as a whole. Just as the community, i.e., the court, are not obligated to bring a sacrifice unless the judges are sages fit to deliver rulings, they deliver an erroneous ruling, the transgressors err because of this ruling, and they ruled to nullify certain aspects of a prohibition and maintain others, so too, an anointed priest is not liable unless all these stipulations are met.
What is implied? If the anointed priest ruled erroneously for himself and thought that it was permitted to throw an article from one domain to another on the Sabbath and acted in this manner, relying on his judgment, when he becomes aware of his transgression, he should bring a bull as a sin-offering. If, however, he did not rely on his ruling, but instead, acted inadvertently and threw an article, or he relied on his ruling, but was not a distinguished sage, or he nullified a prohibition in its entirety when ruling for himself, or he ruled erroneously to negate only a portion of the prohibition, but did not act while relying on his ruling, but instead, performed the transgression inadvertently for another reason, or he purposely delivered an erroneous ruling, but performed the transgression inadvertently, he is exempt from bringing a sacrifice entirely. For the laws that apply to an anointed priest's ruling for himself are identical to those applying to the congregation with regard to the ruling of the court in all regards.<br>If he delivered a ruling for himself and then forgot the rationale motivating the ruling and at the time he acted said: "I am acting on the basis of my previous ruling," he must bring a bull as a sin-offering.
If he delivered a ruling for himself to nullify certain aspects of the prohibition against the worship of false deities and maintain others and he acted according to his ruling, he brings a she-goat, as does an ordinary person, provided he erred in his ruling, as we explained. For the anointed priest is not obligated to bring a sacrifice unless he has a lapse of awareness while delivering a ruling and then acts inadvertently as is the law with regard to the community as a whole. If, however, he merely acted inadvertently without delivering a ruling, whether he violated the prohibition against the worship of false deities or other commandments, he does not bring a sacrifice at all.
When the anointed priest ruled together with the High Court and he and they both erred in their ruling, the anointed priest is exempt even though he acted according to the mistaken ruling that he issued. The rationale is that he did not rely only on his ruling alone, but his ruling together with that of the court. Hence it is not necessary for him to bring a sacrifice for atonement individually. Instead, if the court bring a sacrifice, he receives atonement together with the community at large. And if the transgressors bring a sacrifice, he does not bring a sacrifice, because he does not bring a sacrifice individually.
If he together with the court ruled erroneously, they ruled concerning forbidden blood and he ruled concerning forbidden fats, he does not receive atonement together with the community. Instead, he brings a bull on his own accord.
When an anointed priest is in doubt of whether or not he committed this type of advertent transgression - i.e., he ruled in error and acted accordingly - he does not bring a provisional guilt offering, for he is comparable to the community at large who do not bring a provisional guilt-offering. When, by contrast, a <i>nasi</i> is in doubt whether he transgressed or did not transgress, he should bring a provisional guilt-offering like other ordinary people, because his obligation for an inadvertent transgression is not dependent on his ruling.<br>What is the connotation of the term <i>nasi</i> used in the Torah? A king who is not under the jurisdiction of any other man in Israel. There is no one superior to him in his sovereignty except, God, his Lord. This applies whether he is of the Davidic dynasty or of other tribes. If there were several kings and one is not subject to the other, each one should bring a goat for his inadvertent transgression.<br>What is meant by the term "anointed priest"? This refers to a High Priest who was anointed with the oil of anointment, not one who was installed in his office through wearing the priestly garments.
When a High Priest who had been anointed with the anointing oil, but was removed from his office, because of a physical blemish, old age, or the like and inadvertently violated a transgression in this manner, he must bring a bull for his inadvertent transgression. For there is no difference between an anointed priest who serves and one who was removed from his office except the bull offered on Yom Kippur and the tenth of an <i>ephah</i> offered each day. These are brought only by a High Priest who is serving in his office, but with regard to the bull brought for the inadvertent violation of all the mitzvot, the two are governed by the same laws.
When a <i>nasi</i> performs a transgression together with the community, because of a ruling of the court, he receives atonement together with the people at large. If the court were offering a sacrifice due to their error, the entire nation and the king are exempt from a sacrifice, as we explained. If those who transgressed due to the court's ruling were obligated to bring a sacrifice and the king was one of them who transgressed, he should bring a goat. For the goat brought by the <i>nasi</i> takes the place of a ewe or a she-goat that an ordinary person brings.
When a <i>nasi</i> becomes afflicted by <i>tzara'at</i> and is removed from his office or he is removed from his office for other reasons, he is considered as an ordinary person. If a <i>nasi</i> transgressed while in office and then was removed, he must still bring a goat, as can be inferred from Leviticus 4:22: "because of his transgression that he violated," i.e., the sacrifice that he brings depends on his status at the time he transgresses.
When an anointed priest or a king violate a transgression requiring a sacrifice before they are appointed to their office, they must bring a sacrifice like an ordinary person even if they become aware of it after they become appointed. This is derived from Leviticus 4:22: "When a <i>nasi</i> transgresses," and <i>ibid.</i>:3: "If the anointed priest will transgress...," i.e., these sacrifices are required only when he transgresses while a <i>nasi</i> or while anointed.<br>Accordingly, if a priest ate a piece of fat concerning which there was a question whether it was forbidden and he became aware of this question after he was appointed as a High Priest, he must bring a provisional guilt-offering.<br>If one ate half an olive-sized portion of forbidden fat while he was an ordinary person and another half after becoming a <i>nasi</i> in one lapse of awareness or he ate half an olive-sized portion while he was a <i>nasi</i> and half after leaving his office, they are not combined and he is exempt.<br>If one ate half an olive-sized portion when he was an ordinary person, he was appointed as a <i>nasi</i> and then was removed from his office, there is an unresolved doubt if the two times he ate are combined to make him liable or his service as a <i>nasi</i> creates a distinction between the two.