Bechinat Olam
בחינת עולם
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Bechinat_Olam
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Bechinat Olam



Chapter 1

Heavens above, earth below, and between the endless expanse of the discerning heart
A passion for inquiry which extends to the earliest shoots of humanity, to the quarry from which we were hewn.
With unfathomable wisdom, and a heart bursting with questions and queries.
The heart of the righteous, in love with justice and charity, overflows with insight. 
Within he sanctifies the Holy One of Israel; with his lips he honors the God of Glory.
Without a shepherd there is no wisdom, no counsel, no understanding. 
Save for the Perfect One, all others fall back before Him.
Can the heart of the heavens endure? Can the heart of the sea contain? Yet all inquiry is enclosed within the walls of the human heart.
Can the spirit of wisdom, hovering over waters of rest and streams of Eden, be stilled by the wings of the wind?
How can the vast expanse of earth be encompassed by thought’s dwelling— a little chamber, no larger than the palm of a hand?
Behold: man’s portion is from God above; God’s portion is from man below.
God is in the heavens, and man, alone on the earth, walks before Him.
Seeking signs in the scripture of truth; great are his deeds in law and judgement.
Were it not for seasons of dread and moments of terror, nothing would prevent his ascent into the heavens, his embrace of the arms of the world, and, in his knowledge of good, his becoming like God.

Chapter 2

And thus, from the failure of their hands, the faithful succumb to apathy and despair
From the ruin and slaughter of the city,  they despise their own reflection
From the corruption of politics, they loathe their very soul.
I said: This man of earth- was he not meant to be one with the heavenly hosts high up above? 
His heart is vaster than the sea, his horizons without limit.
When his wings are spread to the southern sky, the abode of light, the concealed is revealed
And when he turns to the east, the cradle of the rising sun, he opens wisdom’s hidden mysteries
On the chariots of his wisdom he ascends to the heavens, finding in the abyss the pathway to the heights.
From his lowly station to the heavenly heights, and down once more to the depths of earth, until the pathways of the world stand open before him.
Running and returning, carrying and fetching, the spirit of understanding reaches the very ends of the creation, lifting upwards and casting down, all within the flash of cognition
Until, by strength, spirit and pride, he places the orbs of the earth and even the heavens above into the palms of his hands.
And so he continues until his knowledge contains every trait, and every secret of each and every being of the creation, each according to its kind. 
And for the God of all the gods, wondrous words are said, and for the highest of the high, a rising speech is spoken.