Tractate Sefer Torah
מסכת ספר תורה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Tractate Sefer Torah



Chapter 1

The text of a Torah Scroll is not written on parchment made of skins of unclean (i.e. non-kosher) domestic animals or unclean wild animals, and not sewn with their sinews, and not wrapped with their hair. It is a halacha from Moshe at Sinai that it should be written on parchment made of skins of clean domestic animals or clean wild animals, and is sewn with clean skins, and wrapped with clean hair.  And it should be written with ink. Because there is allusion from a verse: "And I will write the book with ink" (Jeremiah 36).
It can be written on parchment made from skins of dead (i.e. not slaughtered in a way fit for eating) or sick (in a way that makes them unfit for eating) kosher animals. And we are not concerned that perhaps the skins were pierced at the animal’s heart.
Skins for Torah Scrolls and mezuzot are accepted from anywhere. And we are not concerned that perhaps the skins were pierced at the animal’s heart.
A Torah Scroll is written on parchment on the side of the skin that faced the flesh, or on hide treated with gallnuts on the side where there was hair. If one substitutes one side of the material for another, i.e. he writes on the wrong side, it is invalid and we don’t read from it during public ritual Torah readings.
A Torah Scroll is not written on a Diftera (hide treated with salt and flour), on a writing tablet, or on scraped parchment. It is not written with black coal, black paint, tree resin, or copper sulfate. We don’t mix copper sulfate into the ink used to write the Torah.
Rabbi Yaakov said in the name of Rabbi Meir: we do mix copper sulfate into the ink for sacred writing. Rabbi Yehuda said that Rabbi Meir would say: It is allowed by the Torah to write with ink containing copper sulfate except for writing the passage regarding a sota used in the Temple because it must be possible to erase the writing.
Rabbi Shimon Ben Lakish said that Rabbi Meir said in the name of Rabbi Ishmael that we do mix copper sulfate into the ink for sacred writing.
Sacred texts are not written in Paleo-Hebrew script, Median language or script, Elamite language or script, or Greek  language or script. Seventy  elders wrote the Torah for King Ptolemy II in Greek script. And that day was as difficult for Israel as the day the Golden Calf was made because the Torah could not be translated as well as was needed.
Thirteen  things were changed in it: They wrote "God created in the beginning" instead of “In the Beginning God Created” (Genesis 1:1). They wrote "I shall make man in My image and likeness" instead of “Let Us make man in Our image and Our likeness” (Genesis 1:26). And "He concluded his work on the sixth day and rested on the seventh day" instead of “And on the seventh day God concluded His work” (Genesis 2:2). They wrote "Male and Female He created him" instead of “them” (Genesis 5:2); "Come, let Me go down instead" of “let Us go down” (Genesis 11:7); "And Sarah laughed among her relatives" instead of “laughed to herself” (Genesis 18:12). They wrote "For in their anger they killed an ox and with their will they uprooted a trough" instead of “For in their anger they killed a man and with their will they slaughtered an ox” (Genesis 49:6), "And Moses took his wife and his sons, and set them upon a carrier of people" instead of “upon a donkey” (Exodus 4:20). They wrote "And the residence of the children of Israel, who lived in the land of Canaan and in Egypt was four hundred thirty years" instead of “And the residence of the children of Israel, who lived in Egypt, was four hundred thirty years” (Exodus 12:40). They wrote "I have not taken one item of value from them" instead of “one donkey” (Numbers 16:15). They wrote "And the short-legged beast" instead of “hare” (Leviticus 11:6). They wrote "Which Hashem your God allotted you to give light to all nations" (Deuteronomy 4:19) inserting the phrase “to give light”. They added to the text “to the sun, the moon, or the whole host of heaven that I did not command” (Deuteronomy 17:3) the words “to serve them” at the end.
A Torah Scroll is not written with any color but black, even gold. There was a case brought where Alexandreans’ Torah Scrolls’ mentions of God’s name were all written in gold. When the case was brought before the chachamim, they said “Suppress them”.
If a Hebrew verse in the scroll was written in Aramaic translation (targum) or a verse of Aramaic translation was written in the Hebrew of the bible, or the portion of Haazinu was written with letters close together or with letters far apart but not according to the law, the scroll is invalid. Don’t read from it during public ritual Torah readings.
If one has finished writing the entire Torah Scroll and there was less than a column left to write, he spreads out the writing so that it constitutes an extra small column and does not hold back from doing so even though it is normally forbidden.
A petucha paragraph break that is rendered as a setuma paragraph beak or a setuma as a petucha, should be hidden away. What is a petucha? Any paragraph that starts in the beginning of the line. What is a setuma? Any paragraph that does not start in the beginning of the line. How much space should there be at the end of the line and at the beginning of the next line for it to be considered a petucha? Enough space to write three letters there.
If while writing a Torah scroll one finished a passage at the end of a column, if there is one line left on the column and it is a passage that is a setuma, he starts in the middle of the line. And if it is a petucha, he begins the next column from the top and leaves the final line on the original column blank.

Chapter 2

Space is left between words so they can be read, and between letters so two letters will not be misconstrued as one letter. If letters were mixed up  or there is a gap in the middle of a word, the scroll is invalid. Don’t read from it during public ritual Torah readings.
One may insert two  letters of a large word as an extension of a line into the margin between columns, but not of a small word. And if it is a small word by itself, it is also forbidden to insert it.
A margin two fingerbreadths wide is used between columns in a Torah Scroll. And in a scroll from the Prophets or the Five Books (a Torah scroll not for public reading), a margin a thumb-breadth wide is used.
In a Torah Scroll a margin of a tefach in height is inserted above the text. Below the text two portions of a tefach. And in a scroll from the Prophets or the Five Books, three fingerbreadths below and two above. In both cases  if the scribe wants to increase the margins, he can increase them as long as, when combined, they are not of greater height than the text.
In a Torah Scroll a margin four blank lines high is inserted between books. In a scroll of the twelve prophets  the margin between books should be 3 blank lines. At the end of the scroll and at its beginning enough space is added to wind it around the pole. An exact size for the space was not given in the Torah, but at least one column is left blank at the end of the scroll, but unless it is a Torah Scroll it’s not necessary to also do so at the beginning.
A sheet should not be made smaller than three columns, and not larger than nine columns. Regarding parchment, a specific number of sheets was not prescribed. Rather, one can add as many as he wants as long each has no less than 3 columns.
If one finished the entire scroll and there is one column left, he should make it into its own small sheet, and need not hold back from doing so even though it is normally forbidden.
If a sheet that is part of a Torah Scroll has worn out, don’t remove two of them and replace them with two new ones. Rather, remove 3 and replace them with 3. And the writing on the replacement sheets must be exactly like the original.
The maximum height of a column is such that it can be seen in its entirety easily. And it should not be shorter than a tefach. Rabbi Yossi bar Yehuda says no shorter than 3 fingerbreadths. 
Do not make a Torah Scroll’s length (i.e. height) greater than its width (i.e. its circumference) when rolled up or its width greater than its length. Rather, make the height and width equidistant from its center, and make it from the best hide.
Do not make the Torah Scroll half from hide treated with gallnuts and half from parchment other than that made from deer, and in the case of deer parchment it is allowed even though it is not the best hide.
Do not join sheets with glue. Do not write on a patch. Do not sew in an area where there is writing. Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar said in the name of Rabbi Meir: One can join sheets with glue, and one can write on a patch, but one should not join in an area where there is writing. If a scroll is torn, attach a patch to it from the outside.

Chapter 3

One may make the Torah and the Prophets as one scroll. These are the words of Rabbi Yehuda. And the chachamim  say the Torah should be its own scroll and the Prophets should be their own scroll.
There is no need to insert four blank lines  between books of The Prophets like there is between books of the Torah. Rather, a separate margin for the books of the Torah and a separate margin of three blank lines for the Prophets. And one can begin the next book from the top of the next page without any margin if the previous book ended at the end of the column.
A Torah Scroll should not be split into separate books because one does not go down from greater holiness to lower holiness, but separate books can be connected to form a Torah Scroll when their sizes and pages are equal. Scrolls containing two books of the Torah each should not be joined together to make a Torah Scroll, nor should scrolls containing a book and a half be joined, but if from the beginning one intends to write a Torah Scroll in pieces of a book and a half or two books each  and join them in the future, it is permitted.
If a scroll has an improper gap in the text or its verses have markings above them, the scroll is invalid. Don’t read from it during public ritual Torah readings. If letters are engraved or connected and circled with ink, don’t read from the scroll.
A scroll where text got erased is invalid. Don’t read from it during public ritual Torah readings. Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says: if its image has not been removed (i.e. the letters are still readable) it is permitted to read from it.
A scroll where one letter got erased out of all of them is forbidden to read from during public ritual Torah readings. If most of the letter got erased and a minority of it is intact it is permitted to read from such a scroll.
A public Torah reading  is not begun with reading more than four  columns (alternative reading that makes more sense: less than three columns), but even ten columns can be read at once, and we do not refrain from doing so.
The scribe should not lay his hand with the quill  on the text, and he should not hold the parchment of the Torah Scroll he’s writing with the text facing away from him, but rather he should hold it with the text facing him. The Torah Scroll should not be taken out of its bag, rather let the bag be removed from it, but for the proofreaders of Torah Scrolls these are all permitted.
The Torah Scroll should not be placed on a chair or placed next to it and read from like that which Rabbi Nehemiah said: “The Torah Scroll should not be placed on a chair or hung and then read from in the manner contracts are read because we should not shame the Torah Scrolls.”
The Torah Scroll should not be placed on a bed or at the foot of the bed or under the bed, so that a man may sit (alternative reading that makes more sense: and a man should not sit) on a bed when a Torah Scroll is on it. It is related regarding Rabbi Eliezer that he was sitting on the bed. When he remembered  that a Torah Scroll was on it, he got up and sat on the ground like a man who was bitten by a snake. As it is written: “You shall keep My Shabbats and venerate My sanctuary” (Leviticus 19:30). You shall not fear the Shabbats themselves, but the One who commanded them to you. Since it is written “This is my God and I will glorify Him” (Exodus 15:2), it is interpreted to mean beautify Him in commandments such as having beautiful tzitzit, mezuzah, Torah Scrolls, etc. as Rabbi Yishmael said. Rabbi Akiva says that the verse means “I will speak about God’s beauty”, i.e. praise His abundant greatness. Aba Shaul says the verse means “I will be like Him”. Just as He is compassionate and merciful, so too you should be compassionate and merciful. 
It is not proper to disgrace food. A man should not sit on a basket full of dates or dried figs, but he can sit on a basket full of beans or on a cake of dried figs because it is customary to do this.
A vessel  should not be covered with food. Rabbi Meir says any food that has skin is permitted to cover a vessel. Rabbi Yehuda says any food that has a stem or a piece that can serve as a handle is permitted to cover a vessel. One is not permitted to eat food using other food as a utensil unless one eats them both at the same time.

Chapter 4

These are the names of God that may not be erased once written: “Adonai” (my Lord), “Yud He Vav He” (the tetragrammaton), “Shaddai”, “Tzevo’ot” (Hosts), “I will Be What I Will Be”. Rabbi Yossi says “Tzevo’ot” is also  used as a non-divine name.
One who wrote “El” from what is intended to be “Elohim” or “Yah” from the tetragrammaton  should not erase them. He should not erase them because there are other divine names spelled with those letters.
All letters used in words comprising God’s name, whether before or after  it, may be erased.
All normal (i.e. non-divine) names whose spelling contains the spelling of a divine name can be erased.
In the verse  “For YHVH (tetragrammaton) your God is HAELOHEI HAELOHIM (God of gods)” (Deuteronomy 10:17) the first name (HAELOHEI) is holy and cannot be erased while the second (HAELOHIM) is non-holy and can be erased. The verse continues “and ADONAI HAADONIM (Lord of lords)” the first name is holy and the second name is non-holy. In the verse “God of Abraham” (Genesis 31:53) the word “God” is holy; “god of Nachor” is non-holy. “Their ancestral gods” is non-holy. In the verse “You shall not curse ELOHIM” (Exodus 22:27) ELOHIM has both holy and non-holy interpretations. Rabbi Yishmael says it’s holy.
All seemingly divine names in the Torah that are stated in conjunction with Abraham are holy except the first one (Genesis 18:3). Rabbi Yehoshua says that too is holy.
All seemingly divine names in scripture that are stated in conjunction with Lot are non-holy except the last one (Genesis 19:18); those stated in conjunction with Micah are also non-holy, even those beginning with “YH”; those stated in conjunction with Nabot are holy, even those beginning with “El”.
In the verse  “God (ELOHIM) stands in the divine assembly; among the judges (ELOHIM) He pronounces judgment” (Psalms 82:1) the word ELOHIM has both holy and non-holy usages. In the verse  “God (EL) hands me over to (EL) an evil man” (Job 16:11) The first EL is holy and the second is not. In the verse  “Has he said to (EL) God (EL)” (Job 34:31) the first EL is non-holy and the second is holy. In the verse “Let there not (AL) be a resting place for my outcry!” (Job 16:18) the word AL is not holy. In the verse  “and God (ELOHIM) has told me to hurry” (II Chronicles 35:21) the word ELOHIM is holy. In the verse “Refrain, then, from interfering with God (ELOHIM) who is with me” (II Chronicles 35:21) the word ELOHIM is holy like that which Rav Yossi bar Yehuda says. In the verse “O God (ELOHIM), arrogant men have risen against me” (Psalms 86:14) the word ELOHIM is holy and one reading this verse must pause after the word ELOHIM (so as not to misinterpret the meaning as "Arrogant gods have risen against me").

Chapter 5

If one wrote two divine names in a row intending to only write one, he keeps the first one and cuts out  the second one. Rabbi Yehuda says: if the second  one was at the end of the column, he cuts out and erases the first one and keeps the second one.
If one wrote two non-holy words, he keeps the first one and erases the second. Rabbi Yehuda says: if the second was at the beginning of the column, he erases the first one and keeps the second one.
If one meant to write “Yehuda” and omitted the letter “Daled” thereby writing the tetragrammaton, he inserts the missing “Daled” on top. If he meant to write the divine name (tetragrammaton) and wrote “Yehuda”, He makes the “Daled” into a letter “He”  and deletes the other letter “He”.
If one needed to write “Yehuda”, but forgot, and at the time of writing his intention was to write the divine name (tetragrammaton), even if he only wrote the first three letters, which are the same between the two words, and added a “Daled”, he must still cut the word out and write another “Yehuda”.
If one needed to write the tetragrammaton, but forgot, and at the time of writing his intention was to write “Yehuda”, even if added “Daled”, he can erase the final “He” and convert the “Daled” into a “He”. Rabbi Yehuda says he should return the quill to it and add new ink to the existing divine name, thereby making it holy. The rabbis said to him: this is not ideal.
If one writes the divine name and forgets one letter, he inserts it above the line. If he forgot the entire name and has already written the next word, he inserts it between the lines like that which Rabbi Yehuda said. Rabbi Yossi says he erases what is after where the name is supposed to be, writes the name, and goes back and inserts that which he erased. Rabbi Chanania Ben Akashia says he must hide away the entire sheet.
If one is writing the verse “God (EL) hands me over to (EL) an evil man” (Job 16:11) and forgets that only the first “EL” is holy  and intends to write two divine names, he erases the first one and keeps the second one. (In the Hebrew verse the two words "EL" are next to each other.) 
When one is writing a divine name, even if an Israelite king inquires about his well-being, he may not answer. But if he is writing two or three  consecutive divine names, there is an interruption between them, and he may answer.
One who dips his quill in ink does not begin to write with the first letter of a divine name. Rather, he should begin with the last letter of the word before it.
One who erases even one letter of a divine name transgresses a negative commandment. Rabbi Yishmael says thus it is written “And you will erase their names from that place” (Deuteronomy 12:3) and it is written immediately afterward “You shall not do this to the Lord your God” (Deuteronomy 12:4). But if ink drops on the text (even God’s name), it is permitted to erase it because his intention is only to correct, not erase.
One should not write a scroll of Hallel or any other portion of a book of the Tanach for a child to study. Rabbi Yehuda says it is permitted to write a scroll containing just the text from the beginning of the Book of Genesis until, but not including, the generation of the flood or from the beginning of the Book of Leviticus until, but not including, the verse “It came to pass on the eighth day” (Leviticus 9:1). As for the other books, it is entirely forbidden to write portions of them. If, however, his intention is to finish the entire Torah (or other applicable) scroll in the future, it is permitted to temporarily write only a part of it.
These are the names in Scripture that are to be divided: Beth El, Beth On, Be’er Sheva, Poti Phera, Zaphenath-paneah, Harah Af (the anger is aroused),  Harah Api (my anger is aroused). Rabbi Yossi says they are not divided. Everyone agrees that Amiel, Aminadav, Zuriel, and Tzurishaddai are not to be divided. 
One who had God’s name written on his skin should not wash himself in water or smear himself with oil lest it be erased. Rabbi Yossi says he is permitted to do these things provided he does not rub the spot where the name was written. If God’s name was written on a cow’s horn or on the leg of a bed, the part with the name is to be cut off and hidden away. If it was written on a stone that is part of a building, it shall be removed and hidden away.
If a piece  from a new sheet of a scroll was cut off, it is still permitted to use it. If it is an old sheet it is forbidden to use it. Worm eaten scrolls, tefillin, or covers for scrolls should be hidden away. But they should only be left in a neglected place to decay on their own.