Targum Jonathan on Jeremiah
תרגום יונתן על ירמיהו
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Targum_Jonathan_on_Jeremiah
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Targum Jonathan on Jeremiah



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29



Chapter 30



Chapter 31

In that time, the Lord said, "I will be a God to the whole family of Israel, and they shall be My people;
Thus said the Lord: I gave compassion to the people who came out of Egypt, and they needed sustenance in the desert, as they fled from those who had wished to killed them by sword, he led them by his word to show them the way to the home of rest; Israel."...
Jerusalem said: From the early days, God revealed himself to our forefathers through the prophets, and said to them: "I have loved you with eternal love.
"I will yet again build you up, and you shall be rebuilt, O assembly of Israel! Again you shall take up your tambourines, and go forth in the dance of the merrymakers."
"Again you shall plant vineyards on the hills of Samaria; the planters shall plant and enjoy the fruit." 
For there are days and abundant goodness in the future for the righteous who kept my Torah from the beginning; their portion will be in the land of Israel, as they longed for the years of consolation that were coming, saying: When will we arise and go up to Zion and be seen before Hashem our God?
Therefore, says Hashem: Rejoice, house of Jacob, with joy, and shout at the head of the nations. Announce, sing praises and say: Hashem has redeemed his people, the remnant of Israel!
I will give them from the land of the north and gather them from the ends of the earth. Among them will be the blind and the lame, the expectant mothers and women in labor. In great throngs they will return.
When they were exiled, weeping, it was plain that they would return from their exile. With great mercy I will bring them near; I will guide them by streams of water, on a straight road upon which they will not stumble; because My command has been to Israel as a father, and Ephraim is dear to Me.
Accept the saying of the Lord, O nations, and ... from afar, and say: He who scattered Israel will gather him in and will watch over him like a shepherd guards his flock. 
God has redeemed those of the house of Jacob and saved them from the hands of those too strong for them.
"They shall come and praise in the mountain of the rebuilt Temple in Zion, and they shall delight in the goodness that the Lord will give them, with wine, oil, and fine flour, and with sons of the flock and the herd. And their souls shall be satisfied like a watered garden, like a spring whose waters do not fail."
Therefore, let the congregation of Israel rejoice as with dancing, young men and old men together; I will turn their mourning into feasting, and I will console them from their sadness.
"And the souls of the priests shall be satisfied with fatness, and my people the house of Israel shall be satisfied with my goodness, saith the Lord.
"Thus says the Lord: A voice is heard in the heights of the world, the house of Israel weeping and groaning after Jeremiah the prophet, whom Nevuzaradan the slaughterer sent from Ramah, weeping bitterly, Jerusalem weeping for its children, refusing to be comforted for her children, for they are exiled."
Thus says the Lord: "Keep your voice from weeping and your eyes from tears, for there is reward for the deeds of your righteous fathers, declares the Lord, and they shall come back from the land of the enemy."
"And I have a plan for your end, says the Lord, and your children will return to their borders."
I hear and reveal before Me the house of Israel, their words and their groaning because of their exile, They say "Suffering has befallen us, but we cannot learn, like a calf who doesn't learn how to plough. Help us return to serve you, for you are the Lord our God.
"...For when we return to your Torah, we are comforted. When You reveal Yourself to us, we beat our thighs in shame and submit because we accept our previous transgressions.
How precious as a son is Israel to Me. Is he not a beloved child? Whenever he takes My Torah words upon his heart to perform them, I remember for his benefit—therefore My compassion stirs upon him, I have great mercy upon him, says Hashem.
Congregation of Israel, remember the righteous deeds of your fathers. Pour out pleading prayers in bitter sorrow. Look upon the deeds you have done, if they were proper; this is why you've had to wander so far. Return, congregation of Israel, and you will return to these, your cities.
How long will you refuse to repent, O congregation of much backsliding [or: congregation of much returning]? For behold, Hashem is creating something new on earth: the people, the house of Israel, will return to the Torah.
Thus says Hashem, Lord of Hosts, God of Israel: They will again say this saying in the land of Judah and its cities when I return their exile: May Hashem bless you, abode of righteousness, holy mountain.
Judah and all its cities will dwell there together—farmers and shepherds alike.
For I will satiate the soul of the weary and fill every languishing soul with goodness.
The prophet said this good news about the days of comfort that would come: I was awakened and saw, and my sleep was sweet to me.
In that day, says the Lord, I will raise up the house of Judah and I will increase men and I will increase cattle.
Just as I devised to uproot, smash, slay and destroy them, so I will devise plans to build and sustain them, says Hashem.
"On that day, they will no longer say, 'Our fathers had sinned, and the children have received the lashes.'" 
"But every man in his sin shall die, whoever sins, he shall die."
"On this day, says the Lord, I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah."
"Not like the covenant that I made with their ancestors on the day I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt; ..., ..., says the Lord."
"When the decree that was made with the house of Israel has been fulfilled after those days," says the Lord, "I will put my Torah within them, and I will write it on their hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people."
"They will no longer teach, each man his neighbor and each man his brother, saying, 'Know the Lord,' for they will all know Me, from the least of them to the greatest," declares the Lord, "for I will forgive their iniquity, and their sin I will remember no more."
Thus says the Lord, who gives the sun for light by day and the fixed order of the moon and the stars for light by night, who stirs up the sea so that its waves roar - the Lord of hosts is his name:
Just as it is impossible for these laws to cease to exist before Me, says the Lord, so too the offspring of Israel will never cease to be a nation before Me, serving Me every day.
Thus says the Lord, how can anyone understand the secrets of heaven from above, or even investigate the foundations of the earth from below? But I will not cast off the seed of Israel for all that they have done, says the Lord.
On that day, said the Lord, the city of Jerusalem shall be built up from the Tower of Pikus to the Corner Gate.
And the line of buildings will go out further until the hill of Gareb and circle around Goah.
"And all the straight paths that fell there, the remains of the palaces of the city, and all the foundations to the Nachla of Kidron, to the corner of the house of Reisah d'Malka, the holy kingdom of God, will not be uprooted or scattered anymore for eternity."