Tractate Derekh Eretz Zuta
מסכת דרך ארץ זוטא
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Tractate Derekh Eretz Zuta





Chapter 1

Ways of the wise disciples: meek, lowly of spirit, eager, retentive, long-suffering, beloved by all, lowly to the men of his house, fears sin, and seeks [judges] each man according to his works. He says, "all that is in this world, I have no delight in it, because this world is not for me." He abides, and repeats, and wears out his coat at the feet of the wise disciples, and no man can find fault [see an evil word] with him. He questions with relevance to the subject, and answers with respect to the halakah/established legal practice.
He becomes like a split gourd that opens to let wind enter, like a deep channel that holds its water, like a canteen that holds its wine, like a sponge that absorbs everything. Do not be like a grand opening that lets the wind enter, nor like a small opening that injures those who happen upon it. Rather, be like a lower threshold that all dust upon, like a (deep?) stake that all lean upon.

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7

Seven attributes of an unformed soul, and seven of a wise soul: The wise is not making his points prior to one greater than he in wisdom or experience, he is not interrupting the words of his peer, he is not hasty to answer in vain. He questions according to the topic, and he answers with respect to the law. He speaks of first things first, and last things last. Regarding that which he has not heard, he says, "I have not heard", and he acknowledges the truth. The opposite of all these, the unformed soul does.

Chapter 8











He who enters a washhouse: to begin, let him remove the coat, after that, remove the shoes. Then the pants, then the tunic.

Chapter 9

Rabbi Eleazar of Kfar says: distance yourself from claims of victimhood, for if you make claims upon others, you may continue into error.
Engender love for he who rebukes you, in order that you add wisdom to your wisdom. And hate for who honors you, to prevent diminishment of your wisdom.
Engender love for the beit knesset/synagogue, in order that you handle your reward everyday.
Engender love for the beit midrash/house of study, in order that your sons come to talmud/discipleship in torah.
Engender love for the poor, in order that your sons not come into the grip of this condition.
Engender love of humility, that your hands may be filled.
Engender love for the chasidim/pious ones, in order that you be delivered from the dark angel.
Be careful in the reading of the "shema" and in prayer, that you may be delivered from the judgement of gehinnom.
Let your house be open to the revachah, in or that you not lack grain.
Be careful of doors of your house, lest we not go up in the hour when you turn to eating and drinking, lest because of the doors of your house, they bring you to the grip of poverty.
Be careful of the honor of your wife, lest she be barren.
Be joyful in the rebuke that comes upon you because it saves you from the sickbed.






If you run for the honor of a sage, you will have sons and daughters of refinement. If you run for the honor of a poor person, you will sons proficient in Torah, and that fulfill its commands among Israel.
If thou seest a wise man, that has died, to not depart from him until thou escortest him to the grave, that on thy departure it should be said of thy shalom, "like the shalom of Pinchas ben Elazar."

Section on Peace

