David Zvi Hoffmann on Leviticus
פירושי רד"צ הופמן על ויקרא
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/David_Zvi_Hoffmann_on_Leviticus
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

David Zvi Hoffmann on Leviticus

Editor's Introduction



On Introductory Notes



From the Author's Son



Author's Introduction



Preface to Torah Commentary



Introductory Notes on Leviticus



Introduction to Sacrificial Laws







Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Verse 1



Verse 2



Verse 3



Verse 4



Verse 5



Verse 6



Verse 7



Verse 8



Verse 9



Verse 10



Verse 11



Verse 12



Verse 13



Verse 14



Verse 15



Verse 16



Verse 17



Verse 18



Verse 19



Verse 20



Verse 21



Verse 22



Verse 23



Verse 24



Verse 25



Verse 26



Verse 27



Verse 28



Verse 29



Verse 30



Verse 31



Verse 32



Verse 33



Verse 34



Verse 35



Verse 36



Verse 37



Verse 38



Verse 39



Verse 40



Verse 41



Verse 42



Verse 43

Through dwelling in sukkot, future generations will remember "that I made [them] dwell in sukkot, etc." Regarding the nature of these sukkot, there are differences of opinion. Josephus (Antiquities III, 10, 4) says: "On the fifteenth of the seventh month, when winter approaches and comes, the law commanded making sukkot in order to prepare for winter, and when they come to the land, they shall ascend to the holy city to celebrate there for eight days..." According to this, the Israelites in the wilderness dwelt in sukkot even in the month of Tishrei, when winter approached. Ibn Ezra also answers the question: "Why is this commandment in Tishrei (and not in Nisan)? – Because the cloud of God was over the camp by day and the sun did not strike them, and from the days of Tishrei they began to make sukkot because of the cold."
However, this opinion can be challenged: a. The expression "that I made [them] dwell in sukkot" does not suit the sukkot that the Israelites made to protect themselves from winter cold. b. "When I brought them out of the land of Egypt" in the law before us refers only to the Exodus in the month of Nisan, and not to a time half a year after the Exodus. c. If this commandment was given at Sinai, even before Tishrei, it is impossible that a law would be enacted to commemorate an event that would occur afterward.
Therefore, we have here a matter concerning an event that occurred immediately after the Exodus from Egypt. Let us ask, then, what the sages say about this. In the Sifra we learn: "That I made the children of Israel dwell in sukkot – Rabbi Eliezer says they were actual sukkot, Rabbi Akiva says they were clouds of glory in the form of sukkot." This passage is explained in the Mekhilta Bo (Friedman edition, p. 2): "Sukkot – actual sukkot, as it is written 'And Jacob traveled to Sukkot [and for his livestock he made sukkot, therefore he called the name of the place Sukkot].' These are the words of Rabbi Eliezer. And the Sages say that Sukkot is only a place, as it is said 'They journeyed from Sukkot and camped at Etham' – just as Etham is a place, so too Sukkot is a place. Rabbi Akiva says Sukkot refers only to the clouds of glory, etc." In the Mekhilta of Rabbi Shimon ben Yochai (page 26) we learn: "Sukkot – Rabbi Akiva says they actually made sukkot for themselves at Sukkot. Rabbi Eliezer says clouds of glory came and encamped over Rameses, etc." (The opinions of Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Akiva were switched here [as in Sukkah 11b], but in the Mekhilta of Rabbi Shimon on chapter 13:20 [page 40] the version is correct). Both Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Akiva connect "that I made [them] dwell in sukkot" to the narrative "The children of Israel journeyed from Rameses to Sukkot," which is the first station where the Israelites camped after their departure to freedom. According to Rabbi Eliezer, that place was called Sukkot because actual sukkot were built there by the Israelites, and according to Rabbi Akiva, because of the pillar of cloud that covered the redeemed like a sukkah (according to the Mekhilta of Rabbi Shimon, this place is, according to the above opinion, Rameses. The Sages do not express a third opinion here, but rather explain that according to Rabbi Eliezer, "Sukkot" is a place name, like "Etham." Compare Mekhilta on 13:20). According to this, the sukkah alludes to the event in which God redeemed Israel from the hand of the Egyptians and made them dwell in sukkot under His protection. While the festival of Passover preserves the memory of Israel's liberation from slavery, the festival of Sukkot recalls another aspect of God's kindness, namely that God did not abandon the redeemed people to chance, but brought them under shelter. And this they shall remember specifically during the days of ingathering, when the house is filled with every good thing, so that Israel, who once languished in slavery and was redeemed by the hand of God and brought into sukkot, should know not to become arrogant from abundance.
From this perspective, the commandment of the four species serves as a complement to the commandment of the sukkah. The four species contain four levels of tree types: a. Willows of the brook – a simple tree without taste or fragrance, b. Branch of a leafy tree – a tree that gives off a pleasant fragrance, c. Palm branches – a fruit tree; the palm produces fruit alone and besides this provides no other benefit, d. The highest level, fruit of a beautiful tree – the fruit of a tree that is the pinnacle of development of the entire plant system (compare Hirsch's commentary). All these trees, beginning with the simplest, which is the willow, and ending with the most important, which is the etrog, are the yield of the land that cannot be obtained in the wilderness, but through God's providence the wilderness was transformed for Israel into a fertile land, so that Israel lacked nothing ("you lacked nothing," Deuteronomy 2:7). Therefore, when coming to the Holy Land, he shall take from all levels of produce and rejoice with it before God. And at the same time he shall also dwell in sukkot, to remember that God brought him out of Egypt and protected him in the wilderness. Through the sukkah and the lulav, Israel declares that the yield of his land is a gift from God, inasmuch as formerly his God graced him with His protection and providence in the wilderness, just as He graces him with them now in his fertile land.
The verse in Hosea 12:10 provides clear and important testimony that this festival was practiced even in the days of the early prophets, where it is said: "But I am the Lord your God from the land of Egypt; I will yet make you dwell in tents as in the days of the appointed time." In this, apparently, the prophet alludes to Leviticus 23:42-43, as Hengstenberg proved with convincing words (in his book Auth. d. Pent. I, p. 77 ff.). Ephraim presumes to rely on his wealth, and proclaims (ibid. 12:9): "I have found wealth for myself." And to this God reproved him: "But I am the Lord your God from the land of Egypt; I will yet make you dwell in tents" – in that state of helplessness and poverty, as you were in the wilderness, and in which you sit every year at the appointed time of the festival of Sukkot, to remind you of the ancient days, when you surrendered yourself to the protection of God alone, and even now I still have the power to cause you to wander from your palaces and make you dwell in sukkot, as in the days of the appointed time. According to this, the prophet Hosea knew the content of the law before us, and moreover, he was certain that his audience also knew it as well as its historical reasoning.
The prophet Ezekiel also reveals in one verse that the complete law of the festival of Sukkot before us was before his eyes. In chapter 20 he describes how the children of Israel angered God with the worship at their high places, and adds (in verse 28): "And they saw every high hill and every leafy tree, and they sacrificed there their sacrifices." Clearly, the prophet alludes here to Deuteronomy 12, where (verse 13) it is forbidden to offer sacrifices "in every place that you see," and of the idol worshipers it is told (ibid. verse 2) that they worship "their gods on the high mountains and on the hills and under every green tree." And if the prophet Ezekiel takes all the expressions from the book of Deuteronomy ("and they saw," "high hill," "tree"), and yet he uses instead of "green tree" the expression "leafy tree" (compare in contrast Ezekiel 6:13), then only the memory of the verse in Leviticus 23:40 brought him to this (that Ezekiel knew all the festivals in our chapter, as well as the law of Passover in Exodus 12, and the law of Yom Kippur in Leviticus 16, we have already proved above in the commentary on verse 8, and on the subject of the time when the law of Yom Kippur was given). That despite all this, recent critics view the verse before us as if it were composed after the destruction of the First Temple, only arouses astonishment.

Hoffmann's Contribution As Defender of the Faith



Bibliography

