Rosh David
ראש דוד
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Rosh David

Title Page



Bereshit



Noach



Lech Lecha



Vayera



Chayei Sara



Toldot



Vayetzei



Vayishlach



Vayeshev



Miketz














<b> And I heard</b> from the crown of my head, the rabbi, my father and teacher, may his memory be a blessing for life in the world to come, that he explained it according to the disagreement between Rav and Rabbi Yochanan in Nedarim 59: As one master holds that living animals are [permanently] rejected (from being fit for a sacrifice) and one master holds living animals are not [permanently] rejected.  And because of that, when [Hoshea] told him, “Israel has sinned,” he held that living animals are [permanently] rejected. And ‘anything that was [first] fit and [afterward] rejected does not return to being fit.’ And likewise, [since] the Jewish people were fit and rejected, they cannot go back to being fit. And it is for this reason that he said (Pesachim 87a), “Exchange them for another nation.” For that which we learned (Yoma 86b), “Great is repentance, etc., as it is written (Jeremiah 3:1), ‘you have committed adultery with lovers, etc.” – Hoshea was before that. So he reasoned that it was true that living animals that were rejected and became fit and were rejected could not become fit again. The Holy One, blessed be He said, “What can I do for this elder?” The intention [of this] is in the way of, ‘the Elder has already decided,’ and he thought that this was the law. Hence He had to arouse him from a different angle. So at the end, the Holy One, blessed be He, said to him that he should learn from Moshe. The intention is to say to him that the opinion of our teacher Moshe was becaise Tzipporah was the daughter of Yitro, and her conception and birth were not in holiness (as a Jew), and she was not pedigreed. On account of that, when the Divine Presence spoke with him, he separated from the woman, meaning the one that was known. And if our teacher Moshe did like this with Tzipporah the completely righteous woman – even though Moshe was very high, the master of [all] the prophets – he should have nevertheless learned to separate from the harlot. For living animals that were [first] fit and [afterward] rejected do not return to being fit. And likewise this one [that Hoshea married], had been fit, but then rejected with her harlotry. But Hoshea answered Him, “I have children from her.” Meaning to say, this one went back to being fit by Your word, since You commanded me to marry her. And if you want to say that he should have separated since she was a harlot in the same way that our teacher Moshe separated from Tzipporah since she was pedigreed – whereas there was no proof from the other prophets, since their wives were pedigreed, and even though the level of Moshe was greater – there is nevertheless a big difference between this one and Tzipporah. That is why he said, “I cannot release her”; meaning to say, to separate from her like Moshe, since Tzipporah was a righteous woman and this one is a harlot. “And I cannot divorce her,” since I have children from her. And his intention is that he was now in doubt. As living animals are not [permanently] rejected, since he saw that the Holy One, blessed be He, did not exchange Israel for another nation. So how could he divorce her? As he would violate a prohibition, ‘for He detests divorce.’ So the Lord said, “But what is your wife? A harlot, as she never came back and became fit. But that which I commanded you was to rebuke you for your opinion, since you did not delve into the law, but you immediately said, ‘Exchange them!’ And that which you became in doubt when you saw that I did not exchange them, you should have doubted it earlier when [you] said, ‘Israel has sinned.’ And [even] if the law is that living animals are rejected, what is the question here? Moreover, they are My children, the children of My tested ones, holy seed, the shoot of My planting, the root will not lie. And they are able to repent.” They are not rejected, even according to the opinion that reasons living animals are rejected, like the Tosafot wrote there concerning that which is lacking time in itself or in its owners, see there. This is the essence of the words of the crown of my head, my father and teacher, may his memory be for a blessing for life in the world to come.

Vayigash



Vayechi



Shemot



Vaera



Bo



Beshalach



Yitro



Mishpatim



Terumah



Tetzaveh



Ki Tisa



Vayakhel Pekudei



Vayikra



Tzav



Shmini



Tazria Metzora



Achrei Mot



Kedoshim



Emor



Behar



Bechukotai



Bamidbar



Nasso



Beha'alotcha



Sh'lach



Korach



Chukat



Balak



Pinchas



Matot Masei



Devarim



Vaetchanan



Eikev



Re'eh



Shoftim



Ki Teitzei



Ki Tavo



Nitzavim Vayeilech



Ha'Azinu



V'Zot HaBerachah

