Jerusalem Talmud Ta'anit
תלמוד ירושלמי תענית
Halakha.com
https://halakhah.com/pdf/moed/Taanith.pdf

Jerusalem Talmud Ta'anit



Daf 1a



Daf 1b



Daf 2a



Daf 2b

to her, and opened her womb.1 The Key of the Revival of the Dead, for it is written, And ye shall
know that I am the Lord, when I have opened your graves.2 In Palestine they said: Also the Key of
Sustenance, for it is said, Thou openest thy hand etc.3 Why does not R. Johanan include also this
[key]? — Because in his view sustenance is [included in] Rain.4
 R. ELIEZER SAYS: ON THE FIRST DAY OF THE FEAST etc. The question was asked,
Whence did R. Eliezer derive this? Did he learn it from Lulab5 or from the Libation of Water?6 If he
learnt it from Lulab, then just as the obligation of the use of the Lulab comes into force on the [first]
day of Tabernacles, so too should we begin to make mention of rain on that day. Or perhaps he learnt
it from Libation. [If so, then] just as Water Libation may be [carried out] on the evening [preceding
the first day] — (for a Master [interpreting the verse], And the meal-offering thereof and their
drink-offerings,7 said, Even by night)-so too should one begin to make mention of rain on that
evening!8 — Come and hear: R. Abbahu said: R. Eliezer deduced it from Lulab only. Some there are
who say: R. Abbahu had a tradition. Whilst others say: He based it on a Baraitha. Which is the
Baraitha? — It has been taught: ‘When do we [begin to] make mention of Rain? R. Eliezer says:
From the time of the taking up of the Lulab; R. Joshua says, From the time when the Lulab is
discarded.9 Said R. Eliezer: Seeing that these Four Species are intended only to make intercession
for water,10 therefore as these cannot [grow] without water so the world [too] cannot exist without
water. R. Joshua said to him: Is not rain on the Feast a sure sign of [God's] anger? R. Eliezer replied:
I too did not say to pray but to make mention. And just as one makes mention of the Revival of the
Dead all the year round11 although it will take place only in its proper time, so too should mention be
made of the Power of Rain all the year round although it comes only in its due season. Therefore if
one desires to make mention all the year round he may do so. Rabbi says: I hold the view that when
one ceases to pray [for rain]12 one should also no longer make mention of it. R. Judah b. Bathyra
says: On the second day of the Feast one [begins] to make mention. R. Akiba says: On the sixth day
of the Feast. R. Judah says in the name of R. Joshua: The last to step before the Ark on the last day
of the Feast makes mention, the first does not; on the first day of Passover the first makes mention,
the last does not. Did not then R. Eliezer reply well to R. Joshua?- R. Joshua can answer you: It is
quite in order to make mention of the Revival of the Dead [all the year round], since any day may be
its time, but is rain seasonable at all times? Have we not learnt: Should Nisan terminate and then rain
fall it is a sign of [God's] anger, for it is said, Is it not wheat harvest to-day etc.?13
 ‘R. Judah b. Bathyra says: on the second day of the Feast one [begins] to make mention’. What is
R. Judah b. Bathyra's reason? — It has been taught: R. Judah b. Bathyra says, Of the second day of
the Feast, Scripture Says, we-niskehem,14 [‘and their drink-offerings’] and of the sixth day,
u-nesakeah15 [‘and its drink-offerings’] and of the seventh day, kemishpatam16 [according to their
rule]. Note [the letters] Mem, Yod, Mem which form the word mayim [‘water’].17 Here you have the
biblical allusion to the Libation of Water. And what makes him [R. Judah b. Bathyra] fix it on the
second day? — Because [the first of the allusions to the Water Libation] is found in connection [with
the order for] the second day. Hence why we should [begin] to make mention on the second day. R.
Akiba says: On the sixth day of the Feast one [begins] to make mention, for of the sixth day
Scripture says, And its drink-offerings.18 Scripture thus speaks of two libations,19 the Libation of
Water and the Libation of Wine. Perhaps both Libations must be of wine? — He [R. Akiba] is of the
same opinion as R. Judah b. Bathyra who said, There is an allusion to water.2

Daf 3a



Daf 3b



Daf 4a



Daf 4b



Daf 5a



Daf 5b



Daf 6a



Daf 6b



Daf 7a



Daf 7b



Daf 8a



Daf 8b



Daf 9a



Daf 9b



Daf 10a



Daf 10b



Daf 11a



Daf 11b



Daf 12a



Daf 12b



Daf 13a



Daf 13b



Daf 14a



Daf 14b



Daf 15a



Daf 15b



Daf 16a



Daf 16b



Daf 17a



Daf 17b



Daf 18a



Daf 18b



Daf 19a



Daf 19b



Daf 20a



Daf 20b



Daf 21a



Daf 21b



Daf 22a



Daf 22b



Daf 23a



Daf 23b



Daf 24a

One day he heard him reciting a tradition that Samuel had said: He that takes out of the sea a fish on
the Sabbath, as soon as there is on it a dry spot as large as a sela’, he has committed a breach of the
Sabbath laws.1 Thereupon R. Jose b. Abin asked him: Why does not the Master add, ‘and between
the fins’? He replied : Are you not aware that R. Jose b. Abin had [already] stated this? [The former]
retorted: I am R. Jose b. Abin. Thereupon R. Ashi enquired: Did you not frequent the discourses of
R. Jose of Yokereth? He replied: Yes. R. Ashi then asked him: Why did you leave him, Sir, and
come here? He replied: How could the man who showed no mercy to his son and daughter show
mercy to me?
 What happened to his son? Once R. Jose had day-labourers [working] in the field; night set in and
no food was brought to them and they said to his son, ‘We are hungry’. Now they were resting under
a fig tree and he exclaimed: Fig tree, fig tree, bring forth thy fruit that my father's labourers may eat.
It brought forth fruit and they ate. Meanwhile the father came and said to them, Do not bear a
grievance against me; the reason for my delay is because I have been occupied up till now on an
errand of charity. The labourers replied, May God satisfy you even as your son has satisfied us.
Whereupon he asked: Whence? And they told him what had happened. Thereupon he said to his son:
My son, you have troubled your Creator to cause the fig tree to bring forth its fruits before its time,
may you too be taken hence before your time!
 What happened to his daughter? He had a beautiful daughter. One day he saw a man boring a hole
in the fence so that he might catch a glimpse of her. He said to the man, What is [the meaning of]
this? And the man answered: Master, if I am not worthy enough to marry her, may I not at least be
worthy to catch a glimpse of her? Thereupon he exclaimed: My daughter, you are a source of trouble
to mankind; return to the dust so that men may not sin because of you. He also had an ass. When it
was hired out for the day [the people who hired it] would place, in the evening, the hire on its back
and the ass would make its way home to its master. If, however, the money was too much or too
little, it would not go. One day a pair of sandals were left on its back and the ass would not move
until they were removed and only then did it proceed.
 Whenever the collectors of charity caught sight of R. Eleazar b. Birtah2 they would hide
themselves from him, because he was in the habit of giving away to them all that he had. One day he
was going to the market to buy a trousseau for his daughter. When the collectors of charity caught
sight of him they hid themselves from him. He ran after them and said to them: I adjure you, [tell
me] on what mission are you engaged? And they replied: [The marriage of] an orphaned pair. He
said to then: I swear, they must take precedence over my daughter. And he took all that he had and
gave to them. He was left with one zuz and with this he bought wheat which he deposited in the
granary. When his wife returned house she asked her daughter, What did your father bring home?
She replied, He has put in the granary all that he had bought. She thereupon went to open the door of
the granary and she found that it was so full of wheat that the wheat protruded through the hinges of
the door-socket and the door would not open on account of this. The daughter then went to the
Beth-Hamidrash and said to him [her father], Come and see what your Friend has done for you.
Whereupon he said to her, l swear,3 they shall be to you as devoted property, and you shall have no
more right to share in them than any poor person in Israel.4
 R. Judah the Prince5 ordained a fast and he prayed but no rain fell. He thereupon exclaimed: What
a great difference there is between, Samuel the Ramathite6 and Judah the son of Gamaliel! Woe to
the generation that finds itself in such plight! Woe to him in whose days this has happened. He felt
very grieved and rain fell. Once the House of the Patriarch ordained a fast and did not inform either
R. Johanan or Resh Lakish. In the morning, however, they did notify them. Resh Lakish then said to
R. Johanan, But we have not undertaken the fast on the previous evening.7 The latter replied: We are
subject to their ordinances.
 Once the House of the Patriarch ordained a fast and no rain fell. Thereupon Oshaiah, the youngest
of the college scholars,8 expounded the verse, Then it shall be, if it be done in error by the
congregation.9 This can be compared to a bride who lives in the house of her father. So long as her
eyes10 are beautiful her body needs no examination; should, however, her eyes be bleared then her
body needs examination. Thereupon the servants of the Patriarch came and put a scarf around his
neck and tortured him. Whereupon the people of the city cried out, Leave him alone; us also he
insults but since we see that whatever he does is for the sake of Heaven, we say nothing to him and
we leave him alone, so you too leave him alone.
 Once Rabbi ordained a fast and no rain fell. Thereupon ‘Ilfa (some say, R. Ilfi),[stepped down
before the ark and] recited [the prayer], ‘He causeth the wind to blow’, and the wind blew. [He
continued], ‘He causeth the rain to fall’, and rain fell. Rabbi then asked him, What is your special
merit? He replied: I live in a poverty-stricken remote place where wine for Kiddush and Habdalah11
is unobtainable but I take the trouble to procure for myself wine for Kiddush and Habdalah and thus
help also others to fulfil their duty.
 Once Rab came to a certain place and decreed a fast but no rain fell. The Reader then stepped
down at his request before the ark and recited, ‘He causeth the wind to blow’, and the wind blew; [he
continued], ‘He causeth the rain to fall’, and rain fell. Rab thereupon asked him, What is your special
merit? The latter replied: I am a teacher of young children and I teach the children of the poor as
well as those of the rich; I take no fees from any who cannot afford to pay; further, I have a fishpond
and any boy who is reluctant [to learn] I bribe with some of the fishes from it12 and thereby appease
him so that he becomes eager to learn.
 Once R. Nahman ordained a fast and he prayed but no rain fell. He thereupon said, ‘Take Nahman
and throw him down from the wall to the ground’.13 He felt greatly dejected and then rain came .
Rabbah once decreed a fast . He prayed but no rain came. Thereupon the people remarked to him:
When Rab Judah ordained a fast rain did fall. He replied: What can l do? Is it because of studies? We
are superior to him, because in the time of R. Judah all studies were concentrated on