Jerusalem Talmud Ta'anit
תלמוד ירושלמי תענית
merged
http://www.sefaria.org/Jerusalem_Talmud_Ta'anit
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Rabbi Mike Feuer, Jerusalem Anthology
-http://www.sefaria.org



Jerusalem Talmud Ta'anit

Daf 1a



Daf 1b



Daf 2a



Daf 2b



Daf 3a



Daf 3b



Daf 4a



Daf 4b



Daf 5a



Daf 5b



Daf 6a



Daf 6b



Daf 7a



Daf 7b



Daf 8a



Daf 8b



Daf 9a



Daf 9b



Daf 10a



Daf 10b



Daf 11a





MISHNA. On the sixth (special blessing added for a fast) he says ‘He who answered Yonah in the belly of the fish, may He answer you and hear the voice of your cries on this day. Blessed are You, oh Lord, who answers in the time of distress.’ 
On the seventh he says ‘He who answered David and Shlomo his son in Jerusalem, may He answer you and hear the voice of your cries on this day. Blessed are You, oh Lord, who has mercy on the land.’
GEMARA. It is written “And he said: I called out from my distress to the Lord, and He answered me…” (Yonah 2:3) There was no need for David and Shlomo and afterwards Yonah and Eliyahu, except to end with ‘who has mercy on the land.’ On the seventh: They said in the name of Sumchus ‘blessed is He who brings low the lofty.’ This makes sense regarding Shlomo, of whom it is written “I have surely built You a house to dwell in…” (Melachim I 8:13) but why David? Because he attempted to count Israel. R’ Abahu said: it is written “When I call, answer me, O God of my righteousness; in my distress You have relieved me…” (Tehillim 4:2) David said before the Holy One ‘Master of the World! Every distress into which I came, You opened it out for me. I entered into the distress of Bat Sheva, You brought me Shlomo. I entered into the distress of counting Israel, You brought me the Holy Temple.

Daf 11b



Daf 12a



Daf 12b



Daf 13a



Daf 13b



Daf 14a



Daf 14b



Daf 15a



Daf 15b



Daf 16a



Daf 16b



Daf 17a



Daf 17b



Daf 18a



Daf 18b



Daf 19a



Daf 19b



Daf 20a



Daf 20b



Daf 21a

There they taught: Shimon the Righteous was of the remnants of the Men of the Great Assembly. He used to say ‘the world rests on three things – on the Torah on the Service and on Acts of Loving-kindness.’ The three of them are found in one verse (Yeshayahu 51:16) “And I placed My words into your mouth…” refers to Torah, “…and with the shadow of My hand I covered you…” refers to acts of loving-kindness, to teach you that anyone who is occupied with Torah and acts of loving-kindness merits to sit in the shadow of the Holy One. This is what is written “How precious is Your kindness, O God, and the sons of man will take refuge in the shadow of Your wings.” (Tehillim 36:8)  “…to plant the heavens and to found the earth…” (Isaiah 51:16) tis refers to the sacrifices “…and to say to Zion [that] you are My people,” (ibid.) this refers to Israel. R’ Chanina bar Pappa said: I went over all of the Scripture and did not find that Israel was called Zion except here “…and to say to Zion [that] you are My people.”