Pesach Haggadah
הגדה של פסח
D. Levi, New York, 1837
http://web.nli.org.il/sites/NLI/English/gallery/of-israel/haggadot/Pages/new_york.aspx

Pesach Haggadah

Kadesh



<small><i>If the Feast happens on the Sabbath Eve, begin here.</i></small>
(The sixth day) and the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of them. And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made: and he rested on the seventh day, from all his 
<small><i>If on any other Night of the Week, begin here.</i></small>
Blessed art thou, O Eternal, our God! King of the universe. Creator of the fruit of the vine.
Blessed art thou, O Eternal, our God! Sove reign of the universe, who hast chosen us from among all people. and didst exalt us above all nations, and didst sanctify us with thy commandments; and with love hast thou given us, O Eternal, our God! <small>(On the Sabbath, say, Sabbaths for rests, and)</small> solemn days for joy, festivals, and seasons for gladness: <small>(on the Sabbath, say, the Sabbath-day, and)</small> this day of the Feast of Unlevened Cakes, the season of our freedom: an holy convocation, a memorial of the departure from Egypt; for thou hast chosen and sanctified us above all people : and thy <small>(Sabbath and)</small> holy festivals hast thou caused us to inherit with <small>(love and favour),</small> joy and gladness.
Blessed art thou, O Eternal, our God! King of the universe, who hath preserved us alive , sustained us, and brought us to enjoy this season.
<small><i>If the feast happen at the conclusion of the Sabbath, say the following before שהחינו</i></small>
Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God! King of the universe, Creator of the radiance of the fire.<br>Blessed art thou. O Lord, our God! King of the universe, who hath made a distinction between holy and not holy; between light and darkness: between Israel and other nations; between the seventh day and the six working days. Thou didst also discriminate between the sanctity of the sabbath-day, and the sanctity of other holy days, and consecratest the sabbath-day in preference to the six working days; thou also separatest thy people Israel, and didst sanctify them with thy holiness, 
Blessed art thou, O Eternal! who maketh a distinction between holy and not holy.
Blessed art thou, O Eternal, who sanctifieth <small>(the Sabbath, and)</small> Israel, and the seasons.
<small><i>Then drink the wine of the Sanctification, leaning on the left side;</i></small>

Urchatz


<small><i>after which, wash your hands, but do not say the blessing.</i></small>

Karpas


<small><i>The Master of the house then takes some parsley, or chervil, and dips it into vinegar. or salt water: and having distributed some to everyone at table, they all say the following Grace before they eat it:</i></small>
Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God! King of the universe; Creator of the fruit of the earth.

Yachatz


<small><i>The Master of the house then breaks the middle cake in the dish. and leaving one half of it there, he lays the other half by, till after supper, for the אפיקומן</i></small>

Magid

Ha Lachma Anya


<small><i>Then take the bone of the lamb, and the egg off the dish, and all at table lay hold of the dish, and say:-</i></small>
Lo! this is as the bread of affliction, which our ancestors ate in the land of Egypt; let all those who are hungry, enter, and eat thereof; and all who are necessitous, come, and celebrate the Passover. At present we celebrate it here, but the next year we hope to celebrate it in the land of Israel. This year we are servants here, but next year, we hope to be freemen in the land of Israel.

Four Questions

<small><i>Then fill the cup with wine the second time, and take the dish from the table: then the youngest in the company asks,</i></small>
Wherefore is this night distinguished from all other nights? On all the other nights, we may eat either leavened, or unleavened bread, but on this night, only, unleavened bread; on all the other nights, we may eat any species of herbs, but on this night only bitter herbs: on all the other nights we do not dip (1) even once, but on this night twice; on all the other nights we eat and drink, either sitting or leaning, but on this night we all lean.

We Were Slaves in Egypt

<small><i>Now put the dish again on the table, and the whole company answer.</i></small>
Because we were slaves unto Pharaoh in Egypt, and the Eternal, our God! brought us forth from thence, with a mighty hand, and an outstretched arm: and if the most Holy, blessed be He! had not brought forth our ancestors from Egypt, we, and our children, and our children's children, had still continued in bondage to the Pharaohs in Egypt; therefore, although we were all wise, all of us, men of understanding and experience, all of us having knowledge in the law, it, nevertheless, is incumbent upon us to discourse of the departure from Egypt; and all those who largely discourse of the departure from Egypt are accounted praise-worthy.

Story of the Five Rabbis

And thus it is related of Rabbi Eleazer, Rabbi Joshua, Rabbi Eleazer, the son of Azariah, Rabbi Akeeba, and Rabbi Tarpon, that they once met (on the night of Passover) in ברק and continued discoursing of the departure from Egypt, all that night. till their disciples came, and said, "instructors, it is time to read the morning שמע."
Rabbi Eleazer, the son of Azariah, said, "verily, I am as a man of seventy years of age, and have hitherto not been able to prove, that the narration of the departure from Egypt, ought to be related at night, till expounded by the son of Zoma; after this manner it is said, that thou mayest remember the day of thy going forth from the land of Egypt, ALL the days of thy life." From whence he observed, that the expression of, the days of thy life, signifies the days only; but ALL the days of thy life, denotes the nights also. But the sages say, the days of thy life, denotes this life only; but ALL the days of thy life, denotes even at the time of the Messiah. 

The Four Sons

Blessed be the Omnipresent; blessed is be who hath given the law to his people Israel; blessed be he whose law speaketh distinctly of four children, of different dispositions, viz., the wise, the wicked, the simple, and he who hath not capacity to enquire.
The wise son thus expresses himself; what mean those testimonies, statutes, and judgments, which the Lord our God hath commanded us? Then shalt thou instruct him in all the laws of the Passover; also, that we must not have a dessert brought to table after the paschal lamb.
The wicked son expresses himself thus: what mean you by this service? By the expression YOU, it is clear, he does not include himself; and, as he hath with drawn himself from the collective body of the nation, it is proper, that thou retort on him: and therefore, answer him thus. 'This is done because of that which the Eternal did FOR ME, when I went forth from Egypt: i.e. for ME but not for him; for had he been there, he would not have been thought worthy to be redeemed.
The simple son artlessly observes, what is this? Then shalt thou answer him; for with a strong hand the Eternal brought us out of Egypt, from the house of bondage.
But as for him, who hath not capacity to enquire, thou must begin the discourse : as it is said, and thou shalt shew thy son on that day, saying. this is done because of that which the Eternal did for me, when I went forth from Egypt.

Yechol Me'rosh Chodesh

Possibly you may think that he (the father) is bound to explain this from the first day of the month ניסן; therefore it is said, ON THAT DAY; yet, as it says, ON THAT DAY, it might be inferred that it must be whilst it is day, but as it is said, this is done because of that, &amp;c., from which it is to be inferred at no other time but when the unleavened cake, and bitter herbs, are placed before thee, 

In the Beginning Our Fathers Were Idol Worshipers

Our ancestors were anciently idolaters, but at present, the Lord hath brought us near to his service: as it is said, and Joshua said unto all the people, thus saith the Eternal, the God of Israel, your ancestors dwelt on the other side of the river, (Euphrates) in old time, even Terah, the father of Abraham, and the father of Nachor; and served other gods. 
And I took your father Abraham from the other side of the flood, and led him throughout all the land of Canaan, and multiplied his seed, and gave him Isaac; and I gave unto Isaac, Jacob and Esau: and I gave unto Esau mount Seir for his possession: but Jacob and his children went down into Egypt. 
Blessed be he, who strictly preserveth his promise unto Israel; blessed be the most Holy, who premeditated the end of the captivity, that he might perform what he had promised to our father Abraham, between the parts ; as is said, And he said unto Abraham, Know for certain, that thy seed shall be strangers in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve them, and they shall afflict them four hundred years. And also that nation whom they shall serve will I judge; and they shall afterwards go forth with great substance. 
<small><i>Lift up the Cup of Wine, and say,</i></small>
And it is this same promise which hath been the support of our ancestors, and of us also: for not one only hath risen up against us, but in every generation there are some who rise up against us to annihilate us; but the most Holy, blessed be he, hath delivered us out of their hands,

First Fruits Declaration


Search, and enquire, what Laban, the Syrian, intended to do to our father Jacob; for Pharaoh decreed the destruction of the males only; but Laban intended to root out the whole: as is said, A Syrian had nearly caused my father to perish, and he went down into Egypt, and sojourned there with few persons, and there became a great, mighty, and populous nation.
And he went down into Egypt, compelled thereto by the word of God, and sojourned there: by which we are taught, that he did not go down to settle there, but only to sojourn: as is said, And they (Joseph's Brethren) said until Pharaoh, to sojourn in the land are we come; for thy servants have no pasture for their flocks; for the famine is sore in the land of Canaan : now, therefore, we pray thee, let thy servants dwell in the land of Goshen.
With a few persons; as it is said, With three score and ten souls thy ancestors went down into Egypt; and now the Eternal, thy God, hath made thee as the stars of heaven for multitude.
And he there became a nation; by which we are informed that the children of Israel were distinguished, even in Egypt, as a peculiar nation.<br>Great and mighty; as it is said, And the children of Israel were fruitful, and increased abundantly, and multiplied, and waxed exceeding mighty, and the land was filled with them. 
And populous; as it is said. I have caused thee to multiply as the vegetation of the field, and thou becamest considerable and great, and adorned with many beauties; thy breasts are fashioned, and thine hair grown, yet thou art naked and bare. 
And the Egyptians ill-treated us, afflicted us, and laid heavy bondage upon us; and the Egyptians ill-treated us; as it is said, Come on, let us deal wisely with them; least they multiply, and it come to pass, if it chance to be a war, they might also go over to our enemies, fight against us, and so get them up out of the land. 
And they afflicted us; as it is said, And they set over them task-masters to afflict them with their burdens, and they built for Pharaoh store cities, even Pithom and Raamses:
and they laid heavy bondage upon us; as it is said, And the Egyptians made the children of Israel to serve with rigour.

And we cried unto the Eternal, the God of our ancestors; the Eternal heard our voice, and observed our affliction, our labour, and our oppression.
And we cried unto the Eternal, the God of our ancestors; as it is said, And it came to pass in process of time, that the king of Egypt died, and the children of Israel sighed by reason of the bondage; and they cried, and their cry ascended up unto God, by reason of the bondage.
And the Eternal heard our voice; as is said, And God heard their groaning, and remembered his covenant with Abrabam, Isaac, and with Jacob.
And he saw our affliction; this denotes their being denied the company of their wives, to prevent propagation; as is said, And God looked upon the children of Israel, and God had knowledge of their affliction.
And our grievousness; this denotes the destruction of the male children; as is said, Every son that is born, ye shall cast into the river, but every daughter ye shall save alive.
And our oppression: this denotes fatigue; as is said, And I have also seen the oppression with which the Egyptians harrass them.
And the Eternal brought us forth from Egypt, with a strong hand, and with an outstretched arm; with terror, and with signs and wonders.
And the Eternal brought us fourth from Egypt, not by means of an angel, nor by means of a seraph, nor by means of a messenger: but the most Holy, blessed be he, himself, in his glory: as is said, And I will pass through the land of Egypt this night; and I will smite all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both of man and beast: and on all the gods of Egypt will I execute judgment; I am the Eternal.
And I will pass through the land of Egypt; I MYSELF, and not an angel: and I will smite all the firstborn; I MYSELF, and no seraph: and on all the gods of Egypt will I execute judgment; I MYSELF, and not a messenger: I am the Eternal! I AM HE, and no other.
With a strong hand; this denotes the murrain: as is said, Behold the HAND of the Eternal will be upon thy cattle which is in the field, upon the horses, upon the asses, upon the camels upon the oxen, and upon the sheep; a very grievous murrain.
And with an outstretched arm; this denotes the sword, as is said elsewhere on such an occasion, And a drawn sword in his hand stretched out over Jerusalem.
And with great terror; this denotes the appearance of the Divine Presence: as is said, Or hath God assayed to go and take unto him a nation from the midst of another nation, by proofs, signs, and wonders; by war, and a mighty hand; by an outstretched arm, and great terrors, according to all that the Eternal, your God, did for you in Egypt, before your eyes?
And with prodigies; this denotes the miracles performed with the rod; as is said, And thou shalt take this rod in thy hand, wherewith thou shalt do the prodigies.
And with wonders; this denotes the plague of blood; as is said, And I will show wonders in the heavens, and in the earth, 

The Ten Plagues


blood and fire, and ascending pillars of smoke.

It may also be explained thus. With a strong hand; denotes two plagues. With an outstretched arm; two plagues. With great terror; two plagues. With prodigies; two plagues. and with wonders; two plagues.
These are the ten plagues, which the most Holy, blessed be he, brought on the Egyptians in Egypt, viz.

BLOOD,
FROGS,
VERMIN,
MURRAIN,
A MIXTURE, NOXIOUS BEASTS,
BOILS,
HAIL,
LOCUSTS,
DARKNESS,
and SLAYING THE FIRSTBORN.
Rabbi Judah formed the initials for an index, thus -: ד"צ"ך – ע"ד"ש" – ב"א"ח"ב
Rabbi Jose, the Galilean, saith, From whence art thou authorized to assert, that the Egyptians were afflicted with ten plagues in Egypt; and upon the sea, they were smitten with fifty plagues? To which he answers: In Egypt, it says, And the magicians said unto Pharaoh, this is the finger of God; but at the sea, it says, And Israel saw the mighty hand wherewith the Lord smote the Egyptians: and the people feared the Lord, and believed in the Lord, and his servant Moses.<br>Now, (Rabbi Jose argues thus) if by the finger only they were smitten with ten plagues, hence, it is deducible that in Egypt they were smitten with ten plagues; and at the sea, they were smitten with fifty plagues. 
Rabbi Eliezer saith, from whence can it be proved, that every plague which the most Holy, blessed be he, brought upon the Egyptians in Egypt, consisted of four different plagues? Answer. From what is said, He sent forth against them, the fierceness of his anger, wrath, indignation, and trouble; also, by sending evil angels among them. Now, WRATH is one, INDIGNATION two, TROUBLE three, and SENDING EVIL ANGELS four. Hence, it is deducible that in Egypt they were afflicted with forty plagues; and at the sea, they were smitten with two hun dred plagues.
Rabbi Akeeba saith, from whence can it be proved, that every plague which the most Holy, blessed be he, brought upon the Egyptians in Egypt, consisted of five plagues? - Answer. From what is said, He sent forth against them the fierceness of his anger, wrath, indignation, and trouble; also, by sending evil angels among them. Now, THE FIERCENESS OF HIS ANGER is one, WRATH two, INDIGNATION three, TROUBLE four, and SENDING EVIL ANGELS five. Hence it is deducible, that in Egypt they were smitten with fifty plagues; and at the sea, they were smitten with two hundred and fifty plagues.

Dayenu

What abundant favours hath the Omni present conferred on us !
For if he had but brought us forth from Egypt, and had not inflicted justice upon the Egyptians, it would have been sufficient.
If he had inflicted justice upon them, and had not executed judgment upon their gods, it would have been sufficient.
If he had executed judgment upon their gods, and had not slain their firstborn, it would have been sufficient.
If he had slain their first born, and had not bestowed their wealth on us, it would have been sufficient.
If he had given us their wealth, and had not divided the sea for us, it would have been sufficient.
If he had divided the sea for us, and had not caused us to pass through on dry land, it would have been sufficient.
If he had caused us to pass through on dry land, and had not plunged our oppressors in the midst thereof, it would have been sufficient.
If be had plunged our oppressers in the midst thereof, and had not supplied us with necessaries in the wilderness forty years, it would have been sufficient.
If he had supplied us with necessaries in the wilderness forty years, and had not fed us with manna, it would have been sufficient.
If he had fed us with manna, and had not given us the sabbath, it would have been sufficient.
If he had given us the sabbath, and had not brought us near to Mount Sinai, it would have been sufficient.
If he had brought us near to Mount Sinai, and had not given us his law, it would have been sufficient.
If he had given us his law, and had not brought us to the land of Israel, it would have been sufficient.
If he had brought us to the land of Israel, and had not built the temple, it would have been sufficient.
How much then are we indebted for the manifold favours the Omnipresent conferred on us? He brought us forth from Egypt, executed judgment on the Egyptians, and on their gods: slew their firstborn : gave us their wealth: divided the sea for us, caused us to pass through on dry land: plunged our oppressors in the midst thereof: supplied us with necessaries in the wilderness forty years; gave us manna to eat; gave us the sabbath; brought us near to Mount Sinai; gave us the law; brought us into the land of Israel; and built the chosen holy temple for us, to make atonement for all our sins.

Rabban Gamliel's Three Things

Rabban Gamliel saith, that whosoever doth not make mention of the three things used on the Passover, hath not done his duty; and these are they: the paschal lamb, the unleavened cake, and bitter herb.
The paschal lamb which our ancestors ate during the existence of the holy temple, what did it denote? It denoted that the most Holy, blessed be he! passed over our fathers' houses in Egypt: as is said, And ye shall say. it is the Lord's passover; because he passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians, and delivered our houses. And the people bowed their heads and worshipped. 
<small><i>Then take hold of the Cake in the Dish, and shew it to the company, as a memorial of our freedom, and say.</i></small>
These unleavened cakes, wherefore do we eat them? Because there was not sufficient time for the dough of our ancestors to leaven, before the Holy Supreme King of kings, blessed is he! appeared unto them, and redeemed them: as is said, And they baked unleavened cakes of the dough which they brought forth out of Egypt; for it was not leavened, because they were thurst out of Egypt, and could not tarry, neither had they made any provision for themselves.
<small><i>Then take hold of the Lettuce, (or green top of the Horse-radish), and shew it to the company, as a memorial of our servitude, and say,<i></i></i></small>
This bitter herb, wherefore do we eat it? Because the Egyptians embittered the lives of our ancestor. in Egypt; as is said. And they embittered their lives with cruel bondage, in mortar and brick, and in all manner of labour in the field: all their labour was imposed upon them with rigour.
It therefore is incumbent on every Israelite, in every generation, to look upon himself, as if he had actually gone forth from Egypt : as is said, And thou shalt declare unto thy son, in that day, saying, this is done because of that which the Eternal did for me, when I came forth from Egypt. It was not our ancestors only, that the most Holy, blessed be be! redeemed from Egypt, but us also did he redeem with them: as is said, And be brought us from thence, that he might bring us in, to give us the land which he sware unto our fathers.

First Half of Hallel

<small><i>Then take the Cup or Glass of Wine in the hand, and say,</i></small>
We, therefore, are in duty bound to thank, praise, adore, glorify, extol, honour, bless, exalt, and reverence Him, who wrought all these miracles for our ancestors and us: for he brought us forth from bond age to freedom; from sorrow to joy; from mourning unto holidays; from darkness to great light; and from servitude to redemption; and therefore let us chant unto him a new song. Hallelujah!
Praise ye the Lord! Praise, O ye servants of the Lord, praise the name of the Lord; Blessed be the name of the Lord, from henceforth and for evermore. From the rising of the sun, until the going down thereof, shall the Lord's name be praised. High above all nations is the Lord, his glory is above all the heavens. Who is like unto the Lord our God, who dwelleth on high ? Who condescendeth to view the things transacted in heaven, and on earth. He raiseth the poor from the dust, and exalteth the needy from the dunghill, that he may set them with princes, even with the princes of his people. He enlivens the house of the childless woman: she becomes a joyful mother of children. Hallelujah.
When Israel went forth from Egypt, and the house of Jacob from a barbarous people Judah became his sanctuary, and Israel his dominion, The ocean beheld it, and fled; Jordan retreated; mountains skipped like rams and the hills like lambs. What ailed thee, O ocean, that thou didst flee? Thou, O Jordan that thou didst re treat? Ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams; and ye hills like lambs? It was from the presence of the Lord! Quake thou earth, from the presence of the God of Jacob; who turned the rock into a pool of water, the flint stone into a fountain of waters.

Second Cup of Wine


Blessed art thou, O Eternal, Our God! Sovereign of the universe! who hast redeemed us, and our ancestors from Egypt; and causest us to attain the enjoyment of this night, to eat thereon unleavened cakes and bitter herbs: O Eternal, our God! and the God of our ancestors, mayest thou thus cause us to attain other solemn festivals and seasons, which approach us: that they may rejoice in the building of thy city, and exult in thy service: and that we may there eat the sacrifices, and paschal lambs, whose blood shall be sprinkled on the sides of thine altar, that they may be acceptable; then will we give thanks unto thee with a new song for our deliverance and redemption. Blessed art thou, O Eternal! who redeemeth Israel.

Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God! King of the universe, Creator of the fruit of the vine.

Rachtzah


<small><i>Then drink of the Wine, and Wash your Hands; and say,</i></small>
Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God! King of the universe, who hast sanctified us with thy commandments, and commanded us to wash the hands.

Motzi Matzah


<small><i>The master of the house then takes the two whole Cakes and the broken one in his hand together, and breaks the Upper Cake.<br>But he must not eat thereof, till he breaks a piece off the broken one, and says the following Blessings and gives a piece of each to every one at the table, who will say the same Blessings, and then eat both pieces together.</i></small>
Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God! King of the universe; who bringeth forth bread from the earth,
Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God! King of the universe; who hast sanctified us with thy commandments, and commanded us to eat unleavened cakes.

Maror


<small><i>The Master of the House then takes some Bitter Herbs, and dips it into חרוסת; and says,</i></small>
Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God! King of the universe; who hast sanctified us with thy commandments, and commanded us to eat bitter herbs.

Korech


<small><i>He then eats it, and gives some to every one at table, who says the above Blessing before they eat it.<br>The Master of the House then breaks the Undermost Cake; takes a piece of it, with some Bitter Herbs of a different kind to all the first, eats them together; and says the following, in commemoration to what Hillel did.</i></small>
Thus did Hillel during the time the holy temple stood; he took the unleavened cake and bitter herb, and ate them together, that he might perform what is said, with unleavened cakes and bitter herbs shall they eat it.

Shulchan Orech



Tzafun


<small><i>After Supper, the Master of the House takes the half of the Middle Cake which he laid by, and gives every one a piece of it.</i></small>

Barech

Birkat Hamazon


<small><i>Then fill the Cups with Wine; and say the Grade which is said after Meat.</i></small>

<small><i>It is the custom of Germans, that he who says Grace, says –</i></small>
Gentlemen, we will say Grace. 
<small><i>And then they answer,</i></small>
Blessed be the name of the Eternal, from henceforth, and for evermore.
<small><i>If the company be Ten or more, then he who says Grace says,</i></small>
We will bless our God, of whose bounty we have been satisfied.
<small>The others answer,</small>
Blessed be our God, of whose bounty we have been satisfied, and through whose goodness we live.
<small><i>Which he repeats</i></small>
Blessed be our God, of whose bounty we have been satisfied, and through whose goodness we live.

Be thou praised, O Eternal, our God! King of the universe, thou who nourishes the whole world with thy goodness; with grace, mercy, and compassion. thou givest food to all thy creatures, for thy mercy endureth for ever. Through thy great goodness we never as yet wanted food, nor wilt thou let us want for evermore; for the sake of thy exalted name, thou nourishes, maintainest, doest good unto all, and providest food for all the creatures which thou hast created. Blessed art thou, O Lord! thou nourisher of all beings.
We give thanks unto thee, O Lord, our God! for having caused our ancestors to inherit that desirable good, and extensive land; and because thou, O Eternal, our God! hast brought us forth from the house of bondage; and for the covenant which thou hast marked in our flesh: for the law which thou hast taught us; and for the statutes which thou hast made known unto us: and for the life, kindness, and mercy which thou hast graciously bestowed upon us: and for the food wherewith thou dost feed and sustain us: continually; daily, and at all hours.
And for all those things, O Eternal, our God! we give thanks unto thee, and praise thee; blessed be thy name, continually in the mouth of every living creature, for ever and ever; as it is written, 'When thou hast Blessed art thou, O Eternal, for the land, and for the food.
O Eternal,our God, we beseech thee, have compassion on thy people Israel, on Jerusalem thy city, on Zion the residence of thy glory, and on the kingdom of the house of David thine anointed: and on the great and holy temple which is called by thy name. O! our God, and our Father, feed and nourish us maintain, support, and enlarge us. O! enlarge us speedily from all our troubles; and suffer us not, O Eternal our God! to stand in need of the gifts of manhood, who are but flesh and blood, nor their loan: but let us depend on thy full, open, holy, and liberal hand; so that we may never be ashamed, nor ever be put to the blush.
<small><i>On the Sabbath, say,</i></small>
Be pleased, 0 Lord, our God! to revive us with thy commandments, and with the commandment of the sev enth day, even this great and holy Sabbath: (for this day is great and holy in thy presence,) thereon to rest, and be at ease, in love, according to the precept of thy will; and in thy good will, o Lord, our God! grant us rest, suffer no trouble, sorrow, or sigh, to disturb us on our day of: shew us, O Lord, our God! the consolation of Zion, thy city, and the rebuilding of Jerusalem, thy holy city; for thou art the Lord of salvation, and the Lord of consolation.
Our God, and the God of our ancestors, mayest thou be pleased to grant that our memorial, and the memorial of our fathers, the memorial of the anointed, the son of David thy servant, and the memorial of Jerusalem, thy holy city, and the memorial of all thy people, the house of Israel, may ascend, come, approach, be seen, accepted, heard, visited; and remembered for the obtaining an happy deliverance, with favour, grace, and mercy, to life and peace; on this day of the feast of unleavened cakes. O Lord, our God! remember us thereon for good; visit us with a blessing, and save us to enjoy life; and with the word of salvation and mercy, have I compassion, and be gracious unto us. O have mercy upon us, and save us, for our eyes are continually towards thee; for thou, O God! art a merciful and gracious King. O rebuild Jerusalem, the holy city, speedily in our days. Blessed art thou, O Eternal! thou, in thy mercy, didst once build Jerusalem. Amen!
Blessed art thou, 0 Lord, our God! King of the universe; Omnipotent! our Father, King, Strength. Creator, Redeemer, Former, and our Sanctifier; the Sanctifier of Jacob, our Pastor, the Shepherd of Israel ; the beneficent King; thou who dealest beneficently with all: for thou hast been, art, and ever wilt be beneficent towards us; Thou hast dealt bountifully with us; as thou doest now, and ever wilt: grant us grace, favour, mercy, enlargement, deliverance, prosperity, blessing, salvation, consolation, maintenance, and sustenance. O may we never want mercy, peace, and life, with every good and happiness.
May the most merciful reign over us for ever and ever. May the most merciful he praised in heaven and on earth. May the most merciful be adored throughout all generations; be eternally glorified amidst us; and be honoured amongst us to all eternity. May the most merciful maintain us with honour. May the most merciful break the yoke of the captivity from off our neck and lead us securely to our land. May the most merciful send us abundant blessing in this house, and on this table on which we have eaten, May the most merciful send us Elijah the prophet, (of blessed memory) to bring us the good tidings of salvation and consolation. May the most merciful bless my father and conductor, the master of this 
house, and my mother, and conductress, the mistress of this house, their house, children, and all belonging to them; us, and all belonging to us; as our ancestors. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. were blessed with all and every good: thus may he bless us altogether with a complete blessing: and let 
us say, amen. <br>May they in heaven shew forth (their and) our merit for our continual welfare; and may we receive a blessing from the Lord, and perfection, from the God of our salvation : and may we find grace and good understanding in the sight of God and man.<small><i>On the Sabbath, say,</i></small><small>May the most merciful cause us to inherit the day that is entirely rest and tranquillity, [eternal life.]</small> May the most merciful cause us to inherit the day say that is entirely good. May the most merciful make us worthy to behold the days of the Messiah, and eternal life in the future state. He giveth great salvation to his king, and sheweth mercy to his anointed; to David and his seed for ever.<br>Fear the Lord, ye his saints, for there is no want to those who fear him. The young lions do lack, and suffer hunger; but they who seek the Lord shall not want any good.<br>Praise ye the Lord, for he is good; for his mercy endureth for ever.



Third Cup of Wine



Pour Out Thy Wrath

<small><i>Open the door, and say, Fill the Fourth Cup, and say,</i></small>
O pour out thy wrath upon the heathen who know thee not, and upon the kingdoms who invoke not thy name; for they have devoured Jacob, and laid waste his beautiful dwelling.

Hallel

Second Half of Hallel


Not for our sake, O Eternal! not for our sake, but unto thy name give glory, for thy kindness and truth's sake. Wherefore should the heathen say, where now is their God?  But God is in the heavens, and hath made whatsoever be pleased. Their idols are silver and gold, the work of men's hands. Mouths they have, but speak not; eyes have they, but see not; they have ears, but hear not; nostrils, but smell not; they have hands, but feel not; feet but walk not; neither is utterance in their throat. Those who make them, shall become like them; so shall all those who trust in them. Israel, trust thou in the Eternal! he is my Help and Shield. O house of Aaron, trust in the Eternal! he is your Help and Shield. Ye who revere the Lord, trust in the Lord, he is your Help and Shield.<br>The Lord hath ever been mindful of us, he will bless us, he will bless the house of Israel, he will bless the house of Aaron. He will bless those that revere the Lord, both small and great. May the Eternal increase you more and more, you and your children. Ye are blessed of the Lord, who made heaven and earth. The heavens are the heavens of the Lord; but the earth hath he given to the children of men. The dead praise not the Lord; nor they who descend into the silent grave. But we will praise the Eternal! from henceforth and for evermore. Hallelujah. 
I am glad that the Eternal hath heard my voice, and my supplications. He hath inclined his ear unto me, therefore will I call upon him as long as I live. If the cords of death encompass me, and the anguish of hell seize me, if trouble and sorrow overtake me, I then call upon the name of the Eternal! O Lord! I beseech thee, deliver my soul. The Eternal is gracious and righteous; yea, our God is compassionate. The Lord preserveth the simple. I was distressed, and he did help me. Return unto thy rest, O my soul; for the Lord will deal bountifully with thee. For thou deliverest my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my foot from slipping. Thus I yet walk before the Lord, in the land of the living. I believe, therefore I speak; I proclaim it. Ah! I said, in my dejection, man is but a transient being.
What shall I render unto the Lord, for all his benefits towards me? I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto the Lord, now in the presence of all the people. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his pious servants. O Lord! I am thy servant; the son of thine handmaid; thou hast loosed my bonds. Unto thee will I offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving; I will also call on the name of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto the Lord, now in the presence of all his people: in the courts of the Lord's temple, in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem. Hallelujah.
Praise the Lord, all ye nations: praise him all ye people. For great is his kindness towards us: and the truth of the Lord endureth for ever. Hallelujah, O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good; for his mercy endureth for ever. Let Israel now say, that his mercy endureth for ever. Let the house of Aaron now say, that his mercy endureth for ever.
 Let those who revere the Lord now say, that his mercy endureth for ever. 

In distress I called on the Lord, and the Lord's answer procured me enlargement. The Lord is for me, I will not fear; what can man do unto me? The Lord is with me, and with those who help me, I therefore shall see my desire on those who hate me. It is better to trust in the Lord, than to rely on men. It is better to trust in the Lord, than to rely on princes. If all the heathen surround me, by the name of the Eternal I will cut them asunder. They swarm about me like bees; they blaze about me like the flame of thorns; by the name of the Eternal I will cut them asunder. If all of them thrust sore at me to overthrow me, the Eternal supports me. The Lord is my strength and song, he is become my salvation. The voice of song and salvation is in the tents of the righteous; the right hand of the Lord hath done valiantly. The right hand of the Lord is exalted; the right hand of the Lord hath done valiantly. I shall not as yet die, but live, and declare the works of the Lord. He hath indeed chastised me, but he hath not given me over to death. Open the gates of righteousness for me, that I may enter them, to praise the Lord. This is the gate of the Eternal! the righteous enter it
I thank thee, thou hast chastised me, and art become my salvation. I thank thee, &amp;c. The stone which the builders rejected, is become the corner head-stone. The stone, &amp;c. This is from the Lord: it is marvellous in our eyes. This is, &amp;c. This is the day which the Lord hath appointed, we will rejoice and be glad thereon. This is, &amp;c.
O Eternal! save us now, we beseech thee. O Eternal! save us now, we beseech thee. O Eternal! cause us to prosper, we beseech thee. O Eternal! cause us to prosper, we beseech thee.
Welcome in the name of the Eternal! we (the priests) of the temple of the Eternal greet you. God, the Eternal! causes his countenance to shine upon us; bring hither the sacrifice bound with myrtle, to the horns of the altar," Thou art my God! and I will praise thee! O my God! I will extol thee! O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endureth for ever.
They praise thee, O Eternal, our God! above all thy works; thy pious servants, with the righteous who perform thy will, and all thy people, the house of lsrael, with joyful song, give thanks, bless, praise, glorify, exalt. sanc tify, reverence, and acknowledge thy sovereign name, O our King! for unto thee, it is proper to offer thanksgiving, and pleasant to sing praise to thy name, for thou art Omnipotent from everlasting to everlasting.

Songs of Praise and Thanks

O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good; for his mercy endureth for ever. 
Oh give thanks to the God of gods; for his mercy endureth for ever. O give thanks to the Lord of lords: for his mercy endureth for ever. To Him who alone performeth great wonders: for his mercy endureth for ever. 
To Him who created the heavens with wisdom: for his mercy endureth for ever.
 To Him who stretched out the earth above the waters: for his mercy endureth for ever. 
To Him who made great lights: for his mercy endureth for ever. 
 The sun to rule by day: for his mercy endureth for ever. 
The moon and stars to rule by night: for his mercy endureth for ever. 
To him who smote the first-born of the Egyptians: for his mercy endureth for ever.
And brought forth Israel from among them: for his mercy endureth for ever. 
With a mighty hand and a stretched-out arm: for his mercy endureth for ever.
 To Him who divided the Red Sea: for his mercy endureth for ever.
And caused Israel to pass through the midst of it: for his mercy endureth for ever.
 But overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red Sea: for his mercy endureth for ever.
 To Him who guided his people through the wilderness: for his mercy endureth for ever.
To Him who smote great kings; for his mercy endureth for ever.
 To Him who slew mighty kings: for his mercy endureth for ever.
 Even Sihon, king of the Amorites: for his mercy endureth for ever.
 And Og, king of Bashan : for his mercy endureth for ever. 
And gave their land for an inheritance: for his mercy endureth for ever.
 Even an inheritance to his servant Israel: for his mercy endureth for ever.
 Who remembered us in our low estate: for his mercy endureth for ever,
 Who giveth food to all flesh: for his mercy endureth for ever. O give thanks unto the God of heaven: for his mercy endureth for ever. 
The breath of all living bless thy name, O Lord, our God! the spirit of all flesh continually glorify and extol thy memorial, O our King! thou art God from eternity to eternity; besides thee, we acknowledge neither king, redeemer, or saviour; thou redeemest, deliverest, maintainest, and hast compassion over us, in all times of trouble and distress: we have no king but thee. Thou art God of the first, and God of the last: the God of all creatures, Lord of all productions; thou art adored with all manner of praise; who governeth the universe with tenderness, and thy creatures with mercy. Lo! the Lord neither slumbereth nor sleepeth, but rouseth those who sleep: awakeneth those who slumber: causeth the dumb to speak; looseth those that are bound: supporteth the fallen; and raiseth those who droop; and therefore thee alone do we worship. 
Although our mouths were filled with melodious songs, as the drops of the sea; our tongues with shouting, as the roaring billows thereof; our lips with praise, like the wide-extended firmament: our eyes with sparkling brightness like the sun and moon; our hands extended like the towering eagles; and our feet as the hinds for swiftness; we, nevertheless, are incapable of rendering sufficient thanks unto thee, O Lord, our God! and the God of our fathers! or to bless thy name, for one of the innumerable benefits which thou hast conferred upon us and our ancestors. For thou, O Lord, our God! didst redeem us from Egypt, and release us from the house of bondage; in time of famine thou didst sustain us; and in plenty thou didst nourish us. Thou didst deliver us from the sword; save us from pestilence; and from many sore and heavy diseases hast thou withdrawn us.
Hitherto thy tender mercies have supported us, and thy kindness hath not forsaken us. O Lord, our God! thou wilt not forsake us in future. Therefore the members of which thou hast formed us, the spirit and soul which thou hast breathed into us, and the tongue which thou hast placed in our mouths; lo! they shall worship, bless, praise, extol, reverence, sanctify, and ascribe sovereign power unto thy name, our King! every mouth shall adore thee, and every tongue shall swear unto thee; unto thee every knee shall bend: every rational being shall worship thee; every heart shall revere thee; the inward part and reins shall sing praise unto thy name; as it is written, And all my bones shall say, O Lord! who is like unto thee? who delivereth the weak from him that is too strong for him; the poor and needy from their oppressors. Who is like unto thee? who is equal unto thee? who can be compared unto thee? great, mighty, and tremendous God? most high God! possessor of heaven and earth! We will praise, adore, glorify, and bless thy holy name; so saith David, Bless the Lord O my soul! and all that is within me, bless his holy name. O God! who art mighty in thy strength! who art great by thy glorious name! mighty for ever! tremendous by thy fearful acts !
<br>The King! who sitteth on the high and exalted throne, inhabiting eternity, most exalted, and most holy is his name; and it is written, Rejoice in the Lord. O ye righteous, for to the just praise is comely. With the mouth of the upright shalt thou be extolled: blessed with the lips of the righteous: sanctified with the tongue of the pious; and by a choir of saints shalt thou be praised. 

And in the congregations of many thousands of thy people, the house of Israel, shall thy name, O our King! be glorified in song, throughout all generations; for such is the duty of every created being towards thee, O Lord, our God! and the God of our fathers, to render thanks, to praise, extol, glorify, exalt, ascribe glory, bless, magnify, and adore thee, with all the songs and praises of thy servant David, the son of Jesse, thine anointed.
Thy name shall be praised for ever, almighty, great, and holy King! in heaven and earth; for unto thee, O Lord, our God! and the God of our fathers, appertaineth song and praise; hymn and psalm, strength and domination; victory, power, and greatness; adoration and glory; holiness and majesty; blessings, and thanksgivings; from now and for evermore. Blessed art thou, O Lord, Almighty King! glorified with praises: most worthy of thanksgivings; Lord of miracles, who delighteth in the songs of psalmody: King! Almighty, and Eternal!

Fourth Cup of Wine

<small><i>Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God! King of the universe, Creator of the fruit of vine.</i></small>
<small><i>Then drink the Glass of Wine leaning, and say the Grace after drinking the Wine.</i></small>
Blessed art thou, O Eternal, our God! King of the universe, for the vine, and the fruit of vine and for the increase of the field and for that desirable, good, and ample land which thou wast pleased to cause our ancestors to inherit, to eat of the fruit thereof, and be satisfied of the goodness thereof. Have compassion on us, O Eternal our God! and on thy people Israel; on Jerusalem thy city; on Zion the tabernacle of thy glory, on thine altar and on thy temple. O rebuild the holy city (Jerusalem) in our days, and lead us thereto; and cause us to rejoice therein, that we may eat of the fruit thereof, and be satisfied with its goodness, and bless thee, in holiness and purity, [and be pleased to grant us rest on this Sabbath day] and cause us to rejoice on this day of the feast of Unleavened Cakes: for thou, O Lord! art good, and beneficent to all: we therefore, will thank thee for the land, and for the fruit of the vine. 
Blessed art thou, O Eternal! and for the fruit of the vine.

Nirtzah

Chasal Siddur Pesach



L'Shana HaBaa

The year that approaches, O bring us to Jerusalem.

And It Happened at Midnight


And thus it came to pass at midnight.
Then didst thou perform abundant miracles in the night. In the beginning of the first watch of this night. 
The righteous professor of God (Abraham) conquered when he divided his company at night. And it came to pass at midnight.
Thou didst threaten the king of Gerah with death, in a dream by night. Thou didst terrify the Syrian in the dead of the night.
And Israel wrestled with an angel, and overcame him in the night. And it came to pass at midnight. 
The first born of the Egyptians didst thou crush at midnight. Their strength found them not when they arose in the night. The swift army of the prince of Harosheth didst thou tread down with the stars of the night. And it came to pass at midnight. 
The blasphemer who imagined to lift up his hand against my beautiful habitation, didst thou frustrate by the number of his slain in the night. The idol Bel, and its statue was overthrown in the darkness of the night. To the meritorious man the secret was revealed in a vision of the night. And it came to pass at midnight. 
He who got drunk in the holy vessels was slain in that night. He (Daniel) who was delivered from the den of lions interpreted the dreadful dreams of the night. The Agagite cherished enmity, and wrote letters at night. And it came to pass at midnight. 
Thou didst awaken thy all-conquering power against him, by disturbing the sleep of the king in the Thou wilt tread the winepress, when saying to the watchman what of the night? Let the watchman (Israel) say aloud, the morning is come after night. And it came to pass at midnight. 
O May the day draw nigh, that is neither day nor night. O thou Most High! make known, that unto thee appertaineth the day, and also the night. Appoint watchmen to thy city (Jerusalem) all day, and all night. O illuminate as the splendour of the day, the darkness of the night. And it came to pass at midnight, 

Zevach Pesach

<small><i>IN GERMANY, THIS IS SAID ON THE SECOND NIGHT.<br>And ye shall say, this is a sacrifice of the Passover.</i></small>
Thy mighty power didst thou wonderfully display on the Passover. Above all the solemn feasts didst thou exalt the Pass over. Thou didst reveal to the Oriental (Abraham) the miracles performed in the midst of the night of Passover. And ye shall say, this is a sacrifice of the Passover, 
I'hou didst appear unto him in the heat of the day, on the Passover. He entertained the angels with unleavened cakes, on the Passover. And ran to the herd, as a memorial of the offerings of the Passover. And ye shall say, this is a sacrifice of the Passover. 
The inhabitants of Sodom provoked God to anger, and they were consumed with fire, on the Passover, Lot was delivered, who baked unleavened cakes for the angels, on the Passover. Thou didst sweep the land of Moph and Noph, when thou didst pass through on the Passover. And ye shall say, this is the sacrifice of the Passover. 
O Lord! thou didst wound the head of the first-born, on the night of the observation of the Passover. O Omnipotent! yet didst thou pass over thy first-born son, (Israel) being marked with the blood of the sacrifice of the Passover. Not suffering the destroyer to enter my doors on the Passover. And ye shall say, this is the sacrifice of the Passover.
The strong and fortified city, was surrendered at the season of the Passover. Midian was destroyed by the cake of barley bread, like the offering of an omer of barley, on the Passover. The mighty men of Pul and Lud were destroyed with a burning conflagration on the Passover. And ye shall say, this is the sacrifice of the Passover. 
The King abode yet in Nob this day, till the time of the Passover. The palm of the hand which wrote the destruction of the foundation of the empire of Babylon, on the Passover. Even at the time when the watch was set, and the table prepared on the Passover. And ye shall say, this is the sacrifice of the Passover.
Esther gathered the congregation to fast three days on the Passover. The sworn enemy (Haman) didst thou cause to be executed on a gallows of fifty cubits high, on the Passover. These two things shalt thou bring in a moment on Uts, on the Passover. Thine band will then be victorious, and thy right hand exalted, as on the night where on was sanctified the festival of the Passover. And ye shall say, this is the sacrifice of the Passover. 

Ki Lo Na'e



Adir Hu



Sefirat HaOmer


<small><i>Blessed art thou, O Eternal, our God! King of the universe, who hath sanctified us with thy commandments, and commanded us to count the days of the  עומר.<br>This is the first day of the עומר.</i></small>

Echad Mi Yodea



Chad Gadya

