Pesach Haggadah
הגדה של פסח
Green, 1897


Pesach Haggadah

Kadesh


SANCTIFICATION.
<small><i>On Friday Evening commence " -</i></small>
"And it was evening and it was morning, the sixth day." 
"Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of them. And on the seventh day God had ended his work which he had made; and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made. And God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it; because that in it he had rested from all his work which God created and made."
<small><i>On Week-days commence here, adding on Friday Evening the words in brackets : -</i></small>
"Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the Universe, Creator of the fruit of the vine. 
"Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the Universe, who hast chosen us from all peoples, exalted us above all tongues, and sanctified us with thy commandments. Thou hast, in love, ordained for us, O Lord our God <small>(Sabbaths for rest),</small> solemn days of joy and festive times of gladness, even this day of <small>(rest and of)</small> the Feast of Unleavened Bread, a holy convocation, a memorial <small>(in thy love)</small> of the Exodus from Egypt. Thou hast chosen us and sanctified us above all peoples, and thou hast given us an inheritance of (loving favour) joy and gladness, days of <small>(Sabbath and)</small> festival. 

Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hast sanctified <small>(the Sabbath)</small> Israel and the days of Festival."
<small><i>On Saturday night continue : -</i></small>
" Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the Universe, who hast made a distinction between sacred and profane, between light and darkness, between Israel and other peoples, between the seventh day and the six days of work. Thou hast made a distinction between the holiness of the Sabbath and the holiness of a Festival, sanctifying the seventh day above all others. It is with thy holiness that thou hast distinguished and sanctified thy people Israel. 
Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hast made a distinction in the degrees of holiness
"Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the Universe, who hast preserved us in life, sustained us, and enabled us to reach this season." 
<small><i>Drink the first cup of wine.</i></small>

Urchatz


<small><i>The celebrant of the Seder washes his hands.</i></small>

Karpas


<small><i>Some parsley or lettuce is then distributed to all present, who on partaking of it say:-</i></small>
"Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the Universe, Creator of the fruit of the earth."

Yachatz

SETTING ASIDE OF THE AFICOMAN.
<small><i>The head of the household breaks in two the middle Matzah, leaving one half on the Seder dish, and placing the other half aside as the Aficoman.</i></small> 

Magid

Ha Lachma Anya


<small><i>The shank-bone and. the egg are removed from the Seder dish, which those present then take hold of while the following is said : -</i></small>
 THIS is the bread of affliction which our fathers did eat in the land of Egypt. Let all who are hungry come in and eat ; let all who require come in and celebrate the Passover. This year we celebrate it here, may we celebrate it next year in the land of Israel. This year we are in exile, next year we may be free. 

Four Questions

<small><i>The egg and shank-bone are replaced and the second cup of wine is filled. The youngest competent at the table then says:- </i></small> 
Wherefore is this night distinguished from all other nights? 
On all other nights we eat either leavened or unleavened bread, but on this night only unleavened bread. On all other nights we partake of all kinds of herbs, but on this night, especially, bitter herbs. On all other nights we do not dip the herbs once, but on this night we do so twice. On all other nights we take our meal either sitting or leaning, but on this night we all lean. 


We Were Slaves in Egypt

<small><i>The following response is then given:-</i></small>
WE WERE SLAVES to Pharaoh in Egypt, and the Lord our God brought us forth from thence with a strong hand and outstretched arm. If the most holy, blessed be He, had not brought forth our fathers from Egypt, then we, our children, and our children's children, would have been slaves to the Pharaohs in Egypt. Now, even though all of us were wise, all of us of great understanding, all of us (learned as) elders, all of us familiar with the Scripture, it would still be our duty to tell again the story of the Exodus from Egypt, and the more we find to say of the Exodus from Egypt, the more praiseworthy are we. 


Story of the Five Rabbis

It happened to Rabbi Eliezer, Rabbi Joshua, Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah, Rabbi Akibah, and Rabbi Tarfon, that they were once banqueting at B'nei B'rak, and were speaking about the Exodus from Egypt all that night until their disciples came and said to them, "Rabbis! the time has arrived for saying the morning SHEMA!" 
Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah said, "I am about seventy years old. and I did not understand why the story of the departure from Egypt should be told at night until Ben Zoma explained it thus : 'The Bible says (Deut. xvi. 3), "That thou mayest remember the day when thou camest forth out of the land of Egypt all the days of thy life." Had it said " The days of thy life," it would have referred only to the day. But as it says, "All the days of thy life," it means to include the nights. The Sages, however, say, had it said only " the days of thy life," it would have referred to this world alone, but as it says, "All the days of thy life," it means to include also the days of the Messiah.''' 


The Four Sons

Blessed is the Omnipotent! Blessed be He! Blessed is He who gave the Law to His people Israel! Blessed be He ! 
Four times does the Bible refer to the enquiring son. 
This indicates that the Bible thought of four kinds of enquiring sons - the wise son, the wicked son, the simple son, and the one that is too young to enquire himself. 


Which is the wise son's question ? "What mean the testimonies and the statutes and the judgments which the Lord our God hath commanded you?" (Deut, vi. 3O.) Thou must answer him by telling him of the laws of the Passover down to the law that no aficoman may follow the Paschal lamb. 

Which is the wicked son's question? "What mean you by this service?" (Ex. xii. 26.) When he thus says You, he purposely excludes himself, and so rejects one of the principles of Judaism. Therefore mayest thou retort upon him by quoting (Exod. xiii. 8), "This is done because of that which the Lord did for me when I came forth from Egypt." For me (thou canst say), and not for him; if he had been there he would not have been redeemed. 

Which is the simple son's question ?  "What is this?" Thou must answer him by saying: "By strength of hand the Lord brought us out from Egypt, from the house of bondage." 
If the son is too young to enquire, thou shalt open the subject to him, as it is said (Exod. xiii. 8), "And thou shalt shew thy son in that day, saying, This is done because of that which the Lord did for me when I came forth from Egypt." And thou shalt show thy son in that day.

Yechol Me'rosh Chodesh

When does the Bible mean that the explanation shall commence? Should it be from the New Moon (of Nisan)? No: for the Bible says, "In that day." Does " that day" mean the daytime? No: for the Bible says " This is done," &amp;c. It would not have said " This is done," except it referred to the moment when the Matzah and bitter herbs were there before thee (to be indicated). 


In the Beginning Our Fathers Were Idol Worshipers

In remotest days our ancestors were idolaters, but now God has brought us to worship Him, as it is said (Joshua xxiv. 2), " And Joshua said unto all the people: Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Your fathers dwelt on the other side of the river in old time, even Terah, the father of Abraham, and the father of Nachor : and they served other gods.
And I took your father Abraham from the other side of the flood, and led him throughout all the land of Canaan, and multiplied his seed and gave him Isaac, And I gave unto Isaac, Jacob and Esau : and I gave unto Esau mount Seir, to possess it; but Jacob and his children went down into Egypt.
Blessed be God who keepeth His promise to Israel! Blessed be He: Blessed be the Lord who determined when the bondage should end, performing that which He promised to our father Abraham in the "Covenant of the Pieces," as it is said (Gen. xv. 13), "And God said unto Abraham, Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs, and shall be enslaved; and shall be afflicted four hundred years; and also that nation, whom they shall serve, will I judge; and afterward shall they come out with great substance." 

<small><i>The cup of wine is lifted up while the following is said:-</i></small>
And it is this (same promise) that hath been maintained to our forefathers and to us, for there has not been only one to rise up against us to destroy us, but in every generation there have arisen against us those who would destroy us, and the Holy One (blessed be He) has delivered us from their hands. 

First Fruits Declaration

<small><i>The cup is replaced on the table :- </i></small>
Enquire and learn what Laban, the Syrian, sought to do to Jacob our father. For while Pharaoh decreed sentence against the male children, Laban sought to destroy the whole (of the family of Jacob), as it is said (Deut, xxvi. 5), " A Syrian (Laban) would have caused my father to perish, and he went down to Egypt, and sojourned there with a few, and became there a nation, great, mighty, and populous."
"And he went down into Egypt," inspired thereto by the word of God. "And he sojourned there." This teaches that our ancestor Jacob did not go down to Egypt to remain there, but only to sojourn; as it is further said (Gen. xlvii. 4), "They said moreover unto Pharaoh, For to sojourn in the land are we come, for thy servants have no pasture for their flocks; for the famine is sore in the land of Canaan ; now therefore, we pray thee, let thy servants dwell in the land of Goshen."
"With a few," as it is said (Deut. x. 22)," Thy fathers went down into Egypt with three score and ten persons; and now the Lord thy God hath made thee as the stars of heaven for multitude."
" And became there a nation." This teaches that Israel became distinguished. "Great and mighty," as it is said (Ex. i. 7), "And the children of Israel were fruitful, and increased abundantly, and multiplied, and waxed exceeding mighty, and the land was filled with them."
"And populous," as it is said (Ezek. xvi. 7), "I have caused thee to multiply as the bud of the field, and thou hast increased and waxen great, and thou art come to excellent ornaments; thy shape is perfected, and thine hair is grown, whereas thou wast naked and bare."
"And the Egyptians evil entreated us, and afflicted us and laid upon us hard bondage" (Deut. xxvi. 6). " And the Egyptians evil entreated us," as it is said (Ex. i. 1O) "Come on, let us deal wisely with them; lest they multiply, and it come to pass that when there falleth out any war they join also unto our enemies and fight against us and so get them up out of the land."
" And afflicted us," as it is said (Ex. i. 11), "Therefore they did set over them taskmasters to afflict them with their burdens. And they built for Pharaoh treasure cities (Pithom and Rameses)."
"And laid upon us hard bondage," as it is said (Ex. i. 13), " And the Egyptians made the children of Israel to serve with rigour."

" And when we cried unto the Lord God of our fathers, the Lord heard our voice and looked on our affliction and our labour and our oppression" (Deut. xxvi. 7).
" And when we cried unto the Lord God of our fathers," as it is said (Ex. ii. 23), " And it came to pass in process of time that the king of Egypt died; and the children of Israel sighed by reason of the bondage, and they cried, and their cry came up to God by reason of the bondage." 


"The Lord heard our voice," as it is said (Ex. ii. 24), "And God heard their groaning, and God remembered His covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob."
" And He saw our affliction." This refers to Egyptian tyranny over Hebrew family life; as it is said (Ex. ii. 25), " And God looked upon the children of Israel, and God had respect unto them." 
" And our labour." This refers to the condemned male children of the Hebrews, as it is said (Ex. i. 22), " Every son that is born ye shall cast into the river, and every daughter ye shall save alive."
"And our oppression." This refers to its severity, 8S it is said (Ex. iii. 9), "And I have also seen the oppression with which the Egyptians oppressed them."
"And the Lord brought us forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand, and with an outstretched arm, and with great terribleness, and with signs and wonders" (Deut. xxvi. 8). 
"And the Lord brought us forth out of Egypt." Not by the hands of an angel, nor by the hands of a seraph, nor by the hands of a messenger; but it was the Holy One, blessed be He, himself, and himself alone, as it is said 
(Ex. xii. 12), "For I will pass through the land of Egypt this night, and will smite all the first-born in the land of Egypt, both man and beast; and against all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgment; I am the Lord." 

" For I will pass through the land of Egypt," i.e., I, myself, and not an angel; "And will smite all the first-born," I, myself, and not a seraph; "And against all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgment," I, myself, and not a messenger. " I am the Lord"; it is I and no other.
" With a mighty hand." This refers to the murrain, as it is said (Ex. ix. 3), " Behold the hand of the Lord is upon thy cattle which is in the field, upon the horses, upon the asses, upon the camels, upon the oxen, and upon the sheep. There shall be a very grievous murrain."
" And with an outstretched arm." This refers to the sword, of which it is said (1 Chron. xxi. 16), "Having a drawn sword in his hand stretched out over Jerusalem."
"And with great terribleness." This refers to the revelation by God (to Israel) of His divine presence, as it is said (Dent. iv. 34), "Or hath God assayed to go and take him a nation from the midst of another nation, by temptations, by signs, and by wonders, and by war, and by a mighty hand and by a stretched out arm, and by great terrors, according to all that the Lord your God did for you in Egypt before your eyes."
"And with signs." This refers to the rod (of Moses), as it is said (Ex. iv. 17), "And thou shalt take this rod in thine hand wherewith thou shalt do signs." 
" And with wonders." This refers to the blood, as it is said (Joel ii. 3O), " And I will show wonders in the heavens and in the earth, 

The Ten Plagues


blood and fire, and pillars of smoke."

Another explanation is, that these expressions: "A mighty hand," "An outstretched arm," "Great terribleness," " Signs" and " Wonders,' each denote a double share in the plagues of which they were the instrument. 

These are the ten plagues which the Holy One, blessed be He, did bring upon the Egyptians in Egypt, namely:

Blood,
frogs,
lice,
vermin,
pestilence,
boils,
hail,
locusts,
darkness,
slaying of the first-born.
Rabbi Judah made of them (of the initial letters of each of these terms) the following signs: דְּצַ"ךְ עַדַ"שׁ בְּאַחַ"ב.
Rabbi Jose of Galilee said: "Whence do we know that while the Egyptians suffered ten plagues in Egypt, they were, at the Red Sea, smitten with fifty plagues." Of Egypt, it is said (Ex. viii. 19), "Then the magicians said unto Pharaoh, This is the finger of God." While of the Red Sea it is said (Ex. xiv, 31), "And Israel saw that great hand with which the Lord wrought against Egypt, and the people feared the Lord, and believed in the Lord and in his servant Moses."<br>Now, if with the finger of God they were smitten with ten plagues, then we may say that in Egypt (where they were smitten by the finger of God) they were smitten with ten plagues, while at the Red Sea (where the whole hand of God was manifest) they were smitten with fifty plagues. 
Rabbi Eleazer said, Whence can we tell that each plague that the Holy One, blessed be He, brought upon the Egyptians in Egypt was equal to four plagues? Because it is said (Ps. lxxviii. 49), "He east upon them the fierceness of his anger, WRATH and INDIGNATION, and TROUBLE, by SENDING EVIL ANGELS among them." Now WRATH indicates one plague INDIGNATION a second, TROUBLE a third, SENDING EVIL ANGELS a fourth; hence we may say that in Egypt they were smitten with plagues equal to forty, while at the Red Sea they were smitten with plagues equal to two hundred.
Rabbi Akiba said, Whence may we say that each plague that the Holy One, blessed be He, brought upon the Egyptians in Egypt was equal to five plagues? Because it is said, "He cast upon them the FIERCENESS OF HIS ANGER, . WRATH and INDIGNATION, and TROUBLE, by SENDING EVIL ANGELS." The FIERCENESS OF HIS ANGER is one, WRATH is a second, INDIGNATION is a third, TROUBLE is a fourth, SENDING EVIL ANGELS is a fifth. Hence we may say, that in Egypt they were smitten with plagues equal to fifty, while at the Red Sea they were smitten with plagues equal to two hundred and fifty.

Dayenu

How many are the benefits which God has conferred upon us?
If He had brought us from Egypt, and had not executed judgments upon the Egyptians: It would have sufficed for our gratitude.
If He had executed judgments upon the Egyptians, and had not then executed judgments upon their gods: It would have sufficed for our gratitude.
If He had executed judgments upon their gods, and had not slain their first-born: It would have sufficed for our gratitude.
If He had slain their first-born, and had not then given us their substance: It would have sufficed for our gratitude. 
If He had given us their substance, and had not then divided the Red Sea: It would have sufficed for our gratitude. 
If He had divided the Red Sea for us, and had not then made us to pass through its midst on dry land: It would have sufficed for our gratitude. 
If He had made us to pass through its midst on dry land, and had not sunk our adversaries in the midst thereof: It would have sufficed for our gratitude. 
If He had sunk our adversaries in the midst thereof, and had not provided for our needs in the desert for forty years: It would have sufficed for our gratitude.
If He had provided for our needs in the desert for forty years, and had not fed us with the manna: It would have sufficed for our gratitude. 
If He had fed us with the manna, and had not given us the blessing of the Sabbath: It would have sufficed for our gratitude. 
If He had given us the Sabbath, and had not brought us to Mount Sinai: It would have sufficed for our gratitude. 
If He had brought us to Mount Sinai, and had not given us the Law: It would have sufficed for our gratitude. 
If He had given us the Law, and had not brought us to the Land of Israel: It would have sufficed for our gratitude. 
If He had brought us to the Land of Israel, and had not built for us the House of His Choice (the Temple): It would have sufficed for our gratitude. 
How much, therefore, has the goodness of the Almighty been doubled and redoubled towards us ! For He brought us from Egypt; He executed judgments upon the Egyptians; He executed judgment upon their gods; He slew their first- born; He gave us their substance; He divided for us the Red Sea; He made us to pass through its midst on dry land; He sunk our adversaries in the midst thereof; He provided for our needs in the desert for forty years; He fed us with the manna; He gave us the blessing of the Sabbath; He brought us to Mount Sinai; He gave us the Law; He brought us to the Land of Israel; He built for us the Temple in which we atoned for our iniquities.

Rabban Gamliel's Three Things

Rabban Gamaliel said, "Whoever does not explain these three things on the Passover has not fulfilled his duty, and these are they: The Passover offering; the unleavened bread; the bitter herbs. 
What is the reason for the sacrifice of the Passover which our fathers partook of in the time of the Temple? Because the Holy One, blessed be He, passed over the houses of our ancestors in Egypt as it is said (Ex. xii. 27), " Ye shall say it is the sacrifice of the Lord's Passover, who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt when he smote the Egyptians, and delivered our houses. And the people bowed the head and worshipped."
<small><i>The celebrant now points to the Matzah.</i></small>
This unleavened bread:- Why is this eaten? Because the dough of our ancestors had not time to become leavened ere the Supreme King of kings, the Holy One, blessed be He, appeared to them and redeemed them, as it is said (Ex. xii. 39), " And they baked unleavened cakes of the dough which they brought forth from Egypt, for it was not leavened; because they were thrust out of Egypt, and could not tarry, neither had they prepared for themselves any victual"
<small><i>The bitter herbs are now pointed out.</i></small>
This bitter herb which we now eat:- What does it mean? It is eaten because the Egyptians embittered the lives of our forefathers in Egypt, as it is said (Ex. i. 14), " And they made their lives bitter with hard bondage, in mortar and in bricks, and in all manner of service in the field; all their service wherein they made them serve was with rigour." 
In every generation each one of us should regard himself as though he himself had gone forth from Egypt, as it is said (Ex. xiii. 8), "And thou shalt shew thy son in that day, saying, This is done because of that which the Lord did unto me when I came forth out of Egypt." Not our ancestors alone did God redeem then, but he did us redeem with them, as it is said (Deut. vi. 23), "And he brought us out from thence, that he might bring us in to give us the land which he sware unto our fathers."

First Half of Hallel

<small><i>Lift up the cup of wine and say:-</i></small>
Therefore we are in duty bound to thank, to praise, to glorify, to exalt, to honour, to bless, to extol, and to give reverence to Him who performed for us, as well as for our forefathers, all these wonders. He has brought us forth from bondage to freedom, from sorrow to joy, from mourning to festival, from darkness to bright light, and from slavery to redemption. Now, therefore, let us sing before Him a new song, Hallelujah!
Praise ye the lord. Praise, O ye servants of the Lord, praise the name of the Lord. Blessed be the e of the Lord from this time forth and for evermore. From the rising of the sun until the going down of the same Lord's name is to be praised. The Lord is high above all nations, and his glory above the heavens. Who is like unto the Lord our God, that hath his seat on high, that humbleth himself to behold the things that are in heaven and in the earth? He raiseth up the poor out of the dusk	and lifteth up the needy from the dunghill; that he may set them with princes, even with the princes of his people. He maketh the barren woman to keep house, and to be a joyful mother of children. Praise ye the Lord. 
When Israel went forth out of Egypt, the house of Jacob from a people of strange language; Judah became his sanctuary, Israel his dominion. The sea saw it and fled; Jordan was driven back. The mountains skipped like rams, the little hills like young sheep. What aileth thee, O thou sea, that thou fleest ? Thou Jordan, that thou turnest back ? Ye mountains, that ye skip like rams; ye little hills like young sheep? Tremble, thou earth, at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob; which turned the rock into a pool of water, the flint into a fountain of water.

Second Cup of Wine


Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the Universe, who didst redeem us and our ancestors from Egypt, and hast brought us even to this night to eat thereon unleaveued bread and bitter herbs. So, O Lord our God, and the God of our fathers, mayest thou enable us to attain to other feasts and sacred days in future, with gladness at the rebuilding of thy city and with joy in thy service, There (in Jerusalem rebuilt) may we partake, in thy favour, of the sacrifices and of the Passover offerings offered upon thine altar, when we will offer to thee a new song for our redemption and our salvation. Blessed art thou, O Lord, redeemer of Israel.
<small><i>Drink the second cup of wine.</i></small>
Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the Universe, Creator of the fruit of the vine.

Rachtzah

WASHING OF THE HANDS.
<small><i>On washing the hands before the meal the following is said:-</i></small>
Blessed art thou, O Lord, King of the Universe, who hast sanctified us with thy precepts, and commanded us concerning the washing of the hands.

Motzi Matzah

THE UNLEAVENED BREAD.
<small><i>The celebrant distributes to each one present a piece of the first and of the second Matzahs. These are eaten after the following blessing is said :-</i></small>
Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the Universe, who bringeth forth bread from the earth.
Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the Universe, who hast sanctified us with thy precepts, and commanded us to eat unleavened bread.

Maror

THE BITTER HERBS.
<small><i>The celebrant now distributes a piece of the horse-radish dipped into the haroseth, before partaking of which the following blessing is said :-</i></small>
Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast sanctified us with thy precepts and commanded us concerning the eating of the bitter herbs.

Korech

HILLEL'S CEREMONY.

This commemorates what Hillel did; for so did Hillel in the time when the Temple existed.
He used to take a piece of the Passover lamb, unleavened bread and bitter herbs and partake of them together, in order to fulfil literally what is said in the Torah," with unleavened bread and bitter herbs shall they eat it" (namely the Passover lamb).

Shulchan Orech



Tzafun

THE AFICOMAN,
<small><i>At the end of the evening meal, prior to the Grace after meals, the celebrant distributes to all present a piece of the Matzah set aside in the early part of the ceremony, after which nothing more is eaten.</i></small>

Barech

Birkat Hamazon

GRACE AFTER MEALS,

A Song of Degrees. When the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion, we were like unto them that dream. Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with exultation: then said they among the nations, The Lord hath done great things for them. The Lord hath done great things for us, whereof we are glad. Bring back our captivity, O Lord, as the streams in the south, They that sow in tears shall reap in joy. Though he goeth on his way weeping, bearing the store of seed: he shall come back with joy bearing his sheaves,
<small><i>The following Introduction is customary if three or more Males, above the age of thirteen, have eaten at table together : He who says Grace commences thus:-</i></small>
Let us say Grace.
<small><i>The others respond:-</i></small>
Blessed be the name of the Lord from this time forth and for ever.
<small><i>If there be present ten or more males above the age of thirteen, the words "our God" are added :- He who says Grace proceeds:-</i></small>
With the sanction of those present, We will bless him (our God) of whose bounty we have eaten.
<small><i> The others respond:</i></small>
Blessed be he (our God) of whose bounty we have eaten, and through whose goodness we live.
<small><i>He who says Grace replies:-</i></small>
Blessed be he (our God) of whose bounty we have eaten, and through whose goodness we live.
<small><i>He who says Grace replies:-</i></small>
Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who feedest the whole world with thy goodness, with grace, with lovingkindness and tender mercy; thou givest food to all flesh, for thy lovingkindness endureth for ever: and through thy great goodness food hath never failed us, neither will it fail us for ever and ever, for thy great name's sake, since thou nourishest and sustainest all beings, and doest good unto all, and providest food for all thy creatures whom thou hast created. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who givest food unto all.
We thank thee, O Lord our God, because thou didst give as an heritage unto our fathers a desirable, good and ample land, and because thou didst bring us forth, O Lord our God, from the land of Egypt, and didst deliver us from the house of bondage; as well for thy covenant which thou hast sealed in our flesh, thy Law which thou hast taught us, thy statutes which thou hast made known unto us, the life, grace and lovingkindness which thou hast vouchsafed unto us, and for the food wherewith thou dost constantly feed and sustain us on every day, in every season, at every hour.
For all this, O Lord our God, we thank and bless thee! Blessed be thy name by the mouth of all living continually and for ever, even as it is written, And thou shalt eat and be satisfied, and thou shalt bless the Lord thy God for the good land which he hath given thee. Blessed art thou, O Lord, for the land and for the food.
Have mercy, O Lord our God, upon Israel thy people, upon Jerusalem thy city, upon Zion the abiding place of thy glory, upon the kingdom of the house of David thine anointed, and upon the great and holy house that was called by thy name. O our God, our Father, feed us, nourish us, sustain, support and relieve us, and speedily, O Lord our God, grant us relief from all our troubles. We beseech thee, O Lord our God, let us not be in need either of the gifts of flesh and blood or of their loans, but only of thy helping hand, which is full, open, holy and ample, so that we may not be ashamed nor confounded for ever and ever.
<small><i>On Sabbath say:-</i></small>
Be pleased, O Lord our God, to fortify us by thy commandments, and especially by the commandment of the seventh day, this great and holy Sabbath, since this day is great and holy before thee, that we may rest and repose thereon in love in accordance with the precept of thy will. In thy favour, O Lord our God, grant us such repose that there be no trouble, grief or lamenting on the day of our rest. Let us, O Lord our God, behold the consolation of Zion thy city, and the rebuilding of Jerusalem thy holy city, for thou art the Lord of salvation and of consolation.
Our God and God of our fathers! May our remembrance rise and come and be accepted before thee, with the remembrance of our fathers, of Messiah the son of David thy servant, of Jerusalem thy holy city, and of all thy people the house of Israel, bringing deliverance and well-being, grace, loving-kindness and mercy, life and peace on this day of the Feast of Unleavened Bread. 
Remember us, O Lord our God, thereon for our wellbeing; be mindful of us for blessing, and save us unto life; by thy promise of salvation and mercy, spare us and be gracious unto us; have mercy upon us and save us, for our eyes are bent upon thee, because thou art a gracious and merciful God and King. 
And rebuild Jerusalem the holy city speedily in our days. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who in thy compassion rebuildest Jerusalem. Amen. 

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe; O God, our Father, our King, our Mighty One, our Creator, our Redeemer, our Maker, our Holy One, the Holy One of Jacob, our Shepherd, the Shepherd of Israel, O King, who art kind and dealest kindly with all, day by day thou hast dealt kindly, dost deal kindly, and wilt deal kindly with us: thou hast bestowed, thou dost bestow, thou wilt ever bestow benefits upon us, yielding us grace, loving-kindness, mercy and relief, deliverance and prosperity, blessing and salvation, consolation, sustenance and support, mercy, life, peace and all good; of no manner of good wilt thou let us be in want.
The All-merciful shall reign over us for ever and ever. The All-merciful shall be blessed in heaven and on earth. The All-merciful shall be praised throughout all generations, glorified amongst us to all eternity, and honoured amongst us for everlasting. May the All-merciful grant us an honourable livelihood. May the All-merciful break the yoke from off our neck, and lead us upright to our land. May the All-merciful send a plentiful blessing upon this house and upon this table at which we have eaten. May the All-merciful send us Elijah the prophet (let him be remembered for good), who shall give us good tidings, salvation and consolation. <small><i>The following has to be varied according to circumstances:-</i>May the All-merciful bless my honoured father, the master of this house, and my honoured mother, the mistress of this house, them, their household, their seed and all that is theirs, us also and all that is ours, as our fathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were blessed each with his own comprehensive blessing; even thus may he bless all of us together with a perfect blessing, and let us say, Amen. Both on their and on our behalf may there be such advocacy on high as shall lead to enduring peace ; and may we receive a blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of our salvation; and may we find grace and good understanding in the sight of God and man.<i>On Sabbath:-</i>May the All-merciful let us inherit the day which shall be wholly a Sabbath and rest in the life everlasting.</small>May the All-merciful let us inherit the day which is altogether good. He is a tower of salvation to his king; and showeth lovingkindness to his anointed, to David and to his seed, for evermore. He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel, and say ye, Amen. O fear the Lord, ye his holy ones; for there is no want to them that fear him. Young lions do lack and suffer hunger; but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his lovingkindness endureth for ever. Thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest every living thing with favour. Blessed is the man that trusteth in the Lord, and whose trust the Lord is. I have been young and now I am old; yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging for bread. The Lord will give strength to his people; the Lord will bless his people with peace.



Third Cup of Wine

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe; Creator of the fruit of the vine.
<small><i>Drink the third cup of wine.</i></small>

Pour Out Thy Wrath

<small><i>OPENING OF THE DOOR.</i></small>
"Pour out Thy wrath upon the nations who know thee not, and upon kingdoms which call not upon thy name. They have consumed Jacob, and they have desolated his dwelling. Pour out upon them thine indignation; let the fierceness of thy anger overtake them. Pursue them in anger, and destroy them from under the heavens of the Lord."

Hallel

Second Half of Hallel

HALLEL.
Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory, for thy mercy, and for thy truth's sake. Wherefore should the nations say, Where is now their God? But our God is in the heavens: he hath done whatsoever he pleased. Their idols are silver and gold, the work of men's hands. They have mouths, but they speak not; eyes have they, but they see not; they have ears, but they hear not; noses have they, but they smell not; they have hands, but they handle not; feet have they, but they walk not; neither speak they through their throat. They that make them shall be like unto them; yea, everyone that trusteth in them. O Israel, trust thou in the Lord: he is their help and their shield. O house of Aaron, trust ye in the Lord: he is their help and their shield. Ye that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord: he is their help and their shield. <br>
I love the Lord, because he hath heard my voice and my supplications. Because he hath inclined his ear unto me, therefore will I call upon him as long as I live. The cords of death compassed me, and the pains of Sheol gat hold upon me; I found trouble and sorrow. Then called I upon the name of the Lord; O Lord, I beseech thee, deliver my soul. Gracious is the Lord, and righteous; yea our God is merciful. The Lord preserveth the simple: I was brought low and he saved me. Return unto thy rest, O my soul ; For the Lord hath dealt bountifully with thee. For thou hast delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling. I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living. I believe, for I will speak: I was greatly afflicted: I said in my haste, All men are a lie. 
What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto the Lord, yea, in the presence of all his people. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints. O Lord, truly I am thy servant: I am thy servant, the son of thine handmaid ; thou hast loosed my bonds. I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will call upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto the Lord, yea, in the presence of all his people; in the courts of the Lord's house, in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem. Praise ye the Lord.
O praise the Lord, all ye nations: laud him all ye peoples. For his mercy is great toward us; and the truth of the Lord endureth for ever. Praise ye the Lord. <br>O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good: for his mercy endureth for ever. Let Israel now say: That his mercy endureth for ever. Let the house of Aaron now say: That his mercy endureth for ever. Let them now that fear the Lord say: That his mercy endureth for ever. 
Out of my distress I called upon the Lord: the Lord answered me and set me in a large place. The Lord is on my side; I will not fear: what can man do unto me ? The Lord is on my side among them that help me: therefore shall I see my desire upon them that hate me. It is better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in man. It is better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in princes. All nations compassed me about: in the name of the Lord I will cut them off. They compassed me about; yea they compassed me about: in the name of the Lord I will cut them off. They compassed me about like bees; they are quenched as the fire of thorns: in the name of the Lord I will cut them off. Thou didst thrust sore at me that I might fall: but the Lord helped me. The Lord is my strength and song; and he is become my salvation. The voice of rejoicing and salvation is in the tents of the righteous: the right hand of the Lord doeth valiantly. The right hand of the Lord is exalted: the right hand of the Lord doeth valiantly. I shall not die, but live, and declare the works of the Lord. The Lord hath chastened me sore: but he hath not given me over unto death. Open to me the gates of righteousness: I will enter into them, I will give thanks unto the Lord. This is the gate of the Lord; the righteous shall enter into it.
I will give thanks unto thee, for thou hast answered me, and art become my salvation. (Repeat this verse.) The stone which the builders rejected is become the head of the corner. (Repeat.) This is the Lord's doing; it is marvellous in our eyes. (Repeat.) This is the day which the Lord hath made; we will rejoice and be glad in it. (Repeat.)
Save now, we beseech thee, O Lord: save now, we beseech thee, O Lord: O Lord, we beseech thee, send now prosperity: O Lord, we beseech thee, send now prosperity. 
Blessed be he that cometh in the name of the Lord: we have blessed you out of the house of the Lord. (Repeat.) The Lord is God, and he hath given us light ; bind the sacrifice with cords, even unto the horns of the altar. (Repeat.) Thou art my God, and I will give thanks unto thee: thou art my God, I will exalt thee. (Repeat.) O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good: for his mercy endureth for ever. (Repeat.) 
Let men praise thee, O Lord, for all thy works. And let the righteous, who do thy will and all thy people the house of Israel, joyfuIly praise, bless, laud, glorify, exalt, reverence, declare holy and ascribe royalty to thy name, O our King. For to thee it is right to give thanks, and to thy name it is fitting to sing, for from everlasting unto everlasting thou art God. 

Songs of Praise and Thanks

O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good: For his mercy endureth for ever. O give thanks unto the God of gods: For his mercy endureth for ever. O give thanks unto the Lord of lords: For his mercy endureth for ever. To him who alone doeth great wonders: For his mercy endureth for ever. To him that by understanding made the heavens: For his mercy endureth for ever. To him that spread forth the earth above the waters: For his mercy endureth for ever. To him that made great lights: For his mercy endureth for ever. The sun to rule by day: For his mercy endureth for ever. The moon and stars to rule by night: For his mercy endureth for ever. To him that smote Egypt in their first-born: For his mercy endureth for ever. And brought out Israel from among them: For his mercy endureth for ever. With a strong hand, and with a stretched out arm: For his mercy endureth for ever. To him which divided the Red Sea in sunder: For his mercy endureth for ever. And made Israel to pass through the midst of it: For his mercy endureth for ever. But overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red Sea: For his mercy endureth for ever. To him which led his people through the wilderness: For his mercy endureth for ever. To him which smote great kings: For his mercy endureth for ever. And slew famous kings: For his mercy endureth for ever. Sihon king of the Amorites: For his mercy endureth for ever. And Og king of Bashan: For his mercy endureth for ever. And gave their land for an heritage: For his mercy endureth for ever. Even an heritage unto Israel his servant: For his mercy endureth for ever. He giveth food to all flesh: For his mercy endureth for ever. O give thanks unto the God of heaven: For his mercy endureth for ever.
The breath of every living being shall bless thy name, O Lord our God, and the spirit of all flesh shall continually glorify and exalt thy memorial, O our King; from everlasting to everlasting thou art God; and beside thee we have no King who redeemeth and saveth, setteth free and delivereth, who supporteth and hath mercy in all times of trouble and distress; yea, we have no King but thee. 
He is God of the first and of the last, the God of all creatures, the Lord of all generations, who is extolled with many praises, and guideth his world with lovingkindness and his creatures with tender mercies. The Lord slumbereth not, nor sleepeth ; he arouseth the sleepers and awakeneth the slumberers; he maketh the dumb to speak, looseth the bound, supporteth the falling, and raiseth up the bowed. 
To thee alone we give thanks.
Though our mouths were full of song as the sea, and our tongues of exultation as the multitude of its waves, and our lips of praise as the wide-extended firmament; though our eyes shone with light like the sun and the moon, and our hands were spread forth like the eagles of heaven, and our feet were swift as hinds, we should still be unable to thank thee and to bless thy name, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, for one thousandth or one ten thousandth part of the bounties which thou hast bestowed upon our fathers and upon us. Thou didst redeem us from Egypt, O Lord our God, and didst release us from the house of bondage; during famine thou didst feed us, and didst sustain us in plenty; from the sword thou didst rescue us, from pestilence thou didst save us, and from sore and lasting diseases thou didst deliver us.
Hitherto thy tender mercies have helped us, and thy lovingkindnesses have not left us: forsake us not, O Lord our God, for ever. Therefore the limbs which thou hast spread forth upon us, and the spirit and breath which thou hast breathed into our nostrils, and the tongue which thou hast set in our mouths, lo, they shall thank, bless, praise, glorify, extol, reverence, hallow, and assign kingship to thy name, O our King. For every mouth shall give thanks unto thee, and every tongue shall swear unto thee; every knee shall bow to thee, and whatsoever is lofty shall prostrate itself before thee; all hearts shall fear thee, and all the inward parts and reins shall sing unto thy name, according to the word that is written, All my bones shall say, Lord, who is like unto thee? Thou deliverest the poor from him that is too strong for him, the poor and the needy from him that robbeth him. Who is like unto thee, who is equal to thee, who can be compared unto thee, O God, great, mighty, and awful, most high God, Possessor of heaven and earth? We will praise. laud and glorify thee, and we will bless thy holy name, as it is said (A Psalm of David), Bless the Lord, O my soul; and all that is within me, bless his holy name. Thou art God in thy power and might, great in thy glorious name, mighty for ever and awful by thy awful acts, the King who sitteth upon a high and lofty throne. He who inhabiteth eternity, exalted and holy is his name; and it is written, Exult in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is seemly for the upright. 
By the mouth of the upright thou shalt be praised, by the words of the righteous thou shalt be blessed, by the tongues of the loving ones thou shalt be extolled, and in the midst of the holy thou shalt be hallowed. 

In the assemblies also of the tens of thousands of thy people, the house of Israel, thy name, O our King, shall be glorified with joyous cries in every generation; for such is the duty of all creatures in thy presence, O Lord our God, and God of our fathers, to thank, praise, laud, glorify, extol, honour, bless, exalt and adore thee, even beyond all the words of song and praise of David the son of Jesse, thy servant and anointed.
Praised be thy name for ever, O our King, the great and holy God and King, in heaven and on earth; for unto thee, O Lord our God, and God of our fathers, song and praise are becoming, hymn and psalm, strength and dominion, victory, greatness and might, renown and glory, holiness and sovereignty, blessings and thanksgivings from henceforth even for ever. Blessed art thou, O Lord, God and King, great in praises, God of thanksgivings, Lord of wonders, who makest choice of song and psalm, O King and God, who art the life of all worlds.

Fourth Cup of Wine

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the Universe, Creator of the fruit of the vine,
<small><i>On drinking the fourth cup of wine say:- On. Sabbath the words in brackets are added:- </i></small>
"Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the Universe, for the vine and for the fruit of the vine, for the produce of the field, and for the pleasant, goodly and great land in which thou didst delight, and which thou didst grant as the inheritance of our forefathers, who enjoyed its fruit, and were sated with its bounties. Be merciful, O Lord our God, to Israel, thy people; to Jerusalem, thy city; to Zion, thy holy habitation; to thine altar and to thy sanctuary. Oh, rebuild Jerusalem, thy holy city, speedily in our days. Conduct us thither, rejoicing in its restoration that we, also, may enjoy its fruit and be sated with its bounties. May we there be enabled to offer thee pure and sanctified blessing <small>(be pleased to grant us strength on this Sabbath day),<small> and grant us joy on this feast of Passover, for thou art good and beneficent to all. Then shall we render thee thanks for the land of Israel, and for the fruit of the vine. Blessed art thou, O Lord, for the land of Israel and for the fruit of the vine. </small></small>
Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the Universe, Creator of the fruit of the vine,

Nirtzah

Chasal Siddur Pesach


Now that we have offered the service of the Passover in accordance with all its prescribed ceremonies, we pray that we may be privileged to fulfil all the ordinances of the Passover in Israel restored. O God, who dwellest on high gather up the countless numbers of Israel; speedily lead us -"the branches of thy vine"- once more to Zion, rejoicing in redemption.

L'Shana HaBaa

During the coming year we hope to be in Jerusalem.

And It Happened at Midnight

<small><i>On the First Night the following is said :-</i></small>
"And it came to pass at midnight."
Oft hast thou wondrously performed many miracles: at night. At the beginning of the first watch of this very night.
Thou didst give victory to Abraham when he divided his band of rescuers in the night. 
Thou didst rebuke the king of Gerar in a dream at night. Thou didst cause Laban to tremble at night. 
Israel wrestled with the angel and prevailed in the night. 
The first-born of Egypt thou didst smite in the middle of the night. The Egyptians found not their strong ones when they arose that night. The army of Sisera thou didst overthrow, even the stars of night helping.
When scornful Sennacherib attacked thy city, thou didst slay his whole host in the night. Bel and his image were humbled in the darkness of the night. To Daniel was revealed a vision in the night. 
Belshazzar, drinking from the holy vessels, was smitten on that night. Daniel, rescued from the lions' den, interpreted the dread visions of night. Haman, in his enmity, wrote his instructions against the Jews at night. 
But thou didst conquer him by the King's sleep departing at night. Now do thou tread the winepress for the prosperity of them that ask, "What of the night?" Watchman of Israel! Cry thou and say, that morning will come for us, though now it be night. 
Hasten the day of redemption, of which it is said. "It shall be then neither day nor night." o Most High ! make known that to thee belongeth day and night. Appoint watchmen for Zion day and night. Shed the brightness of day where Israel sits in darkness as of night. 

Zevach Pesach

<small><i>On the Second Night the following is said:-</i></small> "Ye shall say, It is the sacrifice of the Passover."
 Thou didst manifest thy wondrous power on the Passover. First, of all festivals, didst thou prescribe the Passover. Thou didst reveal to Abraham the occurrences of the night of the Passover, 
Thou didst stand at his door at the heat of day on the Passover. He provided for the angels unleavened cakes on the Passover. And to the herd did he haste to slay a calf, forecast of the sacrifice of Passover.  
Sodom provoked God and was destroyed by fire on the Passover. Lot was delivered thence having baked unleavened bread on the Passover. Thou didst sweep the land of Egypt, when thou didst pass through it on the Passover.
Thou didst smite every first-born on the night of Passover, Thou didst pass over thine own first-born, whose doors were sprinkled with the blood of the Passover. So as not to suffer destruction to enter their doors on the Passover. 
Jericho was captured at the time of Passover,  Midian was destroyed by the cake of barley bread made from the Omer of the Passover. Assyria's destruction took place on the Passover. 
When Sennacherib said: "One day shall we halt at Nob" before the advent of the feast of Passover.  The handwriting on the wall foretold the destruction of Babylon on the Passover. "Set the watch; prepare the table," said the prophet concerning Babylon's destruction on the Passover. 
Esther assembled the congregation to hold three days fast on the Passover. Haman, head of his wicked house, thou didst cause to be hanged on the gallows fifty cubits high on the Passover. A double punishment wilt thou bring upon Israel's enemies on the Passover. Strengthen thy hand, exalt thy right hand, as on the night, when thou didst consecrate the festival of Passover.


Ki Lo Na'e

To Him praise has ever been, and ever will be due.
He is mighty in His dominion, He is truly the Supreme; troops of his angels are continually uttering to Him, "To thee, to thee indeed, surely to thee, to thee alone belongs sovereignty." To Him praise has ever been, and ever will be due. 
He is distinguished in His dominion, truly honoured is He, His ministering angels continually utter before Him, "To thee, to thee indeed, surely to thee, to thee alone belongs sovereignty." To Him praise has ever been, and ever will be due.
He is unsullied in his dominion, He is truly magnificent; His high angels continually utter before him, "To thee, to thee indeed, surely to thee, to thee alone belongs sovereignty." To Him praise has ever been, and ever will be due.
He is One in His dominion, He is truly omnipotent : His attendant angels continually utter before Him," To thee, to thee indeed, surely to thee, to thee alone belongs sovereignty." For to Him praise has ever been, and ever will be due.
He is a ruler in His dominion, He is truly revered; His accompanying angels continually utter before Him," To thee, to thee indeed, surely to thee, to thee alone belongs sovereignty." For to Him praise has ever been, and ever will be due. 
He is gentle in His dominion, He is truly our Redeemer; His righteous angels are continually uttering before Him, " To thee, to thee indeed, surely to thee, to thee alone belongs sovereignty." For to Him praise has ever been, and ever will be due.
He is holy in His dominion, He is truly merciful; His radiant angels continually utter before Him, "To thee, to thee indeed, surely to thee, to thee alone belongs sovereignty." For to Him praise has ever been, and ever will be due.
He is excellent in His dominion, truly is He our supporter; His perfect angels continually utter before Him, "To thee, to thee indeed, surely to thee, to thee alone belongs sovereignty." For to Him praise has ever been, and ever will be due. 

Adir Hu

O mighty God ! Rebuild thy house speedily. Speedily even in our days, rebuild it, O God! Rebuild thy temple speedily.
Elect, great and distinguished God, rebuild thy house speedily! Speedily, even in our days, rebuild it, O God! Rebuild thy temple speedily!
Honoured, all praised, pure and righteous God, rebuild thy house speedily! Speedily, even in our days, rebuild it, O God ! Rebuild thy temple speedily!
O one and holy God, rebuild thy house speedily! Speedily, even in our days, rebuild it, O God! Rebuild thy temple speedily!
O powerful, all wise king, rebuild thy house speedily! Speedily, even in our days, rebuild it, O God! Rebuild thy temple speedily!
O glorious, exalted and mighty God, rebuild thy house speedily! Speedily, even in our days, rebuild it, O God! Rebuild thy temple speedily!
O God, all righteous and holy redeemer, rebuild thy house speedily! Speedily, even in our days, rebuild it, O God! Rebuild thy temple speedily!
O merciful, everlasting, and omnipotent God, rebuild thy house speedily! Speedily, even in our days, rebuild it, O God! Rebuild thy temple speedily.

Sefirat HaOmer

<small><i>COUNTING OF THE OMER. On the second night of the festival the following is said:- </i></small>
"Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast sanctified us with thy precepts, and commanded us concerning the counting of the Omer. "This is the first day of the Omer.

Echad Mi Yodea

Who knows what is just ONE? I know of one. ONE is the God of the world. <br>Who knows what are just TWO? I know two. There were two tables of the Covenant. TWO tables of the Covenant; ONE GOD of the world. <br>Who knows what were just THREE? I know three. The three Patriarchs. THREE Patriarchs, TWO tables of the Covenant, ONE GOD of the world. <br> Who knows what were just FOUR? I know four. There were the four Mothers of Israel. FOUR Mothers of Israel, THREE Patriarchs, TWO tables of the Covenant, ONE GOD of the world. <br> Who knows what are just FIVE? I know five. There are five Books of Moses. FIVE Books of Moses, FOUR Mothers of Israel, THREE Patriarchs, TWO tables of the Covenant, ONE GOD of the world. <br> Who knows what are just SIX? I know six. There are six Books of the Mishnah. SIX Books of the Mishnah, FIVE Books of Moses, FOUR Mothers of Israel, THREE Patriarchs, TWO tables of the Covenant, ONE GOD of the world. <br> Who knows what are just SEVEN? I know seven. There are seven days of the week. SEVEN days of the week, SIX books of the Mishnah, FIVE Books of Moses, FOUR Mothers of Israel, THREE Patriarchs, TWO tables of the Covenant, ONE GOD of the world. <br> Who knows what are just EIGHT? I know eight. There are the eight days of initiation. EIGHT days of initiation, SEVEN days of the week, SIX Books of the Mishnah, FIVE Books of Moses, FOUR Mothers of Israel, THREE Patriarchs, TWO tables of the Covenant, ONE GOD of the world. <br> Who knows what are just NINE? I know nine. There are nine Jewish Feasts. NINE Jewish Feasts, EIGHT days of initiation, SEVEN days of the week, SIX Books of the Mishnah, FIVE Books of Moses, FOUR Mothers of Israel, THREE Patriarchs, TWO tables of the Covenant, ONE GOD of the world. <br> Who knows what are just TEN? I know ten. There are the ten commandments. TEN Commandments, NINE Jewish Feasts, EIGHT days of initiation, SEVEN days of the week, SIX Books of the Mishnah, FIVE Books of Moses, FOUR Mothers of Israel, THREE Patriarchs, TWO tables of the Covenant, ONE GOD of the world. <br> Who knows what were just ELEVEN? I know eleven. There were the eleven stars (in Joseph's dream). ELEVEN stars (in Joseph's dream), TEN Commandments, NINE Jewish Feasts, EIGHT days of initiation, SEVEN days of the week, SIX Books of the Mishnah, FIVE Books of Moses, FOUR Mothers of Israel, THREE Patriarchs, TWO tables of the Covenant, ONE GOD of the world. <br> Who knows what were just TWELVE? I know twelve. There were the twelve tribes of Israel. The TWELVE tribes of Israel, ELEVEN stars (in Joseph's dream), TEN Commandments, NINE Jewish Feasts, EIGHT days of initiation, SEVEN days of the week, SIX Books of the Mishnah, FIVE Books of Moses, FOUR Mothers of Israel, THREE Patriarchs, TWO tables of the Covenant, ONE GOD of the world. <br>  Who knows what are just THIRTEEN? I know thirteen. There are thirteen attributes of God. THIRTEEN attributes of God, the TWELVE tribes of Israel, ELEVEN stars (in Joseph's dream), TEN Commandments, NINE Jewish Feasts, EIGHT days of initiation, SEVEN days of the week, SIX Books of the Mishnah, FIVE Books of Moses, FOUR Mothers of Israel, THREE Patriarchs, TWO tables of the Covenant, ONE GOD of the world.

Chad Gadya

One only kid, one only kid, which my father bought for two zuzim. One only kid, one only kid.
The cat came and ate the kid which my father bought for two zuzim, One only kid, one only Kid.
Then came the dog, and bit the cat that ate the kid which my father bought for two zuzim. One only kid, one only kid.
Then came the stick, and beat the dog that bit the cat that ate the kid which my father bought for two zuzim. One only kid, one only kid.
Then came the fire, and burned the stick that beat the dog that bit the cat that ate the kid which my father bought for two zuzim, One only kid, one only kid.
Then came the water, and quenched the fire that burned the stick that beat the dog that bit the cat that ate the kid which my father bought for two zuzim. One only kid, one only kid.
Then came the ox, and drank the water that quenched the fire that burned the stick that beat the dog that bit the cat that ate the kid which my father bought for two zuzim. One only kid, one only kid.
Then came the slaughterer, and killed the ox that drank the water that quenched the fire that burned the stick that beat the dog that bit the cat that ate the kid which my father bought for two zuzim. One only kid, one only kid.
Then came the angel of death, and slew the slaughterer that killed the ox that drank the water that quenched the fire that burned the stick that beat the dog that bit the cat that ate the kid which my father bought for two zuzim. One only kid, one only kid.  .
Then came the Most Holy, and destroyed the angel of death that slew the slaughterer that killed the ox that drank the water that quenched the fire that burned the stick that beat the dog that bit the cat that ate the kid which my father bought for two zuzim. One only kid, one only kid.