Pesach Haggadah
הגדה של פסח
Luncz, 1901


Pesach Haggadah

Kadesh

<small><i>Fill the first cup with wine.</i></small>
Sanctification for the Passover.
<small><i>(If the Feast happens on the Sabbath begin here).</i></small>
The sixth day, and the heavens and the earth were finished and all their host. And en the seventh day God ended his work which he had made , and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made. And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it, because he thereon rested from all his work, which God creased and made. 

Blessed art thou, 0 Lord, our God! King of the universe, who created the fruit of the wine.
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, our God ! Sovereign of the universe, who hath chosen us from among all people, and exalted us abave all languages, and sanctified us with his commandments ; and with love hast thou given us. O Lord our God <small><i>on the Sabbaths say,</i> Sabbaths for rest,</small> and] solemn days for joy festivals and seasons for gladness: <small><i>[on the sabbath say,</i> the Sabbath day and]</small> this day of the Feast of Unleavened Cakes <small>[and this goddly day of holy convocation],</small> the season of our freedom; on holy convocation, in love, a memorial of the departure from Egypt; for thou hast chosed and sanctified us above all people; and thy <small>[Sabbath and]</small> holy festivals hast thou caused us to inherit with [love and favour] jou and gladness. Blessed art thou, O Lord! who sanctifieth [the Sabbath and] Israel and the seasons. 
Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God ! King of the universe, who hath preserved us alive ; sustained us, and brought us to enjoy this season.
<small><i>(If the Feast happens at the conclusion of the Sabbath, the following is said):</i></small>
Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God ! King of the universe, creator of the radiance of the fire. Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God! King of the universe; who hath made a distinction between holy and not holy, between light and darkness, between Israel and the other nations, between the seventh day and the six working days Thou didst also discriminate between the sanctity of the sabbath-day, and the sanctity of other holy-days ; and consecratest the sabbath-day in preference to the six working days ; thou also separatest thy people Israel, and didst sanctity them with thy holiness.
Blessed art thou O Eternal! who maketh a distinction between holy and not holy.
Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God ! King of the universe, who hath preserved us alive ; sustained us, and brought us to enjoy the season.
<small><i>Then drink the wine of the Sanctification leaning on the felt side.</i></small>

Urchatz

Washing the hands. 
<small><i>After which wash your hands, but do not say the Blessing.</i></small>

Karpas

Taking the parsley, &amp;e. 
<small><i>The master of the house then takes some parsley or chervil, and dips it into vinegar, or salt-water, and having distributeds ome  to every one at the table, they all say the following grade before they eat it.</i></small>
Blessed art thou. O Lord, our God! King of the universe, Creator of the fruit of the earth.

Yachatz

Breaking the middle Cake. 
<small><i>The master of the house then breaks the middle cake in the dish, and leaving one half of it : there, he lays the other half away, till after supper, for the אפיקומן</i></small>

Magid

Ha Lachma Anya

The Service for the Passover.
<small><i>Then he takes the bone of the lamb, and the egg off the dish, and all at table lay hold of the dish,and say:</i></small>
Lo! this is as the bread of affliction, which our ancestors ate in the land of Egypt, let all those who are hungry, enter and eat thereof; and all who are necessitous, come, and celebrate the passover ! At present we celebrate it here, but the next year we hope to celebrate it in the land of Israel. This year we are servants here, but the next year we hope to be freemen in the land of Israel . 

Four Questions

<small><i>Then fill the cup with wine the second time, and take the dish from the table; 
then the youngest in the company asks :</i></small> 

Wherefore is this night distinguished from all other nights? On all the other nights we may eat either leavened, or unleavened bread, but on this night only unleavened bread; on all the other nights we may eat any specie of herbs, but on this night only bitter herbs; on all the other nights we do not dip even once, but on this night twice; on all the other nigts we eat and drink, either sitting or leaning, but on this night we all lean. 


We Were Slaves in Egypt

<small><i>Now put the dish again on the table, and the whole company answer :</i></small>
Because we were slaves unto Pharaoh in Egypt, and the Eternel, our God! brought us forth from thence, with a mighty hand, and an outsretched  arm : and if the most Holy, blessed be He hath not brought forth our ancestors from Egypt, we, and our children, and our children's children, had still continued in bondage to the Pharaoh's in Egypt; therefore, although we were all wise, all of us, men of understanding and exprience, all of us having knowledge in the law, it, nevertheless, is incumbent upon us to discourse of the departure from Egypt; and all those who largely discourse of the departure from Egypt, are accounted praiseworthy.

Story of the Five Rabbis

And thus is related of Rabbi Eleazar, Rabbi Joshua Rabbi Elazar, the son of Azariah, Rabbi Akeeba, and Rabbi Tarphon, that they once met (on the night of Passover) in ברק and continued discoursing of the departure from Egypt, all that night, till their disciples came, and said: ,,instructors, it is time to read the morning :שמע,,
Rabbi Elazar, the son of Azariah, said, ,,verily, I am as a man of seventy years of age, and have hitherto not been able to prove, that the narration of the departure from Egypt, ought to be related at night, till expounded by the son of Zoma ; after this manner it is said, that thou mayest remember the day of thy going forth from the land ot Egypt, All the days of thy life." From whence he observed, that the expersion of, the days of the life, signifie the days only; but All the days of thy life, denotes the nights also, But the sages say, the days of thy life, denotes this life only; but All the days of the life. denotes even at the time of Messiah.

The Four Sons

Blessed be the Omnipresent; blessed is he who hath given the law to his people Israel; belssed be he ! whose law speaketh distinctly of four childern. of different disposition, viz., the wise, the wicked, the simple, and he who hath not capacity to inpuir.
The wise son thus expresses himself: what mean those testimonies, statutes, and judgments, which the Lord our God hath commanded us? Then shalt thou instruct him in all the laws of the Passover; also, that we must not have a dessert brought to table after tho paschal lamb.
The wicked son expresse himself thus: what mean You by this service? By the expression You, it is clear, he does not include himself; and as he hath withdrawn himself from the collective body of the nation, it is proper, that thou retort on him ; and therefore answer him thus: This is done because of that, which the Eternal did for Me, when I went from Egypt: i.e. for Me, but not for him; for had he been there, he would not have been thought worthy to be redeemed.
The simple son artessly observes, what s this? Then shalt thou answer him; for with a strong hand the Eternal brought us out of Egypt from the house of bondage.
But as for him, who hath not capacity to inquire, thou must begin to discourse as is it said, and thou shalt show thy son on that day, saying, this is done because of that which the Eterinal did for me, when I went forth from Egypt.

Yechol Me'rosh Chodesh

Possibly you may think that (the father) is bound to explain this from the first day of the month Nissan; therefore it is said on that day yet, as it says, on that day, it might be inferred that it must be whilst it is day, but as it is said, this is done because of that &amp; c., from which it is to be inferred at no other time but when the unleavened cake, and bitter herbs, are placed before thee.

In the Beginning Our Fathers Were Idol Worshipers

Our ancestores were anciently idolaters, but at present the Lord hath brougt us near to his service : as it is said, and Joshua said unto all the people, thus, saith the Etrenal the God of Israel, you ancestors dwelt on the other side of the river (Euphrates) in old time, even Terah, the father of Abraham, and the father of Nachor and served other Gods. 
And I took your father Adraham from the other side of the river, and let him throghout all the land of Canaan and multiplied his seed, and gave him Isaac; and I gave unto Isaac, Jacob and Esau; and I gave unto Esau mont Seir for his possesion ; but Jacob and his children went down into Egypt. 
Blessed be he, who strictly preserveth his promise unto Israel - blessed be the Most Holy, who premeditated the end of the capacity, that he might perform what he had promised to our father Abraham, between the parts; as is said, and he said unto Abraham, know for certain, that thy seed shall de strangers in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve them, and they shall afflict them four hundred years. And also that nation whom they shall serve, will I judge: and they shall afterwards go forth with great substance. 
<small><i>Lift up the cup of wine, and say: </i></small>
And it is this same promise which hath been the support of our ancestors, and of us also: for not one only hath risen up against us, but in every generation there are some who rise up against us, to annihilate us but the Most Holy, blessed be he, hath delivered us out of their hand.

First Fruits Declaration


Search, and enpuire what Laban, the Syrian, intended to do to our father Jacob ; for Pharaoh decreed the destruction of the males only, but Laban intended to root out the whole, as is said: a Syrian had nearly caused my father to perish and he went down into Egypt, and sojourned there with few persons, and there became a great, mighty and populous nation. 
And he went down into Egypt, compelled there to : by the word, of God, and sojourned there: by which we are taugat that he did not go down to settle there : but only to sojourn as is said: and they (Joseph's Brethren) said unto Pharaoh, to sojourn in the land are we come ; for thy servants have no pasture for their flocks; for the famine is sore in the land of Canaan; now, therefore, we pray thee, let the servants dwell in the land of Goshen. 

With a few persons; as it is said: with threescore and ten souls thy ancestors went down into Egypt; and now the Eternal, thy God, hath made thee as the stars of heaven for multitude. 
And he there decame a nation; by which we are informed that the children of Israel were distinguished, even in Egypt, as a peculiar nation. Great and mighty; as it is said: and the children of Israel were fruitful, and increased abundantly, and multiplied, and waxed exceeding mighty, and the land was filled with them.
And populous; as it is said : I have caused thee to multiply as the vegetation ef the field, and thou becamest considerable and great, and adorned with many beauties; thy breasts are fashioned, and thine hair grown, yet thou art naked bare. 
And the Egyptians ill-treated us: afflicted us, and laid heavy bondage upon us; and the Egyptians ill-treated us; as it said: come on, let us deal wisely with tnem; least the multiply, and it come to pass, if it chance to be a war, they might also go over to our enemies, fight against us, and so get them up out of the land. 
And they afflicted us, as it said : and they set over them task-masters to afflict them with their burdens, and they built for Pharaoh store cities, even Pithom and Raamses,
and they laid heavy bondage upon us; as it said : and the Egyptians made the children of Israel to serve with rigour. 

And we cried unto the Eternal, the God of our ancestors; the Eternal heard our voice, and observed our affliction, our labor, and our oppression.
And we cried unto the Eternal, the God of our ancestors, as it is said : and it came to pass in process of time, that the king of Egypt died, and the children of Israel, sighed by reason of bondage , and they cried, and their cry ascended up unto God, by reason of the bondage. 
And the Eternal heard our voice, as it is said: and God heard their groaning, and remembered his covenant with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.
And he saw our affliction: this denotes their being denied the company ol their wives, to prevent propagation; as it is said: and God looked upon the children of Israel, and God hath knowledge of their affliction.
And our grievouseness; this denotes the destruction of the male children; as it is said; every son that is born, ye shall cast into the river, but every daughter ye shall save alive
 

And our opprossion : this denotes fatigee: as is said: and I have also seen the oppression with which the Egyptians harras them.
And the Eternal brought us forth from Egypt, with a stron g hand with an outstretched arm; with terror and with signs of wonders.
And the Eternal brought us from Egypt, not by means of an angle, nor by means of seraph, nor by means of a messenger. but the Most Holy, blessed be he himself in his, glory; as is said: aud I will pass through the land of Egypt, this night and I will smite all the first-born in the land of Egypt, both of man and beast , and on all the gods of Egypt will I execute judgment; I am the Eternal.
And I will pass throuh the land of Egypt, I Myself and not an angle; and I will smite all the firstborn ; J Myself, and no seraph: and on all the gods of Egypt will I execute judgement. Myself, and not a messenger ; I am the Eternal I am he, and no other. 
With a strong hand, this denotes the murrain ; as is said: Behold, the hand of the Eternal will be upon thy cattle which is in the field, upon thy horses, upon the asses, upon the camels, upon the oxen, and upon the sheep; a very grievous murrain. 
And with an outstretehed arm ; this denotes the sword, as is said eleswhere on such an occasion, and a drawn sword, in his hand stretched out over Jerusalem. 
And with great terrores; this denotes the appearance of the Divine Presences; as is said: or hath God assayed to go and take unto him a nation from the midst of another nation, by proofs, sings, and wonders  by war, and a mighty hand ; by an outstretched arm, and great terrors, according to all that the Eternal, your God, did for you in Egypt, before your eyes?
And with prodigies; this denotes the miracles perfomed with the rod ; as is said: and thou shalt take this rod in thy hand wherewith thou shalt do the prodigies . 
And with wonders; this denotes the plague of blood, as it said: and I will show wonders in the heavens, and in the earth, blood and fire and ascending pillars of smoke. 

The Ten Plagues

<small><i>(Dip the Finger in tae Cup and Springle a Drop out of it, on saying Blood, &amp;e).</i></small>


It may also be explaned thus, with a strong hand, denotes two qlagues With an outstretched arm; two plagues. With great terror. two Plagues. With prodigies ; two plagues, and with wonders ; two plagues
There are the ten plagues, which the Most Holy, blessed be he, brought on the Egyptianins Egypt, viz. 
<small><i>[Dip the Finger in the Cup, and Sprinkle a Drop out of it, on Mentioning every one of the Ten Plagues].</i></small>
Blood,
Frogs,
Vermin,
Murrain,
a Mixture of Noxiout beasts,
Boils,
Hail,
Locusts,
Darkness,
and Slaying the First-born
Rabbi Judah formed the initials to serve for an index, thus דצ"ך עד"ש באח"ב 
Rabbi Jose, the Galilan, saith, from whence art thou authorized to assert, that the Egyptians wers afflicted with ten plagues in Egypt; and upon the sea thy were smitten with fitty plagues ? To which he answeres : In Egypt, it says: and the magicians said unto Pharaoh, this is the finger of God ; but at the sea, it says: and Israel saw the mighety hand wherewith the Lord smote the Egyptians, and the people feared the Lord and believed in the Lord, and his servant Moses . (Rabbi Jose argues thus) if by the finger only they were smitten with ten plauges, hence, it is deducible that in Egypt they were smitten with ten plagues; and at the sea they were smitten with fifty plagues. 
Rabbi Elieser said: from whence can it be proved, that every plague, which the Most Holy, blessed be he, brought upon the Egyptians in Egypt, consisted of four different plagues ? Answer. From what is said: He sent forth against them, the fierceness of his anger, wrath, indignation, and trouble. Also by sending evil angels among them. Now wrath is one, indignation two, trouble three, and sending evil angels four. Hence, it is deducible, that in Egypt they were afflicted with forty plagues, and at the sea, they were smitten with two hundred plagues. 
Rsbbi Akeeba said from whence can it be proved, that every plague, which the Most Holy, blessed be he, brought uopn the Fgyptians in Egypt, consisted of five plagues? — Answer, From what is said ; He sent forth against them the fierceness of his anger, wrath, indignation and trouble; also, by sendig evil angels among them. Mow, the fierceness of his anger is one, wrath two, indignation three, trouble four, and sending evil angels five. Hence it is deducible, that in Egypt they were smitten with fifty plagues; and at the sea, they were smitten with two hundred and fifty plagues. 

Dayenu

What abundant favors hath the Omnipresent conferre on us! 
For if he had but brought us forth from Egypt, and had not inflicted justice upon the Egyptians, it would have sufficient. 
If he had inflicted justice upon them, and had not executed judgment upon their gods, it would have been sufficient. 
If he had executed judgment upon their gods and had not slain their first-born, it would have been sufficient. 
If he had slain their first-born, and hath not bestowed their wealth on us, it would have been sufficient. 
If he had given us their wealth, and had not divided the sea for us, it would have been sufficient. 
If he had divided the sea for us, and hat not caused us to pass through on dry land, it would have been sufficient. 
If he had caused us to pass through on dry land, and had not plunged our oppressors in the midst thereof, it would have been sufficient. 
If he had plunged our oppressors in the midst thereof, and had not supplied us with necesaries in the wilderness forty years, it would have been sufficient. 
If he had supplied us with necesaries in the wilderness forty years, and had not fed us with manna it would have been sufficient.
If he had fed us with manna, and had not given us the Sabbath, it would have been sufficient. 
If he had given us the Sabbath, and had not brought us near to Mount Sinai, it would have been sufficient.
If he had brought us near to Mount Sinai, and had not given us his law, it would have been sufficient. 
If he had given us his law, and had not brought us to the land of Israel, it would have been sufficient.
If he had brought us to the land of Israel, and had not build the temple, it would have been sufficient.
How much then are we indebted for the manifold favors the Omnipresent conferred on us? He brought us forth from Egypt, executet judgmet on the Egyptians, and on their god : slew their firstborn : gave us their wealth : divided the sea for us : caused us to pass through on dry land: plunged our oppressors in the midst thereof: supplied us with necessaries in the wilderness forty years : gave us manna to eat: gave us the Sabbath : brought us near to Mount Sinai: gave us the law : brougth us into the land of Israel: and build the chosen holy temple for us, to make atonement for all our sins.

Rabban Gamliel's Three Things

Rabban Gamliel saith, that whatsoever doth not make mention of the three things used on the Passover, hath not done his duty, and these are they: the pashal lamb, the unleavened cake , and bitter herb.
The pashal lamb, which our ancestors ate durig the existence of the holy temple, what did it denote ? It denoted that the Most Holy, blessed be he! passed over our father's houses in Egypt; as is said : and ye shall say, it is the Lord's Passover :because he passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians, and delivered our houses. And the people bowed their heads and worshipped. 
<small><i>Then take hold of the cake in the dish and show it to the company as a memorial of our freedom, and say:</i></small>
These unleavened cakes, wherefore do we eat them? Because there was not sufficient time for the dough of our ancestors to leaven before the Holy Supreme King of kings, blessed is he ! appeared unto them as is said: and they baked unleavened cakes of the dough which they brought forth out of Egypt : for it was not leavened, because they were trust out of Egypt, and could not tarry, neither hath they made any provision  for themselves.
<small><i>Then take hold of the lettuce (or green top of horse-radish) and show it to the company as a memorial of our servitude, and say:</i></small>
This bitter herb, wherefore do we eat it ? Because the Egyptians embittered the lives of our ancestors in Egypt ; as it said : and they embittered their lives with cruel bondage, in mortar and brick, and in all manner of labor in the field : all their labor was imposed unto them with rigour.
It thereto is incumbent on every Israelite, in every generation, to look upon himself, as if he had actuelly gone forth from Egypt: as is said: and thou shalt declare unto thy son, in that day, saying, this is done because of that, which the Eternal did for me, when I came forth from Egypt. It was not our ancestors, only that the Most Holy, blessed be he! redemed from Egypt, but us also did he redeem with them; as is said: and he brught us from thence, that he might bring us in, to give us the land which he swore unto our fathers.

First Half of Hallel

<small><i>Then take the cup or glass of wine in the hand, and say:</i></small>
We therefore are in duty bound to thank, praise, adore, glorify, extol, honor, bless, exalt, and reverence Him, who wrought all these miracles for our ansestors and us: for he brought us forth from bondage to freedom; from sorrow to joy; from mourning to holy day; from darkness to  great light; and from servitude to redemption, and therefore let us chant unto him a new song, Hallelujah.
Praise ye the Lord! Praise, O yeh servants of the Lord, praise the name of the Lord! Blessed be the name of the Lord, from henceforth and for evermore. From the rising of the sun, until the going down thereof, shall the Lord's name be praised. High above all nations is the Lord, His glory is above all the heavens, Who is like unto the Lord our God, who dwelleth on high? Who condescendeth to view the things transacted in heaven, and on earth. He raiseth the poor from the dust, and exalted the needy from the dunghill, that He may set them with princes, even with the princes of His people. He enlivens the house of the childless woman ; that she becomes a joyful mother of children Hallelujah.
When Israel went forth from Egypt, and the house of Jakob from a barberous people Judah became his sanctuary, and Israel his dominion. The ocean beheld it, and fled; Jordan retreated; mountains skipped like rams, and the hills like lambs. What ailed thee, O Ocean that thou didst flee? Thou, O Jordan, that thou didst retreat? Ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams and ye hills like lambs ? It was from the presence of the Lord ! Quake thou earth from the presenee the God of Jakob ; who turned the rock into a pool of water, the flint stone into a fountain of water.

Second Cup of Wine


Blessed art thou, O Eternal, our God! Sovereign of the Universe! who hast redemed us, and our ancestors, from Egypt; and caused us to attain the enjoyment of this night to eat thereon unleavend cakes and bitter herbes: O Eternal, our God ! and the God of our ancestors, mayest thou thus cause us to attain other solemn festivals and seasons, which approach us: that they may rejoice in the building of the city, and exult in thy service: and that we may there eat of the sacrifices, and pashal lambs, whose blood shall be sprinkled on the sides of thine altar, that they may be acceptable; then will we give thanks unto thee with a new song for our deliverance and redemption. 

Blessed art thou, O Eternal ! who redemeth Israel. Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God ! King of the Universe Creator of the fruit of the vine.

Rachtzah

Washing the Hande.
<small><i>Wash your hands, and say:</i></small> 
Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God ! King of the Universe, who hast sanctified us with thy commandments, and commanded us to wash the hands.

Motzi Matzah

Saying Grace and Breaking the Cake 
<small><i>The master of the house then takes two whole cakes and the broken one in his hand to gether, and breaks the upper cake ; but he must not eat thereof, till he breaks a piece of the broken one, and says the following blessings, and gives a piece of each and every one at the table, who will say the same blessings, and then eat both pieces together.</i></small>
Blessed art thou, O Eternal, our God ! King of the Universe, who bringeth forth bread from the earth
Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God! King of the Universe, who hath sanctified us with thy commandments, and commanded us to eat unleavened cakes. 

Maror

The Eating of the Bitter Herbs. 
<small><i>The master cf the house then takes some bitter herbs, dips it into theחרוסת  and says :</i></small>
Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God ! King of the universe, who hast sanctified us with thy commandments, and commanded us to eat bitter herbs. 

Korech

Eating the Horse-Radish. 
<small><i>The master of the house ten breakes the under-most cake: takes a piece of it, with tome bitter, herbs of a different kind to the first, dats them together, and says the following, in commemoration of what Hillel did.</i></small> 
Thus did Hillel during the time the holy Tempel stood:
he took the unleavened cake and bitter herb, and ate them together, that he might perform what is said, with unleavened cake and bitter herbs shall they eat it.

Shulchan Orech


Bringing the Meat &amp;c.

Tzafun


<small><i>After supper, the master of the house takes the half of the middle cake, which he laid by, and gives every one a piece of it. Then fill the cups with wine, and say the grace which is said after meat.</i><small></small></small>

Barech

Birkat Hamazon

<small><i>Form of the Grace after Meats</i></small>


<small><i>It is the custom that he who says the grace, says :</i></small>
„gentlemen, we will say the grace, “
<small>and they answer:</small>
Blessed be the name of the Eternal from henceforth and evermore.
<small><i>If the company be ten or more, than he who say the grace, says:</i></small>
We will bless our God of whose bounty we have been satisfied.
<small><i>The others answer:</i></small>
Blessed be our God, of whose bounty we have been satisfied and through whose goodness we live.

Blessed be our God, of whose bounty we have been satisfied and through whose goodness we live.

Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God, King of the Universe, who feedeth the whole world with his goodness, and with grace, kindnes, and mercy, giveth food to every creature: for his mercy endureth for ever. And ashis abundant goodness has never been deficient towards us so may we never be in want of substance for ever and ever; for the sake of his great name, for he is the God who feedeth and sustaineth all, and dealeth beneficiently with all; provideth food for all the creatures that he hath created.
 Blessed art thou O lord! who giveth food unto all.

We will give thanks unto the, O Lord, our God! for having caused our ancestors to inherit that desirable, good and ample land; and because thou hast brought us forth from the land of Egypt and redeemed us from the house of bondage; and for thy covenand  which thou hast sealed in our flesh; for the law which thou hast taught us, and for thy statutes which thou hast made known unto us; and for the life, kindness, and mercy, which thou hast graciously bestowed upon us, and for the food wherewith thou dost feed and sustain us, continually; every day and hour.
And for all these things, O Lord, our God! will we give thanks unto thee, and praise thee; blessed be thy name continually, in the mouth of every living create for ever and ever; as it is written, when thou hast eaten, and art satisfied, than shalt thou bless the Lord, the God! for the good land which he hath given thee. Blessed art thou, o Lord! for the gift of the land; and for the food.
O Lord, our God! we beseech thee, have compassion on thy people Israel, om Jerusalem, the city, on Zion, the residence of thy glory, and upon the Kingdom of the house of David, thine anointed; and on the great and holy house which is called by the name. Thou art our God, Father pastor, and Feeder; our Maintainer, Supporter, and Enlarger. Enlarge us speedily from all our troubles; and suffer us not, O Lord our God! to stand in need of the gifts of mankind, nor their loan; but let us depend on thy full, open, and extensive hand; so that we may not be put to shame, nor even be confounded.
<small><i>On the Shabbath say:</i></small>
Be pleased, O Lord, our God! to grant us rest in thy commandments, and in the commandments of the seventh day, even this great and holy Sabbath ; for this day is great and holy in thy presence, thereon to rest, and be at case, in love according to the precept of the will; and in thy good will; suffer no trouble, sorrow, or affliction, to affect us on our day of rest; and show us, O Lord, our God! the consolation of Zion, thy city, and the structure of Jerusalem, thy holy city; for thou art the Lord of salvation, and the Lord of consolatsions.
Our God, and the God of our fathers, shall cause our prayers to ascend, and come, approach, be seen, accepted, heard, and be thought on; and be remembered in rememberance of us, and in rememberance of our fathers in rememberance of thine Messiah, the son of David, thy servant, and in rememberance, thy holy city, and in commemoration of all thy people, the house of Israel, before thee, to a good issue with favor, with grace, and mercy, to life and peace, on this Day of the Feast of Unleavened Bread. O Lord, our God! remember us thereon for good: visit us with a blessing: and save us to enjoy life: and with the word of salvation and mercy, have compassion, and be gracious unto us. O have mercy upon us, and save us, for our eyes are continually towards thee: for thou, O God! art a merciful and gracious King. O rebuild Jerusalem, the holy city, speedily in our days. Blessed art thou, O Lord! who in his mercy buildeth Jerusalem. Amen.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God! King Strength, Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier the Sanctifier of Jacob, our Pastor, the Shepherd of Israel; the beneficent King, who dealeth beneficiently with all; for he hath been, is, and ever wil be daily beneficent towards us. He hath dealt bountifully with us, as he doth now, and will: granting us grace, favor, mercy. enlargement, deliverance prosperity, blessing, salvation, consolation, maintenance, and substance: and may we never want mercy, and a peacable, life, with every good. May he, who is most, merciful, reign over us, for ever and ever. May he, who is most merciful be praised in heaven on earth. May he, who is most merciful, be adored throughout all generation :be eternaly glorified amidst us ; and be honored amongst, us to all eternity. May he, who is most merciful, maintain us with honor. May he, who is most merciful, break the yoke of our capivity from of our neck, and lead us securely to our land. May he, who is most merciful, send us abundant blessings in this house, and on this table, on which we have eaten. May he, who is most merciful, send us Elijah , the propet, of blessed memory, to bring us the good tidings of salvation and conoslation. May he, who is most merciful, bless my honored father, the master of this house, and my honored mother, the mistress thereof: their house, children, and all belonging to them ; us and all belonging to us; as our ancestors Abraham Isaac and Jacob were blessed, with all and every good; thus may he bless us altogether with a complete blessing; and let us say, Amen. May they in heaven show fort (his hand) our merit, for a peaceble preservation: and may we receive a blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of our salvation: and may we find grace and good understandig in the sight of God and man. <small><i>On the Sabbath, say:</i>May he, who is most merciful, cause us to inherit the day that is enterily Sabbath, and rest of everlasting life.</small>  May he, who is most merciful, cause us to inherit the day that in entirely good. May he, who is most merciful make us worthy to behold the day of the Messiah and eternal life in the future state. He giveth great salvation to his king, and showeth mercy to his anointed: to David and his seed for ever. May he, who maketh peace in his high heavens, grant peace unto us and all Iarael, and say ye Amen. Fear the Lord, ye his saints, for there is no want to those who fear him. The young lions do lack, and suffer hunger : but they who seek the Lord shall not want any good. Praise ye the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endureth for ever. Thou openest thy hand and satisfiest the desire of every living thing. Blessed is the man who will trust in the Lord, and the Lord will be his trust. May the Lord give strength to his people. May the Lord bless his people with peace.

Third Cup of Wine

Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God ! King of the Universe, Creator of the fruit of the wine. 

Pour Out Thy Wrath

<small><i>Open the door and say: Fill the fourth cup and say : </i></small>
O pour out thy wrath upon the heathen who know the kingdoms who, invoke not thy name; for they have devoured Jacob, and laid waste his beautiful dwelling. (Pour out thine indignation upon them, and cause thy fierce anger to overtake them ; pursue them in wrath, and destroy them from under the heavens of the Lord). 

Hallel

Second Half of Hallel

Saying the Hallel. 
Not for our sake, O Lord!  not for our sake, but unto thy name give glory, for the mercy and truth's sake. Wherefore should the nations say, where now is their God ? But our God is in the heavens, and hath made whatsoever he pleased. Their idols are silver and gold, the work of men's hands. Mouths have they, but speak not; eyes have they, but, see not. They have ears but hear not; nostrils have they but smell not; neither is utterance in their throat. Those that make them shall become like them: so shall all those who trust in them. Israel, trust thou in the Lord, he his thy help and shield. O house of Aaron, trust in the Lord, he is our help and shield, Ye, who fear in the Lord trust in the Lord, he is your help and shield <br>The Lord hath ever been mindful of us, he will bless uss, be wiil bless the house of Israel, he will bless the house of Aaron. He wil bless those that fear the Lord, both small and great. May the Lord, increase you more and more, you and your children. Ye are blessed of the Lord, who made heaven and earth. The heavens are the heavens of the Lord; but the earth hath he given to the children of man. The dead praise not the Lord; nor they who descent into the silent grave. But we will bless the Lotd, from hencerforth, and for evermore Hallelujah . 
O how I love the Lord ! for he hath graciously heard my voice and my supplicatoin. For he hath inclined his ear unto me therefore will I call upon him, whilst I live. The struggles of death compassed me, and the pangs of the grave seized me ; I was entangled in trouble and sorrow. I then calld upon tho name of the Lord! O Lord! I beseech thee, deliver my soul. The Lord is gracious and righteous; yea, our God is merciful. The Lord preserveth the simple; I was brouget low, and he saved me. Return unto thy rest O my soul; for the Lord hath dealt bountifully with thee. For thou hast delivered my soul from death mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falliug . I yet will walk before the Lord, in the land of the living. I firmly believed, and therefore have I spoken with confidence, although I was greatly afflicted, In my haste I said, all men are liars.
What shall I render unto the Lord, for all his benefits towards me ? I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto the Lord, in the presence of all his people. Grivous in the sight of the Lord is the deateh of pious servants. O Lord! truly, I am thy servant; I am thy servant, the son of thine handmaid, thou hast loosed my bonds. Unto thee will I offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving ; I will also call on the name of the Lord, I will pay my vows unto the Lord, now, in the presence of all his people. In the courts of the Lord's house, in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem. Hellelujah.
Praise the Lord all ye nations: praise him all ye people. For great is his merciful kindness towards us; and the truth of the Lord endureth for ever . Hallelujah .O give thanks unto the Lord, for he it good for his mercy endureth for ever Let Israel now say, that his mercy endureth for ever.
 Let the house of Aaron now saey, that his mercy endureth for ever. Let those, that fear the Lord, now say, that his mercy endureth for evet.

In distress I called on the Lord, and the Lord answered me with enlargement. As the Lord is for me, I will not fear: what can man do unto me ? The Lord is with me, and those who help me: I therefore shall see my desire on those who hate me . It is better to trust in the Lord, than to rely on man. It is better to trust in the Lord, than to rely on princes . All nations compassed me about, but in the name of the Lord will I cut them off. They surrounded me; yea, they compassed me about, but in the name of the Lord will I cut them off. They compassed me about like bees; they are quenched as thu fire of thorns: for in the name of the Lord will I cut them off. Thou hast trust sore at me, that I might fall, but the Lord supported me, The Lord is my strength and song, and he is become my salvation. The voice of song and salvation is in the tabernacles of the righteous: the right hand of the Lord hath done valianty , I shall not die, but live, and declare the works of the Lord. He hath indeed chastised me, but he hath not given me over unto death . Open the gates of righteousness for me, that I may enter through them, to praise the Lord. This is the gate of the Lord, into which the righteous shall enter.
I will praise thee, for thou hast answerd me, and, art become my salvatian . I will, &amp;c. The stone, which the builders rejected, is become the corners head-stone. The stone, &amp;c This is from the Lord it is marvellous in our eyes. This is from, &amp;c. This is the day, wich the Lord hath appointed, we will rejoice, and be glad thereon. This is the day which the Lord, &amp;c. 

O Lord! save us now, we beseech thee. 
O Lord ! save us now, we beseech thee. 
O Lord! send now prosperity we beseech thee. 
O Lord! send now prosperity we beseech thee.

Blessed be he who cometh in the name of the Lord ; blessed are ye from the house of the Lord. Blessed be he who cometh &amp;c. God is Lord : and it is he who hath granted us light. Bring the sacrifice bound with cords, to the horns of the altar. God is Lord : and is he who &amp;c. Thou art my God. and I will praise thee ? O my God ! I will extol thee. Thou art my God, and I will, &amp;c. 


Songs of Praise and Thanks

O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endureth for ever. O give thanks, &amp;c. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy endureth for ever. O give thanks unto the God of gods : for his merey enduerth forever. O give thanks unto Lord of lords: for his mercy endureth for ever: To him who alone doeth great wonders: for his mercy endureth for ever. To him who by wisdom made the heaven : for his mercy endureth for ever. To him who stretched out the earth above the watere: for his mercy endureth forever. To him who made great lights: for his mercy enduret for ever. The sun to rule by day. for his mercy endureth forever. The moon and stars to rule by night. for his mercy endurth for ever. To him who smote Egypt in their first-born : for his mercy andureth vor ever. And brought out Israel from among them: for his mercy endureth for ever. With a strong hand, and with a oustreched arme : for his mercy endureth for ever. To him who devided the Red Sea : for his mercy endureth for ever. And made Israel to pass through the midst of it: for his mercy endureth for ever. But overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red Sea: for his mercy endureth for ever. To him who led his people through the willderness; for his mercy endureth for ever. To him who smote great kings : for his mercy endureth for ever. And slew famous king for his mercy endureth for ever. Sihon, king of the Amorites, for his mercy endureth for ever. And Og, king of Bashan; for his mercy endureth for ever. And gave their lands for an heritage: for his mercy endureth for ever. Even an heritage unto Israel, his servant: for his mercy endureth for ever. Who remembered us in our low estate: for his mercy endureth for ever. And had redeemed us from our enemies: for his mercy endureth for ever Who giveth food to our flesh : for his mercy endureth for ever. O give thanks unto the God of heavens: for his mercy endureth for ever . 

The ebrath of all living bless the name. O Lord, our God ! the spirit of all flesh, continually glorify and extol thy memorial O our King! thou, art God from eternity to eternity; besides thee we acknowledge neither king, redeemet or saviout ; thou redeemest, deliverest. maintained, and hast compassion over us, in all times of trouble and distress: we have no king but thee. Thou art God of the first, and God of the last, the God of all creatures ; the Lord of all productions : thou art adored with all manner of praise : who governeth the Universe with tenderness, and thy creatures wilh mercy. Lo! the Lord neither slumberet nor sleepeth but rouseth those who sleep, awakened those who slumber: causeth the dumb to speak : loosete those that are bound: supporteth the fallen and raised up those who droop : and therefore thee alone do we worship.
Altough our mouths were filled with melodious songs, as the drops of the sea; our tongues with shouting, as therearing billows thereof, our lips with praise, like the wide-extended firmament ; our eyes with sparkling brightness, lik the sun and moon; our hands extended like the towering eagles; and our feet as the hinds for swiftness : we, nevertheless, are incapable of rendering sufficient thanks unto thee, O Lord, our God! and God of our fathers; or to bless thy name, for one of the inumerable benefits, which thou hat conferred on us and our ancestors For thou O Lord, our God ! didst redeem us from Egypt, and release us from the house of bondage; in time of famine didst thou sustain us; and in plenty didst thou nourish us. Thou didst deliver us from the sword; saved us from pestilence: and from many sore and heavy diseases hast thou withdrawn us, Hitherto thy tender mercies have supported us, and thy kidness has not forsaken us.
O Lord, our God! forsake us not in futre . Therefore the members of which thou hast formed us, the spirit and soul which thou hast breated into us and the tongue which thou hast placed in out mouths; lo! they shall worship, bless, praise, glorify, extol, reverence, sanctify and ascribe sovereign power unto thy name our King ! every mouth shall adore thee, and every tongue ahall swear unto thee; unto thee every knee shall bend ; every rational being shall worship thee; every heart shall rever thee ; the inward part and reins shall sing praise unto thy name : as it his written all my bones shall say, O Lord ! who is like unto thee ? who delivereth the weak from him that is too strong for him: the poor and needy from their oppressor; who is like unto thee? who is equal unto thee? who can be compared unto thee? great, mighty and tremendous God ! most high God ! possessor of heaven and earth ! we will praise, adore, glorify, and bless the name, so saith David : - bless the Lord ! O my soul ! and all that is within me, bless his holy name. O God who art migthy in thy strength ! who art great by thy glorious name ! Mighty for ever, tremendous by thy feaful acts. The King ! who siteth on the high and exalted throne, inhabiting eternity, most exalted, and holy his name ; and it is written, rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous, for to the just praise is comely. With the mouth of the upright shalt thou be praised; blessed with the lips of the righteous; extolled with the tongue of the pions ; by a choir of saints shalt thou be sanctified .
And in the congregation of many thousands of thy people, the house of Israel, shall thy name, O our King ! be glorified in song throughout all generations ; for such is the duty of every created being, towards thee, O Lord, our God, and the God of our fathers, to render thanks, to praise, extol, glorify, exalt, ascribe glory, bless, magnify and adore thee, with all the songe and praises, of thy servant David, the son of Jesse, thine anointed.
May thy name be praised for ever, our King ! the Allmighty, the King, the great and holy, in heaven and upon earth , for unto thee I appertained, O Lord, our God! and the God of our fathers, song and praise, hymns and psalms, I might and dominion, victory and power, greatness, adoration, glory, holiness and majesty : blessings and thanksgivings are thine from henceforth to everlasting .All thy work, O Lord ! shall praise thee, the pious servants, with the righteous who perform thy will, and the people, the house of Israel, with joyful song shall give thanks, bless, praiso, glorify, extol, reverence, sanctify and acknowledge thy kingly name, O our King ! for to thee it is proper to offer thanksgiving and pleasant to sing praise to thy name; for thou art God from everlasting to everlasting .

Fourth Cup of Wine



Nirtzah

Chasal Siddur Pesach



L'Shana HaBaa

The coming Year, O Bring us to Jerusalem

And It Happened at Midnight

<small><i>This is said on the first night.</i></small>
And thus it came to pass at midnight.
Then didst thou perform abundant miracles
 in the night. In the beginning of the first watch of this night .
The righteous professer of God (Abraham) conquered when he devided his company at night. And it came to pass at midnight.
Thou didst threaten the king of Gerar with death, in a dream by night. Thy didst terrify the Syrian in the dead of the night A
nd Israel wrestled with an angel, and overcame him in the night. And it came to pass at midnight.
The firstborn of the Egyptians didst thou crush at midnight. Their strength found them not when they arose in the night. The swift army of the prince of Harosheth didst thou tread down with the stars
 of the night. 
And it came to pass at midnight.

The blasphemer who imagined to lift up his hand against my beautiful habitation, didst thou frustrate by the number of his slain in the night. The idol Bel, and its statue was overthrown in the darknees of the night. To the meritorious man the secret was revealed in a vision of the night And it came to pass at midnight.
He who got drunk in the holy vessel was slain in that night He (Daniel) who was delivered from the den of lions, interpreted the dreadful dreams of the night. The Agagite cherished enmity and wrote letters at night. And it came to pass at midnight. 

Thou didst awaken thy all conquering power agaisnt him by disturbing the sleep of the king in the night. Thou wilt tread the wine-press, when saying to the watchman, what of the night? Let the watchman (Israel) say aloud, the morning is come after night.  And it came to pass at midnight . 

O may the draw night, that is neither day nor night . O thou Most High I make known that under thee appertained the day and also the night, appoint watchman to thy city (Jerusalem) all day and all night. O illuminate as the splendour of the day, the darkness of the night. And it came to pass at midnight.


Zevach Pesach

<small><i>This said on the second night:</i>&lt;/small?&gt;</small>
And ye shall say, this is the sacrifice of the Passover . The mighty power didst thou wonderfully display on the Passover. Above, all solemn feasts didst thou exalt the Passover. Thou didst reveal of the Oriental (Abraham) the miracles performed in the midst of the night of Passover And ye shall say this is the sacrifice of the Passover.
Thou didst appear unto him in the heat of the day on the Passover. He entertained the angels with unleavened cakes on the Passover. And he ran to the heard, as a memorial of the offering of the Passover. And ye shall say, this is the sacrifice of the Passover. 
The inhabitants of Sodom provoket God to anger, and they were consumed by fire, on the Passover. Lot was delivered, who baket unleavend cake for the Passover. Thou didst seweep the land of Moph and Noph, when thou didst pass through on the Passover. And ye shall say, this is the sacrifice of the Passover.
O Lord ! thou didst wound the head of the fiirstborn, on the night of the observation of the Passover. O Omniportent! yet didst thou past over thy firstborn son (Israel) being marked with the blood of the saeifice of the Passover. Not suffering the destroyer to enter my dorrs on the Passover. And ye shall say, this is the sacrifice of the Passover.
The strong and fortified city was surrendered at the seasen of the Passover. Midian was destroyed by the cake of barley bread, like the offering of an omer of bar-ley on the Passover. The migthy man of Pull and Lud were destroyed with burning conflagration on the Passover. And ye shall say, this in sacrifice of the Passover. 
The King abode yet in Nob this day. till the thime of the Passover. The part of the hand which wrote the destruction of the foundation of the empire of Badylon, on the Passover. Even at the time when the watch was set, and the table prepared on the Passover. And ye shall say, this is the sacrifice of the Passover. 
Esther gathered the congregation to fast three days on Passover. The sworn enemy (Haman) didst thou cause to be executed on a gallows of fifty cubits high, on the Passover. These two things shalt thou bring in a moment on Utz, on the Passover. Thine hand will then be victorious, and thy right hand exalted, as on the night whereon was sanctified the festival of the Passover. And ye shall say, this is the sacrifice of the Passover. 

Ki Lo Na'e



Adir Hu



Sefirat HaOmer

<small><i>On the second Night commence the counting of the Omer.</i></small>
Blessed art thou, O Eternal, our God! King of the universe, who hath sanctified us wilh the commandments, and commanded us to count the days of the עומר. This is the first day of the עומר . 

Echad Mi Yodea



Chad Gadya

