Pesach Haggadah
הגדה של פסח
Mendes, London, 1862
http://sefaria.org

Pesach Haggadah

Kadesh

<small><i>Fill the first cup and say—</i></small>
SANCTIFICATION.
<small><i>If the Feast happens on the Sabbath begin here —</i></small>
"It was evening, and it was morning," The sixth day — "And the heavens and the earth were finished, and all their hosts. And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made: thus he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made. And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because he thereon rested from all his work, which God had created and made."
<small><i>SANCTIFICATION FOR THE PASSOVER. If the Feast happens on a week-day, or at the conclusion of the Sabbath, begin here.</i></small>
Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God! King of the universe, who createst the fruit of the vine.
Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God! King of the universe, who hath chosen us from among all people, and exalted us above all languages, and sanctified us with his commandments; and with love hast thou given us, O Lord, our God!<small>(<i>on Sabbath say,</i> Sabbaths for rest, and) </small> solemn days for joy, festivals and seasons for gladness, <small>(<i>on Sabbath say,</i>this day of rest, and)</small> this day of the Feast of Unleavened Cakes, the season of our Freedom; a holy convocation <small>(<i>on Sabbath say,</i> in love)</small> a memorial of the departure of Egypt; for thou hast chosen us, and sanctified us above all people: and thy holy <small>(<i>on Sabbath say,</i> Sabbaths and</small> Festivals hast thou caused us to inherit with <small>(<i>on Sabbath say,</i> love and favour)</small> joy and gladness. Blessed art thou, O Lord! who sanctifiest <small>(<i>on Sabbath say,</i> the Sabbath, and)<small> Israel, and the seasons.</small></small>
Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God! King of the universe, who hast preserved us alive, sustained us, and brought us to enjoy this season.

Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God! King of the universe, who created the light of the fire.<br>Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God! King of the universe, who hast made a distinction between things sacred and profane: between light and darkness, between Israel and other nations, and between the seventh day and the six days of labour. Thou hast also made a distinction between the holiness of the Sabbath, and the sacredness of the Festival; sanctified the seventh day above the six days of labour; and separated, and sanctified thy people Israel with thy holy service. 
Blessed art thou, O Lord! who maketh a distinction between holy and holy.
Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God! King of the universe, who hast preserved us alive, sustained us, and brought us to enjoy this season.
<small><i>Drink the wine in a leaning position.</i></small>

Urchatz

WASHING THE HANDS.
<small><i>Wash the hands without saying the usual blessing.</i></small>

Karpas

TAKE THE PARSLEY, &amp;c.
<small><i>Take some parsley or chervil, and having dipped it in vinegar, or salt water, distribute it to all present, and say —</i></small>
Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God, King of the universe, who createst the fruit of the earth.

Yachatz

BREAK THE MIDDLE CAKE.
<small><i>The Master of the house breaks the middle cake in the dish, leaving one half between the two whole ones, and places the other half aside for the "Aficomen"</i></small>

Magid

Ha Lachma Anya


<small><i>He then elevates the dish containing the bone and egg, and all at the table take hold thereof, and say —</i></small>
This is the bread of affliction which our ancestors ate in the land of Egypt: let all that are hungry enter and eat; let all that are in want come hither and observe the Passover. This year we celebrate it here; but we hope next year to celebrate it in the land of Israel: this year we are bondsmen, but next year we hope to be freemen.

Four Questions

<small><i>Fill the second cup of wine, and remove the dish from the table, the youngest present then asks : —</i></small>
Wherefore is this night distinguished from all other nights, that on all other nights we should eat either leavened or unleavened bread, while on this night it must be all unleavened bread;  that on all other nights we should eat any species of herbs, while on this night we eat bitter herbs; that on all other nights we should not immerse the herbs we eat even once, 
while on this night we do it twice; that on all the other nights we should eat and drink either in a sitting or a leaning position, while in this night we all of us lean?



We Were Slaves in Egypt

<small><i>Place the dish on the table and continue : —</i></small>
Because we were slaves unto Pharaoh in Egypt, and the Eternal, our God, brought us forth thence, with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm. And if the Most Holy, blessed be He, had not thus brought forth our ancestors from Egypt, we, and our children, and our children's children, would have still continued enslaved by Pharaoh in Egypt. Therefore, even if we were all of us sages, all of us men of understanding, all of us elders, all of us learned in the law, it would still be imperative upon us to narrate the departure from Egypt; and whoever dilates on the narrative of the departure from Egypt, is accounted praiseworthy.

Story of the Five Rabbis

Even as was done by Rabbi Eliezar, Rabbi Joshua, Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah, Rabbi Akievah, and Rabbi Tarphon, who, being entertained by the inhabitants of Berak, were narrating the departure of Egypt all that night, until their disciples came and said unto them:" Masters, the time hath arrived to read the Morning Shemang."
Rabbi Elazar, the son of Azariah, said, Verily I am a man of nearly seventy years of age: yet was I not able to prove that the narration of the departure from Egypt should be at night, until the son of Zoma expounded it from the passage where it is said, "That thou mayest remember the day of thy going forth from Egypt the whole of the days of thy life." "The days of thy life, said he, "refer to the days alone, but the whole of the days of thy life," include the nights also. The sages, however, explain this text thus: "The days of thy life, refer to this world only, but the whole of the days of thy life, include even the time of Messiah.

The Four Sons

Blessed be God, the Omnipresent. Blessed be He who hath given the law to his people Israel. Blessed be He, whose law speaketh of the four different characters of children, whom we are to instruct on this occasion, the wise, the wicked, the simple, and the one who hath not capacity to inquire.
What says the wise son? He asks: "What are the testimonies, the statutes, and the judgments which the Eternal, our God, hath commanded you?" Then thou shalt surely indoctrinate him in the laws of the passover, duly teaching him that after the paschal offering no dessert must be added.
What says the wicked son? He asks: “What mean you by this service?" He says you expressly to except himself; and since he thus excludes himself from the collective body of the nation, he denies a principle of faith. Therefore must thou retort upon him by saying: "This is done, because of what the Eternal did for me when I came forth from Egypt;" for me, and not for him: since had he been there, he would not have deserved to be redeemed.
What says the simple son? He only asks: "What is this?" But thou must tell him, "With might of hand did the Eternal bring us forth from Egypt, from the house of bondage."
And with him who hath not capacity to inquire, thou must open the discourse, as it is said: "And thou shalt relate to thy son on that day, this is done because of what the Eternal did for me when I went forth from Egypt."

Yechol Me'rosh Chodesh

Can this explanation be given from the commencement of the month (Nissan)? Nay; scripture expressly states "on that day." If on that day, is it permissible to give it in the day-time? Nay; for the text further says "the reason of this." The expression: the reason of this, can only be used at the time when the unleavened bread and bitter herbs are set before thee.

In the Beginning Our Fathers Were Idol Worshipers

Originally our ancestors were worshippers of idolatry: but now the Omnipresent God hath brought us near to his worship, as it is said.  And Joshua said unto all the people, thus saith the Eternal, the God of Israel: "On the other side of the river dwelt of old your ancestor Terah, the father of Abraham and the father of Nahor, and they worshipped other gods."
And I took your father Abraham from the other side of the river, and I made him go throughout all the land of Canaan, and I multiplied his seed: and I gave him Isaac; and I gave unto Isaac, Esau and Jacob; and I gave Esau Mount Seir to inherit, but Jacob and his children went down to Egypt. 
Blessed is He who observeth his promise unto Israel. Blessed is He who even computed beforehand, the end of the captivity, in order, faithfully to perform what he promised our father Abraham between the parts; as it is said: "God said unto Abraham, Know of a surety that thy posterity shall be a stranger in a land not theirs, and shall serve them: and they shall afflict them four hundred years; and that nation also whom they shall serve, I will judge: they shall afterwards go forth with great substance."
<small><i>Lift up the cup of wine and say —</i></small>
And it is that promise which has sustained our fathers and ourselves; for not one only has risen up against us, but in every generation some have arisen against us to exterminate us, but the Holy One, blessed be he, always delivers us from their hands.

First Fruits Declaration

<small><i>Put down the cup.</i></small>
Go forth and learn what Laban, the Syrian, purposed to do to Jacob, our father; Pharaoh put forth his decree against the males only, while Laban designed to extirpate the whole nation, as it is said: A Syrian [Laban] had nearly caused my ancestor [Jacob] to perish,<br>and he went down unto Egypt and sojourned there with but few persons, and he there became a nation, great, mighty, and numerous.
"And he went down into Egypt," constrained by the word of God; <br>"and he sojourned there." This teaches that he went not down to settle but to sojourn; as it is said, " And they said unto Pharaoh, we have come to sojourn in the land, for there is no pasturage for the flocks which thy servants have, because the famine is sore in the land of Canaan; now, therefore, we pray thee, let thy servants dwell in the land of Goshen."
"With but few persons;" as it is said, "With three score and ten persons thy fathers went down to Egypt; and now the Eternal, thy God, hath made thee as the stars of heaven, for multitude."
"And he there became a nation." This teaches that Israel was thus noted, even there in Egypt.<br>"Great and mighty;" as it is said, "And the children of Israel were prolific, and increased abundantly, multiplied, and became exceedingly mighty, and the land was filled with them." 
"And numerous;" as it is said, " I have made thee into a myriad as the growth of the field, and thou hast increased and waxed great, and art possessed of excellent ornaments; thy breast are now formed and thine hair is grown, whereas thou wast naked and bare."
"And the Egyptians ill-treated us, and afflicted us, and imposed upon us heavy bondage."<br>"The Egyptians ill treated us;" as it is said, "Come, let us deal wisely with them, lest they should multiply, and it come to pass, that when a war should occur, they also be added to our enemies, and fight against us and go up from the land." 
"And afflicted us;" as it is said, "And they set taskmasters over them, in order to afflict them with their burdens: and they built stone cities for Pharaoh, Pithom and Raamses."
"And they imposed upon us heavy bondage;" as it is said, "And the Egyptians made the children of Israel serve with rigor."

"And we cried unto the Eternal, the God of our Fathers, and the Eternal heard our voice, and saw our affliction and our sorrow, and our oppression."
"And we cried unto the Eternal, the God of our fathers;" as it is said, "It came to pass, after many days, that the king of Egypt died, and the children of Israel sighed on account of the bondage, and they cried, and their plaint went up to God, on account of the bondage.
"And the Eternal heard our voice;" as it is said, "God heard their groaning, and God remembered his covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob.
"And he saw our affliction;" this refers to the prevention of connubial associations; as it is said, "And God saw the children of Israel and God had knowledge of their affliction.
"And our sorrow;" this refers to the destruction of the male children; as it said, "Every son that is born you shall cast into the river, and every daughter ye shall save alive."
"And our oppression;" this refers to the severity employed; as it is said, " And I have also seen the oppression wherewith the Egyptians oppress them."
"And the Eternal brought us forth from Egypt with a strong hand and with an outstretched arm, with great terror, and with signs and with wonders."
"And the Eternal brought us forth from Egypt;" not by the agency of an angel, not by the agency of a seraph, nor by the agency of a messenger; but the Most Holy, blessed be He, in His own majesty, and in His proper person; as it is said, "I will pass through the land of Egypt on this night, and I will smite every first-born in the land of Egypt from man unto beast: and on all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgment. I, the Eternal."
"I will pass through the land of Egypt." I myself and not an angel; "And I will smite every first born," I myself and not a seraph; and "on all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgment;" I myself and not a messenger: " I the Eternal," I it shall be, and none other.
" With a strong hand;" this refers to the pestilence, as it is said, "Behold the hand of the Eternal is upon thy cattle which is in the field, upon the horses, upon the asses, upon the camels, upon the oxen, and upon the sheep; there shall he a very grievous pestilence."
"And with an outstretched arm;" this refers to the sword, even as it is said, "And a drawn sword is in his hand, stretched out over Jerusalem."
"And with great terror;" this refers to the visible manifestation of the Divine presence, as it is said, "Or hath God tried to go and take him a nation from the midst of another nation, by trials, by signs, and by wonders, and by war, and by a strong hand, and by an outstretched arm, and by great terror, according to all that the Eternal your God did for you in Egypt before your own eyes."
"And with signs;" this refers to the rod with which the miracles were wrought; as it is said, "And thou shalt take this rod in thine hand, wherewith thou shalt perform the signs." 
"And with wonders;" this refers to the plague of blood, as it is said, "And I will show wonders in the heavens, and in the earth,

The Ten Plagues


blood and fire and pillars of smoke."

Another explanation of the text is as follows, "with a strong hand," denotes two plagues, "and with an outstretched arm," denotes two more, "and with great terror," two more, "and with signs," two more, "and with wonders," two more.
These are the ten plagues which the Most Holy, blessed be He, brought upon the Egyptians in Egypt, viz. —

Blood,
frogs,
lice,
a mixture of noxious vermin,
pestilence,
blains
hail,
locust,
darkness,
and the slaying of the first-born.
Rabbi Yehudah arranged them into mnemonic forms: thus, "detsach," "adash," "beachab."
Rabbi Jose, the Galilean, asks, Whence canst thou deduce that the Egyptians were smitten with ten plagues in Egypt, and that at the Red Sea they were smitten with fifty plagues? He thus replies: In Egypt it is said, "The magicians said unto Pharaoh this is the finger of God;" and at the Red Sea, it is said, "The people saw the mighty hand wherewith the Eternal had wrought against Egypt, and the people feared the Eternal, and believed in the Eternal, and in his servant Moses. 
<br>If then they were smitten with ten plagues by a finger only, from this last passage it may be deduced, that in Egypt they were smitten with ten plagues, and at the Red Sea they were smitten with fifty plagues. 

Rabbi Eleazar asks, Whence canst thou deduce that each plague which the Most Holy, blessed be He, brought upon the Egyptians, in Egypt, consisted of four several plagues? From where it is said, that "He sent forth against them the fierceness of his anger, wrath, indignation and trouble, a band of evil angels." Wrath is one, indignation two, trouble three, a band of evil angels four: hence it may be deduced that in Egypt they were smitten with fifty plagues, and at the Red Sea they were smitten with two hundred plagues.
Rabbi Akeevah says, Whence canst thou deduce that each plague which the Most Holy, blessed be He, brought upon the Egyptians in Egypt consisted of five plagues?<br>From where it is said, "He sent forth against them the fierceness of his anger, wrath, indignation and trouble, a band of evil angels." The Fierceness of His anger is one, wrath is two, indignation is three, troubles four, a band of evil angels is five. Hence it may be deduced that in Egypt they were smitten with fifty plagues, and at the Red Sea they were smitten with two hundred and fifty plagues.

Dayenu

How many degrees of beneficence has the Omnipresent performed towards us!
If he had brought us forth from Egypt, and had not executed judgments upon the Egyptians, It would have sufficed us. 
If he had executed judgments upon them, and had not also executed judgments upon their gods, It would have sufficed us.
If he had executed judgments upon their gods, and had not slain their first-born, It would have sufficed us.
If he had slain their first-born, and had not given us their wealth, It would have sufficed us.
If he had given us their wealth, and not have divided the sea, It would have sufficed us.
If he had divided the sea for us, and had not made us pass through its midst on dry land, It would have sufficed us.
If he had made us pass through its midst on dry land, and had not sunk our adversaries in it, it would have sufficed us.
If he had sunk our adversaries in it, and had not supplied our necessaries in the wilderness during forty years, it would have sufficed us.
If he had not supplied our necessaries in the wilderness during forty years, and had not fed us with manna, It would have sufficed us.
If he had fed us with manna, and had not given us the Sabbath, It would have sufficed us.
If he had given us the Sabbath, but had not brought us near to Mount Sinai, It would have sufficed us.
If he had brought us near Mount Sinai, but had not given us the Law, It would have sufficed us.
If he had given us the Law, and had not led us into the land of Israel, It would have sufficed us.
If he had led us into the land of Israel, and had not built the temple of his choice, It would have sufficed us.
Thus how numerous, and how oft repeated are the bounties which the Omnipresent hath bestowed upon us! He brought us forth from Egypt — executed judgment upon the Egyptians — executed judgment also upon their gods: slew their first-born, gave us their wealth, divided the sea for us, made us pass through its midst on dry land, sank our adversaries in it; supplied our necessities in the wilderness during forty years, fed us with manna, gave us the Sabbath, brought us near to Mount Sinai, gave us the Law, and built for us the temple of his choice to atone for our iniquities.

Rabban Gamliel's Three Things

Rabban Gamliel said, whoever does not make especial mention of these three things on the Passover, does not acquit himself of his duty, namely, the sacrifice of the PASSOVER, THE UNLEAVENED BREAD, and THE BITTER HERBS.
The Sacrifice of the Passover, which our ancestors ate during the existence of the Temple, — for what reason was it eaten? Because the Omnipresent passed over the houses of our fathers in Egypt, as it is said, " Ye shall say, it is the sacrifice of the Passover unto the Eternal, who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians, and delivered our houses; and the people bowed themselves and worshipped."
<small><i>Take hold of the cakes in the dish and exhibit them to the assembly.</i></small>
This Unleavened Bread which we now eat, — what does it import? It is eaten because the dough of our ancestors had not time to become leavened ere the supreme King of kings, the Most Holy, blessed be He, revealed Himself to them, and redeemed them; as it is said, "They baked unleavened cakes of the dough which they had brought out of Egypt, for it was not leavened, because they were thrust out of Egypt, and could not tarry, neither had they made any provision for themselves.
<i><small>Take the bitter herb (lettuce or horseradish) and exhibit it to the company.</small></i>
This Bitter Herb which we eat, — what does it import? It is eaten because the Egyptians embittered the lives of our ancestors in Egypt, as it is said, "They embittered their lives with hard bondage, in mortar and brick, and in all manner of labour in the field. All their labour was imposed upon them with rigor. 
In every generation each individual is bound to regard himself as if he had personally gone forth from Egypt, as it is said, "And thou shalt relate to thy son in that day, saying, this is on account of what the Eternal did for me when I came forth from Egypt: " thus, it was not our ancestors only whom the Most Holy, blessed be He, then redeemed, but us also did he redeem with them, as it is said, And he brought us forth from thence, in order to bring us in that he might give us the land which he sware unto our ancestors.

First Half of Hallel

<small><i>Lift up the cup of wine and say :—</i></small>
Therefore, we are bound to thank, praise, laud, glorify, extol, honour, bless, exalt, and reverence him who performed for our fathers, and for us, all these miracles. He brought us forth from slavery to freedom; from sorrow to joy; from mourning to festivity; and from servitude to redemption. Let us therefore sing a new song in his presence. Hallelujah!
Hallelujah! Praise ye the Lord! Praise ye servants of the Eternal! Praise ye the name of the Eternal! May the name of the Eternal be blessed, from now even to all eternity. From where the sun rises unto where it sets, the name of the Eternal is praised. High above all nations is the Eternal, his glory above the heavens. Who is like unto the Eternal our God, who dwelleth on high? Who yet condescendeth to regard what is in the heavens, and on earth. He raiseth up the poor from the dust from the dunghill he lifteth up the needy, to seat him with princes, with the princes of his people. He maketh the barren woman dwell in the midst of her household, and become the joyful mother of children. Hallelujah!
When Israel went forth from Egypt, the house of Jacob, from the people of barbarous tongue; Judah became his sanctuary, Israel his dominion. The sea beheld, and fled; Jordan was driven backward. The mountains skipped like rams, the hills like lambkins. What ailed thee, O sea, that thou fledst? Thou, Jordan, that thou wast driven backward? Ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams, ye hills like lambkins? Tremble, O earth! in the presence of the God of Jacob: who turned the rock into a pool of water, — the flinty rock into a fountain of water.

Second Cup of Wine


Blessed art thou, O Eternal, our God, king of the universe, who redeemed us and our ancestors from Egypt, and who hath brought us to the enjoyment of this night to eat thereon unleavened bread and bitter herbs. Thou, O Eternal, our God, and God of our fathers, mayest thou bring us to enjoy in peace other solemn feasts, and sacred seasons, which now advance towards us, that we may rejoice in the building of thy city, and exult in thy holy service; that we may there eat of the sacrifices and of the paschal offerings, whose blood shall be sprinkled upon the side of thine altar, to render us acceptable. Then shall we, with a new hymn, give thanks to thee for our deliverance, and for the redemption of our souls. Blessed art thou, O Eternal, who hath redeemed Israel.
<small><i>Drink the second cup of wine.</i></small>
Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God, who createst the fruit of the vine.

Rachtzah

WASHING THE HANDS.
<small><i>Wash the hands and say : —</i></small>
Blessed art thou, O Eternal, our God! King of the universe, who hast sanctified us with thy commandments, and commanded us to cleanse the hands.

Motzi Matzah

BREAKING THE CAKE.
<small><i>Take the two whole cakes and the broken one, and say the following blessings; after which put down the third cake, and give to each of the company present a piece of the whole and second half cake, and eat both together.</i></small>
Blessed art thou, O Eternal, our God! King of the universe, who bringest forth bread from the earth.
Blessed art thou, O Eternal, our God! King of the universe, who hast sanctified us with thy commandments, and commanded us to eat unleavened bread.

Maror

EATING OF THE BITTER HERBS.
<i><small>Take some bitter herbs, which dip in with the "Charoseth," and say: —</small></i>
Blessed art thou, O Eternal, our God! King of the universe, who hast sanctified us with thy commandments, and commanded us to eat bitter herbs.

Korech

EATING THE CAKE AND BITTER HERBS TOGETHER.
<small><i>Break the undermost cake, and distribute it with some bitter herb and "charoseth," then say : —<br>This we eat without ablution or blessing, in memory of the sanctuary, even as Hillel did.</i></small>
Thus did Hillel during the existence of the temple: 
he took unleavened bread, and bitter herbs, and ate them together, in order to fulfil what is said in the Law, "With unleavened bread and bitter herbs shall they eat it."

Shulchan Orech

PREPARE THE TABLE FOR THE REPAST.

Tzafun


<small><i>After supper the half of the middle cake, which had been put aside at the commencement of the Service, is distributed among all present, who eat it leaning. This is called the "aficomen," after which no food must be taken during that evening.</i></small>

Barech

Birkat Hamazon

SAY GRACE AFTER MEAT.
<small><i>The third cup is then filled, and</i></small>

<small><i>He who says Grace commences:—<br>If three men, and less than ten, have eaten at the table, he who says Grace commences thus: —</i></small>
Let us say grace.
<small><i>To which the Company reply:—</i></small>
Blessed be the name of the Eternal, from now unto eternity.
<small><i>If ten men or more have eaten at the table, he who says Grace commences thus: —</i><small></small></small>
Let us bless our God, of whose gifts we have eaten.
<i><small>To which the others respond: —</small></i><small>&lt;/smal&gt;</small>
Blessed be our God, of whose gifts we have eaten, and through whose goodness we exist.
<small><i>He then repeats: —</i></small>
Blessed be our God, of whose gifts we have eaten, and through whose goodness we exist.

Blessed art thou, O Eternal, our God! King of the universe, for thou art he who feedeth the whole world with his goodness; with grace, kindness, and compassion, he giveth food to all flesh, for his mercy endureth for ever. And through his abundant goodness food hath never yet failed us, nor will fail us for evermore: for it is because of his own great name that he feedeth and sustaineth all, and doeth good unto all, and provideth food for all his creatures which he hath created. Blessed art thou, O Eternal! who feedest all.
We give thanks unto thee, O Eternal, our God! because thou didst cause our ancestors to inherit the good, desirable, and ample land: and because thou, O Eternal, our God! didst bring us forth from the land of Egypt, and didst thus redeem us from the house of bondage: and because of thy covenant, which thou didst seal in our flesh, and of the law which thou hast taught us, and of thy statutes which thou hast made known unto us; and because of the life, grace, and kindness which thou hast mercifully bestowed upon us, and of the sustaining food wherewith thou feedest us and sustainest us continually, every day, at all times, and at each moment.
Blessed shall thy name continually be in the mouth of every living being for ever and ever, as it is written, "When thou hast eaten, and art satisfied, thou shalt bless the Eternal, thy God, for the goodly land which he hath given unto thee." Blessed art thou, O Eternal, for the land and for the food.
Have compassion, we beseech thee, O Eternal, our God! on thy people Israel, and on Jerusalem thy city, on Zion the residence of thy glory, on the kingdom of the house of David thine anointed, and on the great and holy house which is called by thy name. O our God, our Father! feed, sustain, support, and maintain us, and grant us enlargement. Enlarge us speedily, O Eternal, our God! from all our troubles: and let us not, we pray thee, O Eternal, our God! stand in need either of the gifts of mankind, or of their loans ; but let us depend only on thy hand which' is ever full, open, holy, and liberal, so that we may never be put to shame nor confounded.
<small><i>On Sabbath add till " Lord of consolation."</i></small>
Be pleased, O Eternal, our God! to felicitate us through thy commandments, and especially through the commandment of the seventh day, — this great and holy Sabbath; for this day is great and holy in thy presence, to rest thereon, and to be at repose thereon, in pious love according to the command of thy will. In thy favour, O Eternal, our God! grant us repose, that there be no trouble, sorrow or sighing to afflict us on our day of rest; but cause us to behold, O Eternal, our God, the consolation of Zion, thy city, and the rebuilding of Jerusalem, thy holy city; for thou art He who is the Lord of salvation and the Lord of consolation.
Our God and the God our fathers, suffer to ascend, come, approach, appear, and be accepted; to be heard, borne in mind, and remembered before thee — our memorial and the memorial of our ancestors, the memorial of the Messiah the son of David thy servant, the memorial of Jerusalem thy holy city, and the memorial of all thy people of the house of Israel, — to obtain for us deliverance, happiness, grace, favour compassion, life, and peace, on this Day of the Feast of Unleavened Bread. O, Eternal our God, remember us thereon for good, and visit us thereon with a blessing, and save us thereon to enjoy life. And with the word of salvation and mercy have pity and be gracious unto us. O have compassion upon us and save us, for our eyes are towards thee, because thou, O God, art a merciful and compassionate King.<br>And do thou rebuild Jerusalem, the holy city, speedily, in oar days. 
Blessed art thou, the Eternal, who in his mercy will rebuild Jerusalem. Amen.

Blessed art thou, O Eternal, our God, King of the universe, Omnipotent! our Father, our King, our Strength, our Creator, our Redeemer, our Former, our Holy One, the Holy One of Jacob; our Shepherd, the Shepherd of Israel; the beneficent King who doeth beneficently unto all, who hath been, is, and ever will be beneficent unto us day after day. He hath dealt bountifully with us, he still dealeth bountifully with us, he will deal bountifully with us for evermore; granting us grace, favour, compassion, enlargement, deliverance, and prosperity, blessing, and salvation, consolation, sustenance and maintenance, mercy, life and peace, and every good: yea, of no good will he cause us to be deficient.
May the All-merciful reign over us for ever and ever! May the All-merciful be blessed in heaven and earth! May the All-merciful be praised throughout all generations, be glorified among us to everlasting, and be honored in our midst for ever and to all eternity! May the All-merciful sustain us with honor! May the All-merciful break the yoke of captivity from off our neck, and lead us in security to our land! May the All-merciful send us an abundant blessing on this house, and on the table at which we have eaten! May the All- merciful send us Elijah the prophet (of happy memory) that he may announce to us tidings of happiness, salvation, and consolation! May the All-merciful bless [my father and instructor] the master of this house, and [my mother and instructress] the mistress of this house, and with them, their household, their children, and all that belongs to them; us and all that belongs to us; even as our ancestors Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were severally blessed in all things, through all things, and with all things, thus may he bless us, even all of us together, with a complete blessing, and let us say, Amen. <br>In the high heaven may they obtain for them and for us, the felicity of the Divine guardianship over our welfare, that we may receive a blessing from the Eternal, and righteousness from the God of our salvation, and that we may find grace and due regard in the eyes of God and man. <br><small><i>On Sabbath add the following till "life."</i>May the All-merciful cause us to inherit the day that is all Sabbath and repose in eternal life.</small> <br>May the All-merciful cause us to inherit the day that is all happiness. May the All-merciful render us worthy to behold the days of Messiah, and of the eternal life of a future state. He giveth great salvation to His king, and acteth mercifully towards His anointed, towards David and his progeny for ever. May he who maketh peace in his high heavens, in his mercy, grant peace unto us and unto all Israel, and say ye, Amen.<br> Fear the Eternal, ye his holy ones, for no want have they who fear him. Even young lions lack and suffer hunger; but they who seek the Eternal shall not lack any good. Give thanks unto the Eternal, for he is good, for his mercy endureth for ever. Thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living being. Blessed is the man who trusteth in the Eternal; for the Eternal will be his protection. The Eternal will give strength to his people: the Etenal will bless his people with peace.

Third Cup of Wine

Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God, who createst the fruit of the vine.
<small><i>On drinking the third cup of wine say —</i></small>

Pour Out Thy Wrath

<small><i>Open the door and say — Fill the cups and say — </i>,</small>
Pour out thy wrath upon the heathen who will not acknowledge thee, and upon the kingdoms who invoke not thy name, for they have devoured Jacob and laid waste his dwelling place.<br>Pour out thine indignation upon them, and let thy glowing anger overtake them. Pursue them in wrath and destroy them from under the heavens of the Eternal.   

Hallel

Second Half of Hallel

HALLEL.
Ps. cxv. — Not unto us, O Eternal! not unto us, but unto thy name give glory, for the sake of thy mercy and thy truth. Wherefore should the nations say, Where now is their God? Our God is in the heavens; He hath made whatsoever he pleased. But their idols of silver and gold are the work of human hands. They have mouths, but speak not: they have eyes, but see not. They have ears, but hear not: they have nostrils, but smell not. They have hands, but feel not: they have feet, but walk not; neither is there any utterance in their throat. May those who make them and every one who trusteth in them become like them. Israel, trust thou in the Eternal, he is thy help and shield. O house of Aaron, trust in the Eternal, he is your help and shield. Ye who venerate the Eternal, trust in the Eternal, he is your help and shield. The Eternal who hath ever been mindful of us, will bless us, he will bless the house of Israel, he will bless the house of Aaron. He will bless those who venerate the Eternal, both small and great. May the Eternal increase you more and more, you and your children. Blessed are ye of the Eternal, who made heaven and earth. The heavens are the heavens of the Eternal: but the earth hath he given to the children of men. The dead praise not the Eternal, nor they who descend into the silent grave. But we will bless the Eternal henceforth, and for ever. Halleluyah.
Ps. cxvi. — It is pleasing unto me that the Eternal hath graciously heard my voice, and my supplications. For he hath inclined his ear unto me, therefore will I invoke him whilst I live. Should the struggles of death compass me, the pangs of the grave seize me, were trouble and sorrow to overtake me, I would then call upon the name of the Eternal; saying, O Eternal! I beseech thee, deliver my soul! The Eternal is gracious and righteous; yea, our God is merciful. The Eternal preserveth the simple: I was brought low, and he saved me. Return my soul to thy serenity, for the Eternal hath dealt bountifully with thee. For thou hast delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling. I yet will walk before the Eternal in the land of the living. I firmly believed, and therefore will I declare that when greatly afflicted, I rashly said, All men are liars.
What shall I render unto the Eternal for all his benefits towards me? I will raise the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Eternal. My vows unto the Eternal will I now pay in the presence of all his people. Precious in the sight of the Eternal is the death of his pious servants; therefore unto thee, O Eternal! consider that I am thy servant, the son of thy handmaid, thou hast loosened my bonds. A sacrifice of thanksgiving will I offer unto thee, and invoke the name of the Eternal. My vows unto the Eternal will I now pay in the presence of all his people. In the courts of the house of the Eternal, in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem. Halleluyah.
Ps. cxvii. — Praise the Eternal all ye nations: praise him all ye people: for great is his merciful kindness towards us: and the truth of the Eternal endureth for ever. Halleluyah.<br> Psalm xviii. O give thanks unto the Eternal, for he is good — for his mercy endureth for ever.<br>Let Israel now declare — that his mercy endureth for ever.<br>Let the house of Aaron now declare — that his mercy endureth for ever.<br>Let those who venerate the Eternal now declare — that his mercy endureth for ever. 

In straitness I called on the Eternal, and the Eternal answered me with enlargement. The Eternal is for me, I will not fear: what can man do unto me? The Eternal is with me, and those who help me: I therefore shall see the confusion of those who hate me. It is better to trust in the Eternal than to rely on man. Better is it to trust in the Eternal, than to rely on princes. All nations beset me around; but in the name of the Eternal will I cut them off. They surrounded me, yea, they encompassed me about; but in the name of the Eternal will I cut them off. They compassed me about like bees, they flashed round me as a fire of thorns; but in the name of the Eternal will I cut them off. They thrust sore at me, that I might fall: but the Eternal supported me. The Eternal is my strength and song, and he is become my salvation. The voice of joyous song and salvation resounds in the tabernacles of the righteous: "The right hand of the Eternal hath done valiantly: the right hand of the Eternal is exalted; the right hand of the Eternal hath done valiantly. I shall not die yet, but shall live to proclaim the works of the Eternal. He hath indeed chastised me, but he hath not given me over unto death. Open the gates of righteousness for me, that I may enter through them, to praise the Eternal. This is the gate of the Eternal into which the righteous shall enter.
I will praise thee, for thou hast answered me, and art become my salvation. [I will, &amp;c.] <br>The stone which the builders rejected, hath become the corner head-stone. [The stone, &amp;c.] <br>This is from the Eternal: it is marvellous in our eyes. [This is from, &amp;c.] <br>This is the day which the Eternal hath appointed, we will rejoice, and be glad thereon. [This, &amp;c.]
O Eternal! save us now we beseech thee. O Eternal! save us now we beseech thee. <br>O Eternal! send now prosperity we beseech thee! O Eternal! send now prosperity we beseech thee!
Blessed be he who cometh in the name of the Eternal: we from the house of the Eternal do bless you. [Blessed, &amp;c.] <br> God is Eternal; and he hath enlightened us. Bring the sacrifice bound with myrtle branches to the horns of the altar. [God is Eternal, &amp;c.] <br>Thou art my God, and I will praise thee; O my God, I will extol thee! [ Thou art, &amp;c.] <br>O give thanks unto the Eternal, for he is good, for his mercy endureth for ever. [O give thanks, &amp;c.]
All thy works praise thee, O Eternal! thy pious servants, with the righteous who perform thy will, and thy people, the house of Israel, with joyful song give thanks, bless, praise, glorify, extol, reverence, sanctify, and acknowledge thy kingly name, O our King! for to thee it is proper to offer thanksgiving, and pleasant to sing praise to thy name, for thou art God from everlasting to everlasting.

Songs of Praise and Thanks

Psalm cxxxvii. — O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy endureth for ever. <br>O give thanks to the God of gods: for his mercy endureth for ever. <br>O give thanks to the Lord of lords: for his mercy endureth for ever. <br>To him who alone performeth great wonders: for his mercy endureth for ever. <br>To him who with supreme understanding made the heavens: for his mercy endureth for ever. <br> To him who stretched out the earth above the waters: for his mercy endureth for ever. <br>To him who made great lights: for his mercy endureth for ever. <br>The sun to rule by day: for his mercy endureth for ever. <br> The moon and the stars to rule by night: for his mercy endureth for ever. <br>To him who smote the Egyptians in their first-born: for his mercy endureth for ever. <br>And brought forth Israel from among them: for his mercy endureth for ever. <br>With a mighty hand and a stretched-out arm: for his mercy endureth for ever. <br>To him who divided the Red Sea into parts: for his mercy endureth for ever.<br>And caused Israel to pass through the midst of it: for his mercy endureth for ever.<br>But overthrew Pharaoh, and his host in the Red Sea: for his mercy endureth for ever. To him who led his people through the wilderness: for his mercy endureth for ever. <br>And smote great kings: for his mercy endureth for ever. <br>And slew mighty kings: for his mercy endureth for ever. <br>Sihon king of the Amorites: for his mercy endureth for ever. <br>And Og king of Bashan: for his mercy endureth for ever. <br>And gave their land as a heritage: for his mercy endureth for ever. <br>As a heritage to his servant Israel: for his mercy endureth for ever. <br>Who remembered us in our low state: for his mercy endureth for ever. <br>And redeemed us from our oppressors: for his mercy endureth for ever.<br>Who giveth food to all flesh: for his mercy endureth for ever. <br>O give thanks unto the God of heaven: for his mercy endureth for ever.
The breath of all living shall bless thy name, O Eternal, our God! and the spirit of all flesh shall continually glorify and extol thy memorial, O our King! for thou art God from everlasting to everlasting: and besides thee we have neither king, redeemer, nor saviour, who redeemeth, delivereth, maintaineth, and hath compassion on us in all times of trouble and distress: we have no king but thee. Thou art God of the first and the last ages: God of all creatures, and Lord of all generations; who is adored with all manner of praise; who governeth his world with tenderness, and his creatures with mercy. Lo! the Eternal neither slumbereth, nor sleepeth: he raiseth those who sleep, and awakeneth those who slumber: he causeth the dumb to speak; looseth those that are bound, supporteth the fallen, and raiseth those up who are bowed down, and therefore, to thee only do we render adoration.
Were our mouths filled with sacred song, as the sea is with water, our tongues shouting loudly as its roaring billows; and our lips extended with praise like the widely-spread firmament: and our eyes sparkling like the sun and the moon: and our hands extended like the eagles' wings in the skies: and our feet swift as the hind's: we should yet be deficient to render sufficient thanks unto thee, O Lord, our God! and the God of our fathers, or to bless thy name, for even one of the innumerable benefits which thou hast conferred upon us and our ancestors. For thou, O Lord, our God! didst redeem us from Egypt, and release us from the house of bondage; in time of famine didst thou feed us; and in plenty thou didst provide for us. From the sword thou didst deliver us, from the pestilence thou didst save us, and from many sore diseases thou didst relieve us.
Hitherto thy tender mercies have supported us, and thy kindness hath not forsaken us; and O Lord, our God! do never forsake us. And therefore the members of which thou hast branched out in us, the spirit and soul which thou hast breathed into our nostrils, and the tongue which thou hast placed in our mouth; lo! they shall continually give thanks, bless, praise, glorify, extol, reverence, sanctify, and ascribe sovereign power unto thy name, O our King! for every mouth shall adore thee, and every tongue swear fealty unto thee. Unto thee every knee shall bend; and those of high stature shall bow down before thee. Every heart shall fear thee; and the inward parts and reins shall sing praise unto thy name; as it is written. All my bones shall say, O Lord! who is like unto thee? "Who delivereth the poor from one of superior strength: the poor and needy from his oppressor." Who is like unto thee? who is equal unto thee? who can be compared unto thee, O thou, the great, mighty, and tremendous God! The most High God! possessor of heaven and earth. We will praise, adore, glorify, and bless thy holy name, as David said, "Bless the Lord, O my soul! and all that is within me, bless his holy name.''
Thou art the God! who art mighty in thy strength! who art great by the glory of thy name! who art mighty for ever, and fearful by thy fearful deeds! the King! who sitteth on the high and exalted throne.<br>Who inhabiteth eternity, exalted and holy is his name; and it is written: "Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous, for to the upright praise is comely." With the mouth of the upright shalt thou be praised; blessed with the words of the righteous; extolled with the tongue of the pious; and sanctified in the midst of saints.<br>Also in the congregation of the tens of thousands of thy people, the house of Israel, shall thy name, O our King! be glorified throughout all generations; for such is the duty of every created being in thy presence, O Eternal, our God! and God of our fathers, to thank, praise, extol, glorify, exalt, ascribe glory, bless, magnify, and adore thee, even beyond all the songs and praises of thy servant David, the son of Jesse, thy anointed. 
Thy name shall be praised for ever, our King! thou great, holy, and sovereign God, in heaven and on earth; for unto thee, O Eternal our God! and God of our fathers, appertain song and praise; hymn and psalm; strength and dominion; victory, power, and greatness; adoration and glory; holiness and majesty; blessings and thanksgivings, henceforth and even unto everlasting. Blessed art thou, O Eternal! God and King, great above all praises, the God of thanksgiving, the Lord of wonders, who findest delight in songs of psalmody, King, Almighty! who livest eternally.

Fourth Cup of Wine

Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God, who createst the fruit of the vine.
<small><i>Blessed art thou, O Eternal, for the land, and for the fruit of the vine.</i></small>
Blessed art thou, O Eternal, our God, King of the universe, for the vine, and for the fruit of the vine, and for the produce of the field; and for that desirable, good, and ample land which thou wast pleased to cause our ancestors to inherit, to eat of the fruit, and be satisfied with its goodness. Have compassion, O Eternal, our God, upon us, and upon Israel thy people, and upon Jerusalem thy city, and upon Zion, the residence of thy glory, and upon thy altar and thy temple: and rebuild Jerusalem, the holy city, speedily, in our days. Cause to go up thither, and let us there rejoice on this (on Sabbath add, Sabbath-day, and this) day of the Feast of Unleavened bread, for thou, O Eternal, our God, art good and beneficent unto all, and therefore do we give thanks unto thee for the land, and for the fruit of the vine.
Blessed art thou, O Eternal, our God, King of the universe, creator of the vine.

Nirtzah

Chasal Siddur Pesach

PRAY FOR THE DIVINE ACCEPTANCE OP THE SERVICE.

L'Shana HaBaa

O grant that next year we may be in Jerusalem!

And It Happened at Midnight


And thus "it was at midnight."
Of old thou didst wondrously perform many miracles in the night. At the beginning of the first watch of this night. 
When thou didst cause Abraham, the righteous convert, to be victorious through the division of his band at night. It was at midnight.
Thou didst threaten Abimelech, the king of Gerar, in a dream of the night. Thou didst terrify Laban, the Syrian, on the eve of his meeting with Jacob,— in the night.
And Israel wrestled with the angel and prevailed against him, in the night. It was at midnight.
The first-born of the progeny of Patros thou didst smite at midnight. Their vigorous youth they found not, when they arose in that night. The host of the prince of Haroseth, thou didst trample down through the agency of the stars of the night. It was at midnight. 
When the blaspheming Senachereb purposed to assail thine habitation, thou didst frustrate him through the dead carcases of his host, in the night. Bel and its image were hurled down in the darkness of the night. To Daniel, the much beloved man, was the mysterious vision revealed in the night. It was at midnight. 
Belshazzar who made himself drunken, out of the holy vessels, was slain on that same night. Daniel, who was saved from the lion's den, interpreted the terrifying dreams of the night. Haman the Agagite, who cherished enmity, wrote his letters to exterminate the Jews, at night. It was at midnight. 
Thou didst awaken against him thy all-conquering power by disturbing the sleep of the king, at night. Thou wilt tread the wine-press for them who anxiously ask, Watchman what of the night? Let the Eternal, the Watchman of Israel, cry out and say, The morning hath come as well as the night. It was at midnight.
O let the day of redemption approach, which shall be neither day nor night. Make known, O Most High! that thine is the day and thine also the night. Appoint watchmen to thy city, all day and all night. Illumine, as with the light of day, the darkness of our night.  It was at midnight.

Zevach Pesach

<small><i>On the Second Night say:</i></small>
Ye shall say it is the sacrifice of the Passover. Thy mighty power didst thou wonderfully display on the Passover. To be the chief of all the solemn feasts thou didst exalt the Passover.  Thou didst reveal to Abraham, the child of the East, the redemption which should be wrought at midnight, on the Passover. Ye shall say it is the sacrifice of the Passover.
Thou didst visit his door during the heat of the day, on the Passover. He entertained the angels with unleavened cakes, on the Passover. To the herd he ran and prepared a calf, a prototype of the sacrifice of the Passover.  Ye shall say it is the sacrifice of the Passover.
The Sodomites incensed God, and were consumed with fire on the Passover. Lot was delivered from among them, and he baked unleavened cakes on the Passover. Thou didst sweep the land of Moph and Noph, when thou didst pass through it, on the Passover. Ye shall say it is the sacrifice of the Passover.
Lord, thou didst smite the head of every first-born on the night of the observance of the Passover. Yet didst thou, the Omnipotent, pass over Israel, thy first-born son, when thou sawest the blood of the sacrifice of the Passover. And didst not suffer the destroyer to enter within my doors, on the Passover. Ye shall say it is the sacrifice of the Passover.
Jericho when closely shut up, was taken at the season of the Passover. Midian was destroyed by the cake of barley bread made from the Omer of the Passover. The fat ones of Pul and Lud were to be burned in the blaze, kindled on the Passover. Ye shall say it is the sacrifice of the Passover.
The Assyrian still remained at Nob, till the approach of the season of the Passover. The hand wrote the extermination of Babylon "the deep abyss," on the Passover. The "watch was then set," and "the table then spread" on the Passover. Ye shall say it is the sacrifice of the Passover.
Hadassah assembled the congregation to fast three days on the Passover. Haman, the head of a wicked house, thou didst destroy on a gallows fifty cubits high, on the Passover. The double punishment wilt thou in a moment bring on Uts on the Passover. Thy hand will then shew itself omnipotent, and thy right hand be exalted as on the night when was sacrified the festival of the Passover. Ye shall say it is the sacrifice of the Passover.

Ki Lo Na'e

To him praise is becoming: to him praise will always be becoming.
He is all powerful in his kingdom; he is essentially supreme: his angelic hosts thus say unto him Thine and thine only, thine, yea thine, thine, surely thine, thine, O Eternal! is the sovereignty. To him praise is becoming: to him praise will always be becoming.
He is most exalted in his kingdom, he is essentially most glorious, his ministrants thus say unto him, Thine, and thine only, thine, yea thine, thine, surely thine, O Eternal! is the sovereignty.  To him praise is becoming, to him praise will always be becoming.
He is most pure in his kingdom, he is essentially the most mighty, his archangels thus say unto him: Thine, and thine only; thine, yea, thine; thine, surely thine; thine, O Eternal, is the sovereignty!  To him praise is becoming, to him praise will always be becoming.
He is unique in his kingdom, he is essentially all-potent, his servitors thus say unto him: Thine, and thine only; thine, yea, thine; thine, surely thine; thine, O Eternal, is the sovereignty! To him praise is becoming, to him praise will always be becoming.
He is the supreme ruler in his kingdom, he is essentially most awful, his surrounding hosts thus say unto him: Thine, and thine only; thine, yea, thine; thine, surely thine; thine, O Eternal, is the sovereignty. To him praise is becoming, to him praise will always be becoming.
He is the most meek in his kingdom, he is essentially a redeemer, his righteous ones thus say unto him: Thine, and thine only; thine, yea, thine; thine, surely thine; thine, O Eternal, is the sovereignty. To him praise is becoming, to him praise will always be becoming.
He is most holy in his kingdom, he is essentially most merciful, his bright "Shinanim," thus say unto him: Thine, and thine only; thine, yea, thine; thine, surely thine; thine, O Eternal, is the sovereignty. To him praise is becoming, to him praise will always be becoming.
He is Almighty in his kingdom, he is essentially the upholder, of all his perfect ones who thus say unto him: Thine, and thine only; thine, yea, thine; thine, O Eternal, is the sovereignty. To him praise is becoming, to him praise will always be becoming.

Adir Hu

Oh, may He who is most mighty soon rebuild his house; speedily, speedily, soon, in our days; O God! rebuild it, O God! rebuild it, rebuild thine house betimes.
May He who is all-honoured and all-worthy, most immaculate and merciful, soon, rebuild his house; speedily, speedily, soon, in our days; O God! rebuild it, O God! rebuild it, rebuild thine house betimes.
May He who is most pure, the sole God, soon, rebuild his house; speedily, speedily, soon, in our days; O God! rebuild it, O God! rebuild it, rebuild thine house betimes.


May he who is the most glorious and elevated, the God of strength, soon, rebuild his house; speedily, speedily, soon, in our days; O God! rebuild it, O God! rebuild it, rebuild thine house betimes.
May He who is the redeemer, the all-righteous, the most holy, soon, rebuild his house, speedily, speedily, soon, in our days, O God! rebuild it, O God! rebuild it, rebuild thine house betimes.

Sefirat HaOmer

<small><i>On the Second Night of the Festival the following, until "thy law" is said.</i></small>
Blessed art thou, O Eternal, our God! King of the universe, who hath sanctified us with thy commandments, and commanded us to count the days of the "Omer." This is the First Day of the "Omer." 

Echad Mi Yodea

Who knoweth one? I, saith Israel, know One: One is God, who is over heaven and earth. <br>Who knoweth two? I, saith Israel, know two: there are two tables of The covenant; but One is our God who is over heaven and earth. <br> Who knoweth three? I, saith Israel, know three: there are three patriarchs, the two tables of the covenant; but One is our God who is over heaven and earth. <br> Who knoweth four? I, saith Israel, know four: there are the four matrons, three patriarchs, two tables of the covenant; but One is our God who made heaven and earth. <br> Who knoweth five? I, saith Israel, know five: there are five books of Moses, four matrons, three patriarchs, two tables of the covenant; but One is our God who is over heaven and earth. <br> Who knoweth six? I, saith Israel, know six: there are six books of the mishna, five books of the Law, four matrons, three patriarchs, two tables of the covenant; but One is our God who is over heaven and earth. <br> Who knoweth seven? I, saith Israel, know seven: there are seven days in the week, six books of the Mishnah, five books of the Law, four matrons, three patriarchs, two tables of covenant; but One is our God who is over heaven and earth. <br> Who knoweth eight? I, saith Israel, know eight. there are eight days preceding circumcision, seven days in the week, six books of the Mishnah, five books of the Law, four matrons, threee patriarchs, two tables of the covenant; but One is our God who is over heaven and earth.  <br> Who knoweth nine? I, saith Israel, know nine: nine months preceding child-birth, eight days preceding circumcision, seven days in the week, six books of the Mishnah, five books of the Law, four matrons, three patriarchs, two tables of the covenant; but One is our God who is over heaven and earth.  <br> Who knoweth ten? I, saith Israel, know ten: there are ten commandments, nine months preceding child birth, eight days preceding circumcision, seven days in the week, six books of the Mishnah, five books of the Law, four matrons, three patriarchs, two tables of the covenant; but One is our God who is over heaven and earth. <br> Who knoweth eleven? I, saith Israel, know eleven: there are eleven stars, ten commandments, nine months preceding child-birth, eight days preceding circumcision, seven days in the week, six books in the Mishnah, five books of the Law, four matrons, three patriarchs, two tables of the covenant; but One is our God who is over heaven and earth.  <br> Who knoweth twelve? I, saith Israel, know twelve: there are twelve tribes, eleven stars, ten commandments, nine months preceding child-birth, eight days preceding circumcision, seven days in the week, six books of the Law, four matrons, three patriarchs, two tables of the covenant; but One is our God who is over the heavens and the earth.  <br> Who knoweth thirteen? I, saith Israel, know thirteen: thirteen divine attributes, twelve tribes, eleven stars, ten commandments, nine months preceding child birth, eight days preceding circumcision, seven days in the week, six books of the Mishnah, five books of the Law, four matrons, three patriarchs, two tables of the covenant; but One is our God who is over the heavens and the earth.

Chad Gadya

One only kid, one only kid, which my father bought for two zuzim; one only kid, one only kid.
And a cat came and devoured the kid, which my father bought for two zuzim; one only kid, one only kid.
And a dog came and bit the cat, which had devoured the kid, which my father bought for two zuzim; one only kid, one only kid.
Then a staff came and smote the dog, which had bitten the cat, which had devoured the kid, which my father bought for two zuzim; one only kid, one only kid.
Then a fire came, and burnt the staff, which had smitten the dog, which had bitten the cat, which had devoured the kid, which my father bought for two zuzim; one only kid, one only kid.
Then water came, and extinguished the fire, which had burnt the staff, which had smitten the dog, which had bit ten the cat, which had devoured the kid, which my father bought for two zuzim; one only kid, one only kid.
Then the ox came, and drank the water, which had extinguished the fire, which had burnt the staff, which had smitten the dog, which had bitten the cat, which had devoured the kid, which my father bought for two zuzim; one only kid, one only kid.
Then the slaughterer came, and slaughtered the ox, which had drunk the water, which had extinguished the fire, which had burnt the staff, which had smitten the dog, which had bitten the cat, which had devoured the kid, which my father bought for two zuzim; one only kid, one only kid.
Then the angel of death came, and slew the slaughterer, who had slaughtered the ox, which had drunk the water, which had extinguished the fire, which had burnt the staff, which had smitten the dog, which had bitten the cat, which had devoured the kid, which my father bought for two zuzim; one only kid, one only kid.
The came the Most Holy, blessed be He, and slew the angel of death, who had slain the slaughterer, who had slaughtered the ox, which had drunk the water, which had burnt the staff, which had smitten the dog, which had bit ten the cat, which had devoured the kid, which my father bought for two zuzim; one only kid, one only kid.