Pesach Haggadah
הגדה של פסח
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Pesach Haggadah

Kadesh



Urchatz



Karpas



Blessed are You, Adonai our God, Sovereign of the universe, who creates the fruit of the earth.

Yachatz



Magid

Ha Lachma Anya

Telling [the Story of the Exodus]

This is the bread of affliction that our ancestors ate in the land of Egypt.  Let all who are hungry come and eat.  Let anyone who are in need come and observe Passover. This year we are here; next year in the Land of Israel.  This year we are slaves; next year we shall be free.

Four Questions


How is this night different from all other nights? On all other nights we eat bread or matzah.  Why on this night only matzah? On all other nights we eat any kind of herbs.  Why on this night bitter herbs? On all other nights we need not dip our herbs even once.  Why on this night do we dip twice? On all other nights we eat either sitting or reclining.  Why on this	night do we all recline?

We Were Slaves in Egypt


We were slaves to Pharaoh in Egypt, and God brought us out from there “with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm” (Psalms 136:12). And if the Holy One, Blessed be He, had not brought our ancestors out of Egypt, we, and our children, and our children’s children would still be slaves to Pharaoh in Egypt. 

Story of the Five Rabbis



The Four Sons


What does the wise one say? “What are testimonies, laws, and rulings that Adonai our God has enjoined upon you?” And you should say to him, according to the laws of Passover, “one may not indulge in revelry after the paschal meal.”
What does the wicked one say? “What does this rite mean to you?” He says “to you” and not to himself.  And since he removes himself from the community, he is a heretic.  And therefore, in return, you should blunt his teeth and say to him, “It is because of what Adonai did for me when I came out of Egypt;” “for me” and not for him.  If he had been there, he would not have been redeemed.
What does the simple one say? “What does this mean?” And you shall say to him: “With a mighty hand Adonai brought us out of Egypt, from the house of bondage.”
And to the one who does not know how to ask a question – You take the initiative, as it says: “And you shall explain to your child on that day, ‘It is for this that Adonai did these things for me when I came out of Egypt.’”

Yechol Me'rosh Chodesh



In the Beginning Our Fathers Were Idol Worshipers





And this is the promise that has sustained our ancestors and ourselves, for it was not just once that somebody rose against us to destroy us; for in every generation they rise up to destroy us and the Holy One, Blessed be He, saves us from their hands.

First Fruits Declaration







"The Egyptians did bad to us and oppressed us; they imposed heavy labor upon us." (Deuteronomy 26:6) "The Egyptians did bad to us" - as it is stated (Exodus 1:10), "Let us be wise towards him, lest he multiply and it will be that when war is called, he too will join with our enemies and fight against us and go up from the land."

The Ten Plagues







Blood
Frogs
Lice
Wild Beasts
Pestilence
Boils
Hail
Locusts
Darkness
Plague of the First Born

Dayenu



Rabban Gamliel's Three Things



First Half of Hallel


At this moment, then, we thank, praise, glorify, exalt and bless God who performed all these miracles for our ancestors and for us.  God brought us from slavery to freedom, from sorrow to joy, from mourning to festivity, from darkness to great light, from servitude to redemption.  Let us then sing a new song: HALLELUJAH!
Hallelujah! Servants of Adonai, sing praise, praise the name of Adonai.  Let the name of Adonai be blessed now and forever.  From east to west the name of Adonai is praised. Adonai is supreme over all nations; God’s glory is above the heavens.  Who is like Adonai our God, enthroned on high, concerned with all below in the heavens and on earth? God raises the poor out of dust, and the needy from the refuse heap, to seat them with nobility, with the most noble of God’s people.  And the barren woman, in her house, will become a happy mother of children. Hallelujah!
When Israel left Egypt, the house of Jacob abandoned an alien tongue, Judah became God’s holy one; Israel – God’s reign.  The sea saw them and fled, the Jordan flowed backward.  Mountains skipped like rams, hills like lambs.  What frightened you, Sea, that you fled, Jordan, that you flowed backward, Mountains, that you skipped like rams, Hills, like lambs? The earth trembles at the presence of Adonai, at the presence of Jacob’s God, who turns the rock into a pool of water, flint into a fountain. 

Second Cup of Wine



Rachtzah



Motzi Matzah



Maror



Korech



Shulchan Orech



Tzafun



Barech

Birkat Hamazon



Third Cup of Wine



Pour Out Thy Wrath



Hallel

Second Half of Hallel



Songs of Praise and Thanks



Fourth Cup of Wine



Nirtzah

Chasal Siddur Pesach



L'Shana HaBaa



And It Happened at Midnight



Zevach Pesach



Ki Lo Na'e



Adir Hu



Sefirat HaOmer



Echad Mi Yodea



Chad Gadya

