Mishneh Torah, Shofar, Sukkah and Lulav
משנה תורה, הלכות שופר וסוכה ולולב
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Mishneh Torah, Shofar, Sukkah and Lulav



Chapter 1

It is a biblical commandment to hear the sound of the shofar on Rosh Hashannah as it says "it is a day of blowing the horn unto you." The horn which is blown, both on Rosh Hashannah and for the Jubilee year, is a bent ram's horn. All Shofars are invalid except the horn of a ram. Even though a Shofar is not mentioned explicitly in the passage about Rosh Hashannah, it does say in the passage about the Jubilee year "Then shalt thou make proclamation with the blast of the Shofar" and we have learned through the Tradition that just as the "teruah" of the Jubilee year is with a shofar, so is the "teruah" of Rosh Hashannah.

A priori, we do not blow with a shofar of idolaters (gentiles). But if one blew [with one], he has fulfilled [the commandment]. And if one blew [with a shofar] of a condemned city (<i>eer hanidachat</i>), he has not fulfilled [it]. With a stolen shofar with which he has blown, he has fulfilled [it]; as the commandment is only listening to the sound - even though he did not touch it and did not raise it up, the listener has fulfilled [it]; and there is no law of theft with sound. And so [too with] the shofar of a burnt offering, he should not blow, but if he blew, he has fulfilled [it]; as there is no law of misappropriating [the sacred] with sound. And if you say, "Did he not derive pleasure from listening to the sound"; [the answer is] that the commandments are not given for pleasure . Therefore, one who has vowed not to derive pleasure from the shofar is permitted to blow the blow of the commandment with it.

Chapter 2


...



If the festival of Rosh Hashanah falls on the Sabbath, the shofar is not sounded in every place. [This law was enacted] even though blowing [the shofar] was forbidden only as sh'vut. It would be appropriate for [the shofar] to be sounded, for a positive commandment of the Torah should supersede sh'vut instituted by the Sages. If so, why is the shofar not sounded? Because of a decree [of the Sages] lest a person take it in his hands and carry it to a colleague so that the latter can blow for him, and [in the process,] carry it four cubits in the public domain or transfer it from one domain to another, and thus violate a prohibition punishable by being stoned to death. [This is necessary because] all are obligated in the mitzvah of blowing the shofar, but not all are skilled in it.

Chapter 3

How many blasts is one required to hear on Rosh Hashana? Nine Tekias. This is because the Torah writes 'teruah' with regards to the jubilee year and Rosh Hashana three times. Every 'teruah' requires a straight blast before and after it. Through oral tradition, we learn that all 'teruahs' in the seventh month are the same, whether for Rosh Hashana, or Yom Kippur of the jubilee year, we blow nine blasts. [The setup is] Tekiah, Teruah, Tekiah. Tekiah, Teruah, Tekiah. Tekiah, Teruah, Tekiah.
This Teruah that the Torah discusses, due to the many years of exile, we are unsure what it is. It may be the wail that women wail amongst themselves whilst crying. It may be the sigh that one does, one after the other, whilst they are worried about a great stress. It may also be both together, the sigh followed by the cry, as it usually comes afterwards. This may be called teruah, as this is the way of a worrier, to first sigh, and then cry. We therefore do all options.
The wail is what we call 'Teruah'. The sighing, one after another, is what we called three 'Shevarim'. The order of shofar blasts is therefore thus. The blessing is recited, Tekia is sounded, followed by three Shevarim, a Teruah and a Tekia. This is repeated three times. Then Tekiah is sounded, followed by three Shevarim and a Tekiah. This is repeated three times. Then Tekiah is sounded, followed by Teruah and Tekiah. This is also repeated three times. Therefore, the numbers of blasts is thirty, in order to avoid any doubts.

Chapter 4



Chapter 5

The covering of the sukkah is not kosher from all materials.  One may cover only with materials that grew from the earth, that was uprooted from the earth and that is not susceptible to ritual impurity (tumah) and does not have a bad smell nor has fallen or is wilted.

Chapter 6








One who has their head and the majority of their body in the sukkah and their table in the house, or otherwise outside of the sukkah, and eats -- this is forbidden, and it's as though they did not eat in the sukkah, until the table is within the sukkah. This is a decree, lest they be drawn after their table. And this is even with a very large sukkah.

Chapter 7



Chapter 8











If partners bought a Lulav or Etrog together, neither of them can fulfill the Mitzva on the first day until the other gives him his portion as a gift. If brothers bought multiple Etrogs with money from a shared estate and one brother took one etrog on the first day, he has fulfilled his obligation. However if they keep accounts of the estate money he has not fulfilled his obligation until the other brother gives it to him as a gift. And even if one bought an Etrog and the other a quince or one bought an etrog, a quince, and a pomegranate he has not discharged his obligation until the other brother gives him his share in the fruit even if he would not mind under normal circumstances if the first brother ate it.
Although it is a Mitzvah  to rejoice on all festivals, on the Sukkot holiday there was a time of overabundant joy in the Holy Temple, for it is written, "...you shall rejoice before the LORD your God for seven days." And how was this done? On the eve of the first holiday they would arrange in the Holy Temple a place for the women above and for the men below so that they might not mix one with the other. And they began to rejoice from the night after the first holiday, and continued on each and every day of the intercessory days of the holiday. They began after the Tamid offering was made in the evening to rejoice unto the rest of the day and through the night.
And how was this joy [performed]? The flute was struck and the violin, harps, and cymbals, were played, and every person played any instrument he knew how to play. And those who knew to sing, sang. And they danced, and clapped their hands and thighs, and spun, and crowed, each according to their ability, and spoke words of praise and song. And this joy does not supercede the Sabbath or the Holiday.
It is an obligation to indulge in this merriment. This was not done by the folk of the land or whoever so wished, but by the greatest sages of Israel and the heads of the Yeshivot and the sanhedrin and the pious ones and the elders and the men of virtuous deeds, they were the ones who danced and clapped and played instruments and rejoiced during the days of Sukkot. But the entire People, the men and the women, all would come to look and to listen.
The joy that a person should express in performing the Commandment[s] and in the love of God who commanded them, is a great worship [to God]. Whoever avoids expressing this joy is worthy of being punished for it, as it is stated: "...in return for you not worshipping the LORD your God with joy and with goodness of heart." And whoever carries hismelf haughtily and takes pride in himself and considers hismelf too dignified in such places is a sinner and a fool. Concerning this Solomon admonished and said: "Do not dignify yourself in front of a king." But whoever lowers himself and eases oneself in such places is the [real] great and dignified one who worships out of love. So did David, King of Israel, say: "...and I would be even less worthy than this and would be lowly in my own eyes." There is no greatness and honor but to rejoice before God, as it is stated: "And King David was spinning and crowing before God" etc. Finished are the laws of the Lulav, Praise to the Inspector of kidneys and heart.