Mishneh Torah, Sabbath
משנה תורה, הלכות שבת
Maimonides' Mishneh Torah, edited by Philip Birnbaum, New York, 1967
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH002108864

Mishneh Torah, Sabbath



Chapter 1

To rest on the seventh day of the week is a positive command, for it is written: "On the seventh day you shall rest" (Exodus 23:12). Anyone who works on it negates a positive command while transgressing a negative command, for it is written: "You shall do no work" (Exodus 20:10). What penalty does he deserve for doing work? If he did it voluntarily, willfully, he deserves <i>kareth;</i> if he acted in the presence of witnesses who forewarned him, he is stoned; if he acted unintentionally, he must bring a standard sin-offering.
In Sabbath laws, wherever it is stated that someone deserves punishment for doing something, he deserves <i>kareth;</i> if he acted despite the forewarning of witnesses, he deserves stoning; if he committed the transgression inadvertently, he has to bring a sin-offering.

Chapter 2

Like all other precepts, the Sabbath is set aside where human life is in danger. For a person who is dangerously ill everything may be done on the Sabbath at the bidding of a local competent physician.— —
If it has been estimated on the Sabbath that the patient will require a certain treatment for eight days, we must not say: "Let us wait till evening, so as not to desecrate two Sabbaths." We should rather begin the treatment from that Sabbath day, and desecrate even a hundred Sabbaths for his sake. As long as he needs treatment in the presence of danger or possible danger, we should desecrate the Sabbath for his sake by lighting or extinguishing a lamp, by slaughtering, baking, cooking, heating water for drinking or bathing. The gist of it all is: in consideration of a person who is seriously ill, the Sabbath is like a weekday regarding every thing he needs.
These things should not be performed by non-Jews, minors, servants or women, lest they consider the Sabbath a light matter; instead, scholars and sages of Israel are to carry them out. One must not put off the desecration of the Sabbath in treating a serious patient, as it is written: "If a man obeys them he shall live by them" (Leviticus 18:5), but he must not die by them. From this you may infer that the laws of the Torah are not meant to wreak vengeance upon the world, but to bestow on it mercy, kindliness, and peace.— —
If one feels pain in his eyes, being inflamed or affected by some disease, and pus, tears or blood flow from them, he is considered seriously ill, and we may break the Sabbath in preparing whatever cure he needs.











We must save an endangered life on the Sabbath without first asking for permission from a religious authority. The more speedily a man saves a life, the more praise he deserves. If, for example, he sees a child falling into the lake on the Sabbath, he may cast a net and pull him out, even though he is likely to catch some fish along with him.





If a person traveling in the desert fails to know which day is Sabbath, he should count six days from the day he sensed the error and keep the seventh day as holy, reciting on it the Sabbath blessings, and the <i>Havdalah</i> at the conclusion of the Sabbath. Each day, even the day he recites the <i>Kiddush</i> and the <i>Havdalah</i>, he is allowed to do just enough for maintaining himself alive; he must not do more than is necessary to sustain himself, since each day there is doubt about Sabbath.— —

Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5

The lighting of Sabbath lights is not of free choice, to light or not to light as one chooses, nor is it the kind of religious performance that an individual is not called upon to make a special effort to render, such as preparing an <i>eruv</i> in courtyards or washing the hands before eating. It is rather a duty, binding on men and women alike; they are obligated to have lamps burning in their homes on Sabbath eve. Even if one has nothing to eat, let him go begging at the doors, buy oil, and light a lamp, forming an integral part of Sabbath delight (<i>oneg shabbath</i>). Before lighting, one should recite a blessing: "Blessed art thou, Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast sanctified us with thy commandments, and commanded us to light the Sabbath lights." This is on the same principle that one recites a benediction over all duties introduced by the sages.

The Sabbath lights should be lit during daytime, before sunset. This duty is assigned to women rather than men, because women are usually at home doing housework. Nevertheless, the man should caution them, asking them about it, and telling them and the other members of his household, every Friday before it gets dark: "Light the lights!" If it is doubtful whether darkness has already fallen or not, whether the Sabbath has or has not begun, the lights may not be lit.
The period from sunset until the time when three stars of medium size become visible is called twilight. It is uncertain whether this period is part of the preceding day or of the following night. We generally decide in favor of greater stringency on this score; hence, the Sabbath lights may not be lit during twilight.

Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12








Transfer from one domain to another, in either direction, is one of the principal kinds of work [forbidden on the Sabbath].— — Also, it has been transmitted by tradition that if one carries an object in a public domain for a distance of four cubits (six feet) he is subject to punishment as if he transferred it from one domain to another.
One is not subject to punishment for transfer from one domain to another unless he transfers an object sizable enough to be of use either from a private domain to a public domain or from a public domain to a private domain, by detaching the object from the one domain and depositing it in the other. If, however, one detaches the object but does not deposit it, or deposits it without having first detached it, or transfers an object of less than the minimum size, he is free from liability. Similarly, if one transports an object for a distance of four cubits in a public domain, he is not subject to punishment unless he detaches the minimum size at one end and deposits it at the other.
He who throws or passes an object from one domain to another domain commits an act secondary to that of carrying an object from one domain to another, and is liable. Similarly, he who throws or passes an object a distance of four cubits in a public domain commits an act secondary to that of carrying an object from one domain to another, and is liable.— —

Chapter 13



Chapter 14

Four domains are distinguishable in connection with the Sabbath: the private domain, the public domain, the semi-public domain, and the exempted region. What is meant by a public domain? Deserts, forests, market places, and thoroughfares opening into them, provided that any such public road is at least sixteen cubits wide and has no roof over it. What is regarded as a private domain? A mound ten or more handbreadths high and four or more handbreadths square; a groove ten or more handbreadths deep and four or more handbreadths square; and any area four or more handbreadths square enclosed within walls at least ten handbreadths high. If such an area is enclosed for residential purposes, it may even be many miles in extent. Thus a walled town, the gates of which are closed at night; alleys having walls on three sides and a side-post on the fourth; and a courtyard, a sheepfold or a sheep-pen enclosed for residential purposes — — all are genuine private domains.


What is meant by a semi-public domain? A mound four or more handbreadths square and between three and ten handbreadths high, for no semi-public domain can ever be more than ten handbreadths high or less than four handbreadths square; a groove four or more handbreadths square and between three and ten handbreadths deep; an area four or more handbreadths square enclosed by walls between three and ten handbreadths high; a nook adjacent to a public domain, that is, an area enclosed by walls on three sides and with its fourth side opening into a public domain; for example, an alley that has neither a side-post nor crossbeam on the fourth side; lakes, and arable land in both summer and winter — — all are semi-public domains.


What is meant by an exempted region? An area less than four handbreadths square the height of which is from three handbreadths as far as the sky, since whatever is less than three handbreadths high is deemed part of the ground.— —



It is permissible to move objects throughout the whole of a private domain or an exempted region. Even if one of these two kinds of domain is several miles long, one may nevertheless move objects throughout the whole of it. In a public or semi-public domain, however, articles may not be moved more than four cubits at one time.— —
Just as it is permissible to move articles throughout the whole of an exempted region, so also it is permissible to transfer articles from an exempted region to a private or public domain, or, needless to say, to a semi-public domain. One may likewise bring articles into an exempted region from a private or a public domain, or, needless to say, from a semi-public domain.
Just as it is forbidden to move articles throughout the whole of a semi-public domain, so also it is forbidden to transfer articles from a semi-public domain to a private or a public domain, or to bring articles into a semi-public domain from a private or a public domain. If, however, one does transfer an object from a semi-public domain, or into it, he is free from liability.

Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21

It is written in the Torah "you shall rest," implying that one must rest from doing things that are not even actual work. There are many things which the sages prohibited on the ground that they do not harmonize with the idea of rest. Some things are forbidden because they resemble prohibited kinds of work; others are forbidden as a preventive measure lest they may result in doing work that is forbidden under the penalty of stoning. And these are them.
Whoever levels grooves in the ground is guilty of plowing [on the Sabbath].— —
Women who play games with walnuts, almonds, and the like, must not play with these on the Sabbath, lest they level grooves [on the bare ground, which is forbidden]. It is forbidden to sweep the ground, lest one levels grooves, unless it is paved with stones.— —



Fruit that dropped from a tree on the Sabbath may not be eaten until after the conclusion of the Sabbath, lest one may come to plucking growing fruit.— —

One may not ride an animal on the Sabbath, lest he may come to cutting off a branch for use in guiding it.— —

Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24

Some acts are forbidden on the Sabbath even though they neither resemble nor lead to prohibited work. Why then were they forbidden? Because it is written: "If you refrain from following your business on the Sabbath, on my holy day… If you honor it, not following your wonted ways, not pursuing your business, nor speaking of it" (Isaiah 58:13). Hence, one is forbidden to go anywhere on the Sabbath in connection with his business, or even to talk about it. Thus one must not discuss with his partner what to sell on the next day, or what to buy, or how to build a certain house, or what merchandise to take to such-and-such a place. All this, and the like, is forbidden, for it is written "nor speaking of it." That is to say, speaking of business on the Sabbath is forbidden; thinking of it, however, is permitted.








If anything is forbidden because it conflicts with the idea of rest, the prohibition does not apply during twilight but during the actual Sabbath day. Indeed, during twilight such things are permitted if they are needed for some religious purpose or emergency.— — But if there is no emergency involved, nor religious purpose, it is forbidden.— —

The sages forbade the handling of certain articles on the Sabbath in the way they are handled on weekdays. Why did they enact such a prohibition? They reasoned as follows: Inasmuch as the prophets admonished us and charged us not to walk on the Sabbath in the manner we walk on weekdays, nor to converse on the Sabbath in the manner we converse on weekdays, since it is written "nor speaking of it," so much the more should we refrain from handling articles on the Sabbath in the manner they are handled on weekdays, so that one should not regard the Sabbath as if it were a weekday and be led to lift and rearrange articles from one corner to another or from one room to another, or to put stones out of the way, or do similar things. Since one is at leisure and at home, he might look about for something to do; the result would be that he would not rest at all, thus disregarding what is written in the Torah, "that they may rest…" (Exodus 23:12).

Chapter 25









It is forbidden to handle on the Sabbath any article of which a man takes particular care lest it may depreciate in value, such as tools set apart as merchandise or exceptionally valuable things that one carefully protects from deterioration. Such things are referred to as <i>set apart because of monetary loss</i>.— —
It is also forbidden to handle any article set apart because a prohibition is involved, such as a lamp which was lit for the Sabbath, or a <i>menorah</i> bearing a lighted candle, or a table with money on it, even if the light has gone out, and the money has fallen off the table.— —

Chapter 26



Chapter 27

If one goes out beyond the limit of the town on the Sabbath, he is lashed, for it is written: "Let no man go out of his place on the seventh day" (Exodus 16:29), and <i>place</i> in this verse signifies <i>city limit</i>. The Torah does not define the extent of this limit, but the Sages had a tradition that it is twelve miles, corresponding to the size of the Israelite camp in the wilderness; so this is what our teacher Moses meant to say to them: You shall not go out of the camp. The sages have enacted that one may not go out of the town beyond two thousand cubits, for two thousand cubits (0.7 miles) is defined as <i>open land about the city</i> (Numbers 35:5).
From this you may conclude that one may walk anywhere within the city on the Sabbath, even if it is large as Nineveh, whether it is walled or not. Furthermore, one may walk up to two thousand cubits outside of the city limits in any direction, the permitted area resembling a square tablet.— —

Chapter 28



Chapter 29

It is a positive duty to express the sanctity of the Sabbath day in words, for it is written: "Remember to sanctify the Sabbath day" (Exodus 20:8); that is to say, remember it in terms of praise and sanctification. One should remember it at its beginning and its conclusion by reciting the <i>Kiddush</i> when the Sabbath begins and the <i>Havdalah</i> when it ends.



One must not eat anything or drink wine once the Sabbath has arrived until he has recited the <i>Kiddush</i> benediction. Similarly, when the Sabbath has come to an end, one must not begin to eat or to drink, to do any work or even to taste anything at all, until he recites the <i>Havdalah;</i> one may, however, drink water.
The sages ordained that both the <i>Kiddush</i> and the <i>Havdalah</i> should be recited over wine. Even though he has already said the <i>Havdalah</i> as part of the evening service, he must recite it again over a cup of wine.— —

The <i>Kiddush</i> should be recited only where the meal is served. This means that a person is not to recite the <i>Kiddush</i> in one house and eat in another; but if he has recited the <i>Kiddush</i> in one corner of a room, he may eat in another corner. Why then is the <i>Kiddush</i> recited in the synagogue? For the benefit of transients who eat and drink there.









Just as <i>Kiddush</i> is recited on Friday nights and <i>Havdalah</i> on Saturday nights, so also is <i>Kiddush</i> recited on festival nights, and <i>Havdalah</i> at the termination of festivals and <i>Yom Kippur</i>, since all these are called <i>Sabbaths of the Lord</i> (Leviticus 23:38). <i>Havdalah</i> is recited also at the termination of a festival followed by <i>Hol ha-Mo'ed</i> and at the termination of a Sabbath followed by a festival, but is not recited at the termination of a festival followed by a Sabbath.










Why is a blessing recited over fragrant spices at the conclusion of the Sabbath? It is to cheer the soul which is saddened at the departure of the Sabbath.

Chapter 30

Four things have been enjoined regarding the Sabbath: two on biblical authority, and two on the authority of the sages and clearly expressed by the Prophets. The Torah says: <i>Remember</i> (Exodus 20:8) and <i>Observe</i> (Deuteronomy 5:12); the Prophets clearly speak of <i>Honor</i> and <i>Delight</i>, as it is written: "Call the Sabbath a delight, and the Lord's sacred day an honor" (Isaiah 58:13).
What is meant by <i>honor</i>? The sages explained this by declaring that each person should wash his face, hands and feet with hot water on Friday in honor of the Sabbath, and then enwrap himself in a fringed garment and be seated with dignity in expectation of the Sabbath, receiving it as if he were coming out to meet the king. The ancient sages used to assemble their disciples on Friday, put on their best clothes, and say: "Come, let us go out to meet King Sabbath."
We honor the Sabbath by wearing clean clothes. One must not wear weekday apparel on the Sabbath.— —
In deference to the Sabbath, it is forbidden to arrange for a festive meal to take place on Friday; it is, however, permissible to eat and drink until nightfall. Nevertheless, in deference to the Sabbath, one should refrain from having a regular meal the entire afternoon, that he may enter the Sabbath with a desire to eat.
One should spread his Sabbath table on Friday, even if he requires no more than an olive's bulk of food; so too, he should set his table at the end of the Sabbath, even if he requires only a minute amount of food, in order to honor the Sabbath both at its entrance and departure. One should also set the house in order on Friday before sunset in honor of the Sabbath. A lamp should be lit, a table spread, and a bed properly arranged. All these are marks of respect for the Sabbath.
Even a person of high rank, who does not as a rule buy things at the market or engage in household chores, should himself perform what is necessary for the Sabbath, for this is his way of showing respect. Some of the ancient sages used to chop wood for the cooking; others used to cook or salt meat or twine wicks or light lamps; others used to go out and buy food and drinks for the Sabbath, although none of them would usually do such things on weekdays. The more anyone honors the Sabbath in this manner, the more praise he deserves.
What is meant by Sabbath delight? The sages explained this by declaring that one should prepare rich food and fragrant beverages for the Sabbath as much as he can afford. The more anyone spends for the Sabbath and the preparation of varied tasty food, the more praise he deserves. If, however, he cannot afford this, he may fulfill the Sabbath-delight requirement by preparing anything like a vegetable stew in honor of the Sabbath. He is not obligated to strain himself, begging from others, in order to eat much on the Sabbath. The ancient sages said: "Rather make your Sabbath a weekday [with regard to festive meals] than be dependent on people."
If a person is comfortably rich and all his days are like Sabbath, he should eat different food on the Sabbath as a mark of distinction from the weekday food. If no change is possible, he should at least modify the schedule of his meals by eating later or earlier than usual.
One should eat three meals on the Sabbath: one in the evening, one in the morning, and one in the afternoon.— —

One must not travel more than three Persian miles (12 miles) beginning on Friday morning, so that he may arrive home when the day is still high and prepare his Sabbath meals; otherwise, his family would not know that he is coming home, in order to prepare food for him. Needless to say, if he is going to be the guest of others he should arrive early; otherwise, he would embarrass them, since they would have nothing prepared that is suited for guests.

— — A sea voyage should not begin later than three days before the Sabbath, so that one's mind should be at ease before the Sabbath, and that he should not be excessively uncomfortable.— —