Jerusalem Talmud Bikkurim
תלמוד ירושלמי בכורים
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Jerusalem Talmud Bikkurim



Chapter 1



Halakhah 1



Halakhah 2



Halakhah 3



Halakhah 4



Halakhah 5


Rabbi Liezer Ben Yaakov says ect. Taught in a Mishnah: Rabbi Yehudah says:l, "The daughter of a male convert is like the daughter of a male chalal." All expound the same scripture, (Yechezkel 44:22) "Only virgins, from the seed of the House of Israel." Rabbi Yehudah says, unless her father is of Jewish ancestry. Rabbi Liezer Ben Yaakov says, "unless either her father or mother are of Jewish ancestry. Rabbi Hose says, "unless they are born in the sanctity of Israel." Rabbi Shimon says, "unless her virginity developed in Israel. A Baraita taught in the name of Rabbi Shimon: A female convert, who converted before the age of three years and one day is eligible for the Kehunah, for it is written, (Bamidbar 31:18) "but all the children among the women who have not known a man intimately, keep alive for yourself." And Pinchas (son of Elazar the Kohen) was among them. And the Rabbis (say) "keep alive for yourself" (means) for your male slaves and for your female slaves.
Rabbi Yassa in the name of Rabbi Yochanan (says), The halachah follows Rabbi Yose, but the Kohanim accept upon themselves higher standards in accord with Rabbi Eliezar Ben Yaakov. A certain Kohen married the daughters of converts, and the incident came before Rabbi Abahu. He leaned over the bench; Rav Bivi said to (Rabbi Abahu), "is it not so that my master taught us that the halachah follows Rabbi Yose"? Said (Rabbi Abahu), "But did not the Kohanim accept upon themselves a higher standards in accord with Rabbi Eliezer Ben Yaakov"? Replied (Rav Bivi), "But do we administer lashes for a custom"? Replied (Rabbi Abahu), "If you see fit to placate me, then I will raise him." After he raised him, said (The Kohen), "Since the lashes have been untied, I am even permitted to her."
Rabbi Yaakov Bar Idi Bar Oshaya related an incident involving a family in the south, upon which people cast aspersions. Rebbi sent Rominos to investigate and he found that the grandmother had converted when she was younger than the age of three years and one day, and declared (family) fit for Kehunah. Rabbi Hosbaya said, "They were declared fit in accord with Rabbi Shimon." Rabbi Zebra said, "Here, they are in accord with all opinions." For Rabbi Zeira in the name of Rabbi Rav Adda Bar Achuah (said), " Rabbi Yudah attributed (this law) in the name of Rabbi Ababu in the name of Rabbi Yochanan: The child of a bogerees is fit because (a bogeress) is a prohibition that is found from a positive commandment, (Vayikra 21:13) "He shall marry a woman in her virginity." But not a bogeress.Any prohibition that is found from a positive commandment is a positive commandment, and similarly, (Vayikra 21:14) "Only a virgin of his people shall he take as a wife" but not a convert. Any prohibition found from a positive commandment is a positive commandment. Rabbi Hoshaya challenged: Consider a second-generation Egyptian convert. Why is (the individual) in violation of a prohibition that is found from a positive commandment? Rabbi Hoshaya retracted his statement and said, 'There is no comparison between a positive commandment to Israelites and a positive commandment to Kohanim but is permitted to Leviim and Israelites.