Ramban on Deuteronomy
רמב"ן על דברים
Ramban Commentary
https://www.judaicapress.com/products/ramban-nachmanides-commentary-on-the-torah-5-vol-set

Ramban on Deuteronomy

Introduction







Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Verse 1



Verse 2



Verse 3



Verse 4



Verse 5



Verse 6



Verse 7



Verse 8



Verse 9



Verse 10



Verse 11



Verse 12



Verse 13



Verse 14



Verse 15



Verse 16



Verse 17



Verse 18



Verse 19



Verse 20



Verse 21



Verse 22



Verse 23



Verse 24



Verse 25



Verse 26



Verse 27



Verse 28



Verse 29

And thou shalt put 'eth habracha' upon mount Gerizim. This is to be understood as the targum [Onkelos] rendered it: yath m'vorchaya-- 'the blessers' [i.e. those who will pronounce the blessing]. Upon mount Gerizim-- toward Mount Gerizim." This is Rashi's language, but it is not correct according to the plain meaning of Scripture, for he has not yet instructed concerning [the identity of] those who were to pronounce the blessing [which is only mentioned further on, in Chapter 27:11-14; hence the verse here could not refer to them with the definite article -- habrachah which implies that their identity was already known]. Rather, the meaning of the verses is as follows: "I have set 'before you' a way [to attain] blessing and a way [to attain] curse. And the expression before you signifies that you are to choose for yourselves what you desire, and I inform you that the blessing will be yours when you perform the commandments, and the curse if you do not fulfill them." This is similar to what he further said.  See, I have set before you this day the life and the good, the death and the evil etc. [This verse clearly does not pertain to the setting at Mount Gerizim and Mount Ebal, thus disproving Rashi's interpretation that the blessing refers to "those who will pronounce the blessings."] Then he stated here [in the verse before us], that they were to bestow this blessing of which he speaks, upon them [i.e. the tribes] on Mount Gerizim and the curse on Mount Ebal, this ["bestowal"] being by word of mouth [rather than by some physical act of placing the blessers there, as rashi rendered it]. In a similar was is the interpretation of Rabbi Abraham Ibn Ezra, on this verse, and he shall 'put' them upon the head of the goat [meaning that the high priest, by confessing the sins of the people, "puts" them upon the head of the goat that was to be sent to Azazel]. Thus he is saying here by way of admonition that they are to "put" [or pronounce] the blessing on Mount Gerizim, blessing the people if they will hearken to the commandments of G-d; and the curse on Mount Ebal, saying, "Cursed be he that will not hearken to the commandments and will turn aside from the way which G-d has commanded. And it should be understood that Mount Gerizim was to the South which is to the Right (when you are facing Eastward toward the rising sun - which is how the Torah always orients itself) and Mount Ebal was to the North, about which it says (Jeremiah 1:14) From the North shall disaster break loose. 