Mekor Mayim Chayim on Baal Shem Tov
מקור מים חיים על בעל שם טוב
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Mekor Mayim Chayim on Baal Shem Tov

Kuntres Meirat Einayim



Bereshit



Noach



Lech Lecha



Vayera



Chayei Sara



Toldot



Vayetzei



Vayishlach



Vayeshev



Miketz



Vayigash



Vayechi



Comment 1



Comment 2



Comment 3

See above, Hayyey Sarah #4, regarding this matter; and see in the book Likkutim Yekarim, p.15b, where he writes: “‘Live a life of pain’ (Avot 6:4) – do not read ‘live’ but rather ‘bring to life.’ The explanation is that in every thing he should be careful to intend to bring life to the sparks that are placed within the shells that fell there, for they are in great pain there; see to bring them life and extract them and elevate them.” And so it is in the Likkutei Aggadot at the end of the book Or Torah, p.64b.

Comment 4

Examine well the language of the Rabbi of Toldot Ya’akov Yosef, Mishpatim p.66c, which I copied above, Bereshit in n.160, that a person’s serving [God] afterward through this power is not the essential wholeness for fixing the spark; rather, he must elevate it immediately.

Comment 5

In the book Divrei Shalom, Vayetze p.27d, he wrote in these words: “It is written in the name of Rabbi Israel Ba’al Shem Tov, his soul in Eden, that whatever a person has is relevant to the root of his soul; for in them are the actual sparks of his soul. Therefore when a certain thing breaks or is lost he should not worry at all, for he has elevated what was relevant to him and therefore it broke; and when it is lost and comes to another [person’s possession], presumably that thing also contains holy sparks that are also relevant to that person. Therefore when he has elevated from this what he needed, the thing came to another [person’s possession] for him to elevate what is relevant to him.” And see also in Vayikra, p.40b.

Comment 6

In the book Be’er Mayyim Hayyim, “Explanation of the Haggadah” s.v. Grievous in the eyes of the Lord etc., he wrote: “The Ba’al Shem Tov, may he be remembered for life in the world to come, said: ‘Three who ate at a single table and did not speak words of Torah over it are like those who ate sacrifices of the dead’ (Avot 3:3) – the explanation is that the deceased person is reincarnated in human food, so that words of Torah will be spoken over him, and through this he will bring to life that deceased person who was in this reincarnation; but if they do not speak words of Torah, then he has sacrificed that deceased person who was reincarnated in this food and cast him into lifelessness, and that is why they said ‘sacrifices of the dead.’”

Shemot



Vaera



Bo



Beshalach



Yitro



Mishpatim



Terumah



Tetzaveh



Ki Tisa



Comment 1



Comment 2



Comment 3



Comment 4



Comment 5



Comment 6



Comment 7



Comment 8

In the Book of Or HaChochma, Bereshit writes, "The Baal Shem Tov said about a verse like water before the face, etc. For example, when a person stands at a river, a shadow of man appears in the water, and when the person reduces himself, Is also small, and when a person reduces the smallest after the smallest until his face comes into the water, then the face of the shadow comes against the face of man, so the analogy, the heart of a man who reduces himself against his friend, and then his friend also reduces himself, until the human stage reduces itself So that he can not diminish any more, so his friend does so, and they become idolatry.

Vayakhel



Pekudei



Vayikra



Tzav



Shmini



Tazria



Metzora



Achrei Mot



Kedoshim



Emor



Behar



Bechukotai



Bamidbar



Shavuot



Nasso



Beha'alotcha



Sh'lach



Korach



Chukat



Balak



Pinchas



Matot



Masei



Devarim



Vaetchanan



Eikev



Comment 1



Comment 2



Comment 3



Comment 4



Comment 5



Comment 6



Comment 7



Comment 8



Comment 9



Comment 10



Comment 11



Comment 12



Comment 13



Comment 14



Comment 15



Comment 16



Comment 17



Comment 18



Comment 19



Comment 20



Comment 21



Comment 22



Comment 23



Comment 24



Comment 25



Comment 26



Comment 27



Comment 28



Comment 29



Comment 30



Comment 31



Comment 32

See the Tzaavat HaRivash, which teaches that when one desires to seclude themselves in prayer they must have a companion with them, because one person alone is in danger. Let there rather be two people in one room, each secluding themselves with their Creator. Sometimes, when one is truly cleaving to Gd, they can seclude themselves even in a house full of people. See further on in section 47-48 which say that there should be no one present when wants to cleave to God.

Re'eh



Shoftim



Ki Teitzei



Ki Tavo



Nitzavim



Vayeilech



Rosh Hashana and Yom Kippur



Ha'Azinu



Succot



V'Zot HaBerachah



Esther



Song of Songs



Ruth



Lamentations



Ecclesiastes

