Yein HaTov
יין הטוב
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Yein HaTov

Approbations



Introduction



Index



Part I

Orach Chayim



Yoreh De'ah



Part II

Orach Chayim



Yoreh De'ah



Siman 1



Siman 2




The law of Amalek is fixed in the verse, "you shall blot out the memory of Amalek from beneath the sky; do not forget," and in other verses. The Torah isolated this commandment to Amalek, so it is not within our power to include another nation in [this] commandment, even though they have done more evil than it. It is true that I have seen it brought down in the name of the Gaon, Rabbi Chaim (Soloveitchik), may his memory be blessed, that the commandment of blotting out Amalek is not specifically about the nation of Amalek, but rather that any foreign nation that acts like Amalek has this commandment apply. However I have found neither root or branch to his words! And perhaps he gave this explanation of his about the commandment that is written in the Torah. So according to his approach, this would not be within the category of adding a commandment to the commandments of the Torah. [However] behold, the Rambam in the Sefer HaMitzvot (Positive Commandment 188), was exacting to [distinguish], "the seed," of Amalek only, from the rest of the seed of Esav, etc. And likewise was the author of the Sefer HaChinukh exacting (Commandment 558), since he wrote that [only] if one finds [someone] from "their seed," is the obligation incumbent upon him to kill him and destroy him in any place and at any time. And the Hagahot Maimoniyot (on Laws of Kings 5:5) wrote that this commandment is not practiced in our days, but rather in the days of the Messiah, after the conquest of the land, etc. Behold, you see that also from this perspective, we are not able to learn about the criminals of Germany from the commandment of the blotting out of Amalek. 

Siman 3



Siman 4



Siman 5



Siman 6



Siman 7

<b>Whether it is correct to guide children to move to the land of Israel against the will of their parents</b> 
Blessed is the Lord, 21 Adar 5724 (1964)
To the esteemed spirit and man of understanding, R. S. Z. Shragai, may his Rock protect him and grant him life - peace and much salvation!
I have received his letter from the 19th of this month, in which he referred two questions to me, which are actually one: 
Is it correct to prepare and guide children to move to the land of Israel against the will of their parents? Is there not an offense to the commandment of honoring father and mother through this? And due to the urgency of the matter, I will reply with great brevity:
The Mabit in Part I:139 was asked if a child could move, to live in the land, even if his father and mother are preventing it and are not allowing him to move. And he wrote that the commandment to live in the land of Israel pushes off the commandment of honoring father and mother, so that he may move even against their will. And the Mabit arrives at this from the verse (Leviticus 19:3), "You shall each revere your mother and your father, and you shall keep My sabbaths, I am the Lord." For the Sages, may their memory be blessed, learned from this about all of the commandments - if the father or mother say to the child, "Do not fulfill this commandment," he should not listen to them. For they, the parents, are also commanded by that commandment. And likewise with the commandment of settling the land of Israel, the parents are also commanded to move and to settle in it. 
The author of the Shut Ben Yehudah (Part I, Yoreh Deah 54) [also] dealt with this question. He was asked if a clever son whose heart inspired him to move, that glory may dwell in the holy land, yet his separation was difficult on his father and his mother, so they were impeding him from moving - is he obligated to listen to them on account of the commandment of honoring father and mother? And our teacher, Rabbi Yehudah Ayash also determined that he could move to the land in spite of his father and his mother's opposition, due to the reason stated above.
It therefore comes out that we learn that youth movements outside of Israel are permitted to teach [about] and prepare the youth for moving to [Israel], even in opposition to the will of their parents. And this is only if their education is according to Jewish tradition.
Yitzchak Nissim

Even HaEzer and Choshen Mishpat

