Mishneh Torah, Substitution
משנה תורה, הלכות תמורה
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Mishneh_Torah,_Substitution
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Mishneh Torah, trans. by Eliyahu Touger. Jerusalem, Moznaim Pub. c1986-c2007
-https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH001020101/NLI

Mishneh Torah, Substitution



Chapter 1

Anyone who transfers holiness from one animal to another is liable for lashes for every animal from which he transferred the holiness, as Leviticus 27:10 states: "Do not exchange it and do not transfer its holiness," even though he did not perform a deed. According to the Oral Tradition, it was taught that any negative commandment that does not involve a deed is not punishable by lashes with the exception of one who takes a false or unnecessary oath, one who transfers the holiness of a sacrificial animal, and one who curses a colleague mentioning God's name. These three negative commandments can never involve a deed at all, and yet one is liable for lashes for their violation.<br>Why is one liable for lashes for transferring the holiness of an animal, it is a negative commandment that can be corrected by a positive commandment, as <i>ibid.</i>:33 states: "If he will transfer its holiness, it and the animal to which its holiness will be transferred shall be consecrated"? Because it has one positive commandment and two negative commandments and because the negative commandment it involves is not of the same nature as the positive commandment.This is reflected in the ruling that if the Jewish community or partners try to transfer the holiness of a sacrificial animal, the transfer is not effective. Nevertheless, they are warned not to transfer the holiness. Thus when an individual transfers the holiness of a sacrificial animal, the animal to which he transferred the holiness is consecrated. Even if he transfers holiness on the Sabbath, he is liable for forty lashes. If, by contrast, a partner in a sacrificial animal endeavors to transfer its holiness or an endeavor is made to transfer the holiness of an animal designated for a communal sacrifice - since that person has a share in these sacrifices he is liable for lashes, but the animal to which he endeavored to transfer the holiness is not consecrated.
Whether one transfers the holiness of an animal as an intentional transgression or one does so inadvertently, the transfer of holiness is effective and the person is liable for lashes.<br>What is implied? One intended to say: "This animal should be considered as an exchange for an animal consecrated as a burnt-offering that I possess," and instead, he said: "This animal should be considered as an exchange for an animal consecrated as a peace-offering that I possess," the transfer of holiness is effective and he is liable for lashes. If, however, he thought that it was permitted to transfer holiness or he said: "I will enter that house and transfer the holiness of a sacrificial animal willfully," and instead, he entered and transferred the holiness of the animal unknowingly, the transfer of holiness is effective, but he is not liable for lashes for it.
A person cannot transfer the holiness of a sacrificial animal that does not belong to him. If the owner of a sacrificial animal says: "Whoever desires to transfer the holiness of my sacrificial animal may come and do so," another person may transfer the holiness of that animal.<br>If a person transferred the holiness of a sacrificial animal belonging to him to another animal that does not belong to him, the transfer is not effective. The rationale is that a person cannot consecrate an entity that does not belong to him.
It is the one who will receive atonement who has the potential to exchange the holiness of a sacrificial animal, not the person who consecrates it.<br>What is implied? A person consecrated an animal so that his colleague could gain atonement through its sacrifice, e.g., one consecrated the animals required for the sacrifices of a nazirite so that so-and-so, the nazirite, could gain atonement thereby. It is that nazirite who can transfer their holiness, but not the person who consecrated them, because they do not belong to him.
An heir can transfer the holiness of a sacrificial animal he inherits. If a person dies, leaving a sacrificial animal to his two sons, this animal should be offered, but its holiness cannot be transferred. The rationale is that the sons are partners and partners cannot transfer the holiness of a sacrificial animal, as we explained.
The holiness of sacrificial animals consecrated by gentiles may not be transferred according to Scriptural Law. According to Rabbinic Law, however, if a gentile transfers the holiness of a sacrificial animal, the transfer is effective. If a gentile consecrated a sacrificial animal with the intent that a Jew receive atonement through its being offered and then the gentile transferred its holiness to another animal, there is an unresolved question whether the transfer is effective.
When either a man or a woman seek to transfer the holiness of a sacrificial animal, the transfer is effective.
Even though he is not liable for lashes, there is an unresolved question whether a transfer of holiness made by a minor who has reached the age when his vows are binding is effective or not.
The priests cannot transfer the holiness of animals to be sacrificed as sin-offerings and guilt-offerings that were given to them to offer. Although portions of the animal belong to them, they do not acquire them during the lifetime of the animal, for they do not receive a portion of the meat until the blood is cast on the altar.<br>A priest cannot transfer the holiness of a firstborn animal; even though he does acquire it while it is alive, he does not acquire it at the outset. On the contrary, at the outset, it should be in the home of the Israelite. When, by contrast, an owner transfers the holiness of a firstborn animal, as long as it is in his household, the transfer is binding.Similarly, when a priest transfers the holiness of a firstborn animal born in his herd, not a firstborn animal given to him by an Israelite, the transfer is binding.
The holiness of the ram of the High Priest can be transferred to another animal. The holiness of his bull, by contrast, cannot be transferred to another animal. Even though it is brought from his own resources, since his priestly brethren derive atonement through its sacrifice, they are considered as partners in it.
The holiness of fowl and meal-offerings cannot be transferred, for the relevant verses mention only animals.
The holiness of animals consecrated for the upkeep of the Temple may not be transferred, for with regard to the tithe offering, Leviticus 27:33 states: "He shall not distinguish between good and bad and he should not transfer its holiness." Now the tithe offering was part of the general category of all the sacrifices, why was it singled out?To teach us a concept that applies to the entire general category. The tithe-offering is the sacrifice of an individual, thus excluding communal offerings and sacrificial animals owned by partners. The tithe-offering is a sacrifice offered on the altar, thus excluding animals consecrated for the sake of the upkeep of the Temple. There is an association between the tithe-offerings and the tithes of the crops in which are obligated Jews and not non-Jews; thus excluding sacrifices of the gentiles whose holiness cannot be exchanged as stated.
When a person consecrates an animal that has a permanent disqualifying blemish, its holiness cannot be transferred to another animal, because its body has not been consecrated in a complete way; only its worth was consecrated. If, however, one consecrates an animal with a temporary blemish or one consecrates an unblemished animal and then it contracted a permanent blemish, its holiness can be transferred.
Whether one transfers the holiness of a blemished animal to an unblemished one or that of an unblemished animal to a blemished one, one transferred the holiness of sheep to cattle, or the holiness of cattle to sheep, or that of goats to sheep or that of sheep to goats, or that of males to females or that of females to males, or transferred the holiness of 100 animals to one or that of one to 100, whether he did so all at once or one after another, the transfer is effective and he is liable for the same number of sets of lashes as animals to which he transferred holiness.
The holiness of an animal to which holiness has been transferred cannot be transferred to another animal, nor may the holiness of the offspring of a consecrated animal be transferred to another animal. This is derived from Leviticus 27:10: "And it and the animal to which its holiness was transferred shall be holy." Implied is "it" and not its offspring, "the animal to which its holiness was transferred" and not an animal to which there was an attempt to transfer the holiness of the animal to which its holiness was transferred. If, however, one transferred the holiness of an animal and then transferred its holiness a second time, even 1000 times, the holiness has been transferred to each of them, and one is liable for lashes for each transfer, as we explained.
The holiness of an entire animal may not be transferred to limbs or fetuses, nor may the holiness of the latter be transferred to an entire animal.<br>What is implied? If one says: "The hindfoot of this animal..." or "Its forefoot should be substituted for this burnt-offering," or he said: "The fetus of this animal should be substituted for this burnt-offering," the holiness is not transferred. Similarly, if one says: "This animal should be substituted for the forefoot..." or "the hindfoot of this burnt-offering," or he said: "This animal should be substituted for the fetus of this sin-offering," the holiness is not transferred.
When one seeks to transfer the holiness of a consecrated animal to a hybrid, an animal that is <i>tereifah</i>, one born of Caesarian section, a <i>tumtum</i>, or an <i>adrogynus</i>, the holiness is not transferred to them and it is as if one sought to transfer the holiness of a sacrificial animal to a camel or a donkey. The rationale is that this type of animal is not fit for sacrifice. Therefore one who tries to transfer the holiness of a sacrificial animal to it is not liable for lashes.<br>What is the difference between these and an animal that is blemished? There is the possibility of the type of animal that is blemished serving as a sacrifice, while these types of animals cannot serve as sacrifices.
An animal that was engaged in intercourse with humans - whether it acted as the male or female - is considered as a blemished animal and the holiness of a sacrificial animal can be transferred to it. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.
When an animal was half consecrated and half unconsecrated, holiness cannot be transferred to it, nor may its holiness be transferred.
The holiness of all of the sin-offerings that are consigned to death may not be transferred to another animal. By contrast, the holiness of all of the sin-offerings that are designated to pasture until they contract a blemish and are sold may be transferred to another animal.
When a person sets aside a female animal for his Paschal sacrifice, burnt-offering, or guilt-offering, its holiness can be transferred even though it is not fit to be offered. The rationale is that since its worth is consecrated and it is unblemished, it is considered as if its body was consecrated.<br>If, by contrast, one separated a goat as a sin-offering, a king separated a she-goat as a sin-offering, and a High Priest separated a cow as a sin-offering, their holiness cannot be transferred. The rationale is that anyone who deviates from the commandments prescribed for a sin-offering does not cause the designated animal to be consecrated at all, not even its worth, as we explained in <i>Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim</i>.

Chapter 2

The act of transferring the holiness of a sacrificial animal involves the owner of the animal saying with regard to an ordinary animal that he possesses: "This should be substituted for this" or "This is a replacement for this." Needless to say, holiness is transferred if one says: "This should be substituted for this sin-offering" or "... substituted for this burnt-offering." Similarly, holiness is transferred if one says: "This should be substituted for the sin-offering I possess at home" or "...substituted for the burnt-offering I possess in such-and-such a place."<br>If, by contrast, one said with regard to an ordinary animal: "This should be substituted for a burnt-offering" or "This is substituted for a sin-offering," his words are of no consequence. If he states: "The holiness of this is conveyed to this," a transfer of holiness is not brought about.
The following rules apply when there were two animals before a person, one ordinary animal and one consecrated animal that became blemished. If he placed his hand on the ordinary animal and said: "This one is substituted for this," he has brought about a forbidden exchange of holiness and he is liable for lashes. If, by contrast, he placed his hand on the consecrated animal and said: "This is substituted for this," he has exchanged its holiness and transferred it to the ordinary animal. This is not a forbidden exchange of holiness, but instead, is comparable to redeeming the blemished sacrificial animal with this ordinary animal.
The following rule applies when there were three animals consecrated for the altar before a person and one of them was blemished and awaiting redemption and also three unblemished ordinary animals. If he says: "These are substituted for these," the holiness of two of the consecrated animals is transferred to two of the ordinary animals through the convention of <i>temurah</i> and he is liable for two sets of lashes. The third ordinary animal is substituted for the blemished animal through the convention of <i>chillul</i>. We assume that he sought to use that convention rather than the convention of <i>temurah</i>. The rationale is that since the person had a forbidden course of action, <i>temurah</i> and a permitted course of action, <i>chillul</i>, we operate under the assumption that a person will not abandon the permitted course of action and follow the forbidden one. Therefore he is not liable for three sets of lashes.<br>Similarly, if one says: "These ten ordinary animals are substituted for these ten consecrated animals," and one of the consecrated animals is blemished, the person is liable for only nine sets of lashes, for he intended to transfer the holiness of the tenth animal through the convention of <i>chillul</i>. Even though he had established a halachic presumption by being liable for many sets of lashes, since there is a permitted way for him to transfer the animal's holiness, we presume that he will not abandon the permitted course of action and follow the forbidden one.<br>When there are two consecrated animals and one of them is blemished and two ordinary animals and one of them is blemished, and one says: "These are substituted for these," the holiness of the unblemished animal is transferred to the unblemished animal through the convention of <i>temurah</i> and he is liable for one set of lashes and the holiness of the blemished animal is transferred to the blemished animal through the convention of <i>chillul</i>. The rationale is that we presume that he will not abandon the permitted course of action and follow the forbidden one.
When one says: "The holiness of an animal designated as a burnt-offering and one designated as a peace-offering is transferred to this animal," his statements are of consequence. The animal should be sold and half of the proceeds used to bring the exchange of a burnt-offering and half used to bring the exchange of a peace-offering.<br>If one said: "The holiness of an animal designated as a burnt-offering and the holiness of an animal dedicated as a peace-offering are transferred to this animal," we examine if that was his original intent. If it was, his words are of consequence. If his original intent was merely to transfer the holiness of a burnt-offering, and he afterwards, added "the holiness of a peace-offering" later, only his original statements are of consequence. Even though he retracted them immediately thereafter, only the holiness of a burnt-offering was transferred to the animal.

Chapter 3

What are the laws governing the offering of an animal to which holiness was transferred? A male animal to which the holiness of a burnt-offering was transferred should be sacrificed as a burnt-offering. If the animal to which the holiness of a burnt-offering was transferred was female or blemished, the female should be left to pasture until it contracts a disqualifying blemish. Then it should be sold and a burnt-offering brought with the proceeds of the sale.<br>An animal to which the holiness of a sin-offering was transferred should be consigned to death, as we explained in <i>Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim</i>. An animal to which the holiness of a guilt-offering was transferred should be left to pasture until it contracts a disqualifying blemish. Then it should be sold and freewill offerings brought with the proceeds of the sale. An animal to which the holiness of a peace-offering was transferred is like a peace-offering in all respects: It requires <i>semichah</i>, accompanying offerings, and the waving of the breast and the thigh.<br>An animal to which the holiness of a thanksgiving-offering was transferred is like a thanksgiving-offering except that it does not require bread, as we explained in <i>Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim</i>.The following laws apply to an animal to which the holiness of a Paschal sacrifice was transferred. If the transfer was made before noon on the fourteenth of Nisan, the animal to which the holiness was transferred is not offered. Instead, it should be left to pasture until it contracts a disqualifying blemish. Then it should be sold and a peace-offering brought with the proceeds of the sale. If the transfer was made after noon, the animal to which the holiness was transferred should itself be sacrificed as a peace-offering.<br>An animal to which the holiness of a firstborn offering or a tithe offering was transferred should never be sacrificed. This is derived from Leviticus 27:26 which states with regard to a firstborn: "It is God's." According to the Oral Tradition, it was taught: "It" is sacrificed, but an animal to which its holiness is transferred is not sacrificed. The laws pertaining to the tithe offering are the same as those pertaining to the firstborn offering. An animal to which the holiness of these offerings was transferred should be left to pasture until it contracts a disqualifying blemish. Afterwards, it may be eaten.
An animal to which the holiness of a firstborn is transferred should be given to the priests and an animal to which the holiness of a tithe offering was transferred is given to its owners. Just as a firstborn animal or a tithe offering that contracts a disqualifying physical blemish is not redeemed, as explained in <i>Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach</i>, so too, an animal to which their holiness is transferred is not redeemed.
When an animal was consecrated half as a burnt-offering and half as a peace-offering, an animal to which its holiness was transferred is given the same status. Similarly, when the holiness of any consecrated animal which should not be sacrificed because of a difficulty at the time of its consecration was transferred to another animal, that second animal should also not be sacrificed.<br>If one said: "The holiness of a sacrificial animal should be transferred to half this animal and the other half should be consecrated as a burnt-offering," it should be offered as a burnt-offering. If he consecrated it half as a burnt-offering and half, as a tithe offering, it should be sacrificed as a burnt-offering. If he transferred the holiness of a sacrificial animal to half of it and he consecrated half as a tithe offering, its status is in doubt and it should not be sacrificed.
The following rules apply when a person consecrates an animal with a temporary blemish or, needless to say, an unblemished animal and then it contracts a permanent blemish and it is redeemed. If one endeavored to transfer its holiness after it was redeemed, the transfer is binding, but the animal to which the transfer was made should neither be sacrificed, nor redeemed. Instead, it should be left until it dies. It should not be sacrificed, because it comes from holiness that was already deferred. Nor may it be redeemed, because its holiness does not have the strength to encompass the entity used to redeem it.
When any animal to which holiness was transferred was permanently blemished from the outset, they should be redeemed. Nevertheless, they do not become ordinary animals in a complete sense to the extent that it is permitted to shear them or perform work with them after they are redeemed. For holiness that is transferred can encompass an animal that possesses a permanent blemish, as evident from Leviticus 27:10 which speaks of transferring holiness "from the good to the bad." Here the intent of the term "bad" is an animal that is blemished or the like and thus is not fit to serve as a sacrifice. Nevertheless, concerning it, the verse continues: "It shall be consecrated."
The following laws apply when an animal consecrated as a burnt-offering became intermingled with sacrificial animals consecrated as peace-offerings and one transferred the holiness of one of the animals in the mixture to an ordinary animal.One should bring another animal and consecrate it, saying: "If this one had the holiness of a burnt-offering transferred to it, this animal is a peace-offering. And if this one had the holiness of a peace-offering transferred to it, this animal is a burnt-offering." Thus the animal which he brought together with the animal to which the holiness of the animal was transferred are like animals consecrated as burnt-offerings and as peace-offerings that became intermingled.<br>If the person transformed the holiness of one of these two to a third animal and it is not known which one's holiness he transferred, he should bring another animal fit for sacrifice from his home and consecrate it conditionally, saying with regard to the second animal to which holiness is being transferred: "If this is an animal to which the holiness of an animal was transferred, the animal that was brought remains an ordinary animal. If this animal is an animal to which the holiness of a burnt-offering or a peace-offering was transferred, the animal that was brought is a burnt-offering or a peace-offering." Thus the animal which he brought with the second animal to which holiness was transferred is like a sacrificial animal that became intermingled with an animal to which holiness was transferred. We have already explained the laws pertaining to the intermingling of animals to which holiness was transferred in <i>Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim</i>.
When an animal consecrated as a peace-offering became intermingled with a firstborn animal or a tithe offering and one transferred the holiness of one of the animals of the mixture to another animal, that animal should not be offered. Instead, it should be left to pasture until it contracts a disqualifying blemish and then be redeemed, and then it should be eaten in the same manner as a blemished firstborn or tithe offering, as explained.

Chapter 4

What are the laws pertaining to the offspring of consecrated animals? The offspring of an animal consecrated as a peace-offering and the offspring of an animal to which the holiness of a peace-offering was transferred are like peace-offerings and they should be treated like peace-offerings in all respects. Similarly, the offspring of an animal consecrated as a thanksgiving-offering and the offspring of an animal to which the holiness of a thanksgiving-offering was transferred should be sacrificed like a thanksgiving-offering, except that they do not require bread. For bread is brought only for a thanksgiving-offering itself. This is derived from Leviticus 7:12 which states: "He shall offer on the slaughtering of the thanksgiving-offering...." Implied is on its slaughtering, and not on the slaughtering of its offspring or on that of an animal to which its holiness was transferred, as we explained.<br>To what does the above apply? To the offspring themselves. But the offspring of the offspring should not be sacrificed. From his conduct, it is obvious that he is delaying their offering to raise herds from them. Hence, he is penalized and should not offer them.
The offspring of a sin-offering, and, needless to say, the offspring of an animal to which the holiness of a sin offering was transferred, should be consigned to death.
If a person slaughters an animal offered as a sin-offering and discovers that it was carrying a four-month old fetus that was alive, it may be eaten like the meat of the sin-offering. For the offspring of consecrated animals while they are in their mother's womb are like the consecrated animals themselves.
The offspring of an animal to which the holiness of a guilt-offering was transferred, the offspring of its offspring, and so too until the end of time should be allowed to pasture until they contract a disqualifying blemish. Then they should be sold and the proceeds used to purchase freewill offerings. If the animal to which the holiness of the guilt-offering was transferred gave birth to a male after the guilt-offering is sacrificed, the offspring itself should be sacrificed as a burnt-offering.If one set aside a female animal as a guilt-offering and it gave birth, it and its offspring should be allowed to pasture until they become blemished. Then they should be sold and the person's guilt-offering purchased with the proceeds of the sale. If he already sacrificed his guilt-offering, the proceeds of their sale should be used to purchase freewill offerings.
The male offspring of an animal to which the holiness of a burnt-offering was transferred, the offspring of its offspring, and so too until the end of time are considered as burnt-offerings and should themselves be offered as burnt-offerings.<br>If one set aside a female as a burnt-offering and it gave birth, even though it gave birth to a male, the offspring should be allowed to pasture until it contracts a disqualifying blemish and then the proceeds of the sale should be used to bring a burnt-offering.<br>We already explained in <i>Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot</i> that whenever we use the expression "the proceeds of the sale should be used to purchase freewill offerings" the intent is that the money should be placed in the chests that existed in the Temple whose number we explained in <i>Hilchot Shekalim</i>. The court sacrifices freewill burnt-offerings with that money. The accompanying offeringsare brought from communal funds and they do not require <i>semichah</i>. Whenever, by contrast, we use the expression "it itself should be offered as a burnt-offering" or "he should bring a burnt-offering with the proceeds," the sacrifice requires <i>semichah</i> and the owner must bring the accompanying offerings.
The offspring born to an animal selected as a tithe offering, the offspring of an animal to which the holiness of a tithe offering was transferred, and the offspring of an animal to which the holiness of a firstborn animal was transferred, and the offspring of their offspring until the end of time should not be offered. Instead, they should be allowed to pasture until they contract a disqualifying blemish and then they should be eaten according to the laws applying to a blemished firstborn animal and tithe offering.<br>The offspring of an animal to which the holiness of a firstborn animal was transferred belongs to the priest. The offspring of an animal selected as a tithe offering and the offspring of an animal to which the holiness of a animal designated as a tithe offering was transferred belong to the owner.
The laws that apply to the offspring of an animal to which the holiness of a Paschal sacrifice was transferred are the same as those applying to an animal to which the holiness of a Paschal sacrifice was transferred itself. If its mother should be sacrificed as a peace-offering, its offspring should be offered as a peace-offering. If the law was that the mother should be allowed to pasture until it contracts a blemish and then be sold and the proceeds used to purchase a peace-offering, this same law applies to its offspring.<br>If one designated a female for one's Paschal sacrifice and it gave birth or he designated it for that sacrifice while pregnant, it and its offspring should be allowed to pasture until they contract a disqualifying blemish and a Paschal sacrifice should be brought with the proceeds of their sale. If this female remained unblemished until after Pesach or it gave birth after Pesach, it and its offspring should be allowed to pasture until they contract a disqualifying blemish and a peace-offering should be brought with the proceeds of their sale.
When the offspring of sacrificial animals were born through Caesarian section, as a <i>tumtum</i>, an <i>androgynus</i>, a hybrid, or a <i>tereifah</i>, they should be redeemed and a sacrificial animal that is fit to be brought with the money from the sale of these offspring should be brought.
The offspring of a blemished consecrated animal is like the offspring of an unblemished consecrated animal in all respects and it should be offered in the appropriate manner.
When a consecrated animal discharges a stillborn animal or a placenta, it should be buried and it is forbidden to benefit from it.
A person who changes the purpose for which an article was consecrated from one holy purpose to another violates a prohibition. This is derived from Leviticus 27:26 which states with regard to a firstborn animal: "A person may not consecrate it," i.e., he may not designate it as a burnt-offering or a peace-offering. The same applies to other consecrated animals. They may not be changed to a purpose other than that for which they were originally consecrated. This applies both to animals consecrated for the altar and animals consecrated for the improvement of the Temple.<br>What is implied? If an article was consecrated for the improvement of the Temple Sanctuary, it should not be changed and the money used for the improvement of the altar. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations. One is not liable for lashes for the violation of this prohibition.
What clever technique can be used with regard to a firstborn to consecrate it to the altar for another sacrifice? One may consecrate it in its mother's womb, before it is born. This is derived from Leviticus 27:26: "which will become a firstborn for God among the livestock - a man shall not consecrate it." Implied is that when it is born, one may not consecrate it, but one may consecrate it in its mother's womb.<br>Therefore one may say: "If the fetus in the womb of this cow that has not given birth previously is male, it is consecrated as a burnt-offering." He may not, however, designate it as a peace-offering, for he cannot remove it from the holiness of the firstborn in order to benefit from it. If one said: "It should be a burnt-offering when the majority of its head emerges," it is a firstborn and not a burnt-offering.
One may not use a clever technique to change the fetus of a consecrated animal to another purpose. Instead, it is consecrated with the holiness of its mother. The rationale is that the offspring of a consecrated animal become consecrated in the womb, as we explained. Thus every fetus is consecrated with the holiness of its mother and its holiness cannot be changed in the womb as one may with regard to a firstborn animal. The rationale is that a firstborn animal becomes consecrated only when it emerges from the womb.<br>Although all of the statutes of the Torah are decrees, as we explained in the conclusion of <i>Hilchot Me'ilah</i>, it is fit to meditate upon them and wherever it is possible to provide a reason, one should provide a reason. The Sages of the early generations said that King Solomon understood most of the rationales for all the statutes of the Torah.<br>It appears to me that the verse Leviticus 27:10: "It and the animal to which its holiness will be transferred shall be consecrated" shares a similar motivating rationale as the verse <i>ibid.</i>:15: "If the one who consecrates it shall redeem his house, he shall add a fifth of the money of the redemption valuation to it." The principle behind these laws is that the Torah descended to the bottom of a person's thoughts and the scope of his evil inclination. For human nature tends to increase his property and attach importance to his money. Even though he made a vow or consecrated something, it is possible that he will reconsider, change his mind, and redeem it for less than its worth. Hence the Torah states: "If he redeems it for himself, he must add a fifth." Similarly, if he consecrated an animal in a manner that its physical person becomes consecrated, he might reconsider. In this instance, since he cannot redeem it, he will exchange it for a lesser one. If he was given permission to exchange an inferior animal for a superior one, he will exchange a superior one for an inferior one and claim that it was superior. Therefore, the Torah removed that option, forbidding all exchanges and penalized him that if he made an exchange, "It and the animal to which its holiness will be transferred shall be consecrated."<br>All of these ordinances are to subjugate one's evil inclination and improve one's character. Similarly, most of the Torah's laws are nothing other than "counsels given from distance" from "He Who is of great counsel" to improve one's character and make one's conduct upright. And so it is written Proverbs 22:20-21: "Behold, I have written for you in the Torah prominent matters, to inform you of the veracity of the words of truth, so that you will respond truthfully to those who send to you."