Kiryat Sefer on Mishneh Torah, Red Heifer
קרית ספר על משנה תורה, הלכות פרה אדומה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Kiryat Sefer on Mishneh Torah, Red Heifer



Chapter 1



Halakhah 1

It is a mitzvah to fulfill the commandment of the Red Heifer as it is written: "They shall take to you a red heifer..." (Numbers 19:2). The commandment of the Red Heifer is that it should be a female, three or four years old. And if it is older, it is still valid according to the Sages, as stated in Tractate Parah, where it is said that it can be either three or four years old. Since it is called a calf (עגלה), and a calf is two years old, as it is written: "A heifer of the cattle" (עגלת בקר), the Red Heifer can be three or four years old. As we say in the first chapter of the Mishnah in Parah, that a bull (פר בן בקר) is three years old, and even if it is two years old, it is not called a bull (פר בן בקר) unless it is at least three years old. Therefore, if the Red Heifer is four years old, it is also valid, and if it is older, it is still valid, as stated in the first chapter of Parah. And one does not take a calf and raise it, as it is written: "They shall take to you a heifer" (פרה), and not a calf (עגלה), as we derive from the Sifri Zuta. And this is what is stated in the Torah: "Without blemish" (תמימה תמימת), meaning without blemish of its stature, as we derive from the Sifri Parah. "I hear 'black' and 'white'" (שחורה ולבנה אני שומע), it is taught to say "a red heifer" (אדומה תמימה), meaning completely red, without blemishes. When it says "which has no blemish" (אשר אין בה מום), it includes cases of blemishes. But what does the Torah teach us by saying "without blemish"? It is to teach us to be completely without blemishes. And it is tested as valid, as we learn in the Mishnah in the second chapter and as we learn in the Mishnah in the chapter of blemishes: These are the laws regarding firstborns - those that are tested are disqualified in humans but valid in animals. If it had two black or white hairs within one patch, it is disqualified, as stated in the first Tanna of Rabbi Yehuda in the second chapter of Parah. And we also learn there: If there were two hairs within two cups and they touch each other and lean against each other, it is disqualified. The reason is that it is not completely without blemish in its stature, since the two black or white hairs are adjacent and thus visible. If its testicles are reddish and its head is black, or vice versa, everything depends on the main color, according to the Sages who disagree with Rabbi Meir in the Mishnah, who said that everything depends on the appearance, meaning the head color. But the Sages hold that it is not considered completely red unless its main color is red, and even if its head is shaven, it is not disqualified from being used for the sprinkling in the Temple, as it is only prohibited rabbinically to shave it. But in the case of the Red Heifer, which is rare, they did not decree such a prohibition, as it is stated in the Tosefta in the book of Numbers. And one does not need to be concerned about shaving it. And it is necessary that there remains a portion of the reddish color so that it can be plucked with a pair of hairs, as any hair that cannot be plucked with a pair is considered as if it is not there, as stated in the Mishnah in the chapter of Niddah. Therefore, if the two hairs are white or black and they cannot be plucked together as a pair, it is valid, as it does not disqualify two hairs unless they are long enough to be plucked together, as stated. If its horns or forehead are black, they should be cut off, as stated in the Mishnah in the second chapter of Parah and in the chapter of blemishes. "Za'iri" translates it as "the upper part of the male reproductive organ" that has two or three finger-like extensions that have no male reproductive function. If the black hairs do not reach the location of these extensions, they should be cut off. However, if they extend beyond this point, it disqualifies it. This is also taught in the Sifri and in the Tosefta. The eye, teeth, and tongue do not disqualify based on appearance, as stated in the Sifrei. If the pupil of the eye of the red heifer turns black, it is valid if its appearance is similar to the rest of the heifer. If not, it is disqualified. The reason is that they should not resemble the horns and extensions that require cutting, as mentioned earlier. Alternatively, it may be because the horns have a visible change in their appearance, unlike the eye, tongue, and teeth. If it has a growth or was cut, according to the Mishnah in the second chapter, Rabbi Yehuda disqualifies it, while Rabbi Shimon says that as long as a red hair was plucked from the place where the growth was removed, it is valid. This implies that according to Rabbi Yehuda, even if a red hair grows in the place where the growth was cut, it is disqualified. This is explained by the commentary of the Rabbeinu Avraham ben David (Ravad), who states that the reason is that it does not exhibit complete redness but rather has flawed red hair.