Malbim on Daniel
מלבי"ם על דניאל
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Malbim_on_Daniel
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Malbim on Daniel



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Verse 1



Verse 2



Verse 3



Verse 4



Verse 5



Verse 6



Verse 7



Verse 8



Verse 9



Verse 10



Verse 11



Verse 12



Verse 13

“I was seeing as the vision of the night” – now he saw a new vision, and also this he saw with the night, for still will be the darkness of exile established until the time when the dawn will awaken and break through from among the clouds of gloom.
“And behold, with the clouds of heaven, like a son of man came” – because in the first vision he saw four beasts rising from the stormy sea by means of the winds; instead of the rising of the beasts from the depth of the great abyss, he saw the coming of the kingdom of heaven from the clouds of heaven, from above. And instead of these who came in the form of predatory beasts, came the chosen one of God in the appearance of a son of man.
That the beasts came by wars and storms, and the matters were for tearing prey, the consuming of man they ate; but the kingdom of God will come by the understanding in the Torah of God and doing His commandments – this being attributed to an intelligent human.
And the beasts came from the great abyss, and this son of man, who inherits the kingdom of heaven, will come with the clouds – that the clouds are fine vapors filled with light air, that rise from the waters and moistures upward, and from there rains of blessing they pour to the earth. So too will his coming be by the spiritual dew that rises by means of his Torah and his deeds – which are matters exalted above the material – and the rain that descends is below to the earth, as it is said, “For your dew is a dew of lights.”
And his coming will be attributed to the heavens, not to the great abyss – for he will be elevated from materiality to the supernal and the spiritual. And this itself is what is said, “Lowly and riding on a donkey” – that he will subdue the material and the physical.
“And he came unto the Ancient of Days” – he saw that he will be exalted in his good deeds above all, until he draws near to God and will walk with God.
“And before Him they brought him near” – that after he will be exalted by his deeds and by the good preparation to draw near to God, then also will come to him the assistance from above, and they will bring him near to God, as it is said, “I have known you by name, and you have also found favour in My eyes.”