Radak on Zechariah
רד"ק על זכריה
Rabbi Mike Feuer, Jerusalem Anthology
https://www.sefaria.org

Radak on Zechariah



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Verse 1



Verse 2

So said – This section is a consolation for the future, for the days of the messiah during the war of Gog and Magog which will come upon Jerusalem. Then I will be jealous for her sake and I will pour out great fury upon all the nations that come against her:

Verse 3

So said the Lord – And Jerusalem will be called the city of truth as He promised “The remnant of Israel shall neither commit injustice nor speak lies…” (Tzefaniah 3:13) The same is true for all of the land of Israel, but the verse specified Jerusalem because she is the head of the kingdom. And furthermore because of the mountain of the Lord, the holy mountain which will no longer be profaned by strangers:

Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Verse 1



Verse 2



Verse 3

a stone of burden – She is compared first to a cup of weakness, and then the prophet goes on to compare her to a stone of burden. This is to say - all those who wear themselves out fighting against Jerusalem will be beaten by her. This is like a great stone which is a tremendous burden and a heavy load to those who bear it. Furthermore, while they are lifting it off the ground to place it on their shoulders it will gash their hands. Many men test their strength against it and through carrying it gash their hands. So all the nations of the world will gather against Jerusalem, they will all be gathered together in her. The word burden (maamasa) is as in “…and each one loaded (va’yaamos) his donkey…” (Genesis 44:13) Loading something on a donkey relates to a burden. Targum Yonatan translated it into Aramaic as “a heavy stone for all nations, all who rob her will surely be plundered…”

Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Verse 1



Verse 2



Verse 3



Verse 4



Verse 5



Verse 6



Verse 7



Verse 8



Verse 9

And the Lord shall become King  - When the nations who come to Jerusalem see the wonders mentioned here, they will recognize that the Lord reigns over all the earth and exerts His providence on the lower world. He does with them as he pleases, and nature is transformed to do the will of those who fear Him, because everything is the work of His hands: