Kinnot for Tisha B'Av
קינות לתשעה באב
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Kinnot for Tisha B'Av

Kinot for Tisha B'Av Night



Kinot for Tisha B'Av Day



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19

Yours, my Lord, is the righteousness, because of the wondrous signs You have displayed from then until now;
and ours is the shamefacedness, because of the trial with which You sought to refine us, (but as a result of our failure) You despised us.
Yours, my Lord, is the righteousness because You have taken (our) nation from amidst another nation, with miracles;
and ours is the shamefacedness, because of the hypocrisy to be found within us as we emulated (Egypt's abominable) deeds.
Yours, my Lord, is the righteousness because God went out to redeem us as a people unto Himself;
and ours is the shamefacedness, because they (our forefathers) rebelled on the shore of the Sea of reeds, the nation sinning against its God!
Yours, my Lord, is the righteousness when we recall the proclamation, 'You are witnesses, and I am God!'
and, ours is the shamefacedness, because we blasphemed Hashem in (the Wilderness of) Sin (when we demanded of Aaron), 'Arise and create a god for us!'
Yours, my Lord, is the righteousness because You fed us (the manna) that tasted like dough fried in honey;
and ours, is the shamefacedness, because on the day (we made the Golden Calf), we brought it an offering of fine flour with oil and honey.
Yours, my Lord, is the righteousness because you provided us with the manna, the well and the pillar of clouds;
and ours is the shamefacedness because our forefathers grumbled in their tents about (the manna and called it) the destructive bread.
Yours, my Lord, is the righteousness because in the wilderness we lacked for nothing;
and ours is the shamefacedness because we defied You as Laban, Hazeroth, and Di-zahab as related (by Moses),
Yours, my Lord, is the righteousness because of (how You waged war for us with) Sihon and Og and all the kings of Canaan;
and ours is the shamefacedness because of Achan who appropriated for himself from the forbidden spoils (of Jericho) and found no excuse (for his crime).
Yours, my Lord, is the righteousness because of all that You accomplished through the fourteen saviors(-Judges);
and ours is the shamefacedness because of Micah's idol through which we transgressed.
Yours, my Lord, is the righteousness because You erected (Tabernacles) at Shiloh, Nob, Gibeon and the Eternal Temple (in Jerusalem);
and ours is the shamefacedness because the evil in our midst caused each one's destruction, and in their loss, we have been humiliated.
Yours, my Lord, is the righteousness because although the Destructions of the two Temples were caused by our corruption, we ourselves were spared;
and ours is the shamefacedness because we should have repented to You wholeheartedly so that You would return to us in compassion.
Yours, my Lord, is the righteousness because of the (almost) nine centuries throughout which You withheld Your anger (over our sins) and didn't broadcast it;
and ours is the shamefacedness because (Daniel) the man of delights pleaded with You (to end the Babylonian Exile after a mere seventy years, even though we were not worthy,) saying, 'Incline Your ear, O my God, and hear!'