Bartenura on Mishnah Tevul Yom
ברטנורא על משנה טבול יום
Bartenura on Mishnah, trans. by Rabbi Robert Alpert, 2022
sefaria.org

Bartenura on Mishnah Tevul Yom



Chapter 1



Mishnah 1

המכנס חלות - that they set aside from the started dough, and placed from them a lot, this on top of that, until they became attached to each other, and his intention was from the outset to separate them one from the other.
ונשכו (and they stuck together)- that they became so attached/stuck together until that when he came to separate them, they adhere one to the other, meaning to say, that when a part was detached from one of them and [the rest] goes up with its neighbor.
בית שמאי אומרים חיבור בטבול יום -if a Tevul Yom/one who immersed himself that day [in a Mikveh] came in contact with one of them, all of them are made invalid as if they are one body. For a person who immersed himself that day [in a Mikveh] invalidates priest’s due/heave-offering, and the priest’s share of the dough (i.e., Hallah) has the law of Terumah/heave-offering/priest’s due.
ובית הלל אומרים אינו חיבור – since it is his intention to separate them, and that [piece] that the person who immersed himself that day [in a Mikveh] touched is invalid, but the rest are ritually pure.
מקרצות (pieces of dough, separated from the main dough in the trough) – pieces of started dough that were cut into and detached from large pieces/clumps of started dough, are called מקרצות. It is the [Biblical] language (Jeremiah 46:20): “A ‘gadfly’ (i.e., a pinch – from BDB Dictionary) from the north is coming.” And all of these that are considered here. They are established/stand for the dispute of the School of Shammai and the School of Hillel of the concluding clause [of the Mishnah], for that which is not considered the priest’s share of the dough explicitly, because according to the School of Hillel, the priest’s share of the dough is not deemed connected, neither for a person who immersed himself that day in a Mikveh (i.e., a Tevul Yom) and not for other defilements, but these regarding a person who immersed himself that day in a Mikveh, they (i.e., the School of Shammai and the School of Hillel) are explicitly in dispute, but concerning the rest of the defilements, they agree, as is taught in the concluding clause [of the Mishnah].
חמיטה (a batter of which flat cakes are made) – a thin cake.
עד שלא קרמו בתנור – for since that they became stuck together/attached when they were started dough, their form has been lost if you place them when attached, therefore, they certainly will be separated in the future.
וקולית של מים (a hollow ball/globule of water) – the foam/froth and effervescence that comes up in the water is called קולית, and if a person who immersed himself that day [in the Mikveh] came in contact with that effervescence, according to the School of Hillel, it is not a connection/junction and the waters were not made unfit.
מחולחלת (loosely put in, hollow, blown up)- when the effervescence/froth/scum is hollow from underneath it, and it doesn’t touch the water other than its edges.
הראשונות – that the first boiling/effervescence of pounded beans are not attached on to the beans.
ר' יהודה אומר אף ברתיחה של אורז – The School of Shammai and the School of Hillel also dispute if it is an attachment/connection for a person who immersed himself that day [in the Mikveh] (i.e., Tevul Yom), and if he came in contact with/touched the effervescence, if is as if he came in contact with the rice.
ומודים – the School of Hillel [agrees].
בשאר כל הטומאות – that it is an attachment/connection.
בין קלות בין חמורות – in [cases of] minor [sources of uncleanness], he is first degree of ritual uncleanness; in major [sources of uncleanness] he is a primary source of ritual defilement. And specifically, they dispute concerning a person who immersed himself that day [in a Mikveh], because he had already ascended from his defilement and is not lacking anything other than his sunset [arriving].

Mishnah 2

המכנס חלות – this one on top of that one.
על מנת שלא להפריש – that he would not separate them one from the other.
משקרמו בתנור – that after their form/shape is not lost and the remain as wafers as they were, he places them attached and further does not ever separate them one from the other.
ושל שמן לעולם – whether new or old.
טופח (an aquatic plant, bean) – a kind of legume. But Maimonides states that we call it KORTEMAN in Arabic (according to Jastrow, he defines it as a seed similar to barley). But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.
טמאין בטבול יום – because of the concluding clause [of the Mishnah] that teaches “and it is not necessary to say, By all [other] sources of uncleanness”/"ואין צריך לומר בכל הטומאות", it took [the phrase]: "טמאים בטבול יום"/”are made unclean by a person who immersed himself that day/Tevul Yom,” and even though defilement/uncleanness does not belong regarding a person who immersed himself that day/Tevul Yom, because he doesn’t defile, but rather invalidates heave-offering/priest’s due/Terumah alone.

Mishnah 3

מסמר שאחר הככר – dough that protrudes from the loaf of bread like a kind of nail, and there are those what make it as such for a sign.
וגרגיר מלח קטן (and a small globule/lump of salt) – that was attached to the loaf and baked with it.
והחרחור (and the burnt crust/part of the loaf)- that the bread is burnt less than the thickness of a finger surrounding it. [The word] חרחור is the language of (Jeremiah 6:29): “The bellows puff; the lead is consumed by fire. [Yet the smelter smelts to no purpose – the dross is not separated out].”/"נחר מפוח מאש".
ר' יוסי אומר – all that is burnt is consumed with the loaf, it is a connection/junction, and if the person who immersed himself that day/Tevul Yom touched that which is burnt, it is as if he touched the bread. But if not, it is not an attachment/connection. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 4

הצרור שבככר – that they customarily place a pebble stone within the loaf as a sign/symbol so that it not be exchanged for another, and sometimes they place a large lump of salt or a lupine. All of these are not considered a connection/junction to the bread, but if a primary source of ritual defilement touched one of these, it is not as if it touched the bread itself, and all the more so, a person who immersed himself that day/Tevul Yom that the loaf of heave-offering/priest’s due is not invalidated by this.
והחרחור יותר מכאצבע (the burnt part of the loaf/the burnt crust larger than a finger’s breadth) – and similarly when it is burnt from the bread with more than the thickness of a finger, and an impure person or a person who immersed himself that day had touched the burnt part, it is not a connection/junction to/with the bread.
ר' יוסי אומר כל שאינו נאכל עמו – is not a connection/junction. And We don’t estimate the width of a finger like the first Tanna/teacher [of the Mishnah]. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 5

השעורה והכוסמת – at the time that they are not peeled/husked are not considered human food, for human beings do not eat them with their husks, and something that is not human food is not susceptible to receive ritual defilement.
התיאה (root of crowfoot) – the root of assa foetida, an umbelliferous plant used, as a resin or in leaves for a spine and for medicinal purposes.
והחלתית – in Arabic, such is its name חלתית/assa foetida. And we call it SEFIDITA in the foreign language.
והאלום (Silphium, a kind of assa foetida or Laserpitium) – they said about it that it is a root, a species from the kinds of assa foetida. And all of these are not considered human food, but sometimes, they mix a little from them with the food.
אף אפונים שחורים (even black chickpeas) – that are not other than for healing (i.e., medicinal purposes) and are not made for human food.
טהורים בטבול יום - since he is pure from his defilement and is not wanting/requiring anything other than sunset, he does not invalidate with all of these if they are of priest’s due/heave-offering, but with other defilements they are considered food and receive defilement like the rest of foods. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
הקצח (black cumin) – a kind of black seed, and in the foreign language, NILO. And it is customary to place from it in bread.
והשמשום – this is its name in Arabic. And there is a lot of it in the Land of Israel, and they make sesame oil from it.

Chapter 2



Mishnah 1

משקה טבול יום – the liquids which exude from the person who immersed himself that day) – as for example, his spittle, his urine, the tears of his eyes and the blood from his wounds, and the milk of a woman.
כמשקים שהוא נוגע בהן – like liquids of priest’s due/heave-offering that he touches/comes in contact with, for a person who has immersed himself that day/Tevul Yom invalidates heave-offering/priest’s due.
אלו ואלו – liquids which exude from his body and liquid heave-offering do not defile the Holy Things/make the susceptible to uncleanness , but they invalidate it (see Tractate Parah, Chapter 8, MIshnah 7).
בין קלין בין חמורין (whether minor or major) – minor are unclean reptiles; major are people with gonorrhea/flux (see also Tractate Hullin, folio 88a).
תחילה – first remove/degree of uncleanness and it makes [other things] second [degree of ritual uncleanness] and the second [degree of ritual uncleanness] makes [other things] third [degree of ritual uncleanness.
חוץ מן המשקה שהוא אב הטומאה – as for example the flux of a person with gonorrhea and his digestive organs/bowels.

Mishnah 2

המשקים פסולים – that a person who has immersed himself that day/Tevul Yom invalidates the heave-offering/priest’s due alone, but he does not make it susceptible to ritual defilement, and even liquids, for all that invalidates the heave-offering/priest’s due defiles liquids to be first [degree of ritual uncleanness] except for the person who has immersed himself that day/Tevul Yom. Therefore, the cooking pot is ritually pure, for the liquids that touched/came in contact with the Tevul Yom, even foods do not defile, and all the more so, vessels/utensils, 
but if the liquid was non-consecrated, everything is ritually pure, for a person who has immersed himself that day is pure for non-consecrated produce and for tithes.
ואם היו ידיו מסואבות הכל טמא (but if his hands were dirty/unwashed, everything is ritually impure) – for hands make the heave-offering/priest’s due unfit, and when the liquids were ritually defiled on account of the [dirty] hands, they returned to be first [degree of ritual uncleanness] and defile vessels.
שספק טבול יום פוסל את התרומה – as for example two loaves before him, it is doubtful whether he came in contact with it/touched it or did not come in contact with it/touched it, that in that manner with ritually pure hands, but a person who had immersed himself that day invalidated them/made them unfit.

Mishnah 3

המקפה (a stiff mass of grist, oil and onions, porridge) – a cooked dish that is congealed and thick, as for example, cereal/a dish of pounded grain/grit or pounded beans.
והשום והשמן – that are placed on it as a spice (i.e., for flavor).
נגע טבול יום במקצתן פסל את כולם – for the essence is the stiff mass of grist, and a person who has immersed himself that day/Tevul Yom invalidates/makes unfit the priest’s due/heave offering. But even though he didn’t touch/come in contact with other than with the unconsecrated garlic, it is considered a junction/connection.
ואם היה השום מרובה (but if the garlic was the greater part) – more than the unconsecrated porridge/stiff mass of grist.
הולכין אחר המרובה – and law of everything is like the law regarding heave-offering/priest’s due, but if he touched part of them, he invalidated/made unfit everything.
אימתי – meaning to say, with that which we said if the garlic was the greater part and he (i.e., the Tevul Yom) touched part of it, he invalidates/makes unfit all of it, at the time that the garlic is collected/gathered in the dish, and it is one body, like a kind of a handful/clump of earth.
אבל אם היה מפוזר במדוכה (but if it - the garlic – was scattered in the mortar) – that its parts were separated from each other within the mortar, and a person who had immersed himself that day/Tevul Yom had touched it is then ritually pure, meaning to say, he did not invalidate it other than the place/point of his contact, for since he intended at the time that he is crushing/pounding to separate its parts, it is not considered a junction/connection.
ושאר כל הנידוכין שדכן במקשין (and the rest of the things that are crushed in liquids) – like they do with wheat, when they crush them in a mortar, they pour/sprinkle water over them.
או דברים שדרכן לדוך במשקין ודכן שלא במשקין והן גוש בקערה הרי הן בעיגולי דבילה – that if a person who had immersed himself that day/Tevul Yom had touched part of them, he did not invalidate all of them. Such is what I found in the commentary/explanation of my Rabbis/teachers. But Maimonides explains [the phrase]: "ושאר כל הנדוכים שדכן במשקין"/”And [so is the rule in the case of] all other things which one crushed, which one crushed together with liquids,” their law is like that of garlic. That if a person who had immersed himself that day/Tevul Yom had touched part of what he pounds, he only made unfit/invalid the place of his contact, because the scattering (of the garlic in the mortar) is welcome to him. But if he did not touch it when it became a clod/clump in the bowl, it is connection/junction, and when he touched part of it, he invalidated/made unfit everything.
אבל את שדרכן לדוך במשקין – we have this reading according to the explanation of Maimonides.
ודכן שלא במשקין – even though that he placed that lump/clod in the bowl, they are like cakes of pressed fig, that we stated that when he touched a part of it, all of them were not ritually defiled, in the beginning of the second chapter of [Tractate] Terumot (Mishnah 1).

Mishnah 4

המקפה והחמיטה (the porridge and the batter of which flat cakes are made) – it was their manner to place the batter of which flat cakes are made, which is a thin cake like a kind of wafer, within the porridge.
חיבץ (he – the unclean person- stirred) – that is that he mixed/combined the porridge and the batter of which flat cakes are made with the oil, but anyway, the oil is recognized. And surely it invalidates in every place that the oil goes, because it is impossible to separate it from the porridge and from the batter of which flat cakes are made.

Mishnah 5

בשר הקודש שקרם עליו הקיפה (sacred flesh on the top of which a layer of jelly was formed – as a crust) – the spices and the soup and the fat of the meat congealed upon it, that it was softened and everything became like a kind of crust.
החתיכות מותרות – for the crust is not a connection/junction.
וכל העולים עימה – is considered connected to it, but the rest is ritually pure.
שניהם חיבור – and whether he touched the jelly or whether he touched the pieces [of meat], he has invalidated everything. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri.
ווכן בקטניות (and so in the case of pulse) – of bread that we place on the pulse.
מעשה קדרה בקטניות (that which is cooked in the cooking pot and pulse) – that is to say, pulse that was cooked in a cooking pot, and it is their manner to be split/burst apart. And when they cook well, they attach/connect and become a kind of lump/clod. And there are those who have the reading (instead of "מעשה קדרה בקטניות" /”that which is cooked in the cooking pot in pulse,” [the reading}: "מעשה קדירה וקטניות"/”that which is cooked in the cooking pot and pulse.
הרי אלו ימנו (lo, they are counted – if there are many masses of pulse) – if the unclean reptile touched one of them, it is first [degree of ritual uncleanness], and the clod/lump that is adjacent to it is second [degree of ritual uncleanness], and the other that is adjacent/next to the second [degree of ritual uncleanness] is third-degree uncleanness of heave-offering/priest’s due.
שניהן חיבור זה לזה – but if the person who had immersed himself that day/Tevul Yom touched one of them, its neighbor is invalidated. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri.

Mishnah 6

חבית ששקעה (a jar which sunk) – a wine jug of heave-offering/priest’s due that fell into a cistern and sunk into the wine that is in cistern, and the wine that is in the cistern is unconsecrated and floats above on the top of the cistern. And he (i.e., the person who had immersed himself that day/Tevul Yom) touched/came in contact with it, etc. If he let down his hand into the mouth of the cistern...
מן השפה ולפנים הרי זה חיבור (from the rim and inward it is deemed connected) – and all the wine that is in the wine jug is invalidated, and even if the wine jug from the outset was not completely full from the wine of heave-offering/priest’s due.
מן השפה ולחוץ – that he didn’t put his hand into the mouth of the wine jus, even though he touched the wine of the cistern that is opposite the mouth of the wine jug, nevertheless if is not connected.
אפילו על גבי רום קומה (even if [the level of the wine in the cistern] was a man’s height [above the sunken jar]) – that the wine that was in the cistern ascended on the face of the jug to the height of a person, if he touched corresponding to its mouth, it is connection. But the Halakha Is not according to Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri.

Mishnah 7

מפיה ומשוליה טמאה (whether at its rim or from its bottom) – from its mouth, it is ritually impure, for since all the wine that is below becomes the base for the upper part, it is a connection. And from its bottom also, since all the wine is conducted after the incision, it is a connection.
אבל נקבה מצדה מכאן ומכאן טהורה - and there is no invalidation/other than what he touched, and it is neutralized in one and one-hundred. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.
ונגע טבול יום בקילוח (and the person who had immersed himself that day touched the continuous flow/jet) – the continuous flow/jet alone is in validated, for the uninterrupted flow of liquid poured from vessel to vessel is not considered a connection (of the two liquids) -either for communicating uncleanness or for producing cleanness (see Tractate Taharot, Chapter 8, Mishnah 9), it is like impure priest’s due/heave offering that was mixed with pure, and is neutralized in one and one-hundred, like heave-offering/priest’s due with non-consecrated produce. And in this, even the Rabbis admit that a continuous flow/jet is not considered a connection to vessels, like the incision that is on the side of the jug/jar. And even though the liquids have no purification from their defilement, that is that it is not removed through dipping of a vessel, filled with unclean liquid, so as to make its surface level with the surface of the water into which it is dipped in a Mikveh like that for water, but for the reason of nullification, they are nullified with one in one-hundred. And specifically, when the person who had immersed himself that day/Tevul Yom had contact, the liquids are invalidated, because the person who has immersed himself that day/Tevul Yom does not defile. But with the rest of the defilements, he restores what is in the uninterrupted jet, he defiles everything that is in the vessel through contact.

Mishnah 8

בעבוע שבחבית – when they smelt an earthenware vessel in a furnace/kiln, kinds of bubbles go out in their walls, that they have two walls – one to the inner side of the jar and one to the outer side, and an empty cavity in the middle, and sometimes, there is in a bubble of two incisions/holes, one in the wall of the bubble of the inner side which is to the side of the hollow cavity of the jar, and one in the wall of the outer side, and the jar is filled with liquids, the liquids enter through the incision that is in the inner wall and it breaks through/bursts forth and leaves through the incision that is in the outer wall from above, if it was a jar placed in the tent of a corpse, and is surrounded by a closely covered lid in its mouth and is not surrounded with incisions of bubbles, or that someone who is a primary source of ritual defilement touched/came in contact with the liquid that is in the outer incision, all the liquids are defiled that in the jug, but if the inner part from above them and the outer part from below them, assuming that in a tent of a corpse it becomes defiled, that the tent of the defilement enters into the jar through the incisions, however with a primary source of ritual defilement it is ritually pure, for if a primary source of ritual defilement came in contact with liquids that are in the outer incision that is in the bubble from below, after the inner part from above was like an uninterrupted flow of a liquid poured from vessel to vessel and like blows/lashes (i.e., downward strokes) and it is not a connection.

Chapter 3



Mishnah 1

כל ידות האוכלים (all [stalks serving as] handles for produce) – the stalks that the food is hung/suspended on them, when they want to suspend them, and a person holds it when he wants to eat the fruit/produce.
שהם חיבור באב הטומאה (and it is deemed connected by a primary source of ritual uncleanness) – that if the primary source of ritual uncleanness/defilement touched the fruit/produce itself.
חיבור בטבול יום – if it is a handle for produce of priest’s due/heave-offering and the person who had immersed himself that day/Tevul Yom touched that handle, all of the produce/fruit of heave-offering is invalidated.
שנפרס (that is broken off/divided) – the language of a piece/half. But there are those who have the reading שנפרם/that it is torn open/exposed. It is the language of (Leviticus 21;10): “or rend his vestments.”
מעורה (intertwined/interwoven) – attached [somewhat].
אם אוחז בגדול – the large piece, and the small piece goes up with it and is not broken off from everything.
הרי הוא כמוהו – and if a person who had immersed himself that day/Tevul Yom touched one of them and the second [piece] is invalidated.
ר' נחמיה אומר בטהור – meaning to say, in that which the person who had immersed himself that day did not touch we estimate/measure, whether it is large or whether it is small. If he grabs hold of it, and the impure part is with him, both of them are impure.
וחכמים אומרים בטמא – we estimate/measure, if he grabs hold of the impure piece and the ritually pure piece goes up with it. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
ושאר כל האוכלים – as for example kinds/species of vegetables.
את שדרכו לאחוז – when he comes to carry it, he holds it by its leaf, but if the green/vegetable breaks and falls when he holds it by the leaf, it is a connection/junction, but if not, it is not a connection, whether if the Tevul Yom/person who had immersed himself that day had touched the leaf or whether he touch the green/vegetable itself.

Mishnah 2

ירק של תרומה שנתנו בקערה או באלפס וביצה טרופה (a vegetable of heave-offering that was placed in a bowl or in a tightly covered pot 
and a beaten egg) – in a dish, that the white of the egg and the yolk/yellow of the egg were mixed together and placed on top of the vegetable.
ונגע טבול יום בביצה – even though it is not consecrated. For heave-offering does not belong in an egg, and a person who had immersed himself that day/Tevul Yom does not invalidate something that is not consecrated. Nevertheless, there is a connection/junction, and the vegetable is invalidated as if he had touched it. But however, he did not invalidate ought other than the stalk/stem that is corresponding to/over against the touch of his hand. But all of the rest of the stalks/stems are ritually pure.
כל הסדר העליון (all the entire upper row) – the upper stems/stalks that the egg is upon them. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.
ואם היה כמין כובע – that on account of the cooking, the egg became swollen and became like the hat of a vegetable and it is hollow underneath it.

Mishnah 3

לפס – like a tightly covered pot, like a kind of a pan that they make a cooked dish in. And this egg is cooked with the heave-offering that is invalidated by a person who had immersed himself that day/Tevul Yom.
מן השפה – [from the rim] of tightly covered pot and inward, the streak of the egg is considered as a connection, and if the person who had immersed himself that day/Tevul Yom had touched there, everything is ritually defiled. But if the streak [of the egg] that goes from the rim of the tightly covered pot and outward, it is not concerned to be a connection.
וכל שנקלף עמו – that is what goes up with the streak, it is a connection and not more. Rabbi Yossi is [judged as] lenient and such is proven in the Tosefta (see Tractate Tevul Yom, Chapter 2, Halakha 10). But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.
וכן בקטניות – its law is like that of the egg.

Mishnah 4

אינה נפסלת בטבול יום – we follow after the started dough and not after the leavened dough, even though it is prohibited to non-priests (i.e., literally, “foreigners”).
שהוכשרה במשקה – that placed the wheat in water.
ונילושה במי פירות – but fruit juice does not make susceptible [to ritual uncleanness] and the started dough that was kneaded in them , if it was not made susceptible [to ritual uncleanness] from the outset, it doesn’t receive ritual defilement.
פסל את כולה – for fruit juice makes the started dough a connection.
לא פסל אלא מקום מגעו – for Rabbi Akiva holds that since fruit juice does not make susceptible to ritual uncleanness and doesn’t bring it to a state of defilement, we see them as if they are not, and he did not defile anything other than the place of its contact. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Akiva.

Mishnah 5

פסל את כולו – that he (Rabbi Eleazar ben Yehuda of Bartetota in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua) holds that oil makes susceptible for ritual defilement and connects.
לא פסל אלא מקום מגעו – the oil does not make connection, but it refers to each and every stalk on its own.

Mishnah 6

שנגס (break off, bite off - who took a bite of some food, and something mixed with his saliva fell on his garments) – he turned the food over in his mouth (i.e., chewing). It is the language of stirring the pot.
ונפל – the food [fell] with the moistness of the spittle that is upon it on his clothing and on the loaf of [bread of] heave-offering.
טהור – the loaf, meaning to say it is not susceptible to receive ritual defilement. And even though mere spittle makes it susceptible. It is different here, for he did not consider to spit and it isn’t on purpose/intentional, for it fell upon his garments and it is obvious that it was not satisfactory to him.
כל שהוא רוצה למוץ את גרעינתו (anything on the pit of which he wishes to suck) - if he intended to suck the moisture that is on the pit and the pit/seed fell with the spittle that is upon it on the loaf of heave-offering, the loaf is made susceptible [to receive ritual uncleanness] with the spittle that is on the pit, and that is what he intended.
זיתים נגובים ומרים יבשות כל שאינו רוצה למוץ גרעינתו – he did not have an inappropriate intention regarding this liquid and it is not susceptible [to receive ritual defilement].
אחד טהור ואחד טבול יום באלו – meaning to say that both of them are equivalent in this law.

טמאים בטבול יום – as he explains the reasoning, that liquids of an impure person make it susceptible and defile even unintentionally/not on purpose, and a person who had immersed himself that day/Tevul Yom is like an impure person with regard to this law. But the Rabbis consider the person who had immersed himself that day as ritually pure. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Chapter 4



Mishnah 1

אוכל מעשר. מפרישין ממנו תרומת מעשר בטהרה – for a person who had immersed himself that day/Tevul Yom and hands are second degree of ritual uncleanness. And First Tithe (which goes to a Levite) is considered like unconsecrated produce, and second degree of ritual uncleanness does not make something third degree of ritual uncleanness with unconsecrated produce/food. Even though this tithe is immersed for the tithe of the tithe that is within it (which the Levite gives to the Kohen, regarding second and third degree of ritual uncleanness, the eatables forbidden pending the separation of sacred gifts is like unconsecrated produce/food, therefore, when we separate from it afterwards the tithe from the tithe it is pure.

Mishnah 2

וקוצה לה חלה (and cuts off/separates the priest’s share of the dough) – but does not call it by a designation, for all the while that she did not call it by a designation it is like unconsecrated produce.
בכפישה או בנחותא (in a basket or on a board) – vessels that are not susceptible to receive ritual defilement. And the Rabbis needed this, because of recognition/a sign that she should not touch it again, after she has made for it a designation.
ומקפת (and brings it near) – draws it near to the vessel near her.
וקוראה לה שם – for it is a Mitzvah to take heave-offering from that which is close/brought near. And [the word] "מוקף" is the language of near-by/adjacent. Like we surround two wine jugs in Tractate Betza, [folio 32b]. But it is not considered near/close unless it is adjacent/near-by at the time of designating [the dough] by name.
מפני שהיא שלישי – for someone who had immersed himself that day has the law of second degree of ritual defilement.

Mishnah 3

לשין בה את העיסה – above (i.e., in the previous Mishnayot) we are teaching about a person who had immersed himself that day, but here we are teaching about a vessel that was immersed that day, so that you would not say that a kneading trough was prohibited for perhaps you might exchange it/switch it for a ritually impure/defiled one.

Mishnah 4

לגין (a bottle smaller than a כד/pitcher and larger than a כוס/glass – a LAGIN which requires sunset to be clean and which was filled out of a cask containing tithes for heave-offering) – similar to a wooden pitcher.
ומילאוהו מן החבית – that has in it tithes from eatables forbidden pending the separation of sacred gifts, that is first tithe from which its heave-offering (for the Kohen) had not yet been taken.
תרומת משער משתחשך – in order that the sunset of the flagon/bottle would arrive and the Terumah/heave-offering would not be invalidated, for if the heave-offering would take effect while it is still daylight, it would be invalidated by that which had been immersed that self-same day.
הרי זה ערוב – he did not say anything because one does not acquire an Eruv other than with a meal that is appropriate while it is still daylight, and this is not appropriate until sunset.
נשברה החבית (if the jar broke) – while it is still daylight.
הלגין בטבלו (that which is in the flagon continues in its status of being not tithed) – for at the time that it was appropriate that it would be established as heave-offering, there was never in the world the thing that would be made heave-offering, therefore, the designation of heave-offering does not occur upon it and it is not tithed.
נשבר הלגין – while it is still daylight.
החבית בטבלה – because the designation of heave-offering did not occur on the flagons other than when it became dark, and at that hour, it never was [heave-offering].

Mishnah 5

מחללים על פירות עם הארץ (they exchange the produce of a commoner) – they redeem Second Tithe for the produce of a commoner/someone who is not careful in the practices of Levitical cleanness and tithes, and we don't worry that perhaps the produce of a commoner are tithed, and it is found that he redeems a tithe for a tithe.
חזרו לומר אף על המעות – of a commoner/someone who is not careful in the practices of tithes and Levitical cleanness, they redeem the Second Tithe produce, and they don’t worry that perhaps these monies belonged to a commoner were the monies of Second Tithe produce.
היוצא בקולר (he who goes out with a collar/chain around his neck) – a chain. It is the Aramaic translation of (Ezekiel 19:9): “With hooks he was put in a cage”/"ויתנהו בסוגר בחחים" -and they placed him in chains.
הרי אלו יכתבו ויתנו – and even though he did not say, “and give it [to my wife],” he certainly wanted to say, “write it and give it,” and amidst/subsidiary to his terror/agitation, he didn’t interrupt his words.
מפרש – from the land to the sea.
בשיירא – in the desert/wilderness. (Genesis 37:25): “[Then they sat down to a meal. Looking up, they saw] a caravan of Ishmaelites [coming from Gilead].” We translate in Aramaic an Arab caravan.
אף המסוכן – a sick person who feels that death is approaching. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Shimon Shizuri.

Mishnah 6

הכדומין (a sort of lever with which a pitcher is fished out of a well/watercooler) – a long and large piece of wood and hooks come out this way and that way, and they suspend on those hooks flasks of water (i.e., bottles with a wide body and a narrow neck) in the air in order to cool them. But Maimonides explains, it is a like a kind of bronze wreath/rim and hooks surround it, and with it they lift up the vessels that fell into the cistern.
האשקלונים – that are made in Ashkelon.
המעבר והמזרה והמגוב (the pitchfork -for the first stage of winnowing- passing the grain from one side to the other, the winnowing fan and the rake – an agricultural implement with many teeth, forming a sort of sieve to separate the grain from the chaff or to dry the grain) – utensils used to clean grain from the straw and to remove the straw from place to place. The מעבר/pitchfork, has teeth" and is similar to a human hand, and they remove the straw from place to place. And the מזרה/winnowing fan, with it they winnow/sift the wheat in the granary/threshing floor. Therefore, it is called a מזרה, and its teeth are greater [in number] than the teeth of the מעבר/pitchfork. But the מגוב/rake – its teeth are greater [in number] than that of the teeth of the מזרה/winnowing fan, and with it they sift/assort the grain after the winnowing fan winnowed them.
ועל כולם אמר רבי יהושע וכו' – In the Tosefta (see Tractate Kelim Bava Metzia, Chapter 3, Halakha 14 and Tractate Tevul Yom, Chapter 2, Halakha 14), it is proven that Rabbi Yehoshua refers to all these words of the Mishnah (see beginning of Tractate Tevul Yom, Chapter 4, Mishnah 2 and onwards) , from the woman who is had immersed herself that day until here, and because Rabbi Yehoshua refers to all of them, the Tanna/teacher here teaches many words whose matter is not related to here.
דבר חדש חידשו הסופרים – that the temperament/mind does not provide that the matter will be such. (See also the Bartenura commentary to this phrase in Tractate Kelim, Chapter 13, Mishnah 7, where he states: "ראויין היו להיות טהורים דפשוטי כלי עץ נינהו ומשום שן אחת של מתכת לא נחתא להו טומאה"/”they should be worthy of being ritually pure, for they are simple wooden utensils and because of one tooth made of metal, they should descend to ritual impurity.”)
ואין לי מה להשיב – because of what they said as such [which I cannot respond to].

Mishnah 7

התורם את הבור (he who gives a heave-offering from the cistern) – of wine or of [olive] oil.
על מנת שתעלה שלום (on the condition that it come up in safety) – that he made the condition of mere safety (without specifying), but did not make a condition for a specific matter, without qualification regarding the matter of breakage and spillage it is stated, for on this, a person is afraid at the time that he raises it up from the cistern.
אבל לא מן הטומאה – therefore, if it was defiled, his heave-offering is a heave-offering.
אף מן הטומאה – that when he said that it should come up safely [from the cistern], he is saying that it should come up in ritual purity. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.
נשברה אינה מדמעת (if it – the jar – broke, it does not count as heave-offering) – the designation of “heave-offering” does not come upon it.
עד כדי שתתגלגל (until it rolls back) – all the while that it was not distanced from the cistern so much, that if it rolls back it is considered as [part of] the cistern, we call it – that it didn’t come up in safety.
שהיה בו דעת להתנות – meaning to say that it was in his mind and he thought in his heart (i.e., to himself) to make a condition, but forgot and did not make the condition. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.