Chovat HaTalmidim
חובת התלמידים
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Chovat_HaTalmidim
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org
-Sefaria Edition 2021, Translated by Rabbi Francis Nataf.
-Nataf translation

Chovat HaTalmidim

Introduction

A conversation with teachers and parents of the children [who will be taught from this book]
King Solomon said in Proverbs (22, 6): "Teach the lad according to his way, so that also in his old age he will not turn from it." This is the core of education: that not only at the time the child is young and in the domain of his father that he will listen and do according to the commandments, rather also when he grows up and is in his own domain, even when he becomes elderly he will not turn from it. Because education is not only commands, that one should command his son or student "Do such and such," so too is it not just habit, that one accustoms his son or student to good deeds. Education is far, far beyond commands or habit, and these two things, commands and habit, are simply tools used in its implementation which the educator is forced to use, to command or to habituate, in order to educate on the path of the LORD.
As Rashi, may his memory be blessed, explains the word <i>chinukh</i> (education), in the verse (Deuteronomy 20:5), "who built a house but did not dedicate it (<i>chankho</i>) - "<i>Chinukh</i> is a term for beginning." But it is obvious that we would not say, <i>chinukh</i>, about any beginning. For example, when the Gemara (Pesachim 116a) says about the order of the Haggadah, "One begins with disgrace and ends with praise," we would not say, "One is <i>mechanekh</i> with disgrace, etc." And likewise regarding the Sanhedrin (Sanhedrin 32a) - that we begin from the side - we would not say that, we are <i>mechankhin</i> from the side. However in Parashat Lech Lecha (Rashi on Genesis 14:14), Rashi explains it further to us, as follows: <i>Chanikhiv</i>, etc. whom he had trained in the commandments. It is a term for introducing a person or a thing, for the first time, to some particular occupation in which it is intended that he should remain. It has a similar sense in (Proverbs 22:6), "<i>Chanokh</i> the lad," in (Numbers 7:84) "the dedication (<i>chanukat</i>) of the altar" and in (Psalms 30:1) "The dedication (<i>chanukat</i>) of the house." 
However the term, <i>chinukh</i>, would not be said even about a craftsman that begins his work, if he is already able to do it. Likewise would the term, <i>chinukh</i> of the house, not apply to a house when we begin to build it. Rather, the term, <i>chinukh</i> only applies to the one who is coming to teach himself the craft, or to the [new] use of a house that has already been built. And this is a precise inference from the words of Rashi, "for the first time, etc. in which it is intended that he should remain." It is not about the craft or work, but only about the person. The term, <i>chinukh</i>, applies to the readying for a craft which is within the inner potential of a person to do; or the readying of a house or a vessel for a particular purpose. The word, <i>chinukh</i>, is specific (it is not the same as beginning). It is said about bringing out the readiness that is in a person or a thing from the potential to the actual. If we do not bring it out, it will stay hidden. So we need to bring out and ready (<i>lechanekh</i>) a particular man to do a particular craft, or a house or a vessel for its use - every room for the use for which it is meant; and [every] vessel for the use for which it is meant.
And when this word is used about educating children, the intention is to expand and develop the nature and talent of the child found in small measure, in potential or even in hiding - and to reveal it. And since the essence of God and a Godly soul is hidden and stored away in a Jew even when he is a child, we must raise him and educate him to bring it out, to reveal it and to have it flourish - so that he will be a faithful Jew to God. [Then] he will desire His Torah on his own, so that also in his old age he will not veer from His path. But one who commands or habituates the son or student cannot be sure that [the child] will do according to his command also when he grows up and becomes independent. And that is why Solomon commanded, "Teach (<i>Chanokh</i>) the lad, etc." - you must delve inside him and reveal the Jewish holiness that is hidden there. And only then, "also in his old age he will not veer from it."
But King Solomon did not only inform us of the goal of education, which is to is to bring him to, "also in his old age he will not veer from it." Rather he also explained to us the manner and method of how to reach this, with the words, "Teach (<i>Chanokh</i>) the lad according to his way." For this is the essence of it. As one who only commands and habituates does not need to pay attention to the son or student, to know his nature or intellect, etc. He only has to command, "Do this and that," and that is enough. He will also not feel his own need to treat each and every student differently. He is able to command many students of the same age with one command - "Do this and that." For this thing is not dependent on the student or child, but rather only on him. He will command and that will be the end of it. But an educator who wants to reveal the hidden and stored away soul of the student, to uplift it and set it on fire with a divine fire that reaches the Highest Holy One, such that all of him - even the powers of his body - grows in holiness and pines for God's Torah, he is required to soften himself towards the student that he is educating. He must delve into his juvenility and smallness until he reaches the spark of his stored away - or even hidden - soul, bring it out, develop it and grow it. 
And since this is so, education is not the same for all children. It depends upon the nature, intelligence, character traits, etc. of each and every child. These must be recognized by the educator, and it is not enough for the educator to simply know himself and his own mind. For the matter is dependent upon the one being educated. He may not only use his own strengths to act command and instruct; but must also grab onto, use and bring to bear the mind and strengths of the student. So he may not command and educate the one what he commands and educates the other; as he is different from the first in his nature, will, character traits, etc. And this is what King Solomon hinted to us [when he said], "Teach (<i>Chanokh</i>) the lad according to his way" - each and every one, according to his way. 
Our intention here is not to instruct about the pedagogical tools of education - how to work with a student's intellect, and the methods through which one can broaden his understanding in order to know the simple meaning of the Torah. For we are not just seeking the intellect of the student here, but rather the whole student. We seek the spirit, essence and soul (<i>nefesh, ruach veneshamah</i>) of the Jewish child, in order to connect him to the God of Israel, such that he will be a God-fearing Jew whose every desire is towards Him, may He be blessed. 
Behold that even though every father and teacher knows that the small children or students before them will not remain small but rather grow into adults - possibly even great Torah scholars and servants of God - nevertheless, some only see their goals based on what is before their eyes. And since they only see children, their only goal is to educate them to be good children; they only want to inculcate Torah and fear of Heaven according to their age - and they think that is enough. However such a teacher or father is sinning against God and His people. A teacher or father must know that they must educate and reveal the children of God and the great men of Israel. They must see the children sitting in front of them as great souls that have not yet been chiseled; and that it is incumbent upon them to raise them and make them flourish. He is a gardener in God's garden who must work it and guard it. And even if he sees children who appear to him to be bitter and have bad character traits, he should know that this is the nature of young souls that are not yet ripe - they are bitter when they just blossom, but [sweet] when they mature.
The Baal Shem Tov and his students after him - holy Jews - taught us that there is no completely evil trait or nature in a Jewish child. However we must know how to make use of them and refine them. For example, if one has a stubborn student - which is a bad character trait, from which the teacher may suffer greatly - he must reflect that when [this student] grows up and accepts the yoke of Torah and service to God, his service will be tenacious and marked by self-sacrifice. He will not be flighty and unstable, but will rather be the type of Jewish man we find in the Midrash (Bereishit Rabbah 39:3), "If he erects his words like a wall" - see there - he will be strong like a fortress wall regarding everything having to do with divine service. And if he sees a student with the trait of anger - though it is true that the way the student now uses his anger is very bad, is that enough of a reason to decide that his root is wormwood and gall and that he is bad and lowly by nature? Would we not be playing the fool who hears the praise of the citron and then plucks it to eat the seed or to eat it when it is unripe, and then yells out and makes a fuss, saying, "The citron is bitter and harmful?"
Are the principal and teacher able to imagine the great benefit they can bring out from the bad temper of the angry child when they delve inside him and draw him near, so that his heart and soul burn with self-sacrifice for God? His anger will turn into holy fire - every act of service will burn like glowing coals; all of his words spoken for God, in Torah [study] and prayer, will be with a voice that thunders and draws out fiery flames. And see the explanation of the Rabbi (R. Shneur Zalman of Liadi), may his memory be blessed, in his Siddur on <i>Kegavna</i> - and these are his words: The passion of anger that spins off from the passion in the heart, and any man that is angry by nature, are prone to be enthused with the glowing fire of fervor [for God's service] - see there. Even more certain is that such a person will be filled with anger and rage when he finds a problem or stain in himself. He will have his desire for the good (<i>yetzer hatov</i>) get angry and fling away - even obliterate - the evil within himself. And if he chastises others and rebukes them about their lowliness to their face, he will not mock them nor curse them. Rather he will speak simple words, but words that will seethe like a bubbling cauldron and flow like a raging sea; such that he will melt and uproot even the illnesses and stains from the souls of others.
When we see how the younger generation has become heretical and unbridled, God forbid, our hearts are grieved and our hair bristles. It has no faith, fear or Torah [knowledge]. They hate God and His Jewish servants. The directors and heads of yeshivot - whose heads and hearts are in their yeshivot and with their students - only see fine young men before them. So they are consoled, saying, "It is true that there are many secular Jews now, but Israel is no widow: There are also sons of Zion who are outstanding in halakha and whose hearts are with God." Yet they should please stick their heads out of the four cubits of their yeshivot and please see the great masses of secular Jews, God forbid. 'Tyre is only built from the destruction of Jerusalem' - study halls that were full of Torah students have emptied out, and clubs and organizations the goal of which is heresy and the disparaging of Torah, God forbid, have grown in their place.
Even craftsmen and businessmen who - though they were not Torah students - were previously faithful Jews, have now become heretics like the youth; they have wandered away and fallen into the pit of destruction, God forbid. So should we just suffice with the nucleus of students in our yeshivot? Is that the entire Jewish nation?
And are we even so sure about the students in our yeshivot? Have we already done what is incumbent upon us to do with them? It is true that we can be more certain that the students who have already reached the higher levels - and especially the ones that have become rabbis and filled their insides with Torah and divine service - will, with God's help, remain in God's holy sanctuary and involved in divine service. However, will all [our students] reach the higher levels? How many students in the lower levels will find it impossible to continue their studies until then and will - willingly or unwillingly - go out to do business or learn a trade? It is as it is stated in the Midrash (Vayikra Rabbah 2:1), "A thousand come in to study, but only one of them goes out to become a rabbi." And why should we be certain that on the day after they leave the yeshiva - or shortly thereafter - they will not become unbridled and profane the Shabbat, God forbid, as our saddened eyes have already seen. So why don't we also devise a strategy for them when they are still with us? Is every lad who later becomes unbridled not in our hands when he is a child, being raised in our schools? So why do we leave him and his spirit without a connection to God and His Torah during his childhood, so that it will also exist until the time of his old age?
In fact, we have become accustomed to looking to the heretical youth as if only they were to blame about the matter, and as if we were completely clean. But from all of the righteousness of our father, Abraham, God  [specifically] mentioned (Genesis 18:19), "For I have known him, that he will instruct his children and his posterity to keep the way of the Lord." Each and every generation in Israel is a link in the chain of our legacy, the beginning of which is bound to our father, Abraham, and the end of which is with our righteous messiah - may he come speedily in our days. A generation receives its Torah, its faith and its fear [of God] from the generation that preceded it; then uses them to serve God, and passes them on to the next generation. "That he may instruct his children, etc." is the essence of our survival. And if in our generation, the chain were to, God forbid, be interrupted - such that we not pass on the Torah to the next generation - would they truthfully be the only ones to blame? Are they not from the descendants of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; and do they not have holy souls?
And why should we fool ourselves with empty excuses and say, "We want to pass it on to them, but they are to blame, since they refuse to accept it." For as greatly as the younger generation is to blame about this and as much as they are refusing to listen, we should nevertheless, I plead, imagine what these sinners of today would have been had they lived in earlier generations. Would they also not have accepted [the Jewish tradition] then? Even with all of their responsibility for this, and even with their spiritual infirmities - the likes of which did not exist in pervious youth - would not almost all of them also have been tzaddikim, or, at least, simple faithful Jews? That is because their elders, their parents and the whole of their previous generation would have been generally more God-fearing than us. So too, in this matter of educating the younger generation, they were much more God-fearing, and blazed like fiery torches. So they wouldn't have been negligent and simply watched with equanimity and coldness while the younger generation was drowning in the nethermost pit and the people of God falling to heresy, God forbid. They would have risen with outrage and sacrificed their entire beings and possessions to save them and educate them in the path of God through various theories and plans.
And if so, will we - the generation above them who educates them and bears the obligation to pass on God's holiness, His Torah and His service to them - be able to say with a clear conscience, "Our hands have not spilled this blood of the Jewish souls into the pit of destruction?" What shall we say before the One who sits on high? How shall we justify ourselves before the One who dwells in the skies when He comes to take account of His lofty army upon the earth and of the younger generation whom He deposited in our hands and entrusted to our responsibility? God will roar from on high and give forth His voice from His holy abode - "Where are My children, My beloved children, the children of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob? Where are they!"
And if we truly want to repent to God and repair what we have made crooked in this, we must recognize our part of the guilt. For even if they have an infirmity which did not exist earlier in youth, why have we abandoned them without investigation and without curing their spiritual ailment while they were still small and it was possible for us to know how and with what to heal them - since they would then follow everything we would [tell them]? Would a father or guardian of a child congratulate himself by saying, "I am devoid of guilt for the defects of the child" - if the beginning of the sickness was only a small infirmity which could have been healed, but on account of his negligence, it spread and rotted [the child's] limbs? With all of their guilt and all of their corruption, let us please not push all of the guilt only to the youth. We need to feel pain and concern also about our own negligence. And only then will we be able to seek a plan about what to fix and what to do to heal what is broken in our nation. And let us pray to God that He will guide us in His path and remove the heart of stone from our youth, so that we can all merit to serve Him together in truth and with a full heart; and that we may be among those in Israel through whom He is glorified and [about whose child] it will be said, "Look at this son that I have brought before You!"
Not by conjecture, but by sound methodology and solid facts must we first of all explain the difference between the generations: Why is it that in previous generations any type of education was effective - almost all the students of every teacher and almost all the children of every father were servants of God - but now it is no longer so? The simple and main reason is that youths are thinking that they are already adults before their time. What we are saying is not a fanciful conjecture, as the whole world laments this now. We are not coming to give a reason and cause for this here - as to why children are doing this. But regardless, it is a fact. This spirit of insanity has taken hold of youth to think of themselves as having the mind and will of adults, while their minds are still unstable and their wills, unripe and bitter. Moreover, the Sages, may their memory be blessed, informed us from the beginning (Sotah 49b), "In the time before the messiah, brazenness will grow." This too is brazenness - for a child to think of himself and his mind as trustworthy and reliable, such that they can be depended upon. This has become so accepted that we are sometimes amazed to see this independence and false boldness already bubbling up in the smallest infants who already think of themselves as adults.
There are two evils that grow out of this. The first is that as a result, a lad will look at every advisor, teacher and educator as a foreign tyrant that is overbearingly coming to control him and take away his independence, his opinions and his ability to choose. So a type of opposition, even hatred, wells up inside the child towards his teacher and father - to the point that he pays no attention, to listen to their words and how he should internalize them. Instead, he only thinks about how to get rid of them and escape their hands. 
And the second - which may cause even more damage than the first - is that it used to be that the personality and independence of a child would not crystallize and develop so quickly while he was still immature. Likewise would his emotions and opinions, as well as his worldview and aspirations, not develop so quickly before their time. The child was a type of blank slate with a pure soul that would absorb the depictions and words that his teachers and rabbis impressed upon him. So they could truly 'stuff him like an ox.' And it was not only words, but their souls that [the teachers] brought into them, and engraved into their souls. And so when the glimmerings of the child's spirit, feelings and aspirations later began to slowly bubble up, they found him as a lad who had already been enriched by the richness of Torah and had been 'anointed with holy anointing oil.' And so the glimmerings of his emotions and aspirations were an additional force and 'extra soul,' to add to the Torah and service of God that his rabbis had brought into him, through which he was educated and in the holiness of which he grew up. This is not the case today when the personality and independence of the child crystallize and develop quickly before their time; and when his emotions, aspirations, opinions and worldview blossom quickly while they are still immature, bitter and poisonous. And it is with them that he begins to examine and investigate every matter (even things that are forbidden to him) as an adult would for himself; and to emote and be enthused with unripe emotions. And is it possible that from his mind and from his poisonous emotions and enthusiasm, he will piece together a worldview that is not defective and poisonous?
If we delve into the spirit of the youth and evaluate them with a pure and completely honest investigation, we would see that a lad will usually not veer from the ways of God all at once. He does not profane Shabbat instantly, nor does he suddenly go from the study hall to, mutatis mutandis, the theatres. The Gemara (Shabbat 105b) says, "That is the craft of the evil inclination. Today it tells him [to] do this, and tomorrow it tells him [to] do that, etc." At first glance, we see in the Gemara that only when he is already about to do bad things, God forbid, does he not begin with weighty sins from the start, but rather descends into the pit of destruction gradually. But as we see - even before he comes to the first, most insignificant deed - the internal break in his mind also does not happen suddenly and all at once. Rather a year ago or more, his mind became slightly infirm - infirm, but not infirm. 'It appears like a blemish in the house' - only like a blemish. And the smallest thought bubbles through from it, to look at the Torah and divine service as something disgraceful and as a waste of time; and at the outside world of licentiousness, ignorance and wildness as beautiful and good. Even the most insignificant thing can cause such an infirmity. Since at first, it is tiny and does not do much to him or his deeds, his rabbis - and even his closest friends - do not see any difference in him. But, little by little, it deepens itself into his spirit and spreads into his thoughts, to destroy him, from the spirit to the flesh. Then suddenly a loud voice is heard, that he has left the House of God and fallen into the pit of destruction, God forbid.
Generally this internal blemish in the spirit comes from the selfhood and [resulting] opposition written about above. Once he has his own selfhood; and his opposition - even hatred - bubbles up inside him against his father, rabbis and educators, the opposition will not only arise against them. Rather he will also begin to look with scorn and hatred at what they taught him, at their behavior and their path - the holy path.
What comes out of our words is that earlier, any advisor or father could educate Jewish children and teach them the path of God, even if he was not exacting to educate "according to his way" - according to the way, mind and essence of each child, as King Solomon hinted to us. Even if he only accustomed and commanded them, he was still successful. For the child was a clean spirit while a youth, and even while a young adult. Moreover, he himself felt his own emptiness and the weakness of his mind inside. So he had an inner thirst inside himself to listen to the words of God from any teacher or advisor. And even if there were times when the lad would be mischievous and refuse to listen, he himself would feel that he had sinned; that his father or teacher who disciplined - or even struck - him was right and that he was the sinner. His spirit would fall a little inside himself and make sure that he would listen to their voice from now on, and negate his will to their will - so that, little by little, he would absorb God's Torah into his being and become a faithful Jew. Though one may have been more of a ben Torah and one may have been less, they were all Jews who served God.
It is not like this now, when the child's selfhood and independence jell early before their time. And together with them, his feelings, aspirations  and worldview are revealed while they are still immature. As a result, the division and hatred between the children and their parents is intensified. The children of our generation who were fit to be faithful Jews have left and are no more. They have turned upon us as enemies; they laugh and scorn us and our faith. And this is what King Solomon saw from the beginning, with the wisdom of God that he had, and warned us to teach the lad according to his way - not only with a command, but with education - to teach each and every one, according to his way.
For above we said that the spirit of every Jewish child is a storehouse of holiness; it is just that we need to know how to act upon it; and the same thing is true in this matter. It is true that the personality of the Jewish child has been contaminated by the spirit that has affected all of the world's youth, to jell and develop while still immature; but what personality is it that jells and goes out? Is it not the Jewish personality? Hence we must hasten to soften ourselves to his personality, so that we can grab onto it and act upon it for holiness, before he turns into our enemy. If our teacher Moses, all of the prophets and all of the tzaddikim softened themselves from the high levels of their righteousness towards us for our sake, would it not be a sin for us not to soften ourselves towards each [child] - to teach him according to his way? While he is still at a crossroads as to whether to become a faithful servant of God or, God forbid, a Jewish sinner - we must soften ourselves towards him and speak in his language; almost to turn into a child and speak with him according to his mind and according to his level. 
It is not enough to just teach the lad that he is obligated to listen to the educator, and nothing more. For in the end, he will [still] see his rabbi as his opponent and as a foreign tyrant, as mentioned earlier. The main point is to bring this opinion into his heart: To know that he - the child himself - is the main educator. He is not a minor and a lad. Rather, he is the sprout of God's planting in the garden of Israel. And God has placed the responsibility to nurture and educate this sprout upon him, himself - to be a great tree of life and to make himself into a servant of God, a tzaddik and a Torah great. But since his mind and spirit are young, there is much Torah that he has not learned and his evil impulse is active. So if he is God-fearing and does not want to sin towards God and to destroy the vineyard of the the Lord of hosts - he will need to listen to the Torah of God and His path from his rabbi and his father, both regarding that which is explicit in the Torah and in the Shulchan Arukh and that which is not. The Torah was not sparing in warning about [the importance of] listening to the father and the educator: "Ask your father and he will tell you; your elder, etc." (Deuteronomy 32:7); "you may not veer, etc." (Deuteronomy 17:11); "Listen, my son, to the rebuke of your father" (Proverbs 1:8). And the wayward and rebellious son (Deuteronomy 21:18-21) has not done any sin that is explicit in the written or oral Torah; and yet the Torah is very stringent about it, because his father and mother said, "He did not listen to our voice." And his very identity is not called, glutton and drunkard, based on his actions; but rather, wayward and rebellious, because he is rebellious towards his father and his educator. And [other examples] can be found in the verses.
And as much as possible, the father and educator should make the lad understand and internalize this in his mind and intellect - that the obligation is upon the child to develop and educate himself into a Jewish adult, a tree in God's garden in Eden. And the father or the educator is just the guide that will instruct him how to educate himself, and about what God said. It is like one who comes to ask a question in matters of what is forbidden and what is permissible. [There,] the law is given by the decisor who advises one as to what is kosher, etc. But the main practitioner in the home is the homeowner - it is solely his responsibility that it be kosher and that he get rid of what is forbidden and unfit. And we gain much when we instruct him like this. First, when he will develop with this opinion, he will not see his father or teacher as a foreign tyrant and ruler who wants to rule over him, since the obligation is upon himself. So it is he - with his individuality and selfhood that have already developed in him - who is the ruler, and the one educating himself. And he must additionally be grateful to his father and his teacher for helping him [with this] and lightening his load.
We also stand to gain that even the lads that are not distancing themselves from us so much and are not turning into enemies - but rather only disregarding their divine service from laziness and neglect - will also be stimulated to redouble their service. As the Gemara says (Eruvin 3a), "A stew belonging to two people will be neither hot nor cold" - it is a law of the human psyche that when one has on whom to rely, he will be neglectful and depend on the other. And so too a lad - even if he does not resist - will be neglectful by thinking that his father or teacher will do everything for him. But when he understands that the obligation is upon him and that only he himself is the guide and educator, he will make efforts and not be neglectful.
However with these things alone, we will not yet have fulfilled our obligation. For even if we delve into the independent selfhood of the lad's intellect and make him understand to the point that he grasps intellectually that he bears the responsibility, and will want to strengthen himself in his divine service - nevertheless, have we not already said that it is not only his intellect that comes out prematurely to be like that of an independent adult? Rather it is the selfhood also in his emotions, his excitations and even his enthusiasm that cause him to be excited and enthused by the imagined beauty of the stupidities of the world - such as the theaters and all the other types of licentiousness and unbridledness in the world. So if we ourselves do not stimulate his spirit early on, to get excited from every commandment and to be enthused by the light of God's Torah, we will have done nothing, God forbid. As even if he will grasp intellectually that he bears the obligation to educate himself, his emotions and passions will nevertheless make him veer from the good path to the path that even he himself understands is bad. For is it not that most sinners themselves understand that their deeds are bad at first? Yet it is the excitement of their desires that overpowers their minds, to make them fall into the pit of destruction. 
And this is the essence of Chassidut. That a man not suffice with just his intellect in determining [the contours of] his service. For the connection of the intellect alone is not an enduring connection. He may subjugate it and know clearly in his intellect that he must only serve God in all the details of his thought, speech and action - but his heart and all of his body nevertheless be far removed. [Hence] he must connect his whole spirit, and the life force in his entire body; he must delve into his spirit to elevate it and stimulate it, that it should be enthused, spiritually delighted and rejoice over every commandment; by Torah and by prayer. And when he connects his spirit and even the life force in his body - beside the fact that the commandment and the service that he does will be more elevated and more holy - he will also be more certain that he will be able to stand up against his evil impulse and not be torn away from the Source of Life and cast quickly into the pit of destruction by the seduction of his evil impulse.
It is true that we had always needed to wait with this service of emotions and enthusiasm with youth until they matured. For it is difficult for a child to be enthused with true chassidic enthusiasm. As even in general, whenever the Torah writes [both] statutes (<i>chukim</i>, laws the reasons for which are not obvious) and judgments (<i>mishpatim</i>, laws the reasons for which are apparent), it has the statutes come before the judgements. As the judgements are with discernment - and not just intellectual discernment, but also discernment of awareness. For just because a child does not [yet] have intellect, is he not clear and aware why he wants to kiss his father with his lips? Just the opposite, this is the essence of awareness! His heart desires to kiss his father; and this is more certain that any intellectual matter in the world.
With every commandment - whether understood or not - if the heart of the Jewish adult yearns, enthuses, connects and has strong and certain faith, it is a judgement for him, [both] certain and clear. And that for which he is not excited at all - in his mind or in his heart - is a statute. At first, the Jewish adult has to do many commandments, immerse himself in Torah and service and give himself - his mind, his thoughts and all of his spirit - over to God. And then the more he immerses himself in service and holiness, the more he will feel - at fortuitous times - how his spirit goes out and draws near to holiness and the Supernal Light. [At those times,] his soul attaches itself to God's soul, and he - and even his body - becomes enthused, is in awe, rejoices, yearns and takes pleasure. [But] at first, there are statutes that must be done, even without discernment and without emotion. And afterwards are the judgements with discernment and enthusiasm. So a child must first engage with the statutes, to immerse himself in them without feeling or enthusiasm.
But what can we do with our [younger] generation, when their selfhood and feelings develop and solidify so quickly? If we do not move quickly to grab onto [the child's] enthusiasm - to harness it and to move it towards excitement about holiness - it will emote and become excited with enthusiasm for stupidity and for the reviled 'beauty' of the world, to be impressed by their ways and to covet their ugly mischief. For with the lad of our generation whose emotions and impressions have already matured and become pronounced, it is difficult to still connect him to statutes without emotions - or even to intellectual matters if it is only done with dry intellect. We must delve into his soul, arouse it and have it enthused - such that it feel at least a little of the pleasantness of the illumination of the illumination of the Highest Splendor, that it yearn [for it] and connect [to it].
Hence if we want to connect the child and educate him such "that also in his old age he will not veer from it" - and who does so not only because he is commanded, but also because his spirit pushes him towards it - it is forbidden for us to wait. Rather we must educate them in the ways of true Chassidut from when they are still small. "Teach (<i>Chanokh</i>) the lad according to his way!" And the way required by the youth of our generation is true, hearty and spiritual Chassidut. And even if this will not yet be true chassidic enthusiasm, [the child] will nevertheless reach the 'tip of the staff' and connect. And to the extent that he grows and works on it, he will ascend and merit to become a true chassid.
This is explained in Pardes Rimonim 10:1:5, in which it is written how the colors and physical visions act upon the supernal realms. [Such that] when He wants to act with kindness, He wears white; when He wants to act with strength, He wears red garments, etc. And he said in his holy words (besides the secrets in the matter), "If a person looks at the flow of much water with his eyes, a white liquid is stimulated, etc. So too is this matter. When the spring flows in his mind, he will find ten levels in this thing. As the colors that appear to our eyes - or in our physical mind's eye - impact on the [level of the] spiritual; the essence is stimulated by the spirit; and the soul by the essence. And from the soul, it goes from one state to another; until it rises to the place of its nourishment. So it is aroused according to the state of the [original] form." To here are his holy words
And this is a fundamental concept in Chassidut - that one should get excited and enthused, beginning with lower things. And these physical emotions are able to stimulate him to holiness. So even though it is only physical arousal, the essence is stimulated by the spirit; and the soul by the essence.
And this is the distinction between an adult and a child. Even though the adult chassid begins to be aroused, excited and enthused by something physical; nevertheless even at the time that he does a physical action like drinking alcoholic beverages among the chassidim or like conjuring types of thoughts that arouse him - as we will, God willing, discuss later in the book - it does not remain only a physical arousal. Rather the spirit, the essence, etc. are [also] immediately aroused; until even his soul is aroused and revealed inside him - each one according to his situation and timing.
Even the menorah was lit with a foreign object; however the priest would not leave the menorah until the flame would remain lit on its own. But the child may remain on the level of physical stimulation and excitement. Nevertheless, even in him is there still a type of spark and the slightest filament of illumination of the spirit, shining from a distance. And this too is good, since even this is enough to connect his small body and spirit. For a lad that is excited on the night of Passover by the cleaning of the room, by the multitude of candles, by the beautifully set table - this is also good. As his body is excited, but his spirit is [also] bubbling inside and excited by the recitation of the Haggadah - to say it with a little enthusiasm to God - even though he doesn't know what it is and what it is about.
And this is the "according to his way." As in this book, we want to accustom youth to the ways of Chassidut. Since they have matured early, and their emotions are impacting early, it is required by them and there is no other way. And even though they will not connect to their actual souls and they will not attain true spiritual enthusiasm - but rather only a physical one - that is also good. Since he will be emoting from holiness - his physical emotions would be from holiness - he will be connected through it. So when he grows older, it will be easier for him to be a true chassid. For does a child who begins [to study] Gemara and Tosafot understand them like an adult? And yet it is good, as this study and understanding connects him to Torah.
We are not coming here to specify every matter related to education. We have just pointed out the cause of its current destruction, and that we need to be more exacting with it than in earlier generations. And in this work, we have written down the approach that teachers, parents and children should want to use for the good; even with the contaminating poison - meaning, the selfhood of the child coming out prematurely. As for the other details about education - teachers and fathers should seek them out in our holy Torah, and they will find everything they need. For we are not coming to make any new changes here, God forbid. As our Torah is eternal and it will guide us forever towards the path through which we ascend to God; and what we must do regarding every detail and regarding every matter.
For example, the Gemara (Shabbat 30b) says, "Rabbah, before he began teaching to the sages, would say something humorous and the sages would be cheered. Ultimately, he sat in trepidation and began teaching the topic." To here are the words of the Gemara. He said something humorous so they would be happy, since the Divine Presence only resides amidst joy - as the Gemara says there. However the Torah is like a hammer that breaks apart a boulder which lets off many sparks and many explanations. So in our generation, the Gemara is also hinting to a path for the rabbi or the teacher: The teacher must make efforts to win over the heart of the student and to keep bringing him close. And joy is one of the main vehicles through which he can win him over. The spirit of a child does not tolerate sadness, and the teacher should never appear to him like an irritable or disputative person.
It is not that he should be light-headed in front of the student nor disgrace himself in [the child's] eyes, God forbid. Just the opposite, the teacher should make efforts that the student see him as a man of stature - yet still also as a good and easy-going man. Even when he shows them something humorous, the student should tremble. And even when he puts fear into him, there should be a pinch of joy mixed in. "And rejoice with trembling" (Psalms 2:11). [The child] should tremble in front of him differently than he does in front of an irritable, angry or violent man; but rather with fear that comes from honor, like from one of the lofty ones. If the rabbi is similar to an angel of the Lord of hosts when he gets angry at [the child], the student will not hate him on its account. And when he shows him a pleasant face, he will rejoice and love him and fear him even more.
And the Shelah, may his memory be blessed, greatly enlightens us about our path regarding the education of our generation, when he says about the verse (Proverbs 9:8), "Do not rebuke a scoffer, lest he will hate you; reprove a wise man, and he will love you": When you come to rebuke someone else, do not disparage him and do not curse him and say to him, "You are a scoffer." For he will hate you for this and not listen to you. Rather rebuke the wise - say to him, "Is it not the case that you are a wise man? So why are you doing this?" And so he will love you and listen to you. To here are his holy words.
How very careful must we be about this in our generation, when the heart of a lad is already so removed from us. Moreover, to 'rebuke the wise man,' as above is needed in order for us to bring the heart of the lad close. It is also intrinsically very effective educationally, in that it brings out the physical and mental strengths of the student from their hiding places, to strengthen and galvanize them for Torah and divine service. There is a [relevant] analogy about someone who people are praising to his face as being generous. It is then possible that he will be strengthened to give a contribution that he was previously unable to overcome his character and give. [But] since they praised him as generous like this, they drew out the strength of his spirit to come out and overpower his trait of stinginess. The teacher and the parent must find a good trait in the student and praise him about it and strengthen him. They should say, "You have great talent and ability towards greatness in Torah and divine service, etc. waiting in you. If you only work, you will reach them." Yet the father or teacher must do this with intelligence and understanding, so that it will not bring the student to pride or negligence. 
We did not note all the places in the Torah and Shulchan Arukh that teach us the ways of education, about which we in this generation need to redouble our efforts and be exacting. For the more one seeks, the more one will find.
It is appropriate for a teacher to study Midrash or Ein Yaakov several times a week with his students. The Sages, may their memory be blessed, already said (Sifrei Devarim 49:3), "Do you wish to know the One who spoke and brought the world into being? Learn aggadah." And the more advanced student can study [it] on his own. And when the teacher wants to speak about a matter from the books of Mussar (ethical instruction), it is good for him not to only speak about things related to punishments, but rather also about things related to the greatness of the Jewish soul and its coming close to God and raising itself up to the state of the angels. For even though the spirit of the lad is humbled by rebuke and punishment - not only does only speaking about this not bring him closer, it can also bring to light his aforementioned infirmity. But when he also speaks at length about the greatness of the Jew - the words of rebuke will also be effective; and the lad will be stimulated and enthused.
And likewise should teachers and fathers not neglect parables. For the Sages, may their memory be blessed, already warned (Shir HaShirim Rabbah 1:1:8) - And the Rabbis say, "Let not this parable be light in your eyes. As from this parable, you will be able to master words of Torah." To here are their words. And one must be very exacting with a parable, to tell it properly, in order as if the story actually happened. For this is the way of a child: Even though he knows that it is only a parable - when he hears it, he nevertheless sees the story in his imagination as if it actually happened. And he is more excited and aroused by it than by the analog (the lesson learned through it). And so in Chapter 3 of this book, we expanded on the parable a bit, even though it was not necessary for the main teaching - we described the behavior of the shoemaker and his prayer in such a way that the child will be enthused about it; and be a little aroused not to covet this world so much, but rather to come closer to God through Torah and true divine service. 





Chapter 1

<b>A Call to the Student</b>
Fortunate are you, Jewish lad, and fortunate is your portion. You have merited to study the Torah of God's light and you have risen to be a disciple of that which is delightful and beloved to Him. The angels on high will be jealous of you, yet esteem you; the seraphs will be disturbed by you, yet honor you. The heavens and their hosts, and the earth and its fullness will rejoice about you and humble themselves before you. One will ask the other, "Who is this lad from whose mouth the pillars of fire are burning and whom the Master of the worlds - the Highest of the high - prides Himself and rejoices with him in front of the masses of His hosts and the myriad of His holy ones?"
God rejoices in you. And you, Jewish lad, be glad and rejoice in your great fortune and in this great advantage of yours! For which person would not be glad and rejoice if he merited to be from those who see the face of the King? Who would merit that the King of the kings of kings, the Holy One, blessed be He, would whisper His inner thoughts to him and teach him His law - if he would not rejoice, would it not be considered flightiness and iniquity? However we know too well that if you had internalized that you are studying the Torah with a pure heart and mind; that you felt inside yourself the closeness of God, who is sitting and reciting [the Torah] across from you; that you are supplicating all of your requests about your life, the lives of your parents and their livelihoods and all that your heart's desires in front of God, who is in front of you like a father in front of his child, and that He, may He be blessed, answers and soothes you like a father does to his beloved son - you would have been completely and emotionally elated, and rejoiced with all of your being. But since you do not feel all of this inside - and see yourself as just one of the lads - your spirit does not burst and you do not know to rejoice in [these great causes for] your joy. Moreover, because of this, the will to study God's Torah is sometimes lacking in you; and you do not give your ear to listen to His voice. 
That is why we have come to you, dear son. This is what we want to make out of you: That the grace of the Divine Presence shine upon your face; that your mind, your heart and all of your limbs open up to God's service; that your heart and spirit feel the closeness of God near you; that you pour out all your requests in front of Him, may He be blessed, like a son in front of a loving father who hurries to answer you and soothe you.
Dear son, it is possible that you are afraid and say that, after all, you are still just a lad - soft and tender - who loves to fool around a little and to play with his friends. And now we have come to make you all at once into a sedentary and quiet old man and take away all of your childhood. So you would want none of this. But then you would surely be mistaken. You will stay as young as your years and will continue to be good friends with your valued friends and even play with them. But you will nevertheless reach the goal we have set up for you at the beginning, so long as you know how to play and how to fool around. Yet this is only when you believe and know that God's kingdom is over all of His jurisdiction and that He, may He be blessed, sees everything - even your games. However just like a person requires to supply all of his bodily needs - to eat, to drink and so on - because that is how how God created him; so too is it difficult for you, lads, to refrain from playing, due to your youth. But even in eating and drinking - and also in playing - should one remember that God is the Master of the world. He created it, He directs it and He supervises it. Everything is His and we are also His.
It is an important goal of ours not to force you to go on the path of God against your will, but rather that you too will want to go on it yourself. For we will not suffice with your only doing good things, but rather want you, yourself, to be good - as we have told you. And since this is the essence of our intentions, we are not allowed to leave you with any remnant of thoughts or desires that are not good. So we are obligated to enter your mind and your heart to straighten every one of your thoughts and desires and elevate them. And since we know that you are still hesitant about these words of ours and are asking yourself, "How is it possible that such a great personality will come from me - and even more so when I am still a child - and become a disciple of that which is delightful and beloved to the Holy One, blessed be He, like they are saying to me; my father and grandfather were not like this, and I too am just a simple child" - hence we must also not allow this twisted thought to remain within you.
The word of God is to you, Jewish lad! Make your ears a receptacle to hear the answer to you from your Father in Heaven, who placed [it] in the mouth of His prophets and the Sages of His Torah. We will only collect it, one by one - His holy words that are like flames of fire to you - in order that you will be strong like a cedar of Lebanon that God has planted.
If you are very discouraged because your father and grandfather were simple people, raise your gaze up above them and look further back. Who were your ancestors from way back? The saints, the prophets, the tannaim, the amoraim, the giants and the tzaddikim. And the Gemara says (Pesachim 66a), "If Israelites are not prophets, they are the children of prophets." This is not something that was the case in the past and is no longer. Rather the Gemara is saying that is there a spark of the prophets in you and in every Jewish lad also now. But it is up to you to search for it and reveal it in yourself.
And why is it that you wonder about this and say that since you don't feel any different than any of the other lads, it is impossible for you to be elevated, grow and become holy? Do you understand the essence of the other lads you know? Do you understand the makeup of the essence of the Jewish lad? Be still and listen to the words of the Midrash (Eichah Rabbah 1:32) and you will be amazed: Rabbi Yehudah said, "Come and see how beloved the infants (<i>tinokot</i>) are in front of the Holy One, blessed be He. The Sanhedrin was exiled from Jerusalem, but the Divine Presence was not exiled with [it]; the shifts of the priests and the Levites were exiled, but the Divine Presence was not exiled with them. But once the infants were exiled, the Divine Presence was exiled with them." Up to here are its words. (<i>Editor's note from the printed edition: The word, infants, is not used only for the smallest children. Rather all youths that study Torah with their teachers are called infants in this regard. And see Zohar, 2:98a:2, that one thirteen and above is called a son of the Congregation of Israel, in the sense of (Psalms 2:7), "I have begotten you today..."</i>) The Jewish lads that study Torah are very beloved to the Holy One, blessed be He. For when the Sanhedrin, the priests and the Levites were exiled, the Divine Presence was not exiled with them. But when the the infants were exiled, the Divine Presence said, "I am so connected to them, to the point that is impossible for Me to stay without them. So I will accept the yoke of the exile upon Myself together with them and, as it were, suffer the pain together with them."
And if you do not understand this on your own, with your own mind, please listen to the words of Isaiah the prophet (Isaiah 5:7) - "For the vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is the House of Israel, and the seedlings of his delight are the men of Judah." The whole House of Israel is the vineyard of the Lord and the individual Jewish man is His precious [vine]. Hence the Lord delights in him - so long as he follows His path, the path of the Torah. So you too, Jewish lad, are a small vine. When we are speaking to you now, we do not know with whom we are speaking. And you also don't know who you are and who you will be, when you grow in your divine service and in your Torah. [Perhaps] you will be a tzaddik and a giant, the name of whom will spread from one end of the world to the other; or perhaps even a wealthy servant of God distinguished by Torah [knowledge] and fear [of God], a great philanthropist - good to the Heavens and good to the creations - who will be the glory of the entire Jewish people, such that every father and mother will bless their children by saying, "May the Lord make you like him." How well have we heard about many great men of Israel that were not noticed as being any greater than their friends when they were little. But when they dedicated themselves to His service, may He be blessed, they grew and succeeded. And they became ensconced forever at the head of the Jewish people; the entire House of Israel is sheltered under the shade of their Torah and their service. and we will continue to walk by their light until the advent of our messiah.
It is not that we are now saying that there is no difference in the talents of children. Rather it is that we cannot decide about talents and say, from the beginning, what a child will be when he grows up. For there are students whose talents are hidden and concealed inside themselves to the point that it would be unbelievable that [such a student] could become a great man among the Jewish people, whether in Torah or in true service. And yet when he grows up, all of those who know him are amazed that here in front of us is a great man among the Jewish people; one by whose stature everyone is humbled and by whose greatness everyone is dwarfed. And it is just the opposite, that many great souls that were fit to become great lights for the Jewish people were lost because they were negligent in their work when they were young. And so, you too, dear son - if you are negligent like them, and you, God forbid, lose the talents unperceivably stored inside you, you will not just destroy a lad. Rather it is possible that you will, God forbid, destroy a Jewish giant and a tzaddik of great stature. And you will not only have done evil to him, but also to the entire Jewish people. You will even have hurt the Holy One of Israel: About this thing, the Divine Presence laments and wails, saying, "Let the heavens and their angels eulogize, let the earth and its fullness also cry bitterly for Me - I created a world for myself and I hoped to dwell in it. It is the great men of Israel and My servants, the tzaddikim, that draw My Divine Presence into it and sanctify My name in it; they broadcast My words to everyone and they bring and subjugate everyone to My service. And this young man came along and destroyed from Me, the great man that I awaited; he eliminated the one who would sanctify and house My glory. He chopped off a leg from My throne of glory and banished a portion of My Divine Presence from My world." 
Jewish lads and young men, a great yoke has been placed on your necks; a responsibility much greater and bigger than you think or know is upon you. You will be required to hold up the whole House of Israel, to bring out from yourselves its pious, its tzaddikim, its giants and its sages. Even the revelation of His powerful Divine Presence and bringing closer the arrival of His messiah is given into your hands. Would you, God forbid, want us to rot in the exile, with no seer, prophet or visionary? Or would it perhaps be right in your eyes that while we are still in exile, we should, God forbid, descend further until we fall into the pit. And if, God forbid, there not be found from among you - the next generation - a giant or tzaddik to stand in the breach and to reveal the holiness of our God, will God hold Himself back about all these things?
It is possible that each one of you will rely upon his friends and say, "The great men of Israel will develop from the other young men besides me, whereas I can be negligent and lazy." But if you are going to be lazy, your friends will likewise also be lazy. And they will rely upon you! So what will happen to the Torah? What will happen to the holy nation of Israel? What will happen to the holy Divine Presence? Jewish lad and young man, you must study Torah and seek God. Whether great or small, the obligation rests upon each and every one of you to reveal the Jewish soul that is within him and to make himself into a pillar upon which the House of Israel rests. There is none among you who can excuse himself from this responsibility!

Chapter 2

<b>The Outset of a Student's Adjustment</b>
We are concerned together with your concern, we come to bear your great burden together with you; that is the goal of our words in this book. And if you listen and want it, a great personality will arise from you; the streams of your Torah will be disseminated and your light will be spread to the right and to the left to an extent that you and your ancestors never imagined. 
Do not be sad, Jewish youth! And let not your heart sink inside yourself because of your great responsibility. For sadness is a bad trait that corrupts the mind and the heart. It also brings neglectfulness. Rather do the following: Be strong in the morning to arise from your bed and to think about the crux of our words to you until now, about the great responsibility that is upon you - and be concerned. But only be concerned, and do not be sad. Sadness rests, for example, upon one who has lost all his fortune - he has given up hope and is sad. But concern is found with someone who knows that in this place, deep down in the ground, is a treasure - he is concerned about his work and how to dig so deeply into the ground. But to the extent that he is concerned about this, so will he be strengthened and emboldened in his work. And so will he be gladdened to work until he finds his treasure. 
Think about the greatness of your responsibility and be concerned. And from this concern of yours, start saying the blessing over the Torah; and pray from the bottom of your heart to God, "'Please make delightful, Lord our God, the words of Your Torah, in our mouths, etc.' For Your Torah is truly delightful and sweet. Save me that I should also feel its delightfulness and sweetness. 'And may we be, etc. all of us, from those who know Your name and study Your Torah for its own sake.' Please have mercy on me, Master of the world, that I will merit to rise up to that which is fit for a Jewish youth - that I should study Your Torah for its own sake and know Your name, God, which is the highest level and the greatest happiness, whether in this world or the next world."
And after that, trust in God - that He has heard your prayer, and will fulfill the strivings of your heart and add to your desire for Torah and the yearning of your soul for the pleasure of supernal purity and for the holiness of your Father in Heaven. Rejoice and be strengthened in your service - holy service. But remove the above-mentioned concern from your heart for the rest of the day. (For constant worry weakens the mind and even weakens itself - there is no [true] concern and no accounting if one always dwells upon it.) But you should remember your purpose and your goal the entire day. However only remember - and don't worry - like a man who is walking on the way and reminds himself from time to time about the place he is going to, so that he does not wander to and fro; and the mission that he wants to fulfill, so that he will hurry and not tarry. Study Torah and pray with joy that you have merited to be a Jewish youth that is close to God. Be exacting in your Torah with all of your strength and your mind; delve and understand. For please know that one who fools himself in Torah study and is not exacting, to understand every matter clearly - and especially one who thinks other thoughts at the time that he is studying - is, God forbid, disparaging the glory of God. He is, God forbid, God forbid, saying that it is not worthwhile for him to work, discipline his mind and delve into these fiery words of the Most High.
Pray with as much concentration as you can. And even if it is difficult for you to have intention for the meaning of the words in all of your prayers; at least, whenever you are praying, remember that you are standing in front of your Father - the merciful, awesome, lofty and holy Father. Eat, drink and sleep according to all of your needs. Also rejoice with your friends - good friends that study Torah and conduct themselves according to God's path. 
And now, if you have internalized our words up to here and want to hear further about the path that you will climb towards God and the means through which you will connect to Torah and divine service - then we can already hope that in the end, you will, God willing, reach the state in which it will be said about you, "You are a dear son to Me, a child that is dandled! For whenever I speak of him, I earnestly remember him still. I will surely have mercy on him" (see Jeremiah 31:19).

Chapter 3

<b>Regarding the Main Principles of Spiritual Illnesses and their Remedies</b>
Since our entire purpose is to to bring you closer to the Torah and have you follow God's path, we must therefore prepare you according to what the Torah itself teaches (Psalms 34:15) - "Shun evil and do good." For it is impossible to bring in the King without first cleaning the room. And it is [likewise] impossible for a person to sanctify himself if he has not first removed the evil from his heart. Hence it is up to us to search for every trace that can hold you back in your learning and in your connection to God, and to expel it. But we can only search together with you. And together with you will we examine you, to see and find and destroy the crumbs of chametz and the specks of rot inside of you. For who is your main educator if not yourself? And who has the main responsibility of educating and raising the Jewish lads and young men - the cedars of Lebanon and Torah giants - if not you, yourselves, the lads and young men? And who like you will know your shortcomings that need to be fixed? And who like you is able to so well know your aberrations - which differ and vary with each lad - and to straighten them out? We can only assist you, prepare the straight path for you, teach you and say, "This way, this path or this trail is crooked, and the person that walks on it will reach the nethermost pit and the 'other side,' God forbid. (<i>Editor's note from the printed edition: As there can be a man who follows the Torah in all of his actions, but abberates and is lenient in what appears to him to be minor things. Though his path is good, he may also descend to the pit, God forbid, because of the error he made on a small path or small trail to the side.</i>) However this way, path or trial is straight, and the one who walks on it will reach the forearms of God and the glory of the majesty of His holiness, may He be blessed." But any father, teacher or guide can only tell you and advise you. It is up to you to listen to him, to act and educate yourself according to his path and what he tells you, and to internalize every thought that comes out of his mouth into all the chambers of your heart and being - so that it shall be well for you. But if, God forbid, you refuse and rebel, who or what will help you, to save your spirits from the husk (<i>klipah</i>) that kidnaps Jewish spirits, God forbid? Only you, yourselves, are able to search the recesses of your heart and the nooks and crannies of your spirits to find their shortcomings - everyone according to his personality - and to fix them. So we will only speak about some of them and explain their remedies. But you will be able to learn from them how to seek, find and fix all of your issues.
There are some people - both great and small - who are not aware of their own shortcomings. And even when they see in Mussar books that such and such a trait is bad, it nevertheless does not cross their mind that they have such a trait and that they need to fix it. Neither do they feel pain or concern about it. This is not a good sign for [this person]. For this is the way of sick people - to not feel their sickness getting worse or even to know that they are sick. (See the Rambam's Eight Chapters 3.) However there are also adults and youths with the following trait: His heart inside begins to feel that he has a certain shortcoming and he [then] begins to worry and be in pain. But his mind quickly rationalizes it by saying, "Is it not the case that the shortcoming I have is not as bad as what the book is criticizing? And the small amount that I have is almost impossible to remove, since 'there is no righteous man in the world who never sins.'" This too is a partner to the evil impulse; and [such a person's] end will be the pollution of his spirit and the darkness of <i>Gehinnom</i>. The root of both of these is that they do not seek greatness from themselves. They imagine that only tzaddikim and greats must work to better themselves, but it is sufficient for all other Jews to just be anything that they are. This is like a father who has a fool for a son, so that his father does not require much from him and suffices with the little good that is found in him. And he even overlooks his sins, saying, "Is he not a fool?" But such a man (who rationalizes his own shortcomings) is greatly mistaken. And we have already spoken above about how everyone must strive, help and reveal the tzaddikim, the greats and the giants of the Jewish people; and how the Divine Presence laments the negligent person. But even if he just wants to be a simple Jew, why is he forgetting what a simple Jew is, and the condition that God made with each Jew - from the woodchopper to the water-drawer - when He first came to make them into the Jewish people and to give them the Torah? He said (Exodus 19:5-6), "Now then, if you will obey Me faithfully and keep My covenant, you shall be My treasured possession among all the peoples, etc. And you shall be to Me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation." This is the Jew - [someone from] a kingdom of priests and a holy nation. It was a condition that the Holy One, blessed be He, made: "Now then, if etc." Only if so, will you be Jews. But if not, God forbid...
And who amongst you, Jewish lads, would refuse to be a Jew, God forbid? And who would not demand from himself [to do whatever is required] to say, "I am a Jew, I am a servant of God, and I would work with all of my strength and mind - and even all of my physical and spiritual existence - to merit to be a Jew." And since each one of you would demand this of himself, it is already impossible that he should not find his shortcomings and that his heart not be pained, rather than to [seek to] justify them. Instead he will work with all of his ability to fix them and set them straight.

Chapter 4

<b>The Illness of Laziness and Laxity and its Remedy</b>
Laziness is the most harmful and common illness in youth. Yet, like most other illnesses, it too varies among different youths. There is a lad who is totally lazy: He loves to sleep and walk idly, and any work is a burden to him. He has various excuses for everything, as stated in the verse (Proverbs 26:13 ), "A lazy man says, 'There’s a cub on the road, a lion in the squares.'" He is always righteous in his own eyes, since he is full of excuses. And he always finds the shortcomings of someone better than himself who works. That way, he can justify himself in his heart and not be embarrassed or jealous about not working as hard as him. And even if he will occasionally redouble his efforts and take measures to work, he will quickly waver. He will study consistently only for a week or two at the beginning of the winter or summer (semesters), but no more. If you, God forbid, have such a bad trait, please remove it quickly. Remove it and take it out from its roots. It is disgusting and disgraceful, and it destroys everything like rot inside the bones.
Please answer me, lazy young man, in what way are you better than the rest of the world? The sun and moon do their work without stop. Even the earth - [after] we plow it, arrange it and plant it - gives all of its strength and vigor to its work that God appointed it to do; to grow and develop [plants]. The ox, the horse and all the beasts of burden work with all of their strength. It is only harmful creatures and predatory animals that walk around idly and only desire to tear apart and trample each other. So why should you be like one of them, to walk around idly? Please note that with all of the sacrifice that they put into their great work, the Sages, may their memory be blessed, also sought to arouse themselves [to do even better] with rebuke from the world: So Rabbi Eliezer (Shir HaShirim Rabbah 1:1:9), who had always come to the study hall before the other rabbis and students and left it after all the others had left, nevertheless once saw that the fertilizer workers and the workers of the fields got up earlier than him for their work. So he rebuked himself, saying, "They get up so early for their plain work, so how could I who does the holy service of God start later today?" You should please reflect - the builder works with great sacrifice on the heights of the buildings the whole day; the farmer works his land with the sweat of his brow. And how much sweat and energy does your father expend to bring forth sustenance also for you? All people work - one with his head and one with his limbs - but they all 'break their backs' in their work. Yet you want to walk around idly? Why should the heavens and the earth curse you and say one to the other, "Please see - we and all of our descendants do what our God, Master and Creator has appointed us to do, and all work. But this young man is lazing around and being haughty over all of us by walking around idly!"
But even if you are not afflicted with the terrible illness of laziness and your body and spirit have not been infected with the poison of idleness, you are still not free from searching for and cleansing yourself from the traces of laziness which are called laxity. Though not as dangerous as laziness - if it grabs a person, it can nevertheless also disturb him from bringing out everything that he can bring out and impede him from climbing the path that rises to the House of God. Please remember that the Torah was given from the Heavens; and that to be a Jew who studies Torah and serves God is an ascent to the shade under the wings of the Divine Presence. But one can only arrive at it with work, redoubling of efforts and exertion.
Any work is measured by the value of what it can acquire. Cheap and silly things can be acquired with almost no work. Things more expensive than that are acquired with more work. So one can only acquire Torah and be in His holy shade with hard work; but not with work that is too hard or too much for man's capabilities. For God, may He be blessed, did not give us work that is beyond our strength and our abilities. Yet we must redouble our efforts and exert ourselves in it - not to just work in it when it comes to us; but rather to be a worker in one's essence, and not be lax. And King Solomon said (Proverbs 18:9), "Even one who is lax in his work is a brother to him who destroys." The lazy one does not want to work at all, so he is one who destroys. While the lax one does work when something that must be done comes to his attention, he, himself, is not a true worker. He falls asleep on the job and takes his time for no reason. He wants to do a superficial job and does not exert himself or invest himself in it. But the industrious person is himself a true worker. He seeks to work because it is impossible for him to walk around idly. And when he has no control over it and a few hours - and all the more so, a whole day - go by without work, he is disgusted with himself and sees himself as contaminated. Work is his life and his pleasure. He is not satisfied with easy work, nor will superficiality soothe his work-hungry spirit. He works with alacrity and happily invests of himself. He is like a stream of water that builds up when impeded and gains strength when stopped, in order to break through and surge. [The true worker] too becomes more resolved with each impediment; and each delay only furthers his anticipation to surge and work more.
But behold that even though the illness of laziness is worse than the illness of laxity; it is nevertheless more difficult to cure the lax one than the lazy one. That is to say that if he wants it, a lazy lad has more vehicles to distance himself from the trait of laziness than he does from the trait of laxity. For when he is still in the yeshiva, both his father and his teacher will pile on work for him and he will need to get up early in the morning, arrive at the set time to the yeshiva, learn a certain amount of material each week, etc. And through this, he will become accustomed not to be lazy also when he grows older. But this is not the case for one who is lax. It will be more difficult for him - whether he is intrinsically lax or whether he had been lazy and moved past it, but only to the point of laxity - to cleanse himself from it. For both when he gets up and when he works, it is all with laxity and superficiality - whether it is in his studies or in any other type of divine service: When he comes to get rid of a bad trait, he will not be exacting to take it out from its roots and fix it in every way. In prayer, he will not exert himself to have intention for the meaning of the words, since he only wants superficiality and ease. So he prefers to think superficially rather than to concentrate on the words he is saying in front of the Master of the world.
Therefore, Jewish young man, if you care about yourself and about the years of your life until you reach old age and seniority - expel laziness from yourself and take out the rot of laxity from its roots, so as to destroy it from yourself. Bring yourself to alacrity, and be an industrious person. Not that you should be hasty in all of your actions like impulsive people. For even with all of their hastiness, they are still lax and most of their actions are superficial, without the deeper work that requires the entire body and mind. Be deliberate, but industrious, exertive and alacritous. And since we have already told you that you yourself are in fact your main educator, we will hence explain a little more the mental and physical differences between someone who is lax and someone who is industrious - so that you yourself will consider how and with what to remove laxity in every matter and in every detail, and how to turn yourself completely into an industrious person.
All matters that a person does - whether physical actions of the body or mental actions of the brain - are done by the spirit through the brain, the heart and the other parts of the body in which it is encased. There are many parts of the brain, yet at the time that the soul is encased in them, they are all stimulated and ready to do their jobs for the one goal of understanding the thing upon which it is focused. Likewise if an action is to be done with the limbs, all of the limbs and capabilities are aroused to the one goal of doing such and such an action. But the spirit of one who is lax does not arise with much strength. Instead he is in a type of trance. For you can see that even when a person is sleeping, not all of a person's brain is sleeping and idle. As even then, it works a little to form the dreams seen by his spirit or those that are merely coming from his thoughts of the past day. So too, the lax person - even when he is awake - is like that which the Sages, may their memory be blessed, said, "the one who sits idly, is as if he is asleep." He is not actually sleeping. His spirit is more awake than if it was truly sleeping, but it has not completely arisen and awoken. It is slumbering but not slumbering, awake but not awake. The parts of his brain and his [various] limbs are not exerting themselves and seeking to join and work together. His soul has not arisen to be encased and to give the full vigor and strength to his limbs. He is lacking the life of a strong individual that redoubles his efforts and works successfully; lacking effort and vigorous life. And this is why he is called lax (<i>mitrapeh</i>), which is an expression that connotes frailty and weakness. It is not a weakness of the body, but of the spirit; such that it does not exert itself to arise and grab onto the abilities of the brain and the body, to require them to strive and be exacting. He does not [even] have a picture or model of the work he needs to do. He does not even have delight or enjoyment. 
However please let us ask you, lax young man, why is it that when you need to go on a trip that you love and are happy about, you quickly turn into an industrious person? You get up early in the morning, you get dressed in a few minutes and you do everything with precision and alacrity. And why is it on a Shabbat that comes on the eve of Passover, you are quick to do all your actions with alacrity, whereas you are otherwise always late - very late - with them? You normally do them while yawning and dozing off, so that these actions have no flavor or aroma. That is because the work is beloved to you and your spirit is happy about it, so it rises with strength and grabs onto all the parts of your brain and body and fills them with vigor. They exert themselves rather than being faint, are awake rather than dozing off. So why is it that your service - holy service - is not as beloved to you, to the point where your soul arises for it - to arouse vigorous life, exert your brain and body until they all work industriously, energetically and joyously?
There are many people whose hearts are one with God and are always desiring to serve Him; and when you talk with them, it seems like they are totally immersed in that service - from tip to toe. In fact, however, it is only something they want, whereas they actually remain lowly and small. For whenever they start to desire it and take it upon themselves to act, the evil impulse brings on impediments - such that they are immediately seduced and pushed away. But if they were strong and firm, alacritous and industrious, they would not have been pushed away by every impediment large or small. Rather with the spirit of service - divine service - they would redouble their efforts over everything else, and progress. But since their laxity has been a part of them all the way from childhood, they are neglectful about strengthening themselves and overcoming every impediment. So you too should not rejoice in your good will by itself, unless you remove and take out your laxity from its roots. But if you don't plant alacrity and industriousness in yourself, your evil impulse will impede you, and you will, God forbid, fail.
If our words to you up until now - how the whole people of Israel and even the Holy One of Israel are waiting on you, and how it is in your power to be a Jew, to sanctify the Jewish people and to have the Master of the world dwell in His world that He created - do not suffice to arouse your spirit, such that it should not be lazy or lax, but rather alacritous and industrious; then listen to this parable and illustration:
There is a story of a poor Jewish shoemaker in the Land of Israel who lived near a crossroads. All of his livelihood was from the passersby. If one of them tore their shoe, he would fix it; if their straps would snap, he would replace it. His livelihood was tight, but he - along with his wife and children - was always at ease. For he feared God greatly and also taught the members of his household that the life of a man in this earthly existence is short and temporary; and that the essence is eternal life in the supernal world, in which the soul is delighted by its closeness to the splendor of the precious Kingdom of Heaven and in which it derives pleasure from the light of His Divine Presence, may He be blessed. So what does all of a man's fortune help, if he is idle, does not serve his God and does not get close to Him? He was not a scholar. But he would study and pray to God according to his ability every spare moment he had - by day and by night. And sometimes his spirit would be aroused and become very enthusiastic, so that he would pray and pour out his soul to God. In order that nothing should disturb or confuse him, he would leave his small house and his one-room dwelling and go to the forest nearby. When passersby saw him from afar, they suddenly saw a man whose face was on fire. And when he would praise, thank, laud and speak to God as if his eyes of flesh could see the majesty of His throne of glory in front of him - [the passersby] were astounded and afraid. But those who knew him were already aware of this, and said that it was certainly the pious shoemaker - since that is what he was called by his gentile acquaintances.
And it was at the beginning of the last war (World War I), when all the wayfarers ceased, that his meager livelihood was also interrupted. A day came when he had no bread - neither for him, his wife nor his children. And behold, they went hungry the next day as well. So his small children were fasting and crying out, "Oy father, give us bread, so we don't die of starvation!" And behold, on the third day they were all lying down, weak, and humming like doves, "Father, bread!" Due to the severity of the hunger, only their lips were moving, but their voices could not be heard. They did not have the strength to yell out. He too was weak and his knees buckled from fasting and from the great sadness in his heart for his wife and children. So he strengthened himself and went outside. His wife yelled, "Oy my husband, do not leave. If we must die of famine, let us all die together." But even then did his trust in God not go away. So he said, "I am not going to my death. Rather I am going to the Living God, going to the forest to pray to my Father in the Heavens, that he should do a miracle for us and that we should live."
And he walked along, crying and raising his eyes to the Heavens, he said, "Please God, even before You created Your world, You chose us to be Your children, Your servants that are close to You. Your holy Divine Presence dwelt with us continuously in the Land, and You raised us up on the wings of eagles even unto the Heavens - as it were - into to Your forearms and Your bosom. And how good was it for us then. When there was something to tell us, You told us. You did not only have us hear the majesty of Your voice from the Heavens, but You also spoke with us. You revealed Yourself though a prophet, and we heard the voice of God talking through a man amongst us. The whole world also shuddered in front of You, and in front of us. For who is there that is made of flesh who will not fear people among whom the Master of the world dwells, whom He surrounds and even in whose bodies and spirits He resides? But how bitter is it for us now, when You have hidden Your face from us! The heart pines for Your hidden holiness. The spirit yells out, 'Bring me close, Father,' but noone is listening. For even when a Jew meditates about repentance and thinks, 'Is it not because of the greatness of my sins that God has distanced Himself; let us repent to Him and serve Him, and He will return to us like a merciful father' - even then, it is still bitter for us. For since You have hidden Yourself from us, so many hardships have overwhelmed us - whether in matters of livelihood or in other matters - which seal up the heart and worry the spirit, to the point that they make us transgress against our Maker, God forbid. Master of the world, I am not praying only for myself, but rather for all of Your children, the Children of Israel. Merciful Father, how have You abandoned Your children in such a sad and threatening world? How can You look on and be silent when they are wallowing in the blood of their wounds? But I am not only requesting their livelihood; rather I am seeking You, my beloved Father, and the holiness of my King, of my Holy One. Bring us close; reveal Yourself to us; have mercy upon us; redeem us and send us Your righteous messiah now, so that we will serve You in fear and in love, as our hearts desire and hope."
And it happened that while he was crying and praying so much, he tired. Since he had nothing to refresh himself from the fast and the crying, he fainted. And then he smelled a very powerful, pleasant smell, such that his spirit was lifted a bit. And he saw a very beautiful flower growing in the forest, and the pleasant smell was coming from it. So he strengthened himself, stood up and plucked the flower. And then he hurried home to also revive the souls of his wife and children, at least a little. But when he was on the road, a carriage passed with a lord inside. The carriage stopped and the lord called to him, "Listen poor man, what are you doing with a flower like that? Give it to me and I will compensate you with money." So the poor man answered, "I will not sell it for money. Rather if you can give me a loaf of bread for my wife and children that have been dying from hunger these last three days, I will give you the flower and even bless you before God." So he sold him his flower for the bread and ran happily home. 
And during the night, he saw his father in a dream tearing his clothes, yelling out, crying and striking his breast. He said, "You should know that the prayer you prayed today in the forest came up with an outrage above - such that all of the angels of mercy were aroused and yelled out to God, 'Until when will You not have mercy upon Your downtrodden flock and upon Your children drowning in so many hardships? And yet they do not forget Your name and are so connected to You!' The iron partition that is between the people of Israel and their Father in the Heavens was about to be broken, and all of the prayers that the Jews have prayed from way back that had not risen, now arose and aroused the mercy of the Master of Mercy to reveal the end. And the proclamation went out [that] since you brought the end near with your prayer, the flower that can resurrect the dead will be revealed to you. (<i>Editor's note from the printed edition: See Kohelet Rabbah 5, that there is a grass for the resurrection of the dead that will be revealed to an individual.</i>) And they sent me to come to you in a dream at night to let you know that you should go to the Tomb of the Patriarchs and the other graves of the prophets and resurrect them, and then they would bring our righteous messiah. There was light and joy in all of the heavens and the supernal chambers; the supernal angels and the souls of the tzaddikim rejoiced. But a great noise and lament was made by the Satan and his group - what will they do from now on? So they took counsel to trick you and to take this flower from your hand. And that is the lord that bought the flower from you - he was a messenger of the Satan, who hid his identity to steal the flower of resurrection.
And woe is me now, my son! You have not only done damage to yourself, but to all of Israel, even to the Holy One of Israel. Everything was in your hands, the forefathers, the prophets, all of the tzaddikim - even the messiah was in your hands. And you lost everything for the sake of a loaf of bread! So now it is the Satan and all of the destructive angels that are happy and laughing and making fun of us, whereas we are all ashamed and crying. And everyone is crying out and asking, 'Who was that man that destroyed all of these things and extinguished the holy light; could it be that it was a Jewish man who is called by the name of Israel?'"
And now Jewish young man, are you very concerned about this poor man who destroyed everything holy, the tzaddikim and the coming of the messiah for something of little value? But if you are concerned for him, when he had little chance to do otherwise, since he did not know he was facing a test, you should certainly be concerned - and even get angry - about yourself. For you know that you are constantly being tested [about this], and you nevertheless bend to every small thing, and do not stand your ground. Being a giant and a tzaddik is in your hands - to have God's Divine Presence dwell within you, such that others too will be sanctified by you and brought closer to God through you, be taught the work of God by you and guided on His paths; and you and your friends can bring the revelation of our righteous messiah closer. And what does your desire alone to be a true Jew help if you are lazy and lax and don't work; if you are pushed away be every impediment; jump at whatever appears good in your eyes and never stand your ground in the face of a test large or small? It is not our intention that you should be alacritous and merely do your service like an industrious craftsman of the mundane, mutatis mutandi, when his boss hurries him or when he pushes himself. For his work is only the dry work of the limbs of the body. Rather, arouse your spirit! Let the spirit of God lift you to put thunder into the wheels of your spirit and the limbs of your body; exert yourself and redouble your efforts to serve God with effort, joy and the enthusiasm of holy fire!

Chapter 5

<b>Several Specific Suggestions for the Lax Person</b>
The desire that you have to be industrious and to serve God is not enough by itself. You need to  delve into it and find ideas and tactics to remove laxity, take it out from its roots and instill industriousness in yourself. This is the case with any traits - it is not enough to just have the desire that your bad traits go away and be exchanged for good traits. Rather, you must delve into them to find various suggestions and tactics to help you with them. For bad character traits are an illness of the spirit and the body - would a sick person be healed by the will to be healed alone, if he does not make any efforts, and occupy himself with his healing? And regarding the topic of laziness and laxity with which we are dealing - since you yourself are your main educator, delve into your illness; exert yourself to rule over, and monitor, yourself!
Before any task in your divine service, consider how much time it requires, and monitor yourself: For example, take an hour for this page of Gemara, or review it in half an hour and no more. And before each task, monitor yourself by setting up strong limits - "I will not be negligent in this, but rather finish it in this amount of time." And once you have finished it, see if you have not delayed. If not, rejoice! But if you did delay - and not because of an [unforeseen but legitimate] impediment - you should be saddened and greatly angered with yourself, saying, "Gevalt! What will be with me? I am now destroying two worlds with my lowly laziness, and angering my Maker as a result." And when you get accustomed to it and this monitoring of yourself becomes ingrained - and you will have made it into a heavy yoke on your neck - then whenever you study [Torah], you will feel inside as if someone is standing over you and pushing you, saying, "Do not be lax; do not err in your thoughts to think of other thoughts in the middle of your study."
Even if a lax young man is already able to study in depth on his own - it is nevertheless better that when he studies alone, he should study more simply. So he should assign an amount of time to every part of his learning - in an hour, he should study so much Gemara; in half an hour, so much Tanakh, etc. For when he studies with more depth - besides the fact that he will not be able to set aside a certain time for each thing and to hurry himself, given that there is no set time for in-depth study - he will also err and get confounded by other thoughts. Of course, he should also not refrain from in-depth study, since that it is the essence of Torah study - to delve with all of his strength and thought into the holiness of Torah. And the main seduction of the evil impulse to the lax person is to seduce him to only study superficially, without work and without depth. However when he wants to study in depth, he should do so with his rabbi or with one of his good friends. That way, they will arouse each other not to stray and not be lax. And once he becomes used to being alacritous and industrious - and not lazy or lax - he can already study in depth also when he is studying by himself. 
A young man who has already finished and left the yeshiva - such that his time and studies are not fixed by the director of the yeshiva or his teacher - should fix leaning sessions for the whole day, without adding a great deal all at once. When several days have passed and he has completed his studies every day - he can add a little. For example, if he took upon himself to study a page of Gemara with Rashi and Tosafot for two hours every morning - after a few days, he should say to himself, "Behold I can study the parsha with Rashi during those two hours, without taking away from the Gemara and Tosafot. I will gird my loins and study with greater industriousness, strength, willpower and intellect, and there will be about a quarter hour left for Chumash with Rashi." And so should he add every day - little by little - until he has piled on many sessions of Torah study and divine service every day.
It is good for you to write down the entire day's schedule on paper. For example - in the morning at time x, I will get up; at time y, I will have already gotten dressed, washed my hands, recited the Shema and the Torah blessings and I will begin to study until time z, etc. And every day you should look at your list to fulfill your portion. Even a student in yeshiva - if he only wants it - can push himself and add sessions to the sessions of the yeshiva. And why should you dither and waste so much time at lunch break; and at night, from the time you leave the yeshiva until you go to bed? Why don't you steal a little time from this and from that, to be time for God? And whether you are a yeshiva student or study on your own - you will get so used to the sessions that you set for yourself the whole day, and they will be so regular for you every day and every hour, and even every minute - that they will become like an ironclad rule. So much so, that if something prevents you from finishing one of the tasks, you will be saddened on your own and feel like you breached the wall of that day. And so the Chumash session or the half hour of Gemara that you missed that day will yell out to you, "Why did you abandon me and trample me?"
Everyday, check your daily schedule to see if you didn't miss anything yesterday. If something prevented you and you neglected it - if it was out of your own neglect, God forbid, that you neglected it, be saddened and immediately finish today what you missed the previous day. However if it was because you studied something difficult or you delved deeper into your studies that you neglected it, you should not be pained. Nor do you need to make up today the number of pages you missed yesterday. For the quota that we mentioned, that you should set a number of pages for yourself every day, is only for simpler learning, or for the one who has not repulsed laxity. He must set out a number of pages each day and each hour so that he not be neglectful and spend too much time on one page for no reason. But regarding the one who studies in depth without laxity and spends more time [on a page] because he is adding to his service and divine investigation of the Gemara and Tosafot, etc. - just the opposite, how fortunate is he and how good is his portion! This is the essence of Torah study, through which we merit to cling to God. Such a student should set out his sessions of in-depth study by the hour and not by the page - how many hours he will study in-depth, not how many pages. And however many pages, or even sides, he learns will suffice for him. And do not think that since you put so much work on yourself, you will become accustomed to fooling yourself and learning everything only superficially. Since you will want to make up the quantity of your voluminous service that you accepted upon yourself, it will be just the opposite. Know this rule: The yoke of all the work you pile upon yourself will arouse you to work - not just quantitatively much work that is done superficially; but rather work with depth and precision. Redouble your efforts and exert yourself, so that your entire self will turn into industriousness, to do hard work that breaks even the body. Just the opposite, if you do not feel your responsibility and the yoke upon yourself to finish much material each day, you will become lax - such that even the little you learn will be without depth, joy or even intellect.
And know this rule: Just like it is impossible for someone blind in both eyes to see and for a donkey to think - so too is is impossible for a lad without a yoke to have alacrity and get up early, or for a young man without obligations to himself to be industrious and exacting. And you must already know the reason for this thing yourself. The powers of the spirit in the lax person are dozing; they require someone to move and arouse them, to move them forward to do their work. So the yoke upon you to finish an amount of work like this arouses, awakens and pushes them to their work. And once your capabilities are exerting themselves in their work, they will go deeper and also analyze with depth. This however is not the case with someone who has no yoke and obligation towards a quantity of work. Without something arousing and pushing it, the spirit doses off and does not exert itself, such that your study will be weak quantitatively and poor qualitatively - with neither depth nor profundity.

Chapter 6

<b>The Illness of Selfhood (Individualism)</b>)
Note that even though we will not itemize all the illnesses of the soul and their remedies in this book - like a peddler with his wares - nevertheless just like we spoke about the illnesses of laziness and laxness because they are so central and someone struck by them is unable to take the first step in the world of divine service; so too must we speak about the sickness of individualism here. For it is a hopeless illness; and one struck by it, God forbid, descends into the pit. And to our sorrow, it has spread a great deal today among those lads and young men who lack sense and have hearts of stone. Every such lad or young man thinks of himself as an independent self - he knows how to act and he knows what is good and bad for himself. So there are times when the teacher or the father will tell him something and guide him, yet it appears in the eyes of such a student that he knows better. And because of that, he looks at his teacher as a tyrant who is coming to force him to do something just because that's what [the teacher] wants. So the heart of the student is distanced from his rabbi through this - to the point that all of [the rabbi's] words, Torah and guidance will not [convince the student that the rabbi seeks his good]. So if the student does not hasten to expel this bad trait from his heart - to destroy it completely from within him to the point that nothing is left of it - his end will be bitter, God forbid: There is no hope for such a boy and no good virtue will come from him. And even the good things and good character traits planted into the hearts of all Jews will become corrupted, twisted and rotten in him; they will all turn to evil, God forbid. With his mind, he will actually learn the opposite [of what is intended], to call the bad, good; and the good, bad. He will use his traits for the bad - what we need to love, he will hate; and those things we need to distance, he will love and bring close. Also about him does the prophet lament (Isaiah 5:2), "he hoped it would yield good grapes; instead, it yielded bad grapes." The mind of a Jew and the good traits planted in him as a Jewish young man and that God had hoped would become good grapes - he made into bad grapes. Everything is corrupted and becomes poisonous grapes and bitter clusters. 
This illness is a type of pride. And our holy ones, may their memory be blessed, already foresaw this for us and said (Sotah 49b), "In the time before the messiah, brazenness will grow." In earlier generations, students felt submissiveness and self-negation in front of their goodly parents, rabbis and guides. They themselves recognized that they were small-minded and that they were not equipped for the great work dependent upon them - to guide and develop themselves into becoming the greats of Israel - on their own. And like a man lost in the forest at night when someone comes to guide him and extract him from the terrible darkness of the forest, and bring him to an inhabited place - so was their rabbi in their eyes. They loved him and blessed him; and every thought that came out of his mouth was holy - they would absorb it and internalize it into their spirits and hearts. This is no longer the case, when a lad will [instead] be haughty and say, "I am enough for myself; my mind is good and straight and I can rely upon it. So I will go on my own path."
Good lads and young men, please judge for yourselves - you have begun to internalize our words up to this point, in which we have made you understand what a Jewish young man [actually] is, how God is inseparably connected to him and the yoke that he must bear in developing His holy people - please tell me, is there any greater grief than the grief from these haughty ones; is there any blemish like their blemish? Jewish young men, we do not need to warn you about this terrible character trait. We are certain that the words of God - "A man must fear his mother and father" (Leviticus 19:3); and "The fear of your teacher should be like the fear of the Heavens" (Avot 4:12) - are engraved upon your hearts. You know quite well that it is God who is teaching you Torah; and that the voice of God is encased in the voice and words of your rabbi when he speaks to you about matters of Torah, divine service and even about proper behavior according to the Torah. And the fear and joy, the fright and terror that the people of Israel experienced at the time they were at Mount Sinai and heard the voice of God in flames of fire - some of that is also with you now when you are in the yeshiva: When you remind yourselves that the room in which you are in now is full of angels and seraphim and that God's voice comes out from among them - encased in the voice of your rabbi entering your ears and your heart - fright and joy, fear and love shake your body and roil your heart, and you humble yourselves to the Torah of our God heard in the words of your rabbi.
You I need not warn about this bad trait. But know that the Mishnah says (Avot 4:4), "Be very, very lowly." One has to distance pride from oneself more than any of the other bad character traits, so that not even a trace of it remain. (<i>Editor's note from the printed edition: As is known from the Rambam's Eight Chapters.</i>) Hence perhaps there is a student among you who - while he is not affected by pride to the extent that he opposes his rabbis and parents - still has a bit of pride internally. He does not humble himself in his heart or admire and value them or their words. So even if he has the ability to overcome the evil pride in himself, since it is faint - and even if he listens to them and overcomes himself enough to do what they command - since he nevertheless has a strong sense of selfhood and rock-hard independence, he also needs to be laundered and washed until his heart and spirit are totally cleansed from the traces of this pride. And not only that. Even someone who is prideful towards his friends - whether because his intellect is sharper than theirs or whether he has no reason and is just proud - is also being clawed, together with his spirit, by his evil impulse. A young man like this - please listen to our words: Rise up quickly, be strong and expunge it, if you care about your spirit. Wash and purify it if you don't want to go bad, God forbid, all the days of your life forever. 
And truly why should dear friends be haughty towards one another? Why not recognize yourselves and your friends as pure angels - the hosts of God - whom He has sent to this world, to conquer it for His sake? See that the God of the heavens and earth is called the Lord of hosts - meaning the Lord of armies. And what armies does the Holy One, blessed be He, have in this world? Channah hinted to this in her prayer (that used this name of God). And the Sages, may their memory be blessed, said (Berakhot 31b) that with this name, she intended to say, "Master of the world, from all of the many armies You have created in Your world, is it difficult in Your eyes to give me one child?" We can already see everything from this.
You, Jewish lads and young men, are the hosts and armies of the Holy One, blessed be He; and Channah requested one child from these hosts. You are pure of spirit before Him like His angels on high. You shall conquer the world for His sake and crown Him, may He be blessed, upon it. Not with the sword or the spear, but rather with the spirit of God within you. You shall raise up a treasured and holy nation from yourselves; through you, His light will shine and the world will be sanctified with His holiness. So why should you be haughty and push one heart away from the other, when you are also pushing God away with this? And God has already said about the proud person, "He and I are not able to dwell together, it is as if he is pushing away My feet" (Sotah 5a).
Pure-hearted students, you must love one another! Be careful about the words of the Mishnah (Avot 4:12), "Let the honor of your friend be beloved to you like your own." And your love for one another should not be forced - like one who only loves himself, but since he is warned and commanded to also love his fellow, forces himself not to hate him. That is like one who takes a tiny part of his love for himself and offers it as a voluntary sacrifice to his fellow. Such love is nothing even when it exists, and will quickly dissipate and melt away. 
Your love should be because you know and remember that you are all messengers of God, such that none of you can say, "I am for myself and my friends are completely secondary." Nothing depends upon you, but rather upon the One on high who sent you. You must serve with all of your strength; and Your God of hosts will raise and make each one of you great, both spiritually and physically - according to the level of his service and the level of his humility. And how many times have we been shown lads with great abilities who remained insignificant because they became haughty. Moreover, even regarding a great man who already merited to be a Torah scholar, the Sages, may their memory be blessed, said (Eruvin 54a), "If he becomes arrogant, the Holy One, blessed be He, brings him down." And how many lads have we seen who were not noteworthy as children, but became the glory of Israel as adults!

Chapter 7

<b>The Illness of False Humility and its Remedy</b>
Jewish student, do not think that our words in this book are intended to quite exempt you from studying Gemara, Midrash, Shulchan Arukh and the other holy books that guide us in the holy path that leads to God - God forbid to say such a thing! Just the opposite, our intention is only to refine you so that you will be able to look into them and absorb their holy words into your spirit and body, and that all of your limbs will be watered from the spring that comes out from the House of God and from His holy chambers. Hence we do not quote all of the words of the Sages, may their memory be blessed, the Shulchan Arukh and the other holy books regarding proper behavior. For they are accessible; and anyone, whose spirit desires to be close to the One who is Pure and to be found among His servants and His pure tzaddikim, may learn from them. Instead, we are just quoting that which is relevant to our subject.
In Shulchan Arukh, Orach Chaim 1, it is stated, "One should not be embarrassed in front of other people who mock him in his service to God, may He be blessed." This embarrassment is a large boulder in the bulwark of the plague. For such a man is not even following his own opinion and authority, but rather dragged and pulled along by other people. He is afraid that this mocker will mock him. And for that reason, he negates himself to his opinion. He will only act according to what is good in [the mocker's] eyes. [In this way,] he will be prevented from doing good things, since it is possible that another neighbor will laugh at him for it. And he will also need to adjust himself to find favor in the eyes of a third person and a fourth. Woe is to such a person, who has given over his spirit and body to the authority and opinion of other inconsequential people. They all rule over him, whereas he has no power over his own flesh and bones. This embarrassment in front of those that mock one is an ugly illness; its beginning and foundation is childishness and smallness: When a child is small, he knows that he does not have his own [developed] intellect. So he gets used to measuring all of his affairs according to the customs and opinions of the adults surrounding him - "If I do this, I will be good in their eyes; but if I do the other, they will laugh at me, etc." [In the case of the man we are discussing,] this approach remained with him when he grew up and got older - to pay more attention to what is nice in the eyes of others than to what is actually good.
Jewish young man, please listen to this principle - about this matter and more generally: If you do not exert yourself and redouble your efforts with all of your strength to remove and take out from the roots every bad character trait and immaturity from your childhood, they will forever remain with you and cause you damage. If your evil impulse seduces you, by saying, "Why should you work and fix yourself; you are still a lad and that is why your shortcomings are like this; so when you grow up in years, they will end automatically and your mind and your traits will be strengthened on their own" - mercy upon you, do not listen to it! For only the years get older, not the man. As there are adults - even seniors with regards to their years - who are lads or even children in their opinions and personalities. And this is all because they were negligent in their service and depended on their years [to change them].
Let us now return to our topic, to investigate how this illness of false shame remains in a man from his childhood, and how one can be cured from it: Since at the beginning of a child's intellectual development, he does not have his own [developed] intellect to differentiate between good and bad, nor an internal drive to push him by saying, "Do this and that, but do not do the other" - he needs to absorb ideas from the outside. For he doesn't know what to do on his own without measuring it by the opinions of the adults, as to what is good and bad in their eyes. And if when he grows older, he still doesn't acquire his own intellect or personal drive, the opinion of other people will not budge from within him, and it will be the only thing that controls him. He will even bend to their stupidities and be embarrassed [to disagree with such] opinions, so that they will not mock him. All of his actions will only be to impress other people. And please note this wonder: That there are people that are suffering from both of these opposing plagues - from insignificance and lack of independent thought, as well as from the haughtiness and individualism that we spoke about in Chapter 6. They are haughty against their goodly rabbis and teachers. But their haughtiness is to say, "I am my own person and I have a clear opinion to think that I should negate myself to the opinion of the corrupt [outside] world and be dragged behind it" - like sheep to the slaughter. You good young men should laugh at them and at their twisted and corrupt opinion - to have the pride and individualism to make oneself into a floor rag, to negate oneself and become corrupted! 
It is this way - [that they have] haughtiness together with corrupt lowliness - because even the haughtiness did not sprout from within them. For it is impossible for such a cursed and rotten haughtiness - the foundation of which is a spark of idolatry, God forbid; and the effect of which is to destroy  what remains of the nation of God after Nebuzaradan, Nero and Titus - to rise up from within a Jewish spirit. It is an illness all over the world right now. And since he has no independent opinion but rather bends himself to the world, even this rot contaminates him - such that he rebels against his rabbis and father. 
Hence it is not enough for a person who wants to expel this corrupting illness which has been in him from the time of his youth to just acquire intellect, but rather to acquire his own opinion - as that is the essence here. For even the one who is embarrassed from the mockers and bends to their opinions has an intellect. And they have already grown up and become adults. However all their opinions are not from themselves, but rather from the [outside] world. A child who wants to imitate an adult wears a hat and the coat of an adult and will be a laughing stock in everyone's eyes. But these people have been crafty to know better how to imitate the actions of the world without anybody laughing at them. But one is like the other, since they both follow the way of a monkey - for all of a monkey's wisdom is just how to make his actions conform to the actions of a man. If people in the world say that good is bad, they will do like them - to disparage the Torah and its students. And if they go crazy and become fascinated by a children's game with a ball, he will also humble himself to it and bend himself to its ridiculousness. So we want to open up your own opinion in you. Is not your essence that of a Jew, such that you should reveal the the spirit of Israel inside of yourself? Let the spirit of the forefathers that is stored within you come out and grow. It will move you and it will make you say, "Do this and that; serve God, your God and the God of Israel; observe His commandments; listen to His voice in the mouth of your goodly father and rabbi; mock the ones that are far from Torah; be solid in matters of Torah; be bold like a leopard; and be not afraid of, or embarrassed by, anyone!"
This is the matter about which we must warn you the most. We know very well that you will be careful even on your own against the inciters who explicitly want to push you away, God forbid, from the path of God, to the nethermost pit, the dark place of the other side, God forbid. Their words will be like a stinging fire and like the slings of arrows to you; so you will certainly keep your distance from them and anyone associated with them. Rather we must warn you strenuously about the hypocrites. They will come to you with the guise of innocence, saying, "We also fear the God of our fathers and we serve Him just like you. However this too is the will of God now at this time, that we compromise a little. You have already studied Torah. Now you should study a craft or business." And they will even have the temerity to use our holy words and say, "Even the Mishnah says (Avot 2:2), "It is good for the Torah to be with the way of the world (<i>derekh eretz</i>, usually understood as work)." And they will even seduce you to compromise about divine service by saying, "The times have changed, and we no longer need to be so particular about all of the commandments and Jewish practices and keep so much distance from murkiness, as we did in the past" - and that which is similar to this. And you should not argue or fight with them. Rather answer your words to them in your heart: "If what you are saying is true that times have changed, they have only changed for the worse. Earlier, even the businessman and the craftsman served God. But now, in almost all cases, as soon as the youth leave the yeshiva to do business or work a trade, they fall into the nethermost pit. Do you want to murder me too, to burn my pure soul in the fire of <i>Gehinnom</i>, and to throw my body - the pure young dove - into the cauldron of boiling dung? I will not listen to you! Under no circumstances will I agree to you! I will grab onto the Sefer Torah in which God resides and hug Him - as it were - through it with both of my arms. And I will not release it so long as my soul is within me.
And as far as what they are saying about the need to concern myself about earning a livelihood when I get older, what are these people chirping and what are they thinking? Are their eyes blind and their minds shut off? Do they not see that - whether in hard times like now or in good times like earlier when earning a livelihood was easier - everyone is equal? Many craftsmen are hungry; and, visa versa, many Torah scholars are wealthy. And the Sages, may their memory be blessed, already said (Kiddushin 82b), 'Poverty is not from a trade, nor is wealth from a trade.' God will answer the one He wants, and will make wealthy whoever is good in His eyes. That is enough for me. [So] now I will fill my body and soul with Torah and holiness; and when I grow up and require a livelihood, I will put in the effort. And God, in whose paths I will go, should help me, support me and save me."  
However if, God forbid, the constraints upon you were so great that you were not able to stand up against them, and you were unable to remain exclusively a Torah student; if, God forbid, you were forced to leave the yeshiva and go to the workplace or to a craft while you were still a young man (<i>Editor's note from the printed edition: For example, sometimes a young man is obligated to support his weak parents, God forbid.</i>) - you still should not give up, God forbid, about being a Jew with all of your heart. You still should not abandon, God forbid, the Lord, your God! Please know that harder tests than this lie ahead of you. Be strong and stand up to them, connect yourself to God; and then He too will be with you in everything you face. Let not a day pass without Torah [study]. Pray to Him from the bottom of your heart. Pour out your soul in front of Him in any way you want - whether in the way that we are writing for you here or whether in a different way, whether in speech or in thoughts of the heart: Please, God, Examiner of the conscience and the heart, You know that it was not, God forbid, out of rebellion or trespass that I have left the study of Your Torah and I have gone out to worldly pursuits; and that I did not wantonly leave the world of truth for the world of the mundane. You know all the afflictions that I have endured and the difficulties I have encountered, to the point that my strength was broken and my spirit was depressed and I was forced to go out and seek a livelihood. I am not leaving Your Torah or Your holy service. Even now I am praying to you and studying even more than I can; and all of my thoughts are only to You. Please God, my heart is afraid and my spirit is terrified. I am a tender lamb and there is a long and daunting road in front of me. I am entering this world full of opponents and obstacles - predatory animals and evildoers want to ambush my body and my soul. But if I am like a lost lamb, are You not the shepherd of Israel? And that is my entire hope - lead us, Your glory, like sheep. And that is my entire strength. The way of the shepherd is that when a sheep wanders away from the flock in the forest and a lion or a bear encounters it to tear it up - and so it becomes frightened and yells out with all of its strength - the shepherd listens, his mercy is awakened and he hastens to save it, so long as it still has the breath of life. So too do I accept upon myself that in all of my long and complicated path, I will yell out to You, "Please God, save me," and You will hear me from the heavens and hasten to grab me by the hairs on my head and the strings of my heart and save me and guide me to You, God. (<i>Editor's note from the printed edition: Meaning, since the thoughts of my head and the will of my heart are towards God, He should grab a hold of them and guard my entire body.</i>) 
These things should always be in front of you: Do not distance yourself from your old friends who merited to remain in Torah [study] all day and all night, and to breathe in the air of the Garden of Eden which is among them, and which comes from the wings of the various angels of God. Go see them from time to time, and especially on Shabbat and holidays. Establish a Torah study session for yourself everyday. Say some Psalms with concentration everyday. Make sure to add time from the mundane to the holy [before and after] the Shabbat and holidays. Make your Shabbat and holidays completely holy. Wait for it during the entire week - it is the day that you liberate yourself from the din and noise of <i>Gehinnom</i> and enter the Garden of Eden. Study and speak holy words all of Shabbat with your friends from way back. Look into books of Mussar and Chassidut from time to time.
And you fortunate young men who have merited to always remain in Torah, do not distance him! Have mercy upon this poor soul, who has been pushed into the stream of hail from Egypt - and there is even fire mixed in with the hail which strikes every spirit who has not been set aside by God to save him. You are protected under the wings of the Divine Presence - bring him near also. Do this so long as you see that his heart is true to God and that he yearns for his earlier state when he was sitting with you together in the Garden of Eden. And if you see a small sign that he is turning bad, speak to him nicely and calmly with words that come from your hearts - once, twice and even three times. But if it still doesn't help, send him away so that you are not also burnt, God forbid, from the burning of his soul. For even after he reads our words until now and even after we have warned him and moved him, he still needs miracles and great mercy in order to remain a faithful Jew. For have we moved him any more than that which they commanded and moved his soul before it came down to this world? Yet there are still so many pushed away and lost - God protect us from them and from their masses.

Chapter 8

<b>The Need for Elevation of the Spirit and the Character Traits</b>
Advanced student, please review our words up until now; and take down, in detail, the whole course of improvement that we have written for you. Internalize it and use it to improve yourself. And if it does not work the first time, do not be depressed - the only thing that can possibly be done quickly is to fall into the pit of destruction. But improvement requires a great deal of hard and consistent work. Just the opposite! If you found a blemished trait in yourself, looked into our words, began to improve it and it appears to you that you have fixed it in one shot - you should know that you are fooling yourself. You need to work often and over much time to improve it little by little, until you can defeat it. More generally, you should know that our words up until now are still not sufficient to bring you up to where you need to be. Our words until now are only like a cleaning of the room from dust and from the mice that have nested there. But this does not yet make the room ready to invite the King to dwell in it. It must still be whitewashed; it must still be decorated with flowers; it must still be beautified with nice furnishings, etc. - according to what is appropriate for the King and His essence. 
However whoever has one of these bad character traits or tendencies - such as being lazy, lax or negating oneself to the opinion of the [outside] world, etc. - is so corrupt that it would be impossible for him to reach even the tip of [proper] service. Hence the beginning of our words was how to clean this poisonous dust and these destructive [traits]. But to be a Jew of God's treasured people, the people that is close to Him - such that He desired us and made an agreement with us - requires more polish, elevation and closeness, even after he cleanses himself from the aforementioned filth and foulness. Have you not seen the words of the Midrash (Kohelet Rabbah 1), "What was created for what: Was Israel created for the sake of the  Torah, or the Torah for the sake of Israel?" And the Midrash concludes that the Torah was created for the sake of Israel. You should be astonished and amazed! The Torah that is so holy; God's Torah that the angels desired so much - its entire purpose and creation was for the sake of Israel! The <i>Ein Sof</i> came down to Sinai together with [His] holy multitudes, lightened up the skies and made the earth tremble - all of this was for the sake of Israel! The purpose of His coming and His holy effort was to establish you and your friends to to be the Jewish people that is close to Him - truly close! And to be close to Him should also be your goal, that you always desire. Your heart and spirit should also feel the Holy One of Israel who dwells among them, etc. - as mentioned above. If so, you too must work for this. You must arouse your spirit from its encasement - since it is enclosed in your body - and bring it close to its Father who seeks it. A great deal of work and habituation is required for this. 
Advanced student, I am concerned that you have been startled by my words here. Up until now, you thought that the improvement that we demanded of you before, and about which we said that you are not free and exempted, was only [regarding] how to cleanse your character traits and how to remove the poisonous dust that we just mentioned - and that this would be enough for you to do, in order to climb to the level of being a true Jewish adult - and that you understood us. But this can no longer the case; since even after the cleansing and improvement of bad traits, we are still demanding that you elevate yourself and come closer [to God]. We are demanding that you elevate yourself greatly - such that your whole being approaches God. Yet this is something [optional] in your eyes; something that only the most spiritual people and the great tzaddikim need to make efforts towards reaching, whereas every other simple Jew is exempt. [But then] you have made a big mistake. It is true that the closeness [to God] and elevation of the souls of the great tzaddikim is much greater than that of the simple Jew. Yet even every simple Jew - however he may be - cannot possibly be a Jewish servant of God with a dry heart and an old and covered over spirit. Hence he must raise himself, at least occasionally - above himself and above the whole world. Our teacher, Moses, said to the Israelites (Deuteronomy 4:35), "You have been shown, to know that the Lord is God; there is none else beside him." He did not say this to his generation alone. For the Torah is eternal and our teacher, Moses, is our eternal leader. So even now is he announcing and making it known to all Jewish hearts and spirits, "You have been shown, to know that the Lord is God; there is none else beside him." It is not enough for us to have the knowledge that God, may He be blessed, is found above, outside of us. Rather, you have been shown to know - what is central is that you sense and feel Him, may He be blessed. And you, advanced student, have already been shown a little bit to know this. And if you will not sense the Divine Presence of His glory in front of your eyes like the prophets and the great tzaddikim - our teacher, Moses, already hinted to us [what to do, when he said] (Deuteronomy 4:39), "And you shall know this day, and you shall set it to your heart, that the Lord, He is God, in the heavens above and on the earth below; there is none else." "And you shall set it to your heart" - so set it to your heart, and know that "the Lord, He is God, etc." For please note the nature of your trembling in your heart for God and your yearning for Torah, the commandments and true prayer. And why is it that when you think about how great it would be for me if I could be a great tzaddik that is close to God, like the tzaddikim of earlier days; and how happy I would be if I could make my prayers like those of the Maggid of Kozhnitz, may the memory of the tzaddik be for a blessing for life in the world to come, and I would be united with God in great purity through them - your heart trembles so much, and your entire body quakes from this yearning that is like a torch fire inside of you? From where does all of this come to you, if not from that which your spirit is struck by being in front of the Master, the Lord of hosts? It is for Him that you yearn and melt. "And you shall know this day, and you shall set it to your heart, that the Lord, He is God" - when you set [the matter] to your heart, then you will know that the Lord, He is God!
However our teacher, Moses, did not only say, "And you shall know [...] that the Lord, He is God, in the heavens." He also said, "on the earth below; there is none else." And that is central - to see and know that also below on the earth, there is none besides God and His holiness, may He be blessed. But how can a person say that if, God forbid, there is a foreign god in his heart? For the Gemara says (Shabbat 105b), "What is the strange god that is within a person’s body? Say that it is the evil inclination." And how can a person say, "I am a Jew and I serve God," if he also worships, mutatis mutandis, the strange god inside him, listens to it and does its will, God forbid. How can he approach God, and say, "Blessed are You Lord, our God"; be in front of God and say, "Lord, You are our God" - when he has, mutatis mutandis, a strange god nesting in his heart to which he, God forbid, subjugates himself.
This is the crux - that you expel the strange god and the evil impulse from inside you. We are not asking of you to completely expel it all at once, that you should wake up and be completely pure from any stain or illness. That is impossible. Rather that you regardless begin this divine service of yours and give it all of your efforts. There is a [relevant] parable: To what is this similar? To a king, whose enemy snuck in and settled into the king's palace. If the palace minister exerts himself with all of his strength to expel the enemy, the king will neither get angry nor ignore him. [Rather] he will help him further his campaign - in each room and step of the palace from which the enemy is repulsed, the king will hasten to come and dwell there. But if the minister is negligent and does not attack or fight - and especially if the king feels that he is secretly making peace with the enemy and listening to him - his anger will burn like fire. He will be furious and curse him, saying, "Swindler and traitor, you have given over my domicile to my enemy. How dare you also trick me and say to me, 'You are my king and I serve you?'" You certainly understand the analogy on your own. Your body and soul are a palace of the Ein Sof, and He dwells in them. However the enemy of the King - the strange god and the evil impulse - snuck in and nested inside of you. And how great will be the anger of the King of the world when He says that not only have you - the minister of the palace - allowed the enemy and the strange god to dwell inside you, but you have even made peace with it, subjugate yourself to it and obey it? He will be furious and call you a swindler and a traitor - "How can you also trick Me and say to Me, 'Blessed are You Lord, our God?'" Therefore please start now to cleanse your character traits and thoughts, so that they not be like a slime pit. Please work with all of your strength to sanctify them and crown God over them, such that you should only do, speak and even think according to His words and commandments.
And behold that the entire ability of the Jew to expel the evil from inside himself, to change himself from bad to good and to rejuvenate himself comes from the free will that God has given to us. The beasts and animals are compelled in their deeds, their thoughts and in everything that pertains to them. God gave free will to man, so that he can choose the path of life or, God forbid, the opposite. And like a merciful Father, He requests from each of us to "choose life, in order that you should live" (Deuteronomy 30:19). But a person who wants to [truly] choose one of two paths must be above and beyond them. The Midrash (Bereishit Rabbah 22:6) says, "Fortunate is the man who is above his transgressions. Woe to the man whose transgressions are above him." Can a drunkard decide to choose the good, and make up his mind to no longer get drunk, when he is still drunk? The mind of the one choosing is confounded with the wine; and his spirit is confused by it. With what will a man overcome to choose the holy path, if his essence is that of the animal spirit that sinks downwards, if his intellect is full of the biases of his evil impulse and if he understands the bad to be good, and the good to be bad? Hence a person is required to - at least occasionally - be above his transgressions, his evil impulse, his biases and the whole world. And at the moment of such elevation and purity, he will see and feel in himself that he is a Jew that is close to God; and that his childish deeds, his silliness, his evil impulse and its inclinations are a snake and a viper. So on his own, he will be embarrassed and afraid and will say, "Oy, how contemptible and disgusting I am with all of these [bad] character traits and this lowly silliness that is with me! Oy, how can can I cut off myself - and the root of my ancestors, the Jewish soul within me - from the Source of Life and Holiness, and fling myself into a nest of snake and vipers, a place of rot and death, God forbid?" His entire being will [then] shake and his entire being will tremble. He will redouble his efforts with all of his strength and shake off his spirit and body from the slime and snakes that are wrapped around him. He will overcome and choose a life of purity and Godly holiness from now on. And do you, Jewish young man, not also feel this on the day that you study with consistency and pray with concentration - according to your ability - and at times when you approach holiness a little: You are embarrassed about your silliness and it seems polluted to you; and then it becomes easier to control yourself and to straighten your entire being. And this is what we said to you, that raising yourself up is not [an optional matter] that is only for the great tzaddikim. Rather everyone - according to his situation - is required to elevate his entire being, at least periodically from time to time.

Chapter 9

<b>Some Suggestions with which to Elevate and Improve Oneself</b>
Advanced student, you have certainly asked yourself, "Isn’t the Torah everything - and even the domain of the Holy One, blessed be He? Given that I am studying it, why am I not elevated? And even though there are times when I feel a little elevated, is that tiny bit all the elevation that I can hope to aspire to? Will I reach the state that they are requiring and promising in this book - and that I have hoped for so much - with this? Moreover, why are there others who study Torah and then separate from it, God forbid - and then descend to the pit of destruction? And where is the promise of our holy ones, may their memory be blessed, that its light should bring them back to the good?" Indeed it is true that Torah study connects those who study it to the One who teaches Torah to the Jewish people - the God of Israel. But one needs to know how to study Torah. It states in the holy Zohar 3:152, "The one who thinks that the clothing is the actual Torah and nothing else will have his essence removed and will not have a share in the world to come." (<i>Editor’s note from the printed edition: That is to say, about someone who studies Torah only with his dry human intellect like, mutatis mutandis, he would study another intellectual matter - the holy Zohar says that he has no share in the world to come.</i> The simple intellect that is found in the Torah is only the Torah’s clothing. But who is it that wears this clothing? It is God, may He be blessed. So when one studies Torah, he must make efforts to reach the Hidden One who is hiding Himself in the Torah. Do you want to purify yourself? Rabbi Akiva has already said (Yoma 85b), "Just like a mikveh purifies the impure, so too does the Holy One, blessed be He, purify Israel." But only the one who enters the mikveh is purified. So delve by way of the clothing to the Holy One, blessed be He, who is found in it - and then you will be purified! Granted, at the time you are studying Torah, it is difficult for you to arouse your spirit with lofty thoughts; as you need to concentrate with your whole mind and being in a way that weakens your strength. So arouse your spirit before you start to study Torah, uncover it and connect it with God. And then when you begin to study Torah, you will work with the simple intellect, but your revealed spirit will race and delve by way of the clothing to its King and Creator which is in [the Torah] and become unified with Him, may He be blessed.
But this will not be effective if your spirit - through which you want to elevate yourself and get close to God - is hidden from you; if it is hidden in your body and sleeping in your physicality. So if you don't arouse it from its permanent sleep and don't uncover it from the reed sheet under which it is buried, how will it be elevated and how will it approach the Holy One of Israel? In addition, you should know that awakening a holy spirit is not like awakening a sleeping body. The latter is awoken all at once, whereas the spirit requires continuous work in order to awaken it. As a person can do the commandments with his hands and all of his other limbs and even pray with his mouth, yet his spirit can still be asleep - even unconscious. One must force the spirit to work and be active, and that is how it will awaken and be revealed. Hence during the whole day, even when you are not studying Torah, you should remember that you are a servant of God, and that you must connect with Him. Strengthen your faith in God and think several times a day, "I truthfully and wholeheartedly believe in God, may He be blessed. You are my Father and King. It is clear to me that You are the Master of the world who created all of the worlds and all that is in them - the angels in the heavens and even the tiny creatures under the ground - and that You surround me and fill my body and essence. I am Your servant and I am totally dedicated to You." 'Go over this thought over and over, for everything is in it.'
Accustom your heart and spirit to pour itself out in speech and prayer in front of God. A youth - and even an adult if he only has the understanding of a child - thinks that the whole essence of prayer is the concerns and troubles about which one prays. This is like a poor person who requests help from a wealthy man, or any person who requests that a king of flesh and blood save him from something which is in his power. But only a foolish man with no understanding can profane prayer so greatly and think that it is only for the sake of our concerns - such that without his needs [that he wants answered], he would, God forbid, not pray. For actually, prayer itself - bringing the heart close and pouring out the spirit to God in prayer - is the essence of prayer. Moreover, please see in the Midrash that prayer [should not be] caused by concerns and troubles, but rather it is sometimes that God sends concerns so that we will pray to Him, may He be blessed: It is stated in Shemot Rabbah 21:5 - Rabbi Joshua ben Levi says, "To what is this matter similar? To a king that was on a journey when he heard a daughter of royalty yelling out to him, 'I plead with you, save me from the robbers!' The king heard and saved her. After some time, he sought to marry this woman. He wanted her to talk with him but she didn’t want to. What did the king do? He sent the robbers to trouble her, so that she would yell out and he would hear her." Up to here are its holy words.
You certainly understand the analogy on your own. Your spirit is a daughter of royalty which the Holy One, blessed be He, wants to marry - meaning to bring close and have unify with His holiness. So it needs to speak and pray to Him. For it is from the inner prayer that comes from within the heart that the spirit awakens from its slumber, calls out and unifies itself with the King - the King of the world. And that is the essence and purpose of prayer - so much so that God sends concerns to some Jews, so that they will pray and cry out to God from the bottom of their hearst and spirits. This is like that king that sent the robbers against the daughter of royalty to trouble her so that she would yell out to him. So, you too, when you are ready to awaken your spirit, such that it not sleep and stay unconscious; first awaken yourself with matters related to prayer that hurt you and that you want - such as in (the blessings), "You grant understanding to man; bring us back, our King to your Torah" - that you  yearn that God should open your heart and spirit to Torah and divine service. And likewise in, "Bless this year for us" - for it is not only for the blessing of produce; rather, this prayer is [also] for sustenance in general. And does your heart not warm up and your spirit not pour itself out to pray to God to sustain your parents? And then your spirit will awaken, be revealed and become unified with its King and Maker. But this should not only be when you pray regarding your needs. Rather once you have accustomed your spirit to get up and awaken, it will be even more enthusiastic - with genuine enthusiasm - about matters relating to God. When you say to God, "You are holy and Your name is holy," your spirit will be excited and have the sensation that it is standing in front of the Source of Holiness, and that it is speaking to Him in second person and praising His holiness in front of Him, and that it is saying, "You are holy and Your name is holy, etc." And it will enthuse and melt in the pleasantness of the holiness of the Holy One of Israel. And likewise in the other subjects of the prayers. But not only during the obligatory [services of] the morning, afternoon and evening; all day, you should make efforts to find yourself some free time in which you can speak with God in prayer and lauding. And the more you accustom yourself to the speech of the spirit - the more your heart will soften, your essence will climb and your spirit will come closer to God. But you can only awaken your spirit to speak to God if you strengthen your aforementioned thought that the earth is full of God's glory; and that even if you don't see Him, you are standing within Him and His holiness. Nor have you fulfilled your obligation in this with [just] one thought. Rather the more you can constantly go over thoughts of strong faith, the easier it will be for you to awaken your spirit to speak with God, who is standing in front of you. 
But if it is still difficult for you to picture yourself standing in front of God, such that your spirit be excited and enthused in prayer while you are standing in front of Him whose glory fills the world - because you are in a physical world and your eyes only see the physical and your hands only touch the material - look up at the heavens and contemplate; concentrate your thoughts and think: I am standing on one side of the heavens. But on the other side, another whole world exists. There one can find the angels, the seraphim and all the souls of the forefathers, the prophets and the tzaddikim. And among them is the throne of glory and the great, holy and awesome God who dwells upon it. God, who is hiding in this world, has the majesty of His glory powerfully revealed there. Redouble your efforts, look and think: I am standing on this side and am saying to Him, "Blessed are You, God; I am blessing You, God, to whom I lift up my eyes - whether I can see You or can't see You, I exert my eyes and look at You and bless and speak to You, God."
And if you want to know to what extent your seeing like this affects the Supernal, get ready and listen to the word of God! It is stated in the Sefer Heichalot - and a small part of it is brought down in Tur, Orach Chaim 128 - that God said, "Blessed are you, heavens and those that descend into the chariot, if you can say and tell My children that which I do when they are sanctifying [Me] and saying, 'Holy, Holy, Holy' and [if you can] teach them to lift their eyes upwards towards their house of prayer (meaning the heavens, which is 'the Gate of the Heavens') and raise themselves upward. For I have no greater enjoyment than the time when their eyes are lifted up to My eyes, and My eyes are in their eyes. At that time, I grab My throne of glory by the image of Jacob and hug them and kiss them (meaning every Jew) and remember their exile and hasten their redemption." Up to here are its holy words. What can we say and what can we speak? Please conjure this - our eyes are looking upwards into His eyes, as it were; and He, may He be blessed, is looking at us, and His glory delights in this vision. As it were, the Father and the son are looking at each other, one across from the other. And out of His love and great fondness, the Father is not able to hold back, such that He grabs a hold of, hugs and kisses, the son. The heart melts and the spirit explodes, enthuses and calls out, "To my Father, to my Holy One shall I arise, shall I fly!" 
Focus on these things when you look up to the heavens; exert your eyes and your heart to look and concentrate. And in general when you speak to God in second person - for example, "You are our God," or "Blessed are You, etc." - be exacting about the "You," even if you are not looking at the heavens at that time. Picture in your mind that you are saying, "You," to God who is in front of you. But do not think that you are only able to awaken your spirit in the ways that we have written to you. The matter is not like this. Every Jew - so long as he knows that his body and heart are not unbridled, to do and think what comes to them; and he works upon himself - will occasionally find ways and methods to awaken his spirit and enthuse; and to have it release itself from the hiding places of its body in order to come closer to God. And sometimes thoughts and arousals will come to you on their own, such that you do not conjure or prepare for them. For example, during the High Holiday prayers when [the congregation] is singing the praise of God, "You are our God, etc.," you begin to sing with them. But then fear comes into your heart: Are not the higher and lower beings now singing praise to the great God that towers above them? What connection do lowly I have with them; and so how can I have the temerity to join with the singers of God and the ones that bring Him joy? And then a spirit of life and strength suddenly comes to you: Is this not the way of joy? The instruments and musicians go through the streets and play together with the families of a wedding party and the important [guests], and they are [all] gladdened and rejoice. But the degraded children of the city - barefoot, with blackened faces and with dirty second hand clothing - also hasten and race to rejoice, sing and clap their hands with the others. And this is also part of the joy of a wedding and its honor. And then your spirit sees the great chorus of God's singers - His angels above together with Israel below - now singing and humming a song to the King of glory that stands above them, hearing and listening, rejoicing and glorified. And you are like the barefoot dirty child; so you run with all of your strength and join them. And together with the holy chorus, you sing praise to your God for whom you have yearned. Your joy is full and your essence is overflowing with tremendous enthusiasm - so much so that your heart is sometimes melting, and you cry about this more than you cry at Kol Nidrei.
But this is only if you work on many occasions to awaken your spirit; and it doesn't sleep within a heart of stone for the seventy years of your life. Then it will also awaken on its own. And you should know that some of our tzaddikim and holy ones, may their merit protect us - seraphs of fire who came closer to God than we can imagine - sometimes used [various] methods and mechanisms to awaken their holy and pure spirits at first. For example, it states in Beit Aharon that before prayer, the tzaddikim would imagine themselves laying in the grave with afflictions, until someone would call to them and say, "Arise and stand up to pray" - see there. (<i>Editor's note from the printed edition: And it appears that they aroused themselves with this only at the beginning, and that they no longer needed it afterwards. For it is stated there that Rabbi Asher (the First of Stolin), may the memory of the tzaddik be for a blessing, prayed with this [tool] for a year. It is implied there that it was [only a year, and] not more.</i>) And it is easy for an understanding person to know how a person can be aroused in his prayer if he pictures this strongly in his thoughts. And you too, advanced student - if at the beginning, you use various methods and work through them, you will be able to, God willing, reach a greatness beyond what you can fathom. 
And from now on, this is the foundation of your free choice - that you arouse yourself and bring yourself a little closer to holiness. And at such a time of elevation - with a high and pure spirit - look at the lowliness in which you regularly exist; at the laziness and at the other bad character traits; at your lowly thoughts and wants that you think about and desire. And, on your own, you will be embarrassed by them. Get angry and furious with yourself, and say, "Oy, why am I laying in a slime pit the whole day? It is really a toilet of immaturity and stupidities! From now on, I am taking upon myself to be a Jew that is a servant of God. I want to be a Jew! Master of the world, I am taking upon myself to be Your true servant." You should repeat thoughts - and also words - like these many times; and with God's help, they will be very effective for you. For this is a law of the spirit: It submits to words that come powerfully from the heart. One can even seduce others with words of the heart and the spirit, all the more so oneself - so long as they are coming out at a time when one is elevated and higher than himself.
Yet you are not able to suffice with a general mental resolution to accept upon yourself to be a good Jew. Rather you must put forth efforts at this time of elevation to improve specific bad traits and shortcomings that you know you have. Of course, it is true that when a Jew is praying with enthusiasm, it is better not to get into many calculations. He should not deal, and dirty his hands, with his shortcomings. He should rather pray and study and enthuse and get close [to God], according to that which is stated in the holy books about this. But [he should work on his shortcomings] immediately after his prayer - and even during the prayer leader's repetition of the Shmoneh Esreh. And likewise, if he is occasionally aroused at other times besides during prayers, he should make efforts to improve [his traits] individually [than as well]. For it is impossible to search for chametz without the light of the candle. When you are aroused and the spark of holiness is now burning inside you, examine yourself so as to improve yourself - while it has not yet been extinguished. For example, if you are prone to anger, God forbid, reflect: Is it good for me to get angry and to be flung away from in front of God? The Gemara says (Nedarim 22b), "Even the Divine Presence is not considered important before someone who is angry"; (Shabbat 105b) "Anyone who gets angry is as if he is worshipping idolatry." (<i>Editor's note from the printed edition: This is brought down by Rambam in his Commentary on the Mishnah, Avot 2:10</i>) So shall I get angry and do this abomination, God forbid? Shall I rebel against the God of Israel, the God of my spirit and soul that I feel now inside of me, God forbid? I am accepting upon myself not to get angry anymore, and I am accepting this wholeheartedly. Master of the world, please help me stand my ground and not get angry. And fix this thought and resolution so powerfully in your heart and soul that when something angering happens to you and you begin to get angry, you will remember your disparagement of anger and the resolution you took upon yourself not to get angry; and it will be easier for you to control yourself and relax. And from then on, when you are aroused to anger, your main work will be to be obstinate in remembering and picturing for yourself - in the strongest possible way and with the clearest possible thought - the time of your elevation and the resolution that you took upon yourself then. And likewise should you do with the other shortcomings that you sense that you have.
But do not imagine that you will be able to fix all of your shortcomings and become elevated even without work. Do not make this disgraceful mistake! For without work, one can only rot in the grave and nothing more. But to improve oneself and become a Jewish servant of God requires work. And not infrequent and sporadic work - sometimes working and sometimes leaving it - but rather only consistent work. 'And all the days of your life - the days [is to include] the days; whereas all of the days is to include the nights.' It is forbidden to remove your mind from yourself and from your work [upon this]. And then we can be certain, with God's help, that your work will be much easier, and that you will not be like those people, God forbid, that - while they have good intentions to be truly good Jews - nevertheless remain on the same level all the days of their lives. And on their last day, they look at themselves and yell out, "How am I any better now than I was when I was a youth? Upon what I have spent all the days of my life?" For with strategies like these [that we have been discussing] and others like them, God willing, you will elevate yourself and go from strength to strength.
And you may also use practical tactics for the sake of your improvement. For example, regarding the matter of anger, take upon yourself that when you a feel a tiny bit of anger inside you, you will say a Torah thought with your mouth. For example, say, "It was taught in the school of Elijah, 'Anyone who studies laws, etc.'" And if it is possible for you to say something that you have to invest a little of your thought into, it is even better. First of all, the Torah thought in which you invest your thought, protects - and it will save you from the impulse of anger. But it is also [due to] the simple nature of the body: Anger is a type of temporary insanity about the thing that is angering one. Hence it is difficult for the person to have his healthy intellect overcome his anger and not get angry at that time, as he is lacking his healthy intellect. The insanity pushed it away. But it is not that he is insane about everything, God forbid - only about that one thing. Hence it is only thinking against the anger that is impossible for him to consider then; and to think not to be angry. For he is insane about that thing. But another thought that is not against his anger is easier for him to consider. So he can say Torah thoughts that are not against his anger. And when he removes his thought [from the anger] for an instant - to have his intellect delve into the Torah thought - the insanity leaves him. Then it becomes easy for his healthy intellect to even overcome his anger and control it, so that he not be angry.
More generally, it is unfortunate that in our times, they have called anger, "a problem of the nerves," (as in getting on one's nerves or being unnerved). And because of this, a person can exempt himself by denying the evil of this trait and saying, "This is not a bad character trait, but rather a physical problem, such that it is dependent on the body." It is true that stimulation of the nerves can cause anger. But please consider why when a gentile gets angry at someone, he is ready even to kill him, whereas an unrefined Jew will [only] hit him; and a more refined Jew will neither kill nor hit, but rather get furious and curse him. So even though the problem of nerves is the same in all of them, they nevertheless do not all do the same bad deeds when they are angry. The matter is simple - a person can control his spirit even when he is asleep. So when he rolls to and fro in his sleep, he does not roll off the bed onto the ground when he reaches the edge of his bed. Rather he feels that he must return towards the center of his bed and does not fall off. He is asleep and has no [conscious awareness] at that moment; yet the awareness that is fixed in his spirit at the time he is awake restricts him also now when it is absent. And it is like this in all matters. Fixed awareness and thoughts that are always with a person have it in their power to control the person even when his awareness is missing. With a Jew of lesser character, it prevents him from killing even if he gets angry and it gets on his nerves. And one more refined who has more awareness will [therefore] not even hit. So the more we think and accept upon ourselves not to get angry, as mentioned above - even though our neves will be weak and our intellect will be lacking from us at that moment - our fixed awareness will nevertheless limit us, that we should not even get furious and curse, even when our anger is stimulated.
And if you have hatred that has settled inside you against one of your fellows and you want to remove the hatred but are not able: As is well-known, because of the hate you already have towards him, you will see that he has shortcomings and sins. Only if you can remove the hate in your heart can you see if the shortcomings are really anything more than that. However as just mentioned, you want to remove the hatred from your heart but are not able. So then do this - write him a letter. Don't send it to him; just store in your wares. In it, you can deprecate him as much as the snake of hatred in your heart desires. For a few days, read the letter out loud and imagine that he is standing across from you and that you are cursing him with these curses and maledictions. Then after a few days, the anger you have towards him will certainly depart from your heart; and if you are more spiritually refined, you will even want to run to appease him. And do not wonder about this suggestion, and do not say that it is one of two things - either it is untrue or it is sorcery. For is this possible that when I write a letter and curse him and then read it again, I  will be satisfied and I will even appease him? It is neither untrue, nor an act of sorcery. Rather it is a law of the psyche, that when one curses and maledicts one's enemies, his anger leaves him somewhat. (<i>Editor's note from the printed edition: As it is stated in Siftei Tzaddikim in the name of R. Moshe Alshich, may his memory be blessed, on the verse, "And the Lord regretted, etc." [Exodus 32:14]</i>) But since his fellow answers him back when he curses him, his hatred for him only grows. But you, who have written the harsh letter according to the great measure of your hate and read it out loud and disparaged him, will experience your anger towards him diminishing once you have cursed him. And when you come to read it again on the second day - when your anger has already lessened - and you are still deprecating him with the depracations of the letter that was written with the level of anger from [the previous day] when your anger was greater, your heart will already begin to rebuke itself a little on its own and say, "Did I really curse him with so many disparagements, maledictions and curses?" It will already be impossible for you to read all of the curses with yesterday's great anger. But have you not taken upon yourself to read it? Moreover not all of your anger has yet subsided. Hence you force yourself to keep reading. But on the third day, your anger is even more subdued than on the second day and it is already impossible for you to read it. You are already regretting that you revealed your feelings with so much deprecation and cursing. You will look for strategies to make up with him; and you will make up with him. One with a good heart will be quickly appeased, whereas the stiff-necked will need to read it more times. But, with God's help, all will be appeased by this. However only use this tactic of the letter on rare occasions. And be very careful not to lose it and not to show it to even your closest friends, so that your fellow not find out that you wrote it about him and his anger wax against you.
As stated, you may seek out practical suggestions for anything. Accordingly, for example, if you are trying to improve your trait of laziness regarding sleep - because you love to sleep a great deal, or because you worked hard today, got tired and are afraid that you will sleep later than usual tomorrow - try this: Do not lay down lengthwise on your bed, but rather across it and put your legs on a chair. And as soon as you wake up in the morning, kick away the chair and you will already have your feet on the ground. Only do this if it does not damage your health and does not make you tired the whole day because you didn't sleep properly at night. And even then, do not do this more than twice a week.

Chapter 10

<b>Changing Bad Character Traits into Radiant Lights</b>
A person will often see contradictions only because he does not look deeply into a matter, but rather only glances at it superficially. But if he delves more deeply into the essence of the matter, he will see that there is no contradiction - that there was no difficulty nor [need for a] resolution. The matter is totally consistent, however it is just that it branches out in different ways. So too now - you are certainly finding difficulties with our words and saying, "Do I not see contradictions in this? At first, he promised me that I could become elevated and grow into being a great man among the Jewish people - even if I don't feel greatness or extra talent - because a supernal treasure is buried within me; that the higher holiness that is sealed and hidden even from me can be revealed with the service of my body; and that my spirit will rise with toil. But then he concedes that there are bad traits in me, and instructs me to fix them! Let us leave that I don't feel the holiness within me. But why should I be [considered] bad and [assume that I] experience spiritual illnesses? And if there is a storehouse of holiness inside me, from where did these bad traits get fixed in my spirit - as if they were essential to my spirit and its nature." 
As mentioned, it is only a contradiction if we just look at our matter superficially. But it is impossible for us to stay with a superficial understanding - with it alone, we would not reach our goal. For that which we have spoken up until now about improving the traits - only how to withstand them, how to conquer them and how a person not let them destroy him or others - will not suffice in order for us to to come to our goal. [We will not arrive at it] unless we transform these bad traits themselves into radiant lights and bonfires of supernal fire with which to serve our Maker; and make all of our essences into a holy people, a treasure, and a nation of priests - according to that which God stipulated with us and wanted from the beginning.
For if the human intellect can only superficially see that our traits our bad, God sent us the holy man of God, the Baal Shem Tov, may the memory of the tzaddik be for a blessing; and his holy students after him, the lights of Israel - and they taught us that the traits of a Jew are holy. They come from above and flow downwards. However in this world and in the this-worldly body, their appearance changes and they appear to be bad - if we don't know how to deal with them. There is [a relevant] parable about clear water in a dirty flask. Because of the flask, the water also looks dirty from the outside.
If you don't know, have you not heard that there are holy traits and emanations (<i>sefirot</i>) above, in which the light of God and His holiness are encased, and through which He is revealed and acts in the worlds that He created? And if you do not know what the emanations are - since is not for your age to study the books of Kabbalah - do you not say in your prayers, "To you, God, is greatness, power, splendor and majesty, etc." (in the morning service, from I Chronicles 29:11)? And which one of you does not say after the counting of the Omer, "That which I have damaged in the emanation of kindness in kindness; kindness in power; kindness in splendor, etc.?" It is from these holy emanations that the Holy One of Israel brings light within us, the people that is close to Him. And just like with the traits above, so too with the traits with which He has given us light - His will is to be encased in them and to reveal His holiness through them. [For example,] the trait of kindness inside us, which flows down from the emanation of kindness and supernal love - God's love for Israel, the love of the angels in doing the work of their Creator, as it is written (in the morning prayers), "and lovingly give permission, etc." - only holiness can be found there. So we should only use it for holiness - to love God, His Torah and the Jewish people. And with the trait of power, we should fear Him with true fear. And this is not just latent love and fear that a Jew naturally has in his essence for God - a love and fear that he does not feel, such that his heart does not quake nor tremble from them. Rather a person must at least make times to arouse his love for God with yearning and longing for Him, may He be blessed. He should pray, "Please, God, bring me close to You. Why do You hide Your face from me; and why have You distanced me from Your holiness?" His yearning and longings should be like the yearning and longings of a child for his father; a child who is totally excited and quaking for his father, to the point that his heart pains him. Likewise regarding fear, a Jew should not suffice with just a natural fear, which is not revealed inside him and does not cause him to feel a trembling in his soul. Rather, he needs at some point to arouse a tangible fear, as if he were standing in front of the Powerful King. He should be completely afraid and trembling from the dignity of His glory and from the greatness of His power which is in front of him.
And please see the words of the Rambam, may his memory be blessed, that are brought in Orach Chayim 1:1 - and these are his words: When one takes to heart that the great King, the Holy One, Blessed be He, whose glory fills the earth, is standing over him and watching his actions - as it is stated, "'Will a man hide in concealment and I will not see him,' declares the Lord" (Jeremiah 23:24) - he immediately acquires fear and submission from dread of God, may He be blessed, and is constantly ashamed from Him. Up to here are his holy words. And this is the essence! It should not be a latent fear inside him like that which exists in the face of a king that is far from him; about whom it is only in his mind that the king does exist far from him and we need to fear him, since he has the power to do good or bad to him. Rather it should be the fear, submission and dread in front of God, who stands over him and is watching his actions. [From such a fear], he will tremble and his limbs will knock against each other; he will be humbled and negate himself from the majesty of His glory that is before him. Such a fear will not be light and weak; it will not be pushed away or negated by any physical want or desire. Moreover, even at a time when his fear is not highly present inside of him - if he can just remember the dread and trembling that he had an hour or two ago, he will also run away and distance himself from any trace of sin, or even from a permissible desire that is against God's will. And if he looks inside and sees that he has done some sinful act, speech or even thought - or that he has walked around aimlessly, which is the foundation of all sin - he shall become mad and angry at himself: He shall say, "Oy gevalt, what have I done against God? I am worse than the lowliest Jewish sinner, God forbid. Master of the world, forgive me! I will take it upon myself to be a [proper] Jew with all of my heart from now on!"
These traits that are within us are actually the lofty emanations [of God] that have come down to us. And so we should grieve very greatly for the holy chambers that have been destroyed; and for the radiant lights inside us that have been damaged. [For] with the same love that God has brought down from His holy abode - with which we love Him and serve Him and through which we are like ministering angels - we feel love for stupidities. And with this trait of power - with which we fear and dread Him with the fear of the angels - we feel improper fear, anger and baseless hatred.
Dear son, we have already told you several times that your main educator is yourself. So if you don't take the reins of control into your own hands to control yourself, to be the captain of the ship and to steer it - who knows if it will not break and have you drown in the raging seas and in the physical world with the worst human aspirations. And then all of your teachers and all of your rabbis will not be able to assist you, God forbid. Hence we need to make efforts to have you understand this thing better, even according to your mind and your years - how those traits that you feel to be bad are actually radiant lights in their essence, and are the highest emanations that have constricted themselves and flowed down into you. [Giving you this understanding] is in order that it be easier for you to improve them and bring them back to their original holiness. For this is the beginning of all healing - to recognize the source of the illness, its starting point and its hiding places.
For this is the difference between arousal of the traits and arousal of other human powers like intelligence or strength: A person can arouse his strength on his own, even if there is nothing causing him to arouse it. He can put vitality in his bones, exert his fists and say, "If an enemy comes in front of me now, I will smash him to pieces." And he will feel an intensification of his strength - even though his enemy is not in front of him, nor is that even a thought, such that it be the cause for the arousal of his strength. Moreover, strong men actually must wrestle from time to time. This is not because they hate each other, nor is it to show their strength. Rather it is because of the power of the strength that is stored up inside of them, which pushes them to express it. That is to say, that it is not because of the other strong man that is wrestling with him that his strength is aroused, but just the opposite - his strength arouses him to express it and it pushes him to wrestle, as is well-known. And likewise with the arousal of intelligence, a person will sometimes be stimulated to look into a certain cerebral matter, not because the thing is in front of him and stimulates him to do so. Rather it is the opposite - the intelligence that is stored in his brain is aroused, and it makes him seek something to analyze. And this is the reason why intelligent people do not waste time. The intelligence within them pushes them to analyze and to deepen their understanding, to study and to [have itself] be expressed.
This is not the case with arousal of the traits. They do not become aroused on the their own, without something else arousing them. A person's anger or fright is only aroused by something else. And if it were not for that thing, he would not be angry or afraid. As is well-known, it is a sign of mental illness for someone to get angry or afraid by himself. Likewise with love, it is only if there is something that arouses a person to love. It does not happen by itself. A person can be in a situation in which it is easier to arouse him to love than to get angry; or to get angry than to love. Likewise, one person may be easier to stimulate to love, while another will be easier to stimulate to get angry. But both of them are only stimulated by (external) things which arouse them. And it is unimaginable that anger be aroused on its own - as with the power of strength or the power of intelligence - and he seek someone at whom to get angry; or love on its own, that he seek someone to love. (<i>Editor's note from the printed edition: That which it is stated in the holy books, that the reason for the creation is because it is the nature of the good to do good; such that God, may He be blessed, was aroused by Himself and created creatures so that He could do good to them - that is only with Him, may He be blessed, because all of His arousal is from Him. As He is not composite and there is no change in Him, God forbid, but rather only simple unity. And understand this.</i>) And this is also the reason why the traits are encased in the pollution that is in a person. For when he feels one of his traits, he does not feel a holy trait - love or fear of holiness - nor even neutral love or fear that he can choose to use for holiness or its opposite. Rather, at the beginning, he will feel lowly traits inside him - love for stupidities and negative fear, anger and hatred. And his sensation of them is not like his sensation of intelligence or strength, concerning which he feels neutral intelligence or strength inside which he can use as he chooses. As intelligence and strength are aroused by themselves, which is why we feel them in a neutral fashion. But since traits only arise and become pronounced in him because of something external -and a child's traits are only aroused by physical things of this world, given that he is immersed in this world - hence he only sees them in this form, as physically oriented traits. So the quicker we can educate and accustom the child to arouse and reveal his traits for holy things, the more their form will change for the better and he will feel them for the good - love of God, of Torah and of the Jewish people; fear of Him, may He be blessed; and anger towards those who violate His will, and all the more so towards himself if he sees some lowliness within himself - from the beginning. And it is not only when he is small that the habituation and use of traits for holiness is useful. Rather during a person's entire life, the more he uses his traits for that which is not good, the more he degrades the higher traits that are found inside of him and encases them in disgusting things. Then worse traits will be felt by him. And so what will he use to be sanctified unto God? And where will be the garments with which the light of God can be encased, so that it can dwell within him? Whereas the person who greatly improves and sanctifies his traits will not only remain with traits that do not do damage - like a violent ox that is tied and bound, who itself is evil but is now unable to inflict damage. Nor will he only have refined physical traits. Rather, this will also make it easier for him to reveal the sublimity in his traits. The supernal emanations that are drawn down in him will be revealed. They come from the Most High; and he will serve the Most High and the Holy through them. And just like He, may He be blessed, is encased in the traits (emanations) above, so too will He be encased in the traits that are in him. He will dwell in him through them; give light to his spirit; and, as it it were, embrace his soul and even speak to it. 

Chapter 11

<b>Constancy in the Divine Service, Constancy in the Quest and an Elevated Outlook</b>
Behold you have already been shown that you are not just a simple person in this world, nor just a private individual only relevant to yourself. Through your divine service, you are united with the supernal worlds. And the emanations and spiritual lights are even found within you. Hence everything is dependent upon you: When you damage your traits and yourself, you cause damage to all the supernal chambers; and when you improve [your traits], you improve all [these chambers]. And through them, you also get closer in front of the One who is Pure and whose servants are pure - so much so that even the ministering angels will be jealous of you! And you will then have the light of the One who is Above and Holy drawn down into them and dwell within them.  
Advanced student, since you have gotten this far in our words, you must certainly feel some change for the better in yourself. Then you already know that we are not coming to sermonize. Rather we want to show you, that you should know that the essence of the Torah and its purpose is you - that you should become a true Jew. There are many levels of holiness. One of them - the central one of them - is the Jew. You should be the Jew that you can make of yourself! And since you have not only delved into our words with your brain, but have actually begun to work through them - even though you still have not finished your work and your self-improvement, as it is impossible to finish them in one or two, etc. shots - your heart has softened, and you have already begun to work with all of your essence to improve and reveal a little of His supernal holiness that is inside you, etc. And your Father in the Heavens is joyful about this; the little light that shines from you is also shining its light over the heavens and the earth. The Jewish people is compared to the stars. A star is in the sky and it shines upon the earth. And you, man of Israel, are upon the earth - yet your light shines over the earth and the skies. But the main thing is that you do not 'hop between two lines': That in one moment you get excited and bring yourself close to the One who resides in the Heavens, but in the next moment, you fall beneath the earth to the pit below it - to stupidities, to the wasting of time, to clowning around and to licentiousness. Of course, it is true that it is impossible for someone to always remain on a high level; it is impossible for him to be on the same level that he is on when he prays, the whole day . However it is also impossible for him to be on the same level that he is on during Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur, the whole year; but nevertheless, if he does not gird himself with his will and his holiness that he had on Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur - to not be negligent about everything that he took upon himself then and not veer from the path upon which he trod when the cloud of God appeared to him on Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur, and not to be cooled down even at the time that he does not feel it - he will not only bring down his whole year; he will also ram the Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur and the little light that shone upon him then into the pit of destruction, God forbid. And likewise here - even though it is impossible to always be on the level that you were on at the time of elevation when your soul became close [to God] and you poured yourself into the lap of your Father in the Heavens, you must nevertheless tie and bind yourself to the holy things and good acts, etc. that you took upon yourself at a better time - a time of elevation - and do them.
Constancy in divine service is of the essence. However it is impossible for someone to connect to constant service if he does not constantly quest for it. Please note that King David supplicated God (Psalms 86:11), "Show me Your way, O Lord; I will walk in Your truth; let my heart be undivided in reverence for Your name." He had already killed his evil impulse, as the Gemara (Talmud Yerushalmi, Berakhot 9:5) says; and had risen to the highest level of holiness - so much so that he merited to be one of the legs of [God's] throne of glory. Yet in spite of all this, He supplicated God, like someone on the outside and someone who has not started his divine service, "Show me Your way, O Lord; I will walk in Your truth." And he did not only quest for this occasionally and at special times, but rather constantly - as it is written (Psalms 86:3), "for I call out to You the whole day." Picture this: A prince is lost in a mountainous and desolate wilderness among predatory animals and murderous ambushers. But he knows that there is a path there that leads back to his father, the king. However the path is hidden from him and he does not recognize it. How great and constant would be his quest and his search for the path? And how great would be his cries to his father, "Show me your way, O father!" Only if you can see yourself as a lost son of the King that is distanced from the King, your Father in the Heavens - lost in the desolation of this world, physicality and stupidities that injure the body and kill the spirit - only then will you constantly quest for God's path and constantly cry out, "Show me Your way, O Lord!" And to the extent that you are constant about questing, you will be constant in your divine service. But if you are not constant in supplicating from the bottom of your heart, it will also be impossible for you to serve Him with constancy.
And there is something else in addition. You already know that you need to draw down the supernal light and reveal the supernal traits that are in you. The power of a Jew's will arouses the Higher Will to be lit up within him. [So] your will and your constant quest is not an empty matter! Through it, you draw down the light and holiness of the higher traits. And this will have to suffice for you [about this matter].
Dear son, we have already said that we are not just coming to command you to walk in God's path here; for you already know that, and your spirit long for it. Rather we have also come to help you and accustom you to walking upon it. And behold we have already told you that you must be constant in your divine service - whether at the time you are ascending, at the time you are rest or even at the time that you fall - and that this depends upon the constancy of your quest for the true path from physicality to God. But we have not yet fulfilled our obligation as a helper and as a support with just these words. For how does one arouse this; and how does one become regular about constantly questing and being concerned? This is the way of a person: Even though he knows that he is a Jew and he needs to shake himself off from the slime and mud that uglify him; to wash and cleanse himself, and to return to his King and his Holy One, the Holy One of Israel - nevertheless, he only knows it in his heart; but he is not pained about it. It is possible that he experiences some concern about this in his heart for a few minutes. But it is a light matter to him, so that his heart aches about it only occasionally. He only feels a constant quest about [matters of] this world, how to attain them, how he will strive for them and be haughty with them, etc. - but nothing else. So how will our words help - that you should be questing for it and be concerned about it - if we don't help you and accustom you about how to be concerned and to quest. We have already told you once, twice and three times that without your working and exerting yourself mightily with all of your strength in your service, all of our words will not even budge one of your feet from the mud in which you are mired up to your neck. But even when you exert yourself in your service, we must still teach you how to arrive at this constant questing. 
'Take heed and listen!' Pain in the heart and the constancy of your quest are dependent upon your outlook. The heart of a wealthy man who becomes poor will be very pained, so long as his outlook about himself is that he is a wealthy man. Then he thinks to himself, "Am I not a wealthy man; so why do other wealthy people have more"; and also why was he and all of his household previously so comfortable and pampered, etc. And he will never stop his quest to find ideas to regain his wealth, with God's help. But if he changes his previous wealthy outlook and, from now on, sees himself as a poor person like any other poor person, he will then no longer concern himself with, nor even quest, for ideas to regain his wealth. It is true that even then, he will hope that he wins the lottery or finds a lost object [of great value] and becomes wealthy. But it will only be in his thoughts that he will hope and yearn for fantasies of wealth. But in his heart, he will only quest for dry bread and a nice warm basement apartment. And likewise, your entire essence is dependent upon your outlook on what is a Jew, and [hence] to what you must aspire. [Of course,] you already know this and we have already spoken about it. But even the poor person (who had been rich) who changes his outlook to the outlook of a poor person remembers his wealth and hopes to get wealthy. However since it is only in his thoughts that he knows this and it is no longer fixed in his heart; and he has a different outlook about himself internally - he is not concerned and does not quest; nor does he exert himself to regain his wealth again, such that he will even be lazy in his work and in his business. Likewise is your knowledge only in your mind; and that is not enough. God said (Hosea 11:3), "I have pampered Ephraim, taking them in My arms" - the Father yearns to take every Jew to Him, through his prophets. But the lost spirit and the son forlorn in the physicality of the world must be accustomed [to this yearning], in order to come back and go to his Father and, as it were, jump into His arms. "I have pampered Ephraim, taking them in My arms" - God accustoms us, but we must also accustom ourselves to this. And now, I would say that your faith in God cannot be buried or hidden inside of you. It has to rather be clear and strong - remember, do not forget! Be careful and constant about that which we wrote for you earlier in Chapter 9, to think several times a day that God, may He be blessed, fills the world with His glory; and that you are constantly found in front of Him, may He be blessed, etc. And you should especially do this a great deal in your free time. For why should you waste and injure your mind with stupidities? Use it to think about faith in God! And to the extent that you think more about this, you will become accustomed to faith. So much so the that it will not be a latent belief about what one knows, but rather a piece of certain knowledge, clearly and strongly envisioned - knowledge that is clearer to you than your knowledge that the sun shines. For it is a law among Jews that when they repeat and think about something - even that which is above their comprehension - it becomes more certain and stronger than that which they see with their eyes. It is simple - for does his spirit not see the things that are above his intellect? It is just that his spirit is hidden from him. But the more he thinks about them, the more he accustoms his spirit and its vision to come out and be felt by him. Then, with its vision, he sees the truth of these things. But it is not only faith in God, and that He fills all of the worlds that you have to accustom yourself to always think. Rather you must also think from time to time about your purpose and the purpose of the whole Jewish people that we spoke about above; and the stipulation that the Holy One, blessed be He, made with us - that "you shall be a nation of priests and a holy nation, etc." -  to the point that this purpose should not be something unusual in your eyes. Then that which we are asking from you will not be like extra things which we can do without. Rather, in your own eyes, you will not see any other way to be a Jew. And to the extent that you become accustomed to these thoughts, your entire outlook on the world, on the Jewish people and on yourself will become a different one. The highest holiness and the Jewish people will no longer be two different and disparate things for you, but rather this and that will be one. And as you accustom yourself more to this and elevate this outlook [in yourself] more, you will automatically feel concern in your heart when you feel a slight tinge of physicality or stupidity in yourself. And you will constantly supplicate,   "Show me Your way, O Lord; I will walk in Your truth" - save me that I can serve You truthfully in fear and in love. And the more you quest, the more you will serve.
Accustom yourself to your holy thoughts and higher outlook, as described above. Now please contrast the lofty state of earlier times as opposed to our lowly state now. For according to what is apparent from the Prophets and the Writings, prophecy was not something unusual, a novelty or a wonder. When God wanted to inform Manoach and his wife of the [future] birth of their son, Samson, he did not inform them by way of a dream or a heavenly voice (<i>bat kol</i>). For what is the point of all these things, when He can send an angel to them? And if once was not enough, He sent it a second time - even though Manoach and his wife were not greats among the Jewish people, as the Sages, may their memory be blessed, have said. But were they not still Israelites - they were still among the holy people. And so they were able to see and speak to the angel, like one man to another - this one asks and that one answers. King Saul also prophesied among the band of prophets, even though he was not a prophet and it was before he became king. And not only him; but when he sent his messengers to chase King David and they came to Samuel the prophet and his students, the sons of the prophets, the spirit came upon them and they also prophesied. And it appears that it was not only to save David that God had the spirit of prophecy rest upon them. For He would not have changed bloodthirsty pursuers into prophets in order to save him. He would have rather done a different miracle, as He did other times when He saved him. But why is there a need for miracles and changing nature here? The Holy One, blessed be He, does not do miracles for no reason, if there is something as simple as making them into prophets [available] here. Were they not Israelites? When they distance themselves from their Source, they become more physical; but when they are alongside prophets, they too experience prophecy sprouting forth from them. And even when Saul chased after [David]; when he came to [the prophets], he prophesied the whole night. Moreover, the Sages, may their memory be blessed, said (Megillah 14a:11) that the prophets were twice as many as the [Israelite men] that came out of Egypt, meaning that there were 1,200,000 prophets in Israel. But they were not recorded in the verses, since only prophecy that was needed for [future] generations was written down; whereas prophecy that was not needed for [future] generations was not written down. And it is stated in Midrash Shir haShirim that this number was only during the generation of Elijah the prophet, and it did not include the prophets from other generations. The advantage of the prophet over other Israelites was that he was always a prophet, such that the level of his prophecy was much greater than theirs. To illustrate: Today there are tzaddikim that are always tzaddikim and serve God greatly - each one according to his level. Yet there is no getting away from the fact that there is righteousness (<i>tzedekah</i>) and divine service in every Jew, at least sometimes. And if their righteousness is not like the righteousness of the tzaddik, it is service and righteousness nevertheless. So too was it with prophecy in earlier times: The forty-eight prophets, who were recorded, rose to becoming great prophets - each one according to his level. They were permanent prophets, as it is stated in the verse (Jeremiah 1:5), "I have given you as a prophet unto the nations." But to receive prophecy once, at a time of need - as in the case of Manoach and his wife; or when they were among the prophets - every Israelite was able to merit that. For were the Israelites not close to God in earlier days? So the apertures of the Heavens were open, and the Father spoke with the children for any need.
We were in such a lofty and holy state then! And how low have we become in our state now? We have been dullened and distanced. First prophecy stopped; then also holy spirit. And how great is the disconnect and [God's] hiddenness now! So much so, that even to just arouse some spark of arousal, some trace of enthusiasm, which is only the light of a light, the spark of a spark, etc. of prophecy - requires so much effort and toil for a Jew!
We do not want to make you into a prophet or even into someone with holy spirit (in one shot). However how corrupted and defiled is the son of the King who is sent away to a disgusting basement and degraded into someone physical and profane and is yet not even concerned about himself; and who does not yearn to return to his original state - to the purity of his spirit and to being close to his Father! The refined outlook of a son of the King has changed into the outlook of someone debased, who does not look upon himself as a pure and good son of the King, but rather as someone physical and defiled - that is his pit and that is the cause of his destruction! And who knows if because of this, he will not decide to remain in his degradation forever?!?
Leave me be, and I will cry out bitterly: My essence afflicts me! Therefore I will ask, "Who will concern themselves for the people of God if not you, Jewish young men? And who will aspire and give themselves up entirely to serve, in order to bring Israel back to its lofty holiness and to the purity of its essence if not you, who are free the whole day from business and crafts and only have the Torah as your profession so long as you are still tender?" You are still able to change your flesh to holy flesh, your essence to one that consumes fire and your entire being to become the splendor of Israel and the sons of the King's chamber.
Jewish young man, what is this that you look upon yourself and upon every Jew as an intelligent animal? Why only immerse yourself in how to seek and find prey - in this and in other stupidities - the whole day? You are concerned when it is missing, and satisfied when it is attained; and you waste your whole life with them! Why is it that you don't seek out greatness, and rather justify yourself as long as you are not hurt and do not sin? Tell your spirit, "I am not asking new things from you; rather what was once, will be once again: We shall return to the purity and shine of our bodies and our spirits; we will return to our Father from yore."
Jewish young man, look at the earlier radiance of the splendor of Israel and at its essence which was pure like the essence of the skies; and be concerned about the terrible darkness now. Be concerned and yearn to serve, to return and be elevated, to come at least a little closer to our God. Find time to arouse your soul. Aspire, pour out your soul and enwrap yourself in a speech like this: Please God, forever have You been our Father and we have been Your children. And forever - as soon as a Jewish boy or girl springs out from the womb of its mother, it experiences many bitter troubles and difficult and harsh sufferings in order to separate us from You, God forbid. Yet each one of us is prepared to give his life for You, God. And even a 'small lamb' among us is already stretching out its neck for Your sake. There is no end to the pyres of fire that have burned us and there is no comparison to our constant troubles all the days of our lives, sucking up the the vigor of our lives. But for Your sake and in order to not be separated from You, we accept it all with love and joy. We are all like this, and I am also like this. I am like this now and I will always be like this. However, my Father and King, when You always led us, we could see Your powerful Divine presence eye to eye, and You spoke to us like a father who loves his children; and how goodly was it for us then! It is not like this now. Our iniquities have caused You to ascend upon high. You have shut the Heavens behind You. There is no one to see and no one to hear; none speaking and none answering; no prophet and no seer. Please, God, to whom have you abandoned the little flock, the remnant of Israel, in a desolate wilderness like this - a place of damagers of body and spirit? My Father in the Heavens, my soul is frightened of being without You for an instant; bring me close to You like before!

Chapter 12

<b>Various Topics Concerning Chassidut and the Connecting with the Torah Through it</b>
Behold you have already been shown, to know that the Jewish adult - and even the young man - is not a physical being like the beasts and animals. Rather he is a spiritual being, a child of the Heavens that God put on the earth. And even his body is not like the bodies of other physical creatures. It is pure and tender; it is a body fitting a higher soul like this. But for various reasons - from the sin of the first man to the bad choices of other people, etc. -  he too has become physical in this world. So he covers and hides his soul and all of his identity - to the point that he does not recognize himself and doesn't know about the treasure chest that is inside of him. And the essence of his service is to arouse his spirit and have it overcome his body. And then he will even transform his skin, return to his identity and will - out of his own free will - serve the God of the heavens and the earth like the supernal angels, the seraphim of God. And in the previous chapters, we have already showed you methods to become aroused, to raise up your outlook, to arouse your concern about yourself and to quest for the path that rises to the House of God - to walk in it with an elevated soul.
But you should know, advanced student, that all of our words are only means through which to get aroused. But the most important thing is that you yourself work on this in every detail. There is a [relevant] metaphor of a man who fainted. So they give him various drops and he regained his consciousness. And now if he eats bread, milk, etc. from now on, he will, with God's help, recover. But if he becomes foolish and says, "These drops had great power to bring me back to life after I fainted; all the more so will they strengthen me when I am vital; so why should I chase after and work for my sustenance" - and he stops eating and drinking anything besides the drops, he will become sick. So too are our words only drops to arouse the holy Jewish spirit and body to do their work. So if they work in the methods that we have outlined for you and in the ways that we have written for you - then you will, with the blessed God's help, be elevated and become a Jew that is close to God. You will feel your merit inside of you; and you will become excited in everything - words of Torah, prayer and commandments - with burning embers of holiness from them inside of you. But it you don't work - not on your traits, to cleanse them from their defilement and to sanctify them; and not with your whole body to do the back-breaking labor of a slave for his master - but rather just rely on these arousals or other ones like them, you will, God forbid, be like the one who fainted and wants to nourish himself with the drops. You will lose everything and even, God forbid, damage the higher holiness. However we are confident in you, that you will not delay or be lax in your work. And you will not do it all at once, but constantly - little by little - as mentioned above in Chapter 11. And this is our intention in all of these things. And with this, you will already have begun to be a chassid.
And if you should ask, "What is Chassidut and what is the advantage of a chassid who serves God, over one who is not a chassid who serves God" - know that it is impossible to explain the matter to you any more, since Chassidut is not just an intellectual matter that bears explanation. As the intellectual component of Chassidut is only one part of it, and it comes only with work. It is just like it is impossible to intellectually explain the content of prophecy - for only the prophet knows what it is. And for him, it was so simple that he did not understand why others did not see it - as the prophet said (Amos 3:8), "the Lord God has spoken, who can but prophesy?" For he did not understand how someone could not prophesy when God spoke. So too is Chassidut, which is the revelation of a certain spark of a spark of prophecy that is found in the Jew (as it is stated in the Gemara, Pesachim 66a, "Israel... are the sons of prophets."). It is impossible to only explain it intellectually - not its service and not the way it looks [at things] - how a chassid prays, enthuses and connects his spirit with the higher holiness and how he sees the pleasant beauty of the Radiance of the world in the Torah and in the commandments and how a spark of the power of the Divine Presence hovers over the whole world. And so too when the chassid himself is elevated and enthused, he sees the matter with him as simple and certain. But afterwards if he falls, he no longer understands his previous [state] or vision. However all of this is beyond you for right now, Jewish young man. It is bigger and greater than your place to know or even want things like these. But if you have internalized our words, you have already reached the tip of Chassidut and you have already tasted 'from the honeycomb with the tip of the staff.' And if you are consistent in working on this, you will, God willing, become a chassid - you will be shielded in the shadow of God, and the power of the Divine Presence will hover over you.
Behold we have told you earlier that all holiness is found in the Torah and that you can connect to the holiness of the Ein Sof through it, however you need to know how to study Torah. First of all, you have to reveal your spirit that is hidden within you - sleeping, even unconscious - and enter the Torah with it. And you have already seen a little in these chapters to know how and with what to arouse it and reveal it. But if someone should ask you, "What is the benefit of your Chassidut, if it causes you to take away from your times for Torah [study], and what will your revealed spirit gain if you are not toiling in Torah? You will not even come to Chassidut, as 'an ignoramus cannot be a chassid'": Please answer him, according to his mistake - that all of the words that we have spoken to you up until now will not snatch even one hour of the day from your Torah study. They will rather only consume away your thorns. The free quarter hours that you usually waste and the idle and empty thoughts that you have [at that time] are what will be stolen from you; and in their place will come wisdom, holiness, light and Chassidut. 'And how can the living contradict the living?' Please observe and see whether the Chassidic community in each generation is more devoid of Torah scholars than other Jewish communities. And if in previous generations, there were numerically no fewer Bnai Torah among the Chassidim than among the rest of the Jews, in this generation we see clearly that the number of Bnai Torah among the Chassidim is now growing by comparison to the others. That is to say that in this declining generation, God help us, the number of Bnai Torah has not gone down so much, and the number of those becoming estranged from God and His Torah among the younger generation has not grown so much, among the Chassidim, as in other Jewish communities - as I merited to hear from a certain God-fearing rabbi who is not a Chassid: He said that in Poland, it is Chassidut that is continuing to preserve Torah and divine service. And all the more so, you advanced students, when you will bring back the crown of Chassidut as in former days and go back to being part of the original chassidim that possess   a chamber of the Divine Presence and a living Jewish soul that burns like a supernal torchfire in their hearts. Chassidut will announce about you and those like you, "Whoever is for God, come to me." And it will not only be the number of people that will grow, such that there will be a greater number of Jewish young men who will volunteer for Torah [study] and divine service, but rather also the amount and quality of Torah in each young man and adult that will grow and be greater. Everyone will study more pages and hours and will gird their loins to delve deeper into them with analysis and depth.
It is a simple thing for us to answer the following riddle: Why is it that - on account of our many sins - those who estrange themselves from studying the Torah of our God have grown to be so many, given that it is what connects us to God? And why is it that so many, many have weakened their hands when it comes to Torah study, only out of laziness and laxness; and yet they have chosen physical work or crafts that are more taxing instead of it? And even now in the time of the Depression - when it has already been shown to everyone that it is neither a craft nor business that brings wealth; and more of them are starving and thirsty, God save us - toiling in the Torah of our God is nevertheless harder for them than, mutatis mutandis, mundane work. So they leave the work of the holy Torah and run to work with clay and the physicality of the physical. And if we might understand that wonder, why do even Bnai Torah - and all the more so, senior Bnai Torah (<i>avreikhim</i>) - that go into business, sometimes waste so many hours and even days from Torah [study] for no reason? And this, even when they know the words of Midrash Eichah (Eichah Rabbah, Petichta 2) that the Holy One, blessed be He, sometimes puts aside severe sins but never puts aside the rejection of Torah. And nevertheless, they neglect it - even though they are careful even about light sins. So we see that the reason [for all of this] is that people's nature is that - more than bodily strength - it is a person's mind and enjoyment that give him stamina. So work that a person enjoys - or that his mind thinks that he will enjoy - will give him the stamina to do it, at least ten times as much as for work he does not enjoy and is not clear whether he will benefit from it, even if the work is very easy. And it is like people say, if you get a farmer to wave his sickle when there is no grain or plants in front of him to reap, he will not be able to do it for even half an hour, but will rather get weary; yet the pleasure he gets from reaping his harvest gives him the stamina to work the entire day. Hence someone who studies Torah with a dry spirit will only study when he thinks that he has what to benefit from it - either as 'a pickaxe with which to dig' (to earn money) or more generally because he will be esteemed in the eyes of others. And since, to our sorrow, there is less esteem for Torah in our generation, there is not much to gain from it in this world. And not only has the honor of those who study become lessenned, the criminals and unbridled ones even make fun of [Torah scholars]. Hence in the younger generation, even someone who wants to study will weary from its toil, if his spirit is dry. As there is no pleasure, nor the thought that he will benefit from it, to give him stamina. And even what he learns will be superficial; he will not have the wherewithal to exert himself deeper. Instead, he will choose hard physical work; and he will be able to do it and derive stamina for it, since he thinks that he will benefit from it.
But you students are not like this. Once you become used to the ways of Chassidut, your spirits will be aroused and revealed; sparks of the Garden of Eden will sparkle in you; you will feel the Holy One in the Torah and enjoy the radiance of His Divine Presence. And that will be your reward - from it, you will derive the stamina to exert yourself and study for many hours and with great depth. Do not let it appear to you that we are making a mistake and saying that you will quickly be transformed into holy people that study Torah for its own sake without any hope of receiving reward - not to earn something from it or to be esteemed through it. For only great tzaddikim merit this. We are not making such a mistake. Rather the matter is similar to a father who loves his son. And from his great love for his son, he sees many virtues in him. So much so that he doesn't understand why others besides him do not love him for his virtues as well. But in fact it is possible that [the son] does not even have one of these virtues. It is just that [the father's] intense inner love encases itself in his brain and prompts his mind to benefit his son, such that he should see positive virtues in him. True, the Torah includes all good aspirations - even physical ones. But it is not because of them that you pore over it and are even attached to it. And, even if in your mind, it is only for them that you are attached, the foundation of these perceptions and aspirations of yours is nevertheless your love and your spirit's connection to the Torah. It is this which is encased in your brain and prompts your mind to benefit the Torah, such that you see all the good in it - even the physical good. [It is true that] the great tzaddikim, who have sanctified both their spirits and their bodies and give over their spirits and minds to Torah and to serving God, will study and serve only because of their love for the Torah and divine service. However you, young man - your body is still in the mind of your brain. You know yourself - and you think about your own good and the good of your body. Therefore even the inner love of your spirit for the Torah and for God's service is encased in thinking about yourself, to see virtues and [the fulfillment of] good aspirations for you through it. So that even in your 'not for its own sake,' there is 'for its own sake' encased in it. And it is possible that the Sages, may their memory be blessed, hinted to this [when they said] (Pesachim 7b), "A person should always engage in Torah and the commandments, even not for their own sake; as through the not for their own sake, one comes to for their own sake." The word, "comes," is referring to the 'for its own sake' (as opposed to the person engaging in it, which is the standard reading), as it if were written, <i>bet, (alef,) hay</i>: In which [type of] 'not for its own sake' should one engage? In one in which the 'for its  own sake' comes with it and is covered by it.
It is true that there is also the opposite. There is a person who imagines in his mind that he is studying for its own sake but is really fooling himself, and the foundation of his study is his inner thinking about himself. This is the distinguishing sign: Someone whose 'for its own sake' is false - such that internally his thought is for himself - when his personal interest ceases and he sees that he cannot profit so much from his study, or it appears to him that he can earn more, mutatis mutandis, from another venture, he will quickly fling off his study together with his false 'for its own sake.' But the student who is connected internally - even if externally, his mind is not 'for its own sake' - will not cease [to study] even when his physical aspirations dissolve. Whether his other personal interests fail or not, he will remain connected to the Torah and will always continue to become even more connected.
We also want to make you understand the following with regards to the reason for the laxness of young men and even adults in Torah study, so that you will comprehend to know the great advantage that comes to you from Chassidut even regarding Torah: As you should know that besides [the question of stamina], the actual difficulty or easiness of work is not only measured by the strength that a person has to invest in it, but also by its compatibility - whether the work is compatible to [the worker's] essence and makeup or not. And the Midrash (Shemot Rabbah 1:32) says about the back-breaking (<i>parech</i>) labor of the Egyptians that our teacher Moses saw their burdens: A big load for a small person and a small load for a big person; the load of a man for a woman and the load of a woman for a man. And this is simply difficult to understand. A big load for a small person and the load of a man for a woman is understood. But a small load for a big person and the load of a woman for a man? Just the opposite, it is lighter than their ability! So what did our teacher Moses see that this too was such a burden? And see Ein Yaakov, who also asks this question. But it seems to me that the difficulty of work is also measured by compatibility. If they command a wildman to carry stones onto walls, he will not get so tired - since it accords with his essence and is compatible with him. But if they command him to engrave fine settings, he will become weary from it - even assuming he would be able to do it. And if they would command a sage to carry even light stones, he will get more weary than when working a job that is difficult but clean (white collar work). If they command a man to plow and plant and to do men's work, he will not get as weary as if they force him to bake and cook and do other women's work. And the Egyptians, who intended to embitter the lives of the Jews and to weaken their strength, switched the work of women and men, etc., the load of a big person and a small person, etc. - work that did not accord with each one's essence. Hence a man of this world will prefer to pursue even difficult work of this world, its wisdom and its studies, because it is compatible with him and his essence. But the Torah - which is from the Heavens and from the Garden of Eden and even preceded the world, and is [hence] not compatible with his physicalized body and essence - is difficult for him and wearies him. But it is only with a physical man that has no heart, whose soul is unconscious and buried in his physicality, that the Torah and the service from the Heavens is not compatible. You are not like this, chassidic students! Your souls are alive and somewhat revealed [even now]. For you, it is the physical work of this world and its sciences that is not compatible with you, and which weary you. And it is only the Torah and the service from the Heavens that is compatible with your souls that are from the Heavens. You will have stamina for it; it will give you life and delight and it will gird you with strength!
The matter is like this: The Torah is from the Heavens; and when you study Torah, you rise to the Heavens - you rise to God and become united with Him. And He, may He be blessed, is drawn into your brain and your heart and even dwells in your body. For what is the rationale of the Torah that you are analyzing? God gave the Torah, and this rationale is God's knowledge! For why is this and that a commandment? Because God wanted it. Since you have aroused your spirit and revealed some of it and you are exerting it on the Torah and its analysis, your spirit and your brain are clinging to God. And when you understand a thought from the words of the Torah, God's reasoning is now, as it were, found in you - as is discussed in the holy books about this. So when you arouse your will for the Torah and the commandments, this will is not yours. Rather it is He, as it were, that now wills the Torah and the commandments in you. For this is the essence of the Torah and the commandments that God wants, and this will of His is now being revealed in you. So you are feeling the will of God for the Torah and the commandments in you. Is there a greater unification than this? He, may He be blessed - who is higher than all of the worlds, the One with no limit and no end, such that even the angels ask, "Where is the place of His glory" - is  united with you and dwelling inside of you! And after this, why should you wonder about the words of the Mishnah (Avot 4:17), "More precious is one hour in repentance and good deeds in this world, than all the life of the world to come?" And is there greater elevation and more of a Garden of Eden than this?!? And this is the enjoyment and the Garden of Eden that you feel at the time that you study Torah and after you study Torah. You will not know it with your physical mind, but your spirit inside will delight and rejoice from this contact with your Father in the Heavens. And you will delight more when you understand a difficult matter than after the study of an easy matter. For since the matter was more difficult and you needed to gather all the abilities of your spirit - and even of your body - in this work, you will have made a greater part of your spirit and strength cling to the Father of souls and the Master of spirits. So you will delight more. But upon an easier matter on which you only expended a little effort, you will have only brought out a smaller part of your spirit to this clinging with the Most High. So this is a lesser delight for the spirit. And if a student delights more after studying an easy matter than a difficult one, it is a sign that his delight is not truly the delight of the Garden of Eden, but rather from the lessening of work; and his delight is from his leisure and his laxness! But truthfully, is there anything easy in the Torah? For example, when you begin to study [Talmud], they taught you [the section], "Two people are grabbing [a garment]," in Bava Metzia, which is easy for a child. But is it truly easy? For how much did the Tosafists and the other commentators - early and late - toil, dig and delve into it! And there is even room for you to make your mark upon it. If you strive and merit, you will still find more there. So in every place and in every topic, you can strive and delve and bring out a larger part of your strength, your spirit and your soul - to have it cling to the Torah and to the Eis Sof who is found in it.
Hence regarding any matter that you are coming to study, if you belittle the matter and say, "The topic is easy and readily understood" - it will already be difficult for you to access its depth; and you may even sometimes err in its simple understanding. And the Sages, may their memory be blessed, said (Yoma 29a:2), "old material is more difficult than new material." This is because one thinks, "I will certainly understand this topic easily, since I already learned it." But since he does not gird his loins and exert himself towards the matter with all of his strength; and he does not come out to truly grasp the topic, to work and to delve in it - he will not understand it. But who is the Jew who does not understand that every topic in the Torah is deep; and that when he toils and delves, he will come to the 'depths of the King' - the King of the world? And who is the Jew whose spirit does not wholly tremble to go out and meet the Ein Sof and to work in His service, to think the thoughts of God and to understand the mind of God? Certainly there have been times when after studying a nice new idea that you were enthused about, a spirit of holy jealousy came over you towards the tannaim, amoraim and the other greats and tzaddikim - may their merit protect us: Were they not also born of a woman - and nevertheless they merited to reveal so much of God's Torah in this world; they brought light to the entire House of Israel; and even in the supernal yeshiva in the supernal world, God, may He be blessed, says the law in their name! And I am a small ant; what am I worth among these lions of [God's] chariot? But why do you only suffice with a spirit of jealousy, and not want to follow in their footsteps? Please note that - with all of the greatness of their souls and their righteousness, which we cannot grasp - they toiled and worked greatly; they distanced themselves from the whole world and dedicated themselves to working in Torah. And how greatly did they toil when they studied! The Gemara (Shabbat 88a) says that when Rava was analyzing a discussion, he would injure his fingers and blood would drip, yet he would not notice. And it is said about the Ari, that even when he was studying the simple understanding of the Torah, he would stive so much that much sweat would drip off from him. But you, who are a small ant in comparison to them, do not even want to exert yourself! Hence every subject in the Torah should be weighty for you. And before you begin to study it, it should be difficult and formidable in your eyes. But it should not be so formidable for you that you give up on it. And likewise when you come to a topic that is formidable even on the simple level, your spirit should not fall and say, "This is much too hard for my brain and my grasp." Because in that way, your spirit will become lax and your intellect will become soft - and you will not work. Rather you should think, "It is a formidable topic, but I also have  God's spirit and reasoning inside me. I will redouble my efforts and will be able to do it with God's help, may He be blessed."
And likewise is it with the books of the commentators, whether regarding the simple understanding of the Torah or regarding Chassidut or Mussar. When you come to analyze and study [such] a book, think that an angel of God is extending his head from the Heavens and speaking these words to you in the name of God. For who was the tzaddik above, before God sent him to this world, and where is he now? God sent an angel to this world to read the proclamation and to speak all of His words for which God sent him. And when he finished speaking his words, he went back and ascended to the Heavens. So will you not exert your essence, make your ears into a receptacle to hear with all of your strength and be exacting with every letter that is being spoken to you from the Heavens? And would you not want to be this or that author's - the angel from the Heavens - student? Please see that the Gemara (Berachot 6b) says, "Anyone who fixes a place for his prayers is helped by the God of Abraham; and when he dies, they say about him, etc., 'He was from the students of our father, Abraham.'" And about Hillel the Elder, they said (Sotah 48b) that he was a student of Ezra - even though he [lived] several hundred years after him. This is because anyone who listens to the words of a tzaddik and follows in his ways is his student. And who is it that does not yearn to be a student of the earlier and later commentators, of the Baal Shem Tov, of the great Maggid (of Mezeritch), of the Maggid of Kozhnitz and of their students, may the memory of the tzaddikim be for a blessing?
If you feel tired in the middle of your studies - whether because you have been studying for a while or because of another reason - and you are therefore not exerting all of your strength and your brain in your studies, it is better for you to stop your learning and rest for a quarter hour or a little more. For why should you fool yourself, to sit with the Gemara and say, "Am I not learning," when your learning is not worth anything? It is better to you to refrain from it for a quarter or half hour, so that your conscience will afflict you and say, "Have I not wasted time from Torah [study]; I will redouble my efforts from now on." And it is possible that the rest [itself] will actually redouble your strength, and that you will now feel renewed to study and delve into the Torah.
It is proper that at the time of your study, you should make some change with your body, like changing your place: If it is possible for you not to study in your home, make an effort to go to another place with all of your strength. But if you don't have another place to study, or if there are people in that place who will cause you to waste time, you should at least designate a special room - or at least, a special place - to study. And there is an additional [benefit here]. For besides the fact that the place you have designated for Torah becomes sanctified and more conducive for Torah - the actual act and active change you are now making with your body for Torah, acts to also change your thoughts and ideas and to sever all the strings that have tied them until now to matters of the world. And just like your body, so too will your spirit and thoughts get up from their slumber or from their involvement in this world that they were involved in and say to themselves, "That's enough; we shall now exert ourselves on the work of Torah!"

Chapter 13

<b>Not to Miss Out on Oneself</b>
There are some things for which even a light warning is enough. And then there are things that need to be warned about, repeated and explained many times. (<i>Editor's note from the printed edition: And this is like Rashi, may his memory be blessed, says in Parshat Tzav [Rashi on Leviticus 6:2:1], "The verse has to make him more alacritous in a case where there is a financial expenditure." It is implied from this that there are things that need to be warned about more than other things.</i>) So too with the topic that we are now beginning to speak about: It is not enough with a light warning or even with the various isolated passages about it spread out throughout our words until now. We need to explain it and insist upon it a great deal.  
The Gemara says that if a commandment comes to you, do not miss out on it (literally, let it turn into chametz). But if missing one commandment is a bad thing and one can still repent for it, missing out on all of oneself and all of one's doings is so bad that there is almost no repentance for it. But to our great sorrow, many young men are afflicted by this thing. In Chapter 7 above, we already warned you not to rely upon your years which will multiply, and your body which will grow; and that you should not hope that your bad traits will go away on their own when you grow older. For it is only the years that get older and not the man - see there. And behold this is the case not only about purifying bad traits, but also about the acquisition of elevated traits and the ways of Chassidut. And it is not only someone who relies on his years and does not work at all who is corrupted, but even one who wants to work, but only delays and misses out on his work. Hence, chassidic student, if you want to guard yourself from an illness from which you can, God forbid, almost never get rid of - guard yourself and beware, not to delay any matter. And do not say, "I will do this tomorrow," or after [some other] period of time. And since you studied our words to you until now, do not have false hopes about topics, practices and requirements, saying, "This thing is not for me, I am a youth. When I grow older, I will choose it; and when I am more mature, I will even work on it." Shudder from such words! Jump back from such thoughts! For you must know that they are the words of your [evil] impulse that has risen to kill you and destroy you from both worlds, God forbid.
Have we not said to you, that it not enough to just do good actions, but that you must also be good; and that you not just act with chassidic traits, but that you must also be a chassid? Hence the sooner in your youth, you also work on your traits - according to what we have written to you - the better you will be, and the easier it will be for you to transform the fibers of your flesh and the mass of your bones to the purity and merit of Chassidut. But the more you delay and miss out on the work, the more you will miss out on your whole self; and it will be unlikely that you will come to the goal that we taught you at the beginning. Don't you know that if they bend one of the limbs of a child for a certain amount of time - for example if they bind one of his hands backwards - it will remain bent even when they remove the binding? This is not the case with an adult, in whose case it will return to its place after the binding is removed. This is because the child grows and adds flesh to his flesh and bone to his bone. And the portions of flesh and bones that grow during the time that his hand is bound and bent, sprout and grow bent. This is not the case with the adult, in which neither his flesh nor his bones are still growing and increasing in him. So the procedure will not have so quick an effect, to change his actual structure and the form of his flesh and bones. According to his essence and character, so is the essence and character of the procedure. Likewise, if you begin to follow the chassidic paths in your youth - each one according to his age - then the fibers of your brain and your heart will carry the ideas and desires of Chassidut: Love, fear, etc. And as all the parts of your body and your bones grow and increase, they will increase and sprout with the nodes, connections and inflections of Chassidut. And just like every type of beast, animal, crawling thing and birds of a feather have their own inclination, nature and essence - because the structure of its brain, its strands and all the distinctions of its limbs are specific to it and different from another spiece - so too will your brain, your heart and all of your limbs that have grown in Chassidut, have Chassidut as their nature and essence. To behave differently and with coarseness will be difficult for them, such that all of their work will be cleaner, more truthful and more righteous. 
Please remember, chassidic student, how many great and good people are jealous of you and your youth, saying, "If I could only now be a youth or young man and devote and give over all of the day to God." How many of them are yearning to be in a clean body, and with a spirit that pines for God; yet it is already difficult for them because of their years! But you have everything in your hands right now. So will you waste this pearl and say, "When I grow older, I will work; and when I am more mature, I will improve?"
The Mishnah says (Avot 4:20), "One who learns as a child is compared to what? To ink written on new parchment. And one who learns as an elder is compared to what? To ink written on scraped parchment." And so is it in all matters - whether in the study of simple understanding or whether in Chassidut and self-improvement. For there are many people who know what service and self-improvement are, yearn for it and even force themselves to do it. Nevertheless they spend all of their years coercing and necessarily forcing themselves and are constantly 'hopping between two lines': Such a person will occasionally force himself to work for half an hour or an hour, but then falls right back to being like he was before. And then he forces himself, falls again and forces himself once more. And he spends his years in this way, without making even one step forward. He will not elevate himself from his state, because he spends his choicest abilities and his best years hopping and falling. [But] you are not like this, precious young men! If you begin from your childhood and work on this from your youth, Chasidut will become your flesh and blood. Even if you fall, you will not retreat; and even if you will sometimes stagnate, you will not sink into the swamp. And you will not need to spend all of your time trying not to fall and just rasing yourselves up from the dirt and the mud. Your main work will only be to elevate yourselves. Even your falls and the times of your acting small will be like those of a mountain climber. He too sometimes get tired and occasionally injures his foot. But even then, he does not [truly] fall or go down. He rests and continues to climb; bandages his foot a little and continues the trek. You will always ascend and always reveal the greatness that is within you. And truly, Jewish young man, you are able to bring out inclinations and improvements from inside yourself which you never imagined, and that you yourself will still not understand. For example, you can bring out a positive and strong will that is even stronger than you - to which your entire self will be subjugated, and which you will be forced to follow against your will without any excuses or equivocations. You will feel inside yourself as if the spirit of God that severs mountains and breaks down boulders is suddenly encountering you and lifting you up to this or that service. It will sever all the impediments and break down all the hindrances. God is the Lord and you are His servant, so you are compelled to serve Him.
And if you begin with them from your childhood, you will be able to improve yourself in many details of divine service and self-improvement to the point that they become second nature for you, and will not have to remind yourself about them each time. For example, you can reach the level that when you walk in the street, you will not have to close your eyes in order for you not to see evil. Rather, you will automatically not see it. You will not have to avert your eyes from falsehood, as the eyes themselves will not see falsehood. Do not imagine that we are making a mistake to think that you will quickly sanctify yourselves so much that even if your eyes look at something forbidden, you will not see it - like King David requested. You should know, dear son, that it is not us that are mistaken but the people of the world that are mistaken - to think of this world that God created as a type of storehouse of bad desires, thoughts and inclinations; and that whoever wants to serve God is forced to leave and distance himself from the whole world. And because of this [self-defeating perspective], they distance themselves from divine service and holiness, and become mired in the stupidities of the world. They are similar to someone who sees a man drown in the river, and so decides and says that water is the essence of evil in the world and that it was created just to kill. And how foolish is such a man! Is it possible to exist without water? Is it because this one crazy person did not know how to use water properly and - instead of using it to give life to plants, animals and people - killed himself with it, that water is evil? Likewise is it with the whole world. It is a world that God created. So even the depths of the world - in all of their bends and all of their twists - have paths, furrows and caves that lead to its Creator, to its Master, to the Master of the world. And all the shortcoming are only in man, who does not use the things in the world for the good, but rather for the bad. The verse proclaims [this] and says (Proverbs 19:3), "A man’s folly distorts his way, and his heart rages against the Lord." Is it not that you have paths that lead you to God, and it is only you that distorts them? So why do you continue to get enraged and speak perversion - that God, God forbid, created a world of physicality in which it is impossible to serve its Creator?
Likewise in our matter: You can come to this greatness, such that you not see the false and the bad while you are still in this world. Even if you have not yet elevated yourself to becoming such a great tzaddik, and your eyes have not yet been sanctified to look at evil and not see it, you can [still] reach it - if you accustom yourselves in your childhood to the paths of Chassidut in the ways we have written for you. For it is a simple and well-known matter that the human brain thinks small thoughts without a man knowing it. For example, sometimes a mosquito will sting a person in the face, such that he will lift his hand to scratch [his face] while he is unaware of any of it. And this is not only when he is awake. Rather this happens even when he is asleep, that he not be aware of all that is happening - even to dream of it. The thoughts did not pass through his brain - he feels a sting and [unconsciously] thinks to move his hand to action, to scratch. (We are not coming to explain how this process happens in the brain. Regardless, it is a fact.) And this is not only the case with things that are built into him at birth, like this. Rather even things that were not built into him from when he was little - but he got used to afterwards - also became planted in his brain, such that he think about them automatically without being conscious of it. For example, when he is an infant, he is able to fall off his bed at night. Yet when he gets older, he will turn from one side to the other; but when he reaches the edge of his bed, he will come back and turn towards the other side. Yet he did not know or even see that he was laying at the edge of his bed or in the middle of it. He feels it with his sides, with his shoulder and with all of his flesh; and that information comes to his brain, which gives the command that he must now roll over towards the middle of his bed. Yet he was not aware of this thought - not even in his dream - that was so strong as to move his entire body. And even though he did not think like this in his infancy; nevertheless since he grew up with the knowledge that he should protect himself from falling, the thought was absorbed into the flesh of his brain, into its veins and its nerves. So it become second nature for them, such that they automatically think of it; they even act and move him - as we said earlier in the parable about bending the child's hand backwards, etc.
And when you grow up with pure thoughts and with Chassidut from your youth; and when you engrain and carve into your brain and your heart, into the nerves and veins of your heart with which you grow up, that it forbidden for you to look at something forbidden - then when you grow up, when something forbidden just begins to come before your eyes, they will quickly turn to the right, to the left or to the ground, even before you begin to see it clearly; and even before your brain and your mind know that there is something forbidden in front of them. And you will not even notice any of your surroundings, and you will not see the thing that is forbidden for you. But this is only if you don't wander the markets and the streets for no reason - like outsiders and those who sit on street corners. Rather you only walk into the street for something that you need, and the yoke of holy divine service is not moved from upon your neck. It is not that you will think that it is forbidden to look, for such thoughts are not so helpful for you. More generally, your mind needs to be pure and not to wallow in thoughts of looking or not looking; you must move past such thoughts. But you should just remember that you are a Jew and that you are not unbridled, God forbid. And all the more so [will you avoid it automatically] when you accustom yourself to think about some holy matter or, at the very least, some business matter while you are walking.
If you are in doubt and do not understand the truth of these words of ours, ask the elders and they will tell you; the sages - the Torah sages - and they will talk to you. But why should you ask? Try what we have told you; and you will see for yourself that our words are solid and firm.
Advanced student, guard your childhood and be careful with your young adulthood! How pleasant is a childhood; how sweet is a young adulthood that is blessed by God! It is like a river of honey and like a river that comes out of the Garden of Eden. It infuses all of a person's years with nectar, it gives its vigor even unto old age and even unto seniority; from its irrigation, he will flourish. His body will grow older and his strength will weaken, but his fire will survive. He will be warmed by its heat and enthused by its flame. Who is foolish enough to lose out on it; and who is crazy enough to sully, and even block off, his source of life?
It is not that we are saying here that it will be impossible for someone who does not begin the work of Chassidut in his youth and does not accustom his spirit to it from his childhood - such that it should rise from the reed mats and shake off the piles of dirt that cover it - to come to it afterwards in any way. God forbid to say such a thing! The gates of Heaven are always open to every Jew, if he girds his loins and is willing to subjugate his abilities to 'work and to carry.' And does the mishnah (Avot 4:20) that says, "And one who learns as an elder is compared to ink written on scraped parchment," lock the gate in front of penitents who want to repent to Torah in their old age, God forbid? The difference however is the amount of work [required]. As the old man who wants to study Torah and to work at Chassidut must work ten times - a hundred times - as much, or even more, than the child that studies early. (<i>Editor's note from the printed edition: In the Eight Chapters of the Rambam, may his memory be blessed, it says that even someone whose nature is inclined towards shortcomings in his learning is also able to reverse them and better them. It is just that he must add work to the work.</i>)  And since - on account of our many sins - not every person is able to dedicate himself with all of his abilities even for easy holy work, and all the more so for the heaviest and hardest work; therefore if you do not rise early and sanctify yourselves now in your youth, young men, it is clear and certain that you will not attain it, God forbid. And it is not just your souls that will mourn about you and cry about your destruction, it is also the souls of all Israel - the prophets and the tzaddikim, from beginning to end. And even the Master of spirits and the Father of all souls will, as it were, be saddened by your negligence and angered by your laziness. For the darkening of your souls is a darkening and threat to all of the worlds; and their light is a light to them all. Moreover, we can say that even one who devotes himself completely to the work of Chassidut in his older years - even if he attains it by much hard work - will nevertheless be forever lacking those periods of time that passed before he began his work. This is besides the first chassidim who lived during the days of the Baal Shem Tov and the Rebbe, Rabbi Baruch (of Medzhybuz), etc., may the memory of the tzaddikim and holy people be for a blessing for life in the world to come. As they were holy beyond our comprehension also from before; and they were - more generally - above time and nature. [So]  they attained what they attained even though they only began to work at Chassidut in their later years.
This is to say that the Mishnah says (Avot 5:21), "Forty [is the age] for understanding, Fifty [is the age] for [giving] counsel." That means that the life of a person is divided into seasons - when he is forty, his mind will be fit for understanding; and when ten more years are added to him, he will reach a different season, that of counsel. And this is not only the case with the seasons of forty and fifty. Rather every number of five or ten years of a person's life differs with regard to their season. For that which the season of young adulthood is fit, later seasons - and even the season of old age - will not be fit. And for that which the seasons of old age and hoary-headedness are fit, the seasons before them will not be fit. And please note this wonder: That when the prophet announced the word of God (Joel 3:1), "After that, I will pour out My spirit on all flesh; your sons and daughters shall prophesy" - he then also distinguished and said, "your old men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions." The sight of the old men will be in a dream, but that of the young men will be in a vision. It is not that we are coming now to explain the difference between the sight of a dream and the sight of a vision. Nevertheless, there is a difference, and the prophet divided them according to their seasons - the young men in their season and the old men in their season. It should be understood that this verse is not relating to God's prophets, who were above their bodies; above time and all of the world. So the level that a prophet would reach in his prophecy, he would reach during any of his seasons, nor was it subject to any season. Rather this verse is speaking about the whole Jewish people, as it is stated (Joel 3:2), "Even upon the slaves and the maidservants, etc., will I pour out My spirit." And the entire people - even in their greatness - is subject to the seasons. This means to say that a person is divided into seasons also in his service of God, and that he is fit for something different in each one of them. For example, there are the seasons of youth, in which a person is more fit to enthuse; and there are the seasons of older age, in which a person is more fit to delight in the pleasantness of the Supernal One. There are seasons when if one does not enthuse, he feels nothing; and there are seasons that even at the time when he is not enthusing, he feels the delightfulness and sweetness from even every simple thing, and even from every letter in the Torah or prayer which he says. There are seasons in which his enthusiasm - like any part of his divine service - begins in his brain, by his delving with his mind; and there are those in which it is more fit to begin in the heart, etc. Hence if a man rises in his youth to serve God through the ways of Chassidut and to bring out all that for which his spirit is fit [in the various seasons] for divine service, he will fix all of them in himself. And at the time of his old age, his service will be a type of crowning glory within which all the shades and faces of the various seasons will be seen. However if he delays getting used to it - even if he toils at it [later] - he will be lacking his seasons that he missed.
And now, junior and senior students - you are involved in the service of the holy, great, powerful and awesome God! You have merited to be the armies of the Loftiest of the lofty, of the One with no limit and no end. The angels on high do not see Him, may He be blessed, and ask, "Where is the place of His glory?" Yet He rests upon you and dwells among you! And even His name, the Lord of hosts (<i>tzevaot</i>), is called according to your name, His hosts. Say to Him, "Our King, we are Yours; we are giving over all of our powers and all of our souls to You; and we are giving over ourselves to Your Torah and to Your service!"
And now, advanced students, go and conquer the world for your Father, the glorious King!

Instructions and Admonitions

<b>Many of them are summaries of earlier chapters. It is [thus] fitting for the students to review them so as to remember them.</b>
Are you still laying in bed in the morning, while the God of the heavens and the earth is expecting you in the yeshiva, to teach you His Torah with love and joy? Do not be lazy; get up quickly! Gird your loins and run to the lap of your Father in the Heavens.
But if you went to bed without [God's] yoke and without joy, you will also get up in the morning without [God's] yoke, without alacrity and without joy. Think at night, "When will I get up and become engrossed in God's Torah and be surrounded by the light of His holiness?" Put water next to your bed (to use in washing your hands as soon as you get up), recite the Shema with concentration and delve into this thought until you fall asleep. And then you will be alacritous even in the morning; you will be joyful and jump up for [your study of] our God's Torah. 
What is this, that you whisper the Torah blessings and the recitation of Shema in the morning, as if they were things that have no substance, God forbid? Does not the whole day depend upon its beginning? Please remember the yoke that is upon you - all of the worlds, and even God's holiness in this world, is dependent upon you! Concern yourself with this. And from this concern, think or say, "Master of the world, I am giving over all of myself to Your service; save [me] that I should merit to be Your servant and to fulfill Your will." And from this thought, say the Torah blessings and request from God, "Please make delightful, etc." - that He should have you taste from the sweetness of the Torah (See Chapter 2).
Remember that you are from the armies of the Holy One, blessed be He. So it is incumbent upon you to proclaim His greatness and to crown the Master of all the worlds, from when you first open your eyes. And when you say, Adon Olam, be exacting about, and enthused from, each word of it.
Before you recite Shema, stop for a few instants and think, "Behold I am accepting the yoke of the Kingdom of Heaven upon myself; and I am neutralizing myself to His greatness and His holiness, may He be blessed." And from this thought, recite Shema. And have in mind that which the Sages, may their memory be blessed, said (Berakhot 13b) - to crown Him over the heavens and the earth and the four directions of the world; and that you are prepared to throw yourself into the fire for the sake of sanctifying Him, may He be blessed.
Be exacting in all of your deeds and in all of your behavior the whole day. For do you want to desecrate God's name, God forbid? That people will, God forbid, say, "Please look at this student from the armies of the Holy One, blessed be He, and from those who study His Torah - see how lowly and terrible he is in all of of his deeds!"
Do not associate with a bad friend. You should keep a distance of an arrow's flight even from his smalltalk. For with one mocking statement - even with the wink of one of his eyes - he is able to spoil the entire wealth of Torah and holiness that you have gathered inside of yourself from ten years of toil, God forbid.
Get to the yeshiva at the exact time. And if you get there after that time [even] once, concern your heart  about that sin; and you should take it upon yourself to get there early from now on. Sit in the yeshiva with fright and joy, for God is with you there now to teach you His Torah.
When you return home from the yeshiva, you should feel that you are missing it. And you should think, "How good it is in the yeshiva; how pleasant it is for me to be a student of the Holy One, blessed be He."
Be very, very careful not to say something false or to use coarse language, God forbid. For one who says false things becomes false himself; and his Torah is no longer the Torah of truth and purity. But in the case of one who guards his mouth and his tongue - both he and his Torah are pure and true.
If you know that you did something improper or that you did not learn properly that day, discipline yourself orally. You should say, "What have I done? Why is all of my behavior so low? I am throwing my whole life into the pit below with my own hands, God forbid." Repeat these words of rebuke to yourself angrily a few times; and take it upon yourself to behave better from now on.
If it is sometimes difficult for you to overcome something - such as being strong and not lazy, or studying without getting lax or some other thing - think, "Will I, God forbid, lose all of my world just for this thing? Have I reached such a low point that I can't strengthen myself in even one thing? I will exert the rest of my strength and kick away the stone of the evil impulse and smash it to pieces!"
And if you are grabbed by a passion to do something: Even though it is not something forbidden, it is a sin and an abomination for a ben Torah to be given over to his lower passions and to the desires of his [evil] impulse. Hence you want to desist from it, but it is difficult for you. You have already tried all of the strategies, but it is still difficult for you. Then nevertheless  do this - think, "I will indeed do this; however not now, but rather in an hour or two. And am I so disgusting, God forbid, that I cannot delay my desire for an hour or two?" And this will certainly work for you, to delay it for a couple of hours. And the first and second time, you will indeed do that which you promised yourself after an hour or two. But be assured that you will benefit in one of two ways. Either the thing will be so disgusting in your eyes that you yourself will not want to do it even the first or second time; or at the very least you will have accustomed yourself to control yourself so much that by the third time, you will control yourself so well that you will not need to promise yourself to do it after an hour, but will rather completely eliminate it.  
Be very, very careful in the love of your friends. A wealthy boy should not be proud about his wealth, and a poor boy should not be lowly in his own eyes because of his poverty. For all of you are the sons of God; you are His pure angels upon the earth.
And to the extent that you all join together in love and bind your souls together to be truly one, God will join Himself to you as well. And the opposite is also true: Any defect and division between you causes you, God forbid, to be distanced from and rejected by God.
It is correct from time to time for the students to speak among themselves about God's greatness, matters of divine service and man's subordination to Him, may He be blessed. And even though they will not be telling each other anything new - for one will only be telling his friend what he already knows - they should still speak and recount [these things].
______
The worst of evils is self-justification, such that one be righteous in his own eyes. And it is like the verse states (Jeremiah 2:35), "I will hereby judge you for your saying, 'I have not sinned.'" Its cause is a lack of introspection, such that a man not introspect about himself. And even worse than this is when he does not expect greatness from himself, and praises himself in his heart, saying, "I have already introspected, and not found any weighty sins in myself; and that is enough for me." But do you not want to at least be a simple Jew? Do you not need to fulfill the stipulation of the Holy One, blessed be He, which He made with us when we received the Torah - that we can only be Israel in this way. You must demand the greatness and holiness of essential Jewishness from yourself; so do not be righteous in your own eyes. Look for and condemn your shortcoming. Gird your loins and elevate yourself (and see Chapter 3 about this).
______
And it is not only someone who strangles himself that commits suicide, God forbid. Also one who is lazy or lax destroys a part of his life, by wasting time. And if it is still possible for a lazy person to rebound when he sees the hours he has wasted and looks at the parts of his life that are rotten with slime - one who is lax is worse off. For he can fool himself and say, "I am serving [God] and involved in Torah [study]." Yet everything is with laxness, such that he too is destroying his time and parts of his life. And it will only be when he reaches old age that he will wake up, tear his hair out and yell, "Oy veh, where have all of my years gone? Where are all the many weeks, days and hours without end? What have I used them for? I have no Torah, divine service, holiness or knowledge of God in me! Everything was in my hands, and I wasted it! I have also damaged the whole Jewish people and even injured the Most High." So get up while there is still time! Cast off your laziness along with your laxness from yourself; serve God with joy and with strength. And acquire that which it is possible for you to acquire with the price of your years - so that you will be fortunate in this world and it shall be good for you in the world to come (see Chapter 3).
But what will it help up for someone to redouble his efforts so much if he does not budget his time and designate his hours - each one for its own work and activity? His hours, that function in disorder and are wasted in disorder, will be like the day and night of the days of chaos [before creation]. Each night, he will wonder and say, "I don't know how the day passed. I didn't even feel it passing; it is as if it snuck by and ran away from me." But the next day and the third day, etc. will also be the same, sneak by with emptiness and waste, and run away.
So if you care about your life, budget all of your time - each hour for its work. Also in your mundane affairs - even when you go to speak with someone, plan ahead how much time you will talk. Your time should not be unbridled, but rather disciplined according to its work. Write your daily schedule for yourself on paper and do not budge from it. And then you will have come to all of your days at the time of your old age (see Chapter 5).
______
There will be one fate for the proud one and the lax one; for the one that is stiff-necked against his teachers and his rabbis and the one with false humility. The one hates his teacher, the Torah and even, as it were, [God]; whereas the other one neutralizes everything on account of even one stupidity from the [outside] world. They have one fate: There is nothing good to hope from them, not even a scrap of light will be seen from them. Both of them will perish in darkness, and rot in blackness and doom.
Listen, my son, to the foundation of their illness, and your eyes will be enlightened. Be strong and beware of them, so that you shall live.
Their Jewish individuality (<i>anokhiut</i>) is missing from them, and that is their illness. The individual (<i>anokhi</i>) - which is a spark of the I (<i>Anokhi</i>) am the Lord, your God of receiving the Torah - that is the foundation of Jewishness is missing from them. And that breaks down their entire essence and tramples them. So they are like a ship without a captain - dragged along by every bad wind and thrown around by the waves of the angry seas - the end of which is to drown in the depths of the sea. Like ones unbridled, they too are dragged along by all the bad currents of the world, and are injured by all the injuries and incidents of the world. So if there is some sort of current of foolishness or even of transgression, arrogance, evil brazenness or hatred of the holy that passes through the world, it tramples them.
Awaken your Jewish individuality that is inside you and be saved! Become a chassid and serve! (See Chapters 6 and 7.)
______
Is the service of the Omnipresent before you only like something with which to spend your free time, God forbid? It is also possible that it is only to drive out your concerns about your shortcomings; so that you can say, "I am working and improving myself" - even though you have not improved yourself at all; or to say, "I am being elevated," when all of his elevation is drowning in the swamp. He is rejoicing about lifting one foot that he extracted, but is not noticing that the other foot is submerged in it. And then he rejoices when he raises the other foot, but does not notice that now the first one is submerged. And since he is not able to raise up his essence and himself, he spends the whole day working and rising; while the whole day passes, he never moves from his place, but rather stays in the swamp up to his neck.
But if you are afraid of imagined elevation and only yearn to truly run to the God of truth, raise up your essence - your spirit! For how will you be elevated if you are submerged in the swamp? And how will you choose the good if it is buried in the evil? Quickly arouse it, while the breath of life is still in it. Swiftly bring it out, while it is not choked by the heaps and heaps of stupidities you have gathered upon it.
Arouse it with prayer; arouse it with Torah, service or any way of arousal that comes to you. For you should engrave this upon your heart: If even the simplest Jews were to listen to the calls of his soul and pay attention to the cries of its afflictions, the song of its joys; the call of its climbing upward and the noise of its falling, a thick long book could be written even concerning the events of a single day. But who is listening to its call and who is paying attention to the convulsion of this poor one? Pay attention to it, and you will be aroused on your own! Thoughts, suggestions and resolutions will come to you on their own. And through them, you will be aroused. 
But the first and last foundation of everything is faith. Not that you should just know of your faith in your thoughts, but that you should rather put all of yourself into the chambers of faith.
For you should inscribe this rule of the psyche upon your heart: Review is not only useful for memory. Rather it is also useful to broaden the knowledge and make it stand out, even in front of your eyes and your heart. So with the knowledge and thought that a person only rarely thinks about and - even then - with little thought: When he reviews it, and thinks and talks about it a great deal, it will become so certain, so clear and so pronounced in front of his eyes, that his whole room - even all of his surroundings - become full of that thought, and he becomes totally immersed in it.
Hence when you increase thinking and speaking to yourself and your friends about your faith that God, may He be blessed, fills the whole world with His glory - you will then see and feel in your brain and your heart that all of your essence is in the chambers of holiness and that it is placed in the chambers of faith. And the stronger your faith will be and the more it fills you inside and out, the easier it will be for you to arouse your spirit.
Accustom yourself to concentrate and to be aroused in prayer. At first, [do so] with things that speak about your needs, such as in "You grant understanding to man; bring us back to your Torah; bless [this year] for us," [the latter]  being the request for sustenance; and the like - and afterwards, accustom yourself to also concentrate on other topics in the prayers. 
If you want to test whether your arousal is true - a revealing of the spirit and a coming slightly closer to the Highest Purity - or just false excitement, check your character traits. If they have improved at least a little, you should know that you have removed some of their evil encasements and revealed some of their source and their holiness. And you have been aroused through them - through the bad traits that come before [proper] love and fear. But if you have not taken anything away from their badness and and have not removed anything from their lowliness, [it is a sign that] you have not done anything with your arousal. And it is possible that it is even another bad thing, to fool yourself with them.
Be quick after your arousal and after your proper prayer - while your essence is still warm and while the images of holiness are still floating in front of your eyes - to look at the lowliness of your traits and to be shaken; to observe down from the holy mountain that you have climbed to the snakepit and to be embittered. Crush them and improve! Eliminate the evil of the encasement and reveal their essential holiness (see Chapters 8 and 9).
______
Yet it is much harder to possess a decision than it is to possess will. For other things - such as the intellect and strong thought - help the will. But the essential reality of a decision, qua decision, is at a time when everything besides it is absent. At such a time, when there is no strong will or intellect, the decision is only for the sake of the decision.
That is to say that a person's doing is according to his will. And everything depends upon its strength, even the negation of all impediments. If his will is strong, he will break and eliminate them; but if it is weak, they will negate it, God forbid. And this is the good fortune of man - that there are also aids to help him possess will. For he can also be aroused - or strengthened and drawn out if he has already been aroused - by the reflection of his thoughts and mind, that this is what he is supposed to do. However if the one working can only sometimes use his will - at the time he is aroused - he must always use the [power of his] decision, even when his arousal as well as his mind have become quiet. For this is the way of people: Thought arouses the will, and the will arouses his thoughts to understand according to that which he wants. But when they are both quiet, he will not do nor enact even something for which he had earlier been willing to give over his life - when his will and thought were strong. However if he arouses his decision - to say to himself, "This is what I have already decided to do, so this is what I must do" - he will then do it and fulfill [the decision]. But if not, neither his will nor his thought will assist him, since they are not constant.
Deciding is a trait unto itself, which a person must bring out from within him, little by little. For he will then do the obligation of a certain type of work - even after the arousal of his will has passed, even when he no longer understands it as he did at the time that his will was aroused - because that is what he decided. It is difficult to possess this, since he has no intellect or will to help him at that time. But it is required for someone involved in divine service, and he is not able to do without it. Yet he can make it sprout and grow, little by little.
______
And in the same way as it is impossible to do anything without will or to be consistent without a decision, likewise is it impossible for one to attain any elevation without belief in himself and trust in the power of his work.
That is to say that you have already been shown, to know that it is not enough for a person to only do good deeds. Rather he himself must also become good, to make his traits into good traits. Then he will also grow through the greatness and elevation of Israel. But the way of a person when he is lowly in his traits and in his entire being, is that it is difficult for him to believe that they will be transformed for the better and that he will be elevated. And because of this, he will be lax and not exert himself. Rather he will only do good deeds; but he will not exert himself to make himself good as well. But have we not said, repeated and repeated once more to you that you do not know yourself and are only seeing [your outer] shell. However what is inside is hidden also from you. So why should you doubt your ability - without proofs or knowledge - and thereby lose your whole great future? Possess will, possess decision and believe in the power of the Jewishness which is inside you and in your service - and you will also see whether or not you will become sanctified and shine like as star. 
______
Whether with man or with the ground from which he was taken, it is impossible to bring out their potential and reveal what is hidden in them without toil and sweat of the brow. And to the person who imagines that he can work on holy service without toil and without self-constraint, it will be said, "Go away from the camp of the Divine Presence, you will remain an unbridled man until the day of your death, we shall curse him."
And with what does an agricultural worker constrain himself to toil? With the knowledge that without it, he will die of hunger. Likewise, so long as you have a slight thought that the revealing of your spirit and its clinging to its holiness through action in Torah, in prayer and in other work, is only a type of optional addition which it is possible to do without - you will not toil nor constrain yourself. And because of that, you will not bring out even a shred of your spirit.
Only if you truly remember that the Holy One, blessed be He, stipulated with us - that to be His treasured nation and to be Israel is totally impossible with a contaminated spirit - only then will you toil to bring out that which is hidden in your spirit, and constrain yourself to purify it with supernal purity.
The disturbance of thoughts and confusion of the brain during prayer and divine service also comes from lack of toil. For it is the way of thoughts to ride upon one another and that one group [of thoughts] confounds another group. And so they flow, moving quickly, on their own without disturbance in a person's brain - these passing away and those coming, etc. - there is no end to them (especially with businessmen). So when one comes to pray - even if a certain good thought arouses itself in him: Since he has no toil or redoubling of efforts, [his thoughts] therefore come like a stream of water and flush it away.
Therefore stop before every prayer and service, and think, "Behold I will gird my loins, and I will toil with all of my ability to strengthen my love, fear and thoughts to God to the point that the raging waters of bad thoughts will not flush it away. And I will strengthen myself over all of them with the Lord; and overcome with my God." 
It is impossible to get anywhere without toil. But with toil, it is possible to get everywhere.
But you must accustom yourself to have control over your thoughts, until it will no longer be necessary to do this during prayers and divine service. 
There are many thoughts that a person loves to think about and dwell upon without any purpose. Rather it is only for the sake of enjoyment - for example, a thought from some joyful occasion that happened to him or that he hopes will happen to him. Redouble your efforts during such a pleasurable thought and push it away with force and outrage; and think of another thought [in its place]. This is not for any [specific] reason; but rather just in order to accustom yourself to control your thoughts during prayer and divine service as well. 
Remember, do not forget that you will not always be involved in just pushing off thoughts that are not good. For not many of those will come to you. Rather you will also be involved in strengthening a certain good thought, the absorption of  your love, the arousal of your fear and that all of your thoughts be in matters of holiness. And through this, a thought that is not good will automatically be pushed away - it is impossible to push away darkness without the use of light.
And if it is difficult for you to concentrate; and it is even difficult during prayer for you to strengthen yourself over all of your great confusion and to concentrate - picture in your imagination that you want to push your way through a large crowd of people to a place where God is. And actually do this - exert your body, your limbs and your tendons like someone who is pushing himself through. Even contort your face and think, "Through them all to God, with strength to God." However do not use your brain for the exertions and contortions of your body. Let your body strengthen itself in that which it does, and your mind strengthen itself in its thoughts towards God. And you will actually feel a true closening of thought and concentration towards holiness.
However if you have toiled to stand yourself up against your mundane thoughts and you have not been able; have insistently tried to deepen your thought towards holiness, but it has not come - then look at this time towards the portion of your soul that is above as it is running from a crowd of destructive angels and threatening predatory animals to the gates of the Garden of Eden. It is running, but they are running after it. This one bites it, this one breaks its bones, this one pushes it down and this one blocks its path. And from great fear and terror, the spirit yells out with a great and bitter cry, "Please, God, save me and bring me close!" The heavens and the earth tremble; likewise the gates of the Garden of Eden. And even the crowd of wild ones trembles from the voice of its cry. They tremble, are frightened and stop; and it runs away to the Garden of Eden. 
And just like the portion of your spirit above, also your portion inside of you is afraid of all the predatory thoughts. It yells out with a great and hidden cry from inside your heart. Your soul cries out and they stop; so you can approach holy prayer. And understand [this].

Three Essays for Senior Students

Introduction





