Chidushei Halachot on Avodah Zarah
חדושי הלכות על עבודה זרה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Chidushei Halachot on Avodah Zarah



Daf 1a



Daf 1b



Daf 2a



Daf 2b



Daf 3a



Daf 3b



Daf 4a



Daf 4b



Daf 5a



Daf 5b



Daf 6a



Daf 6b



Daf 7a



Daf 7b



Daf 8a



Daf 8b



Daf 9a



Daf 9b



Daf 10a



Daf 10b



Daf 11a



Daf 11b



Daf 12a



Daf 12b



Daf 13a



Daf 13b



Daf 14a



Daf 14b



Daf 15a



Daf 15b



Daf 16a



Daf 16b



Daf 17a



Daf 17b



Daf 18a



Daf 18b



Daf 19a



Daf 19b



Daf 20a



Daf 20b



Daf 21a



Daf 21b



Daf 22a

On Rashi, in the commentary beginning "Even though they accepted it together initially and he said to him..." Rashi's intent is that they initially accepted it together in a general way (stam), and afterwards, one said to the other, etc. This interpretation resolves the matter.
On Tosafot, in the commentary beginning "Come and hear: If they stipulated..." The question is raised: Why not derive the rule from the earlier clause (reisha)? Tosafot respond that this is because the Gemara wants to clarify, etc. Their explanation is as follows: From the earlier clause, one could infer that in a general case (stam), the ruling is lenient, as it says, "He should not say, etc."—implying that in a general case where nothing was explicitly stated, it would be permitted. To address this, Tosafot explain that one cannot derive leniency from the earlier clause (reisha), because it is possible that the phrase "He should not say, etc." is only mentioned due to the subsequent clause (seifa), "If they stipulated, etc." This teaches that even if one explicitly stipulates, "You take Shabbat in exchange for weekday," it is permitted. Without the earlier clause, we might have assumed the permission only applies when one does not explicitly stipulate "Take Shabbat in exchange for weekday," but rather says initially, "Take days in exchange for days," and includes Shabbat as part of the gentile's portion implicitly. Thus, there is no difficulty in asking, "What is being inferred? If they stipulated, it is permitted—implying that in a general case, it is prohibited?" Since one could respond that the phrase "If they stipulated" even permits an explicit stipulation, the Mishnah should have included the general case of permission (stam) to teach the more significant novelty (chidush) that a general case is permitted, all the more so if there was an explicit stipulation. As Tosafot write later, "Certainly, if they stipulated, it is permitted, even if they explicitly calculate." The novelty of a general case being permitted is greater than the novelty of a stipulated case in all circumstances. This explanation resolves the issue.
On Tosafot, in the commentary beginning "We do not place an animal, etc." Tosafot write, "This reasoning does not stand, etc. And in two tractates, everyone agrees there is no order." This is difficult to understand: Why is it necessary to mention that "everyone agrees there is no order"? Even if there were an order, the case here involves an anonymous Mishnah (stam) followed by a dispute. The anonymous ruling is here in Seder Nezikin in Tractate Avodah Zarah, and the dispute appears later in Seder Taharot in Tractate Parah. Investigate this carefully.