Jerusalem Talmud Berakhot
תלמוד ירושלמי ברכות
merged
http://www.sefaria.org/Jerusalem_Talmud_Berakhot
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-http://www.sefaria.org
-Rabbi Mike Feuer, Jerusalem Anthology
-http://www.sefaria.org



Jerusalem Talmud Berakhot

Daf 1a

From when may one recite Shema in the evening? From the time the Kohanim go in to eat their Terumah [produce consecrated for priestly consumption], to the end of the first watch, says Rabbi Eliezer. And the Sages say: Until midnight. Rabban Gamliel says: Until the break of dawn. It once happened that his [Rabban Gamliel’s] sons came from a house of feasting. They said to him: We have not recited Shema. He to them: If dawn has not broken, you are obligated to recite it. [This is true] Not only in this case; saying, in all cases where the Sages said [some precepts can be performed] only until midnight — their obligations remain until the break of dawn. [e.g.] Burning the fats and limbs [of the sacrifices, on the Temple altar] — those precepts [can be performed] until the break of dawn. [e.g.:] All [sacrifices] which may be eaten for one day — their precepts [of eating them can be performed] until the break of dawn. If that is so, why did the Sages say, "until midnight"? To distance a person from transgression....
Thus we learn from the time that the Kohanim (Priests) enter to eat their Terumah (produce consecrated for priestly consumption). Rabbi Chiya taught: From the time that people were accustomed to eating their meals on erev Shabbos (the evening of the Sabbath) And he taught these opinions were equal.

Daf 1b



Daf 2a



Daf 2b



Daf 3a



Daf 3b



Daf 4a



Daf 4b



Daf 5a



Daf 5b



Daf 6a



Daf 6b



Daf 7a



Daf 7b



Daf 8a



Daf 8b



Daf 9a



Daf 9b



Daf 10a



Daf 10b



Daf 11a



Daf 11b



Daf 12a



Daf 12b



Daf 13a



Daf 13b



Daf 14a



Daf 14b



Daf 15a

This reinforces what Rabbi Yitzhak said about Rabbi Yohanan: that until the bath-keeper Yaakov came, he wore them [tefillin]. Rabbi Yirmiya asked before Rabbi Zeira: What if the bathhouse was used for bathing during the hot days (i.e., summer) but not used for bathing during the rainy days (i.e., winter)? He said to him: a bathhouse, even if not used for bathing, [is analogous to the rules] for a bathroom that does not contain feces. Mar Ukva said: a pig is like a moving bathroom. Rabbi Yonah inquired: what is [the law] for a pebble [with feces on it] that is on the sea shore? Rabbi Ammi the doctor said: Rabbi Yirmiya taught that one should pass it while covered in a scarf; this ruling is rejected. Rabbi Zeira, in the name of Abba bar Yirmiya:  one may eat a snack with [tefillin] on, but not a meal. [Similarly, one may] take a nap, but not sleep with them on. There are tannaitic rabbis who teach: One says a blessing once. There are tannaitic rabbis who teach: One says a blessing twice. How is the one who said  once be correct? The one who said that one blesses twice [says so because] he ate and they aren't on him. Rabbi Zeira said that Abba bar Yirmiya [is referring] to a person that only eats snacks. Rabbi Zeira, in the name of Rabbi Abba: A person should not enter a urinal if a [holy] book and tefillin are in his hands. When Rabbi Yohanan had a book in his hand [and wanted to urinate] he would give it to someone else. When he had on his tefillin, he would stand with them. A baraita argues against Abba bar Yirmiya: a person may enter a urinal if a book and tefillin are in his hands. Rabbi Zeira said that Abba bar Yirmiya [is referring to two cases, one applies] to someone who can wear them, [and the other] to someone who cannot wear them. After all, why should he spoil them if cannot even fulfill the commandment? Initially, people would give them [tefillin] to other people, but those people would take them and run away. So they decreed that they should be placed in holes [in the wall]. When it happened 

Daf 15b



Daf 16a



Daf 16b



Daf 17a



Daf 17b



Daf 18a



Daf 18b



Daf 19a



Daf 19b



Daf 20a



Daf 20b



Daf 21a



Daf 21b



Daf 22a



Daf 22b



Daf 23a



Daf 23b



Daf 24a



Daf 24b



Daf 25a



Daf 25b



Daf 26a



Daf 26b



Daf 27a



Daf 27b



Daf 28a



Daf 28b



Daf 29a



Daf 29b



Daf 30a



Daf 30b



Daf 31a



Daf 31b



Daf 32a



Daf 32b



Daf 33a



Daf 33b



Daf 34a



Daf 34b



Daf 35a



Daf 35b



Daf 36a



Daf 36b



...He teaches, one should not stand up to pray from within talk, laughter or levity and not amidst empty things, rather from within words of Torah. So too one should not take leave of their friend through talk, laughter or levity and not through empty things, but rather from within words of Torah. So we find among the first prophets who would seal their word with words of praise on consolation. R’ Elazar said ‘except Yirmeyahu who finished with words of rebuke. R’ Yochanan replied to him, he too sealed his word with words of consolation “…so shall Babylon sink and not rise…” (Yirmeyahu 51:64). Since Yirmeyahu goes back and prophecies on the destruction of the Holy Temple, perhaps he sealed his words with the destruction? That is why the verse continues “Until here are the words of Jeremiah,” (ibid.) - he sealed his words with the fall of those who destroyed it. And no one sealed their words with rebuke?! Isn’t it written, “…and they shall be an abhorring for all flesh.” (Yeshayahu 66:24)? That is dealing with the idolators. Isn’t it written, “For you have utterly rejected us…” (Eicha 5:22)? 

Daf 37a


“Restore us to You…” (Eicha 5:21) is written below “For you have utterly rejected us…” Even Eliyahu departed from Elisha from within words of Torah. “And it was that they were going, walking and talking…” (Melachim II 2:11) What were they occupied with? R’ Achva bar R’ Zeira said they were occupied with the reading of shema, this is what it says “and you shall speak of them…” (Devarim 6:7) R’ Yodah ben Pazi said they were occupied with the creation of the world, this is what it says “By the word of the Lord, the heavens were made…” (Tehillim 33:6) R’ Yodan b’rei R’ Ibo said they were occupied with the consolation of Jerusalem as it says “…speak to the heart of Jerusalem…” (Yeshayahu 40:2)The Rabbis said that they were occupied with the matter of the chariot, this is what it says “…and behold a fiery chariot and fiery horses…” (Melachim II 2:11)…