Mishneh Torah, Sales
משנה תורה, הלכות מכירה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Mishneh Torah, Sales



Chapter 1

A purchase is not sold by what one says, even when witnesses testify on such. How [does this work]? [If a seller says to an buyer for example] "This house I sell to you", "This wine I sell to you", "This slave I sell to you", then they decide a price. The buys wants [such a deal] and says, "I purchased it", and the seller wants [such a deal] and says, "I sold it". They say to witnesses, "Be witnesses for us so that [you can testify] that one sold and one bought". Indeed however, this [their testimony] is worthless, and it is as if they never talked. This is true for the giving and receiving of gifts. 
But if a purchase is sold by one of the ways in which it can be sold [properly], the buyer acquires it and there is no need for witnesses at all. Neither one of them [the seller and the buyer] can renege on such. 

















...  

Chapter 2






How does one acquire an animal through pulling it? It goes without saying that if he pulled it and it walked, or rode it and it walked, he has acquired it. But even if he called it and it came, or he hit it with a stick and it ran before him; since it has lifted an arm and leg he has acquired it. And this is when he has pulled it in front of the owner. But if he did not pull it in front of the owner, the owner must tell him, before he pulls it, "Go, pull it, and acquire it."

Chapter 3

Animals or other movable objects are acquired with money according to the Torah, and once the money is given then the object is acquired, and neither can go back. But the Sages established that movable objects would only be acquired with lifting or pulling that which is not lifted.

Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6







One who rents a house to another without specification may not evict them without notifying them thirty days in advance, so as to enable them to find a place and not be thrown into the street, and at the end of those thirty, they must leave. When does this apply? In the summer, but during the rainy season they may not evict them at all, from Sukkot until Pesach...

Chapter 7









And also someone who says he will give a gift to his fellow man, and does not give, is considered untrustworthy. When is this so? When the gift is small because the recipient trusted the giver to give it. But with a large gift there is no loss of trust, because the recipient does not believe he will give him what was said, until he acquires them with a proper act of acquisition. 

Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14









The inhabitants of a city are permitted to establish fixed prices for any commodities they desire, even meat and bread. They may establish conditions stating that anyone who violates these guidelines will be punished in such and such a fashion.
Similarly, craftsmen in a specific profession may establish provisions and agree that one should not work on the day on which another is working or the like, and that anyone who violates these guidelines will be punished in such and such a fashion.
When does the above apply? In a city where there is not a distinguished sage to correct the conduct within the city and improve the ways of its inhabitants. If, however, there is such a distinguished sage, a condition established by craftsmen is not effective without the ruling of the sage. They may not punish or inflict loss on anyone who does not accept their stipulation, unless that stipulation was made with the consent of the sage. Whoever causes a colleague a loss because of a stipulation that was not made with the consent of the sage is liable to pay.

Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22















The law of consecrated property, the law of the poor, and the law of vows are not like the law of ordinary [things]. [If] in his acquisition of these, a person says, "All the offspring of my animal will be consecrated to the Temple treasury"; or, "will be forbidden to me"; or, "I will give them to charity"--even if it is not consecrated because it does not exist--the person is [still] obligated to keep his word, as it says [in Num. 30:3], "All that comes from his mouth, he must do."
Since this is so, if a person on his death bed commands and says, "All that this tree produces [should be given] to the poor," or, "All the profit from this house [should be given] to the poor]," the poor acquire them. 
There are Geonim who differ on this matter and say that the poor only acquire in the way an ordinary person acquires. Therefore, they do not acquire a thing that does not yet exist It is not my opinion that a person is commanded to transfer [his property]. He is commanded to uphold his pledge to charity or to consecrate [his property], as he is commanded to uphold his vow, as we explained in [<i>Mishneh Torah</i>] <i>Arakhin</i>.