Mishneh Torah, Foreign Worship and Customs of the Nations
משנה תורה, הלכות עבודה זרה וחוקות הגויים
Maimonides' Mishneh Torah, edited by Philip Birnbaum, New York, 1967
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH002108864

Mishneh Torah, Foreign Worship and Customs of the Nations



Chapter 1

In the days of Enosh, the people fell into gross error, and senseless was the counsel of the wise men of that generation. Enosh himself was among those who committed the error. Their error was this: They said that in view of the fact that God created the stars and celestial spheres to guide the world, setting them on high and honoring them, and they are his ministering servants, they deserve to be praised, glorified and honored. It is the will of God, blessed be he, that we glorify and honor anyone he has glorified and honored, just as a king desires that respect be shown those who stand and minister before him, since this is an indirect way of honoring the king himself. When this notion entered their mind, they began to build temples in honor of the stars and offered sacrifices to them, praising and glorifying them in speech and prostrating themselves before them, in order to win the favor of the Creator, according to their wrong thinking.— —
In the course of time, false prophets arose among men and asserted that God had expressly commanded them: Worship that particular star, or all the stars; offer such and such sacrifices and libations to it; erect a temple for it; draw a figure of it, that all the people may worship it— — women, children, and the rest of the folk.— — So they began to carve figures in the temples, under the trees, on the mountain-tops and the hills. They would assemble, worship the idols, and tell all the people that this particular figure was able to do good and evil, and that it was proper to worship it and fear it.— — Other impostors then sprang up and declared that the star itself, or the celestial sphere or the angel, spoke with them and said to them: "Worship me in such and such fashion," informing them how to perform the rite, "and do this and refrain from doing that." Gradually the custom of worshiping idols, and sacrificing to them, according to varied rites spread throughout the world. As time passed on, the revered name of God vanished from the lips and minds of all human beings and they knew him no more. All the common people, and the women and the children, thus knew only the idols of wood or stone and the temple edifice, in which they had been trained from their childhood to worship them and invoke their name.— — The world moved on in this manner until our father Abraham was born, the lofty pillar of the world.
As soon as this mighty champion was weaned, he began to think by day and by night, though still an infant, wondering how it was possible that this sphere should keep moving continually if there was no one to guide it. Who is it that causes it to revolve? For it cannot be that it has caused itself to revolve! He had no teacher, no one to instruct him in anything. He was plunged in Chaldean Ur among silly idolaters. His father and mother and the entire population were idolaters, and he worshiped with them. But his mind was busily meditating and reflecting until he had attained the way of truth, apprehended the correct line of thought and knew that there is One God, that he guides the celestial sphere and has created everything, and that there is no God beside him in the entire universe.— — Abraham was forty years old when he acknowledged his Creator. As soon as he attained this knowledge, he began to raise objections against the inhabitants of Ur and to argue with them, telling them: "The course you are following is not the way of truth." He broke the idols and began to instruct the people that it was improper to worship anyone except the God of the universe. To him alone it is right to bow down and offer sacrifices and libations, so that all human beings of the future may know him. Also, it is right to destroy and shatter all the idols, so that the people may not be misled like those who imagined that there was no god but these idols. When he had prevailed over them with his arguments, the king sought to slay him; but he was miraculously saved, and he left for Haran. There he began to proclaim to the entire world boldly, informing the people that the entire universe had only one Creator, and that him alone it was right to worship. He went from city to city and from kingdom to kingdom, calling and assembling the people until he arrived in the land of Canaan proclaiming, as it is written: "There he proclaimed the name of the Lord God of the universe" (Genesis 21:33). When the people flocked to him, asking him concerning his assertions, he informed everyone according to his intelligence so as to restore him to the path of truth. Thus many thousands joined him; they were known as the men of the house of Abraham (Genesis 17:27). He implanted in their hearts this great principle of faith, about which he wrote tracts, and taught it to his son Isaac, who in turn kept instructing and exhorting others. Isaac conveyed it to Jacob, whom he ordained to teach the faith. He too kept teaching and exhorting all who joined him. Jacob instructed all his sons, setting apart Levi whom he appointed as head of an academy to teach the way of God and to observe the charge of Abraham. He charged his sons to appoint instructors from the tribe of Levi in uninterrupted succession, that the traditional lore might not be forgotten. And so it went on increasingly among the descendants of Jacob and their adherents until they became a nation knowing the Lord. The people of Israel stayed a long time in Egypt; they relapsed, learning the practices of their neighbors and worshiping idols, with the exception of the tribe of Levi that adhered to the heritage of the patriarchs. The tribe of Levi never worshiped idols. The principle of faith which Abraham had planted was almost uprooted, with the relapse of Jacob's descendants into the then popular idolatry. But owing to God's love for us, and because he kept his solemn promise to Abraham our father, he appointed Moses to be the teacher of all the prophets and sent him to us. When Moses had begun to function as prophet, the Lord chose Israel as his heritage and adorned them with precepts, showing them the way of worshiping him, and how to treat idolatry and those who stray after it.

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5

He who entices a Jewish man or woman to practise idolatry is stoned, even though neither the enticed nor the enticer worshiped an idol; he dies because he gave instruction to worship an idol.— —
He who entices the majority of the townspeople is a seducer and not an enticer. If the seducer of the city's majority was a prophet, he is stoned to death. The seduced are treated as individuals and not as inhabitants of a seduced city, unless there were at least two seducers.— —




It is forbidden to engage in a debate with one who prophesies in the name of idolatry, and he should not be asked for signs and wonders. If he has done so on his own initiative, he should be completely ignored without thinking about him at all. If anyone considers such signs as possibly true, he breaks a negative command, for it is written: "Do not heed the words of that prophet" (Deuteronomy 13:4).— —

Chapter 6

— — How does the necromancer pretend to reveal the future by communicating with the spirits of the dead? He stands up and burns a certain kind of incense while swinging a myrtle twig which he holds in his hand. He whispers words known to the mediums until the inquiring person imagines that someone is talking to him, responding to what he has asked in extremely low tones from beneath the ground, inaudible but conceived by imagination. Or else, the medium takes a skull of a corpse, offers incense to it, pretending to reveal the future by this practice, until a very low sound emerges from under his armpit, answering him. All that is necromancy, the practice of which is punishable by stoning.
How does the wizard practise his art? He puts a bone of a bird called <i>yaddua</i> in his mouth, offers up incense, and performs other acts, until he falls like an epileptic and talks of things to come. All these things are forms of idolatry.— —



The stone pillar which the Torah has forbidden is a structure where they all gather, even to worship God; such was the manner of idolatry; hence it is written: "You shall not set up a stone pillar" (Deuteronomy 16:22). Anyone who sets up a stone pillar is punished with [39] lashes. The same applies to the figured stone mentioned in the Torah. Anyone who bows down on it, even to worship God, is flogged, as it is written: "You shall not place a figured stone in your land to worship upon it" (Leviticus 26:1). It was an idolatrous custom to place a stone in front of an idol and bow down on it; hence, this must not be done in worshiping the Lord. One is not flogged, however, unless he stretches his hands and feet on the stone so that he lies completely on it. This is the prostration mentioned in the Torah.
This law applies everywhere except in the Temple, where it is permitted to bow down upon the stones, for it is written "in your land," meaning: you must not bow down on the stones in your land, but you are permitted to do so on the polished stones in the Temple. Hence, it has been a Jewish custom to spread mats, or any kind of straw, over the stone floors in the synagogues, to form a partition between the faces and the stones.— —

Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11








What is a soothsayer? This term refers to those who foretell events by astrological observations, declaring that a certain day is favorable while another is unfavorable; a certain day is suited for doing a certain type of work; a certain year or month is unfavorable for a particular thing.
It is forbidden to practise astrology, even if one has done nothing beyond telling the lies which the ignorant imagine to be true and wise assertions. Anyone whose action is influenced by astrology, arranging his work or trip to take place at the time set by stargazers, is punished with lashes, as it is written: "You shall not practise soothsaying" (Leviticus 19:26). The same applies to anyone who deludes by optical deception, pretending in the presence of the viewers to have done something extraordinary which in reality he has not done; he belongs to the category of soothsayer, and is punished with lashes.
Who is a charmer? One who uses words that do not belong to any spoken tongue and have no meaning, supposing foolishly that those utterances are helpful. They go as far as declaring that if anyone utters certain phrases over a snake or scorpion, it turns harmless; and if certain words are used over a human being, he will not be hurt.— — All those strange and ugly sounds and names cannot hurt nor help.
If one was stung by a scorpion or snake, it is permitted to whisper a charm over the affected spot even on the Sabbath, in order to set his mind at case and reassure him, even though it is absolutely of no use. Since he is in danger, it has been permitted lest he may become hopelessly confused.
Anyone who whispers a charm over a wound and reads a verse from the Torah, or one who recites a biblical verse over a child lest he is terrified, or one who places a <i>Sefer Torah</i> or <i>tefillin</i> over an infant to enable him to sleep, are not only included in the category of sorcerers and charmers, but are included among those who repudiate the Torah. They use the words of the Torah as a physical cure, whereas they are exclusively a cure for the soul, as it is written: "They will be life to your soul" (Proverbs 3:22). On the other hand, one who is enjoying good health is permitted to recite biblical verses, or a psalm, that he may be shielded and saved from affliction and damage by virtue of the reading.
Who is a communicator with the dead? One who starves himself and spends the night in a cemetery so that a dead person may appear in a dream and inform him about something he has inquired. Others put on special garments and utter words, offering a particular incense, and sleep alone, so that a certain dead individual may come and converse with him in a dream. In brief, whoever does anything to induce a dead person to appear and give him information, is punished with lashes, as it is written: "There must not be among you anyone who burns his son or daughter, or who practises divination or soothsaying … or an inquirer of the dead" (Deuteronomy 18:10-11).

The sorcerer incurs the penalty of stoning, provided he actually practised witchcraft. The juggler, however, who practises optical deception, making it appear that he did something which he did not do, receives punishment for disobedience.
All these practices are grossly deceptive, used by the ancient idolaters to mislead the nations of the world that they might follow them. It is improper for Jewish people who are remarkably clever to be attracted by such senseless things, to suppose that they are of some use, as it is written: "There is no divination in Jacob, no witchcraft in Israel" (Numbers 23:23). "These nations that you are about to dispossess listen to soothsayers and wizards, but not you…" (Deuteronomy 18:14). Whoever believes in these and similar things, thinking to himself that they are scientifically true and only forbidden by the Torah is nothing but an ignorant fool, included among immature women and children. Cultured, intellectual people, however, know authoritatively that all these practices which the Torah has forbidden are not scientific but inane and senseless. Ignorant people have been attracted by them, for whose sake they have abandoned the ways of truth. For this reason, the Torah exhorts us in forbidding these inanities, saying: "You shall be wholehearted with the Lord your God" (Deuteronomy 18:13).

Chapter 12











Tattoing, spoken of in the Torah (Leviticus 19:28), consists in gashing the flesh and filling up the gash with pigment, ink or other dyes which leave a lasting mark. This was a custom among the pagans who marked themselves for idolatry, meaning that the tattoed was a slave sold and marked for its service. As soon as one inserts coloring matter within the incision he has made in any part of the body of a man or woman he incurs the punishment of lashes.— —

<i>Gedidah</i> (gashing) and <i>seritah</i> (producing incisions) are identical. The pagans used to make gashes in their flesh to express grief for their dead, and injure themselves for the sake of idolatry, as it is written: "They gashed themselves as was their practice" (I Kings 18:28). This too was forbidden by the Torah, as it is written: "You shall not gash yourselves" (Deuteronomy 14:1).— —