Mishneh Torah, Foreign Worship and Customs of the Nations
משנה תורה, הלכות עבודה זרה וחוקות הגויים
merged
http://www.sefaria.org/Mishneh_Torah,_Foreign_Worship_and_Customs_of_the_Nations
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-http://www.sefaria.org



Mishneh Torah, Foreign Worship and Customs of the Nations

Chapter 1

In the days of Enosh, humans made a great error and the sages of that generation gave ignorant advice and Enosh himself was one of those in error.  This was their error.  They said, since God created these stars and the spheres that guide the world and placed them in the heights and treat them with honor and they are the servants that serve before Him.  It is fitting to praise them and to glorify them and treat them with honor.  This is the will of God, blessed be He, that they make great and honor those whom God made great and honored like the king who desires to honor those who stand before him and this is the honor of the king. Since this matter arose in their hearts they began to build palaces to the stars and to make sacrifices to them and to praise and glorify them in words and to bow down before them in order to obtain favor of the creator.  This is the essence of idolatry.  And thus it is said its worshipers know its essence.  They would not say that there is no God, other than a star.  This is what Jeremiah says, "Who will not fear You,  Sovereign of the nations, because to you is appropriate.  Because among all the wise men of the nations and in all their kingdoms there is none like you.  They are both stupid and foolish; the instruction of idols is but wood (Jeremiah 10:7-8)."  That is to say,  everyone knows that you are unique, but their mistake and their folly that they think of as emptiness is your will.
the instruction of idols is but wood!

Chapter 2





A Jew who serves false gods, is like a gentile in all matters. And he is not like a Jew who violated another transgression punishable by being stoned to death. An apostate who worships false gods, is like an apostate to all matters in the Torah. And similarly Jewish minnim (heretics) are not considered like a Jew in any matter. And we never accept there repentance, because the verse states: "None that go to her repent, nor will they regain the paths of life" and minnim (heretics) are people who: go after there thoughts of there hearts, and foolish things which were said, until they ultimately transgress against the body of Torah arrogantly, with scorn, with the intent of provoking God's anger, and yet say that there is no sin involved. It is prohibited to speak to them or to respond to them at all as the verse states "Do not come close to her door." and we can assume that every though of a min is towards worshiping false idols. 

Chapter 3

Whoever worships idols willingly, intentionally, they are punishable by kares and if there were witnesses and warning, stoning. By accident, they bring a set sin-offering (chatas).








It is forbidden to create images for decoration, even if they are not for idolatrous purposes. As it states, "You shall not make with me [Gods of silver and gold -- do not make them for yourselves] (Exodus 20:20)". That is to say, not even gold and silver images which are for decoration, in order not to let people come to the mistaken impression that they are for idolatry. The prohibition of decorative images is specifically regarding the human form. Therefore, wood, plaster, or stone cannot be shaped into the human form. This is when the form is in relief, for example the type of reliefs or imagery employed on basins in palaces, etc. One who creates such an image receives lashes. However if the image was a sunken form, or a painted image such as those placed on panels, or an image created from weaving threads, it is permitted.

Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11




Do not practice soothsaying as idolaters, as it is said, "Do not practice soothsaying (Leviticus 19:26)."  What is meant by a soothsayer?  For example, there are those who say, since my bread fell from my mouth or my staff fell from my hand, I will not go to such and such a place today, that if I go, my desires will not be realized.  If a fox passes before me, I will not go past the doorway of my house today, that if I go I will meet a trickster.  And then there are those that hear a chirping bird and say this will happen or this will not happen, or good will happen for this one or bad will happen for that one.  And thus [also]  those that say slaughter this rooster that crows like a raven, slaughter that hen that crows like a rooster.   Also for one who sets up omens for himself, if this happens to me, then I will do that thing and if this  does not happen to me, I will not do it, like Eliezer, servant of Abraham.  And so all who do things like this, all of this is forbidden.  And anyone who does something because of one of these type of things is lashed.

Chapter 12











The tattooing that is spoken of in the Torah is cutting the flesh and filling the place with blue or  ink or  other dyes that are inscribed.  And this was the custom of the idolaters who inscribed themselves for the sake of their idolatry as if to say he is a servant sold to it and inscribed for its service.  And when one inscribes  with one of these inscribing items after cutting in any place on the body, whether a man or a woman, he or she is to be lashed.  One who wrote but did not inscribe with color or who inscribed with color, but did not write with cutting is not liable.  Only when he writes and dyes as it is written, "an inked writing (Leviticus 19:28)."  To whom does this apply?  To the one who does the tattooing, but the one who is tattooed is not liable unless he assisted in creating this deed, but if he did nothing he is not lashed.
.  