Mishneh Torah, Foreign Worship and Customs of the Nations
משנה תורה, הלכות עבודה זרה וחוקות הגויים
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Mishneh Torah, Foreign Worship and Customs of the Nations



Chapter 1

In the days of Enosh, humans made a great error and the sages of that generation gave ignorant advice and Enosh himself was one of those in error.  This was their error.  They said, since God created these stars and the spheres that guide the world and placed them in the heights and treat them with honor and they are the servants that serve before Him.  It is fitting to praise them and to glorify them and treat them with honor.  This is the will of God, blessed be He, that they make great and honor those whom God made great and honored like the king who desires to honor those who stand before him and this is the honor of the king. Since this matter arose in their hearts they began to build palaces to the stars and to make sacrifices to them and to praise and glorify them in words and to bow down before them in order to obtain favor of the creator.  This is the essence of idolatry.  And thus it is said its worshipers know its essence.  They would not say that there is no God, other than a star.  This is what Jeremiah says, "Who will not fear You,  Sovereign of the nations, because to you is appropriate.  Because among all the wise men of the nations and in all their kingdoms there is none like you.  They are both stupid and foolish; the instruction of idols is but wood (Jeremiah 10:7-8)."  That is to say,  everyone knows that you are unique, but their mistake and their folly that they think of as emptiness is your will.
As time went on, first false prophets began to arise amongst humanity, and claimed that God commanded and said to them, "Worship such-and-such star—or all of the stars—and offer sacrifices and libations to it. Build it a temple, and create an idol to its form, in order to bow down to it. The entire nation should do this, the women, children, and rest of the laymen." The false prophet would show them the image that he fabricated of his own volition and would say this is the form that he informed the people of in his prophecy. And humanity started on this path, making images in temples, under trees, and on top of mountains and hills. They would gather together and bow down to these idols, saying to the entire nation that this idol has the power to deal kindly and unkindly, and therefore is deserving of worship and fear. Their priests would tell them that such-and-such worship would be successful, so do such-and-such, and don't do such-and-such. And other deceitful people began to say that the star itself, or the sphere, or the angel, spoke with them and told them, "Serve me by doing such-and-such". And they informed the people of this path of worship, saying, "Do such-and-such, and don't do such-and-such." This trend spread throughout the world, to serve the idols with varying practices, to bring sacrifices to them and to bow down to them. As time went on, the Honored and Fearsome Name was forgotten from the mouth of the entire world and from their thoughts, and they did not recognize It. And it was that the laymen, the women, and the children only knew the idol of wood and stone, and the temple of stone that to which from their youth they had been educated to bow and to swear in its name. And the wise people among them, such as their priests and those like them, would make themselves believe that there was no God beside the stars and the spheres, in whose honor and form the idols were made. But the Rock of Worlds—only select individuals like Enoch, Methuselah, Noah, Shem, and Ever, knew Him and recognized Him. And on this path did the world continue until the Pillar of the World was born—Abraham Our Father.
Once this Might One was weaning, he began to question these practices while he was young, and to ponder day and night. He would wonder, "How could this sun behave like this always, without a Guide, or someone to keep it in motion? Because certainly it is impossible for it to cause itself to orbit." And he had no teacher or informer; rather he was immersed in the idolatrous environment of Ur Kasdim amongst the foolish idol worshippers. His father and mother, along with the rest of the population, were all idol worshippers. He would worship with them, but he would question and wonder, until he found the true and just path from his own correct intuition. And he knew that there is only one God, that He guides the sun, that He created everything, and that there exists no other God besides Him. And he knew that the entire world was mistaken, and that which lead them astray was that they worshipped the stars and the idols, until they lost the truth. And Abraham was 40 years old when he recognized his Creator. Once he recognized and understood God he began to tell others in Ur Kasdim and argue with them, saying that they path which they walk is not the path of truth. And he broke their images and he began to inform them that it was fitting to worship only the one God of the World, to bow and bring sacrifices and librations to Him alone, in order so that future generations would know Him. And that it was fitting to abandon and destroy all of the idols, so that the entire nation would not be lead astray, like those who believed they were the only gods. Because Abraham overpowered them with his proofs, the king ordered him to be killed. But a miracle was down for him, and he escaped to Charan. He began to call out in a great voice to the entire world that there was only one God, and only He was worthy of worship. And he would travel, and call out, and gather the people from city to city, and state to state, until he arrived in the land of Canaan, and called out [to the inhabitants] there, as it says, "He called there on the name of the Lord, the Everlasting God" (Genesis 21:33). And since the people were gathered around him and asking him questions, he would respond to each and every one according to their ability, until he would return him or her to the true path, until multitudes and thousands had been gathered to him. And these are the people of the House of Abraham. He planted within them this major foundation and wrote books about it, and informed Isaac his son about it. And Isaac would teach and warn others. And Isaac informed Jacob and appointed him to teach and sat and strengthen all those following him. And Jacob our Father taught all of his sons, and separated Levi and appointed him the leader of an academy to teach the path of the Name and to observe Abraham's instructions. And he commanded his sons that a appointments from the Children of Levi should never cease so that the teachings would never be forgotten. And this practice continued and grew amongst the children of Jacob and those who accompanied them, and a nation was created in the world that knew God. Until Israel's days in Egypt grew longer, and they returned to learning their ways, worshipping stars like the Egyptians—except for the tribe of Levi that upheld the commandments of the Forefathers, and the tribe of Levi never worshipped idols. And the fundamental principle that Abraham had planted was almost completely uprooted and the Children of Yaakov returned to err and to stray. And out of God's love for us, he upheld the oath he swore to Abraham, and made Moses our Teacher the Teacher of all the prophets and sent him. And since Moses prophesied, and God chose Israel as His portion, He crowned them with commandments and informed them of the way to worship Him, and what the laws would be concerning idol worship and those who err after idols.

Chapter 2


Idolaters wrote many books about its worship: how it's worshiped, its actions and rules.  The Holy One, blessed be He commanded us not to read those books at all, and not to think about them or their words.  And even to look upon the form of its image is forbidden, as it says "do not turn to the gods."  And in this vein, it says (Deuteronomy 12:30) 'Lest you seek their gods saying 'how does one worship [them]" that one should not ask about the form of worship, even though you do not worship it, for such an act causes one to turn after it and to do like they do, as it says (ibid.) "I shall do so, as well"


A Jew who serves false gods, is like a gentile in all matters. And he is not like a Jew who violated another transgression punishable by being stoned to death. An apostate who worships false gods, is like an apostate to all matters in the Torah. And similarly Jewish minnim (heretics) are not considered like a Jew in any matter. And we never accept there repentance, because the verse states: "None that go to her repent, nor will they regain the paths of life" and minnim (heretics) are people who: go after there thoughts of there hearts, and foolish things which were said, until they ultimately transgress against the body of Torah arrogantly, with scorn, with the intent of provoking God's anger, and yet say that there is no sin involved. It is prohibited to speak to them or to respond to them at all as the verse states "Do not come close to her door." and we can assume that every though of a min is towards worshiping false idols. 

Chapter 3

Whoever worships idols willingly, intentionally, they are punishable by kares and if there were witnesses and warning, stoning. By accident, they bring a set sin-offering (chatas).








It is forbidden to create images for decoration, even if they are not for idolatrous purposes. As it states, "You shall not make with me [Gods of silver and gold -- do not make them for yourselves] (Exodus 20:20)". That is to say, not even gold and silver images which are for decoration, in order not to let people come to the mistaken impression that they are for idolatry. The prohibition of decorative images is specifically regarding the human form. Therefore, wood, plaster, or stone cannot be shaped into the human form. This is when the form is in relief, for example the type of reliefs or imagery employed on basins in palaces, etc. One who creates such an image receives lashes. However if the image was a sunken form, or a painted image such as those placed on panels, or an image created from weaving threads, it is permitted.

Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11




Do not practice soothsaying as idolaters, as it is said, "Do not practice soothsaying (Leviticus 19:26)."  What is meant by a soothsayer?  For example, there are those who say, since my bread fell from my mouth or my staff fell from my hand, I will not go to such and such a place today, that if I go, my desires will not be realized.  If a fox passes before me, I will not go past the doorway of my house today, that if I go I will meet a trickster.  And then there are those that hear a chirping bird and say this will happen or this will not happen, or good will happen for this one or bad will happen for that one.  And thus [also]  those that say slaughter this rooster that crows like a raven, slaughter that hen that crows like a rooster.   Also for one who sets up omens for himself, if this happens to me, then I will do that thing and if this  does not happen to me, I will not do it, like Eliezer, servant of Abraham.  And so all who do things like this, all of this is forbidden.  And anyone who does something because of one of these type of things is lashed.










A sorcerer must be condemned to execution by stoning. This applies when he commits a deed of sorcery. If, however, he merely deludes those who observe him into thinking that he is performing an act although he actually does not, he is given stripes for rebelliousness. [The reason is] that the prohibition against sorcery is stated in the prohibition [Deuteronomy 18:10-11]: "There shall not be found among you one who... [practices sorcery]." It is, however, a prohibition which is punishable by execution by the court, as [Exodus 22:17] states: "Do not allow a witch to live." [Therefore,] lashes are not administered for its violation.
And all of these things are words of untruth and deceit. And it is that with which the early idolaters fooled the peoples of the nations, so that they would follow them. And it is not fitting for Israel who are wise sages to follow this hot air, and not to bring to the heart that there is benefit in them, as it is stated (Numbers 23:23), "Since there is no divining in Yaakov and no magic in Israel"; and it is stated (Deuteronomy 18:14), "Since these nations that you are inheriting listen to the soothsayers and to the magicians, but you not like this, etc." Anyone who believes in these things, and similar to them, and thinks in his heart that they are true and a matter of wisdom, but that the Torah forbade them, is nothing but one of the fools and one [of those] lacking intelligence and in the category of woman and children, whose intelligence is not complete. But wise ones and those complete in their intelligence have known with clear proofs that all of these things that the Torah forbade are not matters of wisdom, but rather emptiness and hot air, that those lacking in intelligence followed and left all of the paths of truth on their account. And because of this, the Torah said when it warned against all of this hot air ((Deuteronomy 18:14), 'Be complete with the Lord, your God."

Chapter 12



All negative commandments in the Torah, both men and women are obligated, except for [not destroying the beard and sideburns] and the Kohen's prohibition of defiling himself to the dead [that apply only to men]. And every positive commandment that is occasional and not constant, women are except, except for Kiddush, eating matzah on the night of Pesach, slaughtering and eating the Pesach sacrifice, Hakhel, and rejoicing [on Festivals] which women are obligated to do.







The tattooing that is spoken of in the Torah is cutting the flesh and filling the place with blue or  ink or  other dyes that are inscribed.  And this was the custom of the idolaters who inscribed themselves for the sake of their idolatry as if to say he is a servant sold to it and inscribed for its service.  And when one inscribes  with one of these inscribing items after cutting in any place on the body, whether a man or a woman, he or she is to be lashed.  One who wrote but did not inscribe with color or who inscribed with color, but did not write with cutting is not liable.  Only when he writes and dyes as it is written, "an inked writing (Leviticus 19:28)."  To whom does this apply?  To the one who does the tattooing, but the one who is tattooed is not liable unless he assisted in creating this deed, but if he did nothing he is not lashed.
...  

Within this prohibition is that there shouldn't be two courts in one city, one that practices this custom and this which practices another, for this will lead to large disputes, as it says "do not divide yourselves" do not make disparate groups.