Mishneh Torah, Foreign Worship and Customs of the Nations
משנה תורה, הלכות עבודה זרה וחוקות הגויים
The Mishneh Torah by Maimonides. trans. by Moses Hyamson, 1937-1949
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH002108865

Mishneh Torah, Foreign Worship and Customs of the Nations



Chapter 1

In the days of Enosh, the people fell into gross error, and the counsel of the wise men of the generation became foolish. Enosh himself was among those who erred. Their error was as follows: "Since God", they said, "created these stars and spheres to guide the world, set them on high and allotted unto them honour, and since they are ministers who minister before Him, they deserve to be praised and glorified, and honour should be rendered them; and it is the will of God, blessed be He, that men should aggrandise and honour those whom He aggrandised and honoured—just as a king desires that respect should be shown to the officers who stand before Him, and thus honour is shown to the king." When this idea arose in their minds, they began to erect temples to the stars, offered up sacrifices to them, praised and glorified them in speech, and prostrated themselves before them—their purpose, according to their perverse notions, being to obtain the Creator's favour. This was the root of idolatry, and this was what the idolaters, who knew its fundamentals, said. They did not however maintain that there was no God except the particular star (which was the object of their worship). Thus Jeremiah said "Who would not fear thee, O king of nations ? For it befitteth Thee; for as much as among all the wise men of the nations and in all their kingdom, there is none like unto Thee. But in one thing they are brutish and foolish. The vanities by which they are instructed are but a stock" (Jerem. 10:7-8). This means that all know that Thou alone art God; their error and folly consists in imagining that this vain worship is Thy desire.
In course of time, there arose among men false prophets who asserted that God had commanded and expressly told them, "Worship that particular star, or worship all the stars. Offer up to it such and such sacrifices. Pour out to it such and such libations. Erect a temple to it. Make a figure of it, to which all the people—the women, children, and the rest of the folk—shall bow down". The false prophet pointed out to them the figure which he had invented out of his own mind, and asserted that it is the figure of that particular star, which had been shown him in his prophetic vision. And then, they began to make figures in temples, under the trees, on the mountain-tops and the hills. There they would assemble, bow down to the figures, and tell all the people that this particular figure conferred benefits and inflicted injuries, and that it was proper to worship and fear it. Their priests would say to them, "Through this worship, shall ye increase and prosper. Do this, and do not do that". Other imposters then sprang up, who declared that the star, celestial sphere or angel, had communed with them, and said to them "Worship me in such and such fashion", had taught them a definite ritual and said to them "Do this, and do not do that". So gradually the custom spread throughout the world of worshipping figures with various modes of worship, such as offering up sacrifices to them, and bowing down to them. As time passed, the honoured and revered Name of God was forgotten by mankind, vanished from their lips and hearts, and was no longer known to them. All the common people and the women and children knew only the figure of wood and stone, and the temple edifice in which they had, from their childhood, been trained to prostrate themselves to the figure, worship it and swear by its name. Even their wise men, such as priests and men of similar standing, also fancied that there was no other god but the stars and spheres, for whose sake and in whose similitude these figures had been made. But The Creator of the Universe was known to none, and recognised by none, save a few solitary individuals, such as Enosh, Methuselah, Noah, Shem and Eber. The world moved on in this fashion, till that Pillar of the World, the Patriarch Abraham, was born. 
After he was weaned, while still an infant, his mind began to reflect. By day and by night he was thinking and wondering: 'How is it possible that this (celestial) sphere should continuously be guiding the world and have no one to guide it and cause it to turn round; for it cannot be that it turns round of itself'. He had no teacher, no one to instruct him in aught. He was submerged, in Ur of the Chaldees, among silly idolaters. His father and mother and the entire population worshipped idols, and he worshipped with them. But his mind was busily working and reflecting till he had attained the way of truth, apprehended the correct line of thought and knew that there is One God, that He guides the celestial Sphere and created everything, and that among all that exist, there is no god beside Him. He realised that the whole world was in error, and that what had occasioned their error was that they worshipped the stars and the images, so that the truth perished from their minds. Abraham was forty years old when he recognised his Creator. Having attained this knowledge, he began to refute the inhabitants of Ur of the Chaldees, arguing with them and saying to them, "The course you are following is not the way of truth". He broke the images and commenced to instruct the people that it was not right to serve any one but the God of the Universe, to Whom alone it was proper to bow down, offer up sacrifices and make libations, so that all human creatures might, in the future, know Him; and that it was proper to destroy and shatter all the images, so that the people might not err like these who thought that there was no god but these images. When he had prevailed over them with his arguments, the king (of the country) sought to slay him. He was miraculously saved, and emigrated to Haran. He then began to proclaim to the whole world with great power and to instruct the people that the entire Universe had but one Creator and that Him it was right to worship. He went from city to city and from kingdom to kingdom, calling and gathering together the inhabitants till he arrived in the land of Canaan. There too, he proclaimed his message, as it is said "And he called there on the name of the Lord, God of the Universe" (Gen. 21:33). When the people flocked to him and questioned him regarding his assertions, he would instruct each one according to his capacity till he had brought him to the way of truth, and thus thousands and tens of thousands joined him. These were the persons referred to in the phrase, "men of the house of Abraham". He implanted in their hearts this great doctrine, composed books on it, and taught it to Isaac, his son. Isaac settled down, instructing and exhorting. He imparted the doctrine to Jacob and ordained him to teach it. He, too, settled down, taught and morally strengthened all who joined him. The patriarch Jacob instructed all his sons, set apart Levi, appointed him head (teacher) and placed him in a college to teach the way of God and keep the charge of Abraham. He charged his sons to appoint from the tribe of Levi, one instructor after another, in uninterrupted succession, so that the doctrine might never be forgotten. And so it went on with ever increasing vigour among Jacob's children and their adherents till they became a people that knew God. When the Israelites had stayed a long while in Egypt, they relapsed, learnt the practices of their neighbours, and, like them, worshipped idols, with the exception of the tribe of Levi, which steadfastly kept the charge of the Patriarch. This tribe of Levi never practised idolatry. The doctrine implanted by Abraham would, in a very short time, have been uprooted, and Jacob's descendants would have relapsed into the error and perversities universally prevalent. But because of God's love for us and because He kept the oath made to our ancestor Abraham, He appointed Moses to be our teacher and the teacher of all the prophets, and charged him with his mission. After Moses had begun to exercise his prophetic functions and Israel had been chosen by the Almighty as His heritage, he crowned them with precepts, and showed them the way to worship Him and how to deal with idolatry and with those who go astray after it.

Chapter 2

The essential principle in the precepts concerning idolatry is that we are not to worship any thing created—neither angel, sphere, star, none of the four elements, nor whatever has been formed from them. Even if the worshipper is aware that the Eternal is God, and worships the created thing in the sense in which Enosh and his contemporaries did, he is an idolater. It is against this that the Torah warns us when it says "And lest thou lift up thine eyes unto heaven, and seest the sun…. which the Lord, thy God hath alloted unto all the peoples" (Deut. 4:19). This means that when your mind roams and you observe that the world is guided by these spheres and that God placed them in the world, as beings that live, endure permanently, and do not disintegrate, like all other things, you may say that it is proper to bow down to these spheres and worship them. Concerning this tendency, God commanded and said, "Take heed lest your heart be deceived" (Deut. 11:16); that is to say, do not be led astray by the fancies of your mind, to worship these beings as intermediaries between yourselves and the Creator.
Many volumes have been composed by idolaters on idolatry, dealing with its essential principle, rites and rules. The Holy One, blessed be He, has enjoined us not to read these books, nor to meditate upon idol-worship, nor upon anything appertaining to it. It is even forbidden to gaze upon the picture of an idolatrous figure, as it is said "Turn ye not unto the idols" (Lev. 19:4). In this connection it is further said "And that thou inquirest not after their gods, saying 'How do these nations serve'" (Deut. 12:30). That means that you shall not enquire in regard to an idol, as to the mode of its worship, even if you are not worshipping it. For this would cause you to turn after it and do as the idolaters do, as the text continues "Even so will I do likewise" (Deut. 12:30).
All these prohibitions come under one category—not to turn to idolatry. Whoever turns towards it, by an overt act, is punished with stripes. It is not only idolatry to which we must not turn in thought. We are likewise warned not to permit any thought to enter our minds, that might cause one to reject a fundamental principle of the Torah. We must not turn our minds to such a thought and thus be drawn after the imaginations of our hearts. For the mind is limited; not every mind is capable of attaining knowledge of the truth in its purity. If every man were to follow after the vagaries of his heart, the result would be universal ruin, ensuing from the limitations of the human intellect. How so ? Sometimes one will be drawn to idolatry. Sometimes he will waver in his mind concerning the Unity of God, as to whether He is One or He is not One. He will speculate on what is above (the visible universe), what below it, what existed before the Creation, what will exist after the world comes to an end. Sometimes he will muse concerning Prophecy, and say to himself 'Perhaps it is true, perhaps it is not'. Sometimes he will harbour similar doubts concerning the Torah as to whether it is of divine origin, or not. And such a person, being ignorant of the logical principles which need to be applied in order to attain positive truth, will lapse into heresy. In this regard, the Torah exhorted us "And that ye go not about after your heart nor after your eyes, after which ye use to go astray" (Num. 15:39). This means "You shall not allow yourselves to be drawn, each one after his own limited intelligence, and imagine that his mind is attaining truth." The sages thus explained the text quoted above (Num. 15:39); "After your heart" refers to heresy. "After your eyes" refers to lechery." Although the violation of this prohibition may result in forfeiture of life hereafter, it is not punished with stripes. This is in accordance with the principle that an infraction which does not involve a physical act does not render one liable to that penalty.
The precept relating to idolatry is equal in importance to all the other precepts put together, as it is said, "And when ye shall err and not observe all these commandments" (Num. 15:22). This text has traditionally been interpreted as alluding to idolatry; hence the inference that acceptance of idolatry is tantamount to repudiating the whole Torah, the prophets and everything that they were commanded, from Adam to the end of time, as it is said "From the day that the Lord gave commandment and onward, throughout your generations" (Num. 15:23). And whoever denies idolatry confesses his faith in the whole Torah, in all the prophets and all that the prophets were commanded, from Adam to the end of time. And this is the fundamental principle of all the commandments.
An Israelite who worshipped an idol is regarded as an idolater in all respects and not as an Israelite who committed a transgression, the penalty for which is death by stoning. A pervert to idolatry is regarded as having renounced the whole of the Torah. So too, the infidels in Israel are in no wise to be regarded as Israelites; as it is said, "None that go unto her return, neither do they attain the paths of life" (Prov. 2:19). Infidels are those who, in respect to the follies of which we have spoken, go after the fancies of their hearts, till at last they become transgressors of the fundamental precepts of the Torah, in a spirit of defiance and arrogance, asserting that there is nothing wrong in what they do. It is forbidden to hold converse with them or give them any reply, as it is said, "And come not nigh the door of her house" (Prov. 5:8). The mind of the infidel tends towards idolatry.
Whoever acknowledges that idolatry is true, even if he does not worship an idol, reviles and blasphemes the honoured and revered Name of God. The idolater and the blasphemer are in the same class, as it is said, "But the soul that doeth aught with a high hand, whether he be home-born or a stranger, the same blasphemeth the Lord" (Num. 15:30). Hence, the idolater is hanged, just as the blasphemer is hanged, both being previously stoned. I have accordingly included the law of the blasphemer among the laws of idolatry, since both the blasphemer and the idolater deny the fundamental principles of our religion.
The following are the rules concerning the blasphemer. The blasphemer does not incur the penalty of death by stoning till he has pronounced the proper Name of God which is written <i>Aleph, Daleth Nun, Yod,</i> and cursed it, invoking one of the names of the Deity that may not be erased, as it is said "And he that blasphemeth the name of the Lord (shall be put to death) (Lev. 24:16). Blaspheming the Proper Name of God is punished by stoning; but one who blasphemes any of the attributive names of God, only violates a prohibition. One authority declares that the extreme penalty is incurred only when the Tetragrammaton (J.H.V.H.) is blasphemed. I am of the opinion that the blasphemer is stoned, who uses either of the Proper Names.
Whence is the prohibition of blasphemy derived ? From the text "Thou shalt not revile God" (Ex. 22:27). The witnesses are examined day after day, using allusive terms such as the phrase "Let José smite José". When the trial is concluded, the Court is cleared and the senior witness is again questioned. The judges say to him 'declare what thou didst hear, explicitly'. He makes the declaration. The judges rise and rend their garments; these rents are never sewn up. The second witness then says 'I heard the same as he did'. If there were many witnesses, each of them has to declare, 'I heard the same as the previous witness'.
If the blasphemer retracts the blasphemy, even immediately after it has been uttered, it is of no avail. One who blasphemed in the presence of witnesses is put to death by stoning. If one blasphemed the Name of God, invoking the name of an idol, zealots attack him and put him to death. If they have not slain him, and he appears before the Court, he is not stoned unless he has blasphemed, invoking one of the Proper Names of God.
Whoever hears the Name of God blasphemed—even if it be one of the attributive Names—must rend his garments, provided that he hears the blasphemy uttered by an Israelite. Whether he hears it directly from the blasphemer, himself, or hears it reported by one who heard it from the blasphemer, he has to rend his garments. But one who hears a blasphemy uttered by an idolater is not obliged to rend his garments. The reason why Eliakim and Shebna rent their garments (when they heard Rabshakeh blaspheming) (II Kings ch. 18), was because Rabshakeh was an apostate. All the witnesses and judges place their hands, one after another, upon the head of the blasphemer and say to him 'Thy blood be upon thy head, for thou hast brought it on thyself'. Of all those, who are condemned to death by the Court, the blasphemer is the only one in whose case imposition of hands is required, as it is said, "And let all that heard him lay their hands upon his head" (Lev. 24:14).

Chapter 3

Whoever worships an idol of his own free will and wilfully, incurs the (divine) penalty of excision. If witnesses were present and there had been previous warning, he is stoned. If one worshipped an idol in error, he brings the prescribed sin-offering.
Several modes of worship were instituted by the idolaters for each image and figure. The mode of worship for one idol is not the same as that for another idol. For example, the worship of Peor consists in indecent exposure of the person before the idol; the worship of Mercury consists in casting stones towards the idol or removing stones from before it. Many modes of worship, similar to these, were instituted for other idols. Hence, he who exposes his person in worship of Mercury or casts a stone before Peor, does not incur the penalty for idolatry. He is only liable, if he worships an idol in accordance with its special ritual, as it is said, "How do these nations serve their gods ? Even so will I do likewise" (Deut. 12:30). The Court must therefore be acquainted with the diverse idolatrous rituals, for no Israelite, (charged with worshipping an idol), is stoned, unless the Court knows that he observed the ritual appropriate to that idol.
The prohibition of these and similar modes of worship is inferred from the text "Nor serve them" (Ex. 20:5). This refers to all modes of worship with the exception of bowing down, sacrificing, offering incense or libation. He who uses any of these modes in the worship of any idol is liable to the penalty for idolatry, even if such is not the mode of worship peculiar to the particular idol worshipped. For example, if one pours forth a libation to Peor, or sacrifices to Mercury, he is liable, as it is said "He that sacrificeth unto the gods, save unto the Lord only, shall be utterly destroyed" (Ex. 22:19). Since sacrifice is included in the modes of worship, why is it especially mentioned in this text? To indicate that even as sacrifice is a mode of worship appropriate to the service of God, and one who offers up sacrifices to another deity incurs the penalty of stoning, irrespective of whether sacrifice is or is not the special mode of worshipping that particular deity, so every mode of worship appropriate to the service of God, if used in the worship of an idol,—whether that is or is not its special mode or worship—renders the worshipper liable as an idolater. It is therefore said, "Thou shalt not bow down to another god" (Ex. 34:14), in order to render one who bows down to an idol liable, even if such an act is not its mode of worship. The same rule applies to the offering of incense or libation. Sprinkling (of blood) and Pouring out Libations are regarded as identical.
If one offers ordure to an idol, or makes a libation to it of a pot filled with urine, he is liable to the penalty for idolatry. One who slays a grasshopper (to an idol) is not liable, unless such is its mode of worship. Thus also, to slay a beast that is short of a limb (as a sacrifice to an idol), does not render the slayer liable unless this was its special mode of worship. If an idol is worshipped by means of a stick, one who broke a stick before it, is liable and the stick may not be used. But if one threw a stick before it, he is liable, but the stick is not inhibited from use. The reason for the distinction is that throwing a stick is not analogous to sprinkling blood; because the stick, after being thrown, is unimpaired, while the blood, after it had been sprinkled, has been dispersed. Whoever accepts any one of the various classes of idols as a god, incurs the penalty of stoning. Even if a man takes up a brick and addresses it thus: 'Thou art my god', or words of similar import, he is liable. And though he retracts immediately and adds 'This is not my god', his retraction is of no avail and he is stoned.
Whoever worships an idol in accordance with its special ritual, even if he does so contemptuously, is liable. For example, if one exposes his person before Peor, in order to show contempt for it, or casts a stone towards Mercury to show his contempt for it, he is liable—these being the respective modes of worshipping those idols—and he should accordingly bring a sacrifice in atonement for his error.
If one worships an idol, out of love, as for instance, if a particular image fills him with delight by its beautiful craftmanship, or, if one worships an idol, out of fear of it, because he apprehends that it might do him harm—like the idolaters who imagine that the idol has power to benefit or injure—he is liable to stoning, provided that he accepted it as a god. But if he worshipped it with the ritual peculiar to it, or with one of the four modes appropriate to the worship of God, and his motive is only love of the idol or fear of it, he is not liable. He who embraces an idol, kisses it, sweeps the ground or lays the dust in front of it, washes it, anoints it, clothes it, puts shoes on its feet, or performs similar offices of respect, violates a prohibition, for it is said, "Nor serve them" (Ex. 20:5). These acts come under the category of worship, but stripes are not inflicted for any of them, since they do not constitute worship explicitly. If any of these acts is a ritual peculiar to an idol, and one performs it with intent to worship, he is liable for idolatry.
If a thorn lodged in a person's foot while he was standing in front of an idol, he is not to bend down in order to remove it, because it would look as if he were bowing down to the idol. If coins, belonging to a person, had been scattered in front of it, he is not to bend down to pick them up, because it would look as if he were bowing down to the idol. But he is to sit down and then extract the thorn or pick up the coins.
Where there are figures in front of an idol, which discharge water, one may not place his mouth over the opening of any of them and drink, because it would look as if he were kissing an idol.
If one acquires an idol for himself, he is punished with stripes, even though he did not make it with his own hand and did not worship it, as it is said, "Thou shalt not make unto thee a graven image nor any manner of likeness" (Ex. 20:4). So too, if one makes an idol with his hands for others, even if he makes it for an idolater, he is punished with stripes, as it is said, "Nor make unto yourselves molten gods" (Lev. 19:4). Hence, one who makes an idol with his own hand and for himself, is punished with stripes twice.
It is forbidden to make figures for purposes of ornament, even if they are not idolatrous, as it is said, "Ye shall not make with Me gods of gold and silver" (Ex. 20:23); that is to say, figures of gold and silver which only serve as ornaments; so that those likely to err shall not err and imagine that these figures serve idolatrous purposes. The prohibition of making ornamental figures only applies to representation of the human form. Hence, a figure of a human being must not be made in wood, clay or stone; provided that the figure is in high relief like sculptures and figures in palaces and the like places; and whoever makes such is punished with stripes. But if a figure is in bas-relief or painted, such as pictures on boards and tablets, or woven in tapestry—it is permitted.
If a signet ring has a human figure on it, and the figure is in high-relief, it is forbidden to wear the ring, but it may be used as a seal. If the figure is in bas-relief, the ring may be worn but may not be used for sealing, because the impression it would make would be in high-relief. It is also forbidden to make figures of the sun, moon, stars, constellations, or angels, for it is said, "Ye shall not make with Me" (Ex. 20:20); that is, 'ye shall not make figures representing My ministers that minister before Me on high'; and such figures may not be made even on tablets. Figures of quadrupeds and of other animals—with the exception of Man,—and of trees and plants, etc., may be made, even if the figures are in relief.

Chapter 4

Those who seduce a city of Israel to idolatry are put to death by stoning, even if they themselves did not worship an idol but only seduced the inhabitants of their city to do so. The seduced inhabitants are put to death by the sword, provided that they worshipped an idol or accepted it as a god. Whence is the prohibition of seduction to idolatry inferred ? From the text "Neither let it be heard out of thy mouth (Ex. 23:13).
A city does not become a seduced city unless those who have led it astray belong to it and are of the same tribe as the rest of its inhabitants, as it is said, "From the midst of thee, and they have drawn away the inhabitants of their city" (Deut. 13:14); unless the seducers are two or more than two, as it is said "Certain base <i>fellows</i> are gone out…. and have drawn away the inhabitants of their city" (ibid 13:14); and unless those seduced are the majority of its inhabitants and number from one hundred up to the majority of the tribe. But if the majority of a tribe has been led astray, they are judged individually, as it is said, "the inhabitants of that city" (Deut. 13:16), that is, not of a small village nor of a large capital. A population of less than a hundred forms a small village and the majority of a tribe constitutes a large capital. So too, if women or children have seduced it, or a single male adult has done so, or a minority only of its inhabitants have been led astray, or if they have gone astray of themselves, or the seducers came from outside—in all these cases, the law of the seduced city is not applied to it; the inhabitants are regarded as individuals who have worshipped idolatry. Whoever has transgressed is put to death by stoning, while the transgressors' property passes to their heirs, as in the case of other malefactors, executed by sentence of a judicial court.
A seduced city may only be tried by a Court of seventy-one judges, as it is said "Then shalt thou bring forth that man or that woman who have done this evil thing unto thy gates" (Deut. 17:5), which means that individual offenders are executed by the sentence of a court at the gate (Tribal court of twenty-three judges); but majorities of cities are only executed if tried and sentenced by the Supreme Court (Seventy-one judges).
None of the Cities of Refuge (Num. 35:10-15), can ever become a seduced city, as it is said, "in one of thy cities" (Deut. 13:13). Nor can Jerusalem be condemned as a seduced city, since it had never been assigned to (any of) the tribes. A frontier town is never condemned as a seduced city, so that idolaters might not invade the Holy Land of Israel and destroy it. One court cannot declare three cities, adjacent to each other, to be seduced cities. But it may so declare them if they are at a distance from each other.
A city is not declared a seduced city unless the seducers used the plural number and said to the inhabitants 'let us go and worship', 'let us go and sacrifice', 'let us go and pour out libations', 'let us go and bow down', or 'let us go and accept the idol as a god'; and the people gave heed and worshipped it with its special ritual; or in one of the four modes appropriate to the worship of God, or accepted the idol as a god. In a city where all these conditions have not been fulfilled by it and its seducers, how are the inhabitants to be treated ? Those who have worshipped idols are to be warned separately, and after testimony has been given of their persisting in idolatry, they are put to death by stoning as individuals who worshipped idols. Their property passes to their heirs.
What is the procedure in the case of a seduced city, when it is in a condition to be declared a seduced city ? The Supreme Court sends a Commission, through whom it institutes an enquiry and inquisition, till the Judges are convinced on clear evidence that all or the greater part of that city's population have been led astray and relapsed into idolatry. Then they send to them two scholars to warn them and try to bring them back to the right path. If they repent, it is well. But if they persist in their folly, the Court charges all Israel to organise an expedition against them. They lay siege to, and wage war upon them till the city is taken by storm. After it has been taken, a large number of tribunals is set up to try the inhabitants. Any one against whom two witnesses come and testify that he worshipped idols, after having been warned, is set apart. If all who worshipped idols are found to be a minority of the inhabitants, they are stoned, and the rest are saved. If those who worshipped idols are found to be the majority, they are brought before the Supreme Court, where their trial is completed. All those who worshipped idols are put to death by decapitation. If it is found that all the inhabitants had worshipped idols, all human beings in the city, including women and children, are put to the sword. If a majority of the inhabitants had worshipped idols, the wives and children of the idolaters are slain with the sword. Whether the whole city or a majority of its inhabitants had been seduced, those who seduced them are put to death by stoning. All the property in the city is gathered into its broadway. If it has no broadway, a broadway is constructed for it. If its broadway is situated outside the city, an exterior wall is built, so as to enclose it within the city, as it is said, "into the midst of the broad place thereof" (Deut. 13:17). All living creatures in the city are slain and all other property, together with the district itself, is burnt. This destruction by fire is an affirmative precept, as it is said, "And thou shalt burn with fire the city and all the spoil thereof" (Deut. 13:17).
Property belonging to the righteous men in the city, that is, those inhabitants who were not led astray with the majority, is burnt with the rest of the goods in the city; because they lived there, their property is destroyed. Whoever converts any portion of it, however small, to his use, is punished with the statutory (39) stripes; as it is said "And there shall cleave naught of the devoted thing to thy hand" (Deut. 13:18).
If the witnesses, on whose evidence a city has been declared a seduced city, are found to have given false testimony, one who has taken possession of any portion of its property acquires the right to the same, and may convert it to his use—the reason being that the witnesses' testimony was refuted.<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* And therefore the property need not be destroyed (as in paragraphs 6 and 7).</i> Why, however, did he acquire the right to the property ? The answer is that every owner of property in that city, immediately after conviction, divested himself of his ownership, by dereliction. The city is never rebuilt, and whoever rebuilds it, is punished with stripes, as it is said "It shall not again be built" (Deut. 13:17). But the site may be converted into gardens and parks, as it is said "It shall not be built again"—which means that it may not be rebuilt as an inhabited district, such as it formerly had been.
When a caravan, travelling from place to place, passed through a city that had been seduced and was also seduced with it, the members of the caravan are put to death by decapitation and their property is destroyed—provided that the caravan stayed in the city at least thirty days. Otherwise, they are put to death by stoning, and their property passes to their heirs.
Property belonging to residents in another district, but deposited in the seduced city—even when responsibility for its safekeeping was assumed by citizens of the condemned city—is not burnt but reverts to the owners, as it is said, "The spoil thereof" (Deut. 13:17)—not the spoil of another district. Property owned by the wicked who were seduced, and which was deposited in another district, if it had been collected and placed with the property in the condemned city, is burnt with it. Otherwise it is not destroyed but passes to the heirs.
A beast, half interest in which belongs to a seduced city (or a resident in it), while the other half is the property of another city, if found in the seduced city, may not be converted to private use. A mass of dough, similarly owned, may be used, because it is capable of partition.
A beast owned by a seduced city, even after it had been ritually slaughtered, may not be converted to private use, as is the rule with an ox condemned to be stoned (Ex. 21:28-32) that had been ritually slaughtered. Natural hair of the men or women of the seduced city may be used. But the hair of a wig found there, comes within the category of "the spoil thereof" and may not be used.
Fruits (of the field or orchard), not yet severed and found in the seduced city, may be enjoyed, as it is said, "And thou shalt gather…. and shalt burn" (Deut. 13:17). The text refers to that which only needs to be gathered and burnt, but not to fruits still attached (to the soil or tree), for these must be severed before they can be gathered and burnt. The same principle applies to the hair of the head, and, needless to add, to trees which are permitted to be used and become the property of the heirs. In regard to sanctified property, cattle set apart to be sacrificed on the altar are suffered to die a natural death, for "the sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination" (Prov. 21:27). If they had been contributed to defray the cost of repairing the sacred edifice, they are to be redeemed, and then are burnt, as it is said "The spoil thereof" (Deut. 13:17), but not the possessions of God.
The first born (of cattle) and the tithe of cattle found in the city, if without blemish, are treated like sacrifices for the altar, and suffered to die. If blemished, they are treated like the ordinary cattle of the city and are slain. Heave-offerings (Num. 18:11), found in it, which have passed into the possession of a priest, are to be left to rot, being his property. If they are still in the possession of the Israelite (owner of the produce) they should be given to a priest resident in another district, for they are God's property and intrinsically sacred.
The Second Tithe (Deut. 14:22-23) and the money into which it has been converted (ibid. 14:24-26), and likewise sacred scriptures, found in a seduced city, must be put away in a place of concealment.
Whoever executes judgment on a seduced city performs a meritorious act, as much as one who offers up a burnt offering that is wholly consumed, as it is said, "Every whit unto the Lord, thy God" (Deut. 13:18). Yea more, he averts fierce wrath from Israel, as it is said, "that the Lord may turn from the fierceness of his anger" (ibid. 13:18); and brings blessing and mercy upon Israelites, as it is said "And show thee mercy, and have compassion upon thee, and multiply thee" (ibid. 13:18).

Chapter 5

He who entices an Israelite man or woman to idolatry is stoned, even though neither the enticer nor the enticed worshipped an idol, but because he gave instruction to worship an idol. And whether the enticer was a layman or a prophet, or whether only one person—male or female—was enticed or a number of persons were enticed, the punishment is death by stoning.
He who entices the majority of the inhabitants of a city to idolatry is a seducer and is not styled an enticer. If the seducer of the majority of a city was a prophet, he is put to death by stoning, and those who were seduced are dealt with individually and not as inhabitants of a seduced city, unless there were at least two seducers. Whether one says "The idol said to me 'worship ye it' " or says "the Holy One, blessed be He, said to me 'worship ye the idol' ", in either case, he is regarded as a prophet who seduced. And if the majority of the inhabitants of a city went astray after him, he is put to death by stoning. The enticer, whether he used the plural or singular number, is put to death by stoning. For instance, if one says to another, "I will worship an idol"; "I will go and worship"; let us go and worship with the ritual especially used for that particular idol"; "I will sacrifice"; "I will go and sacrifice"; "let us go and sacrifice"; "I will burn incense"; "I will go and burn incense"; "let us go and prostrate ourselves";—in uttering any of these phrases, he is an enticer. If he enticed two persons, they act as the witnesses. They bring him to the Court and testify concerning him that he had so spoken to them, and he is put to death by stoning.
For the conviction of an enticer, no previous warning is required. If he spoke to a single individual, that person should reply "I have friends who desire this". And it should be so contrived that the enticer shall make his attempt at seduction before two witnesses, which is necessary to secure his condemnation to death. If the enticer will not consent to entice two persons, it is a duty to secure the evidence of concealed witnesses. In no other class of capital offences but this, is recourse had to this method. What is the procedure ? The one whom he attempted to entice, brings two men, and stations them in a dark place where they can see the enticer and hear his words, while the enticer cannot see them. He then says to the enticer, "Say again what you said to me privately". After the enticer has done so, the one whom he sought to entice replies, "How can we give up our God who is in Heaven, and go and and worship blocks of wood and stones ?" If the enticer retracts or keeps silent, he is not liable. But if he says "This is our duty, and this, it is right for us to do", then those who stood at a distance bring him to the Court and he is put to death by stoning.
The execution of the enticer devolves upon the one he attempted to entice, as it is said, "Thy hand shall be first upon him to put him to death" (Deut. 13:10). The latter is forbidden to love the enticer, as it is said "Thou shalt not consent unto him" (Deut. 13:9). Since, in reference to an enemy, it is said "Thou shalt surely release it with him" (Ex. 23:5), it might be supposed that this person (the enticer) should also be helped. It is therefore said "Nor hearken unto him" (Ibid. 13:9). Since it is said, "Neither shalt thou stand idly by the blood of thy neighbour" (Lev. 19:16), it might be supposed that you are not to stand idly by the blood of this man. It is therefore said "Neither shall thine eye pity him" (Deut. 13:9). The enticed must not seek to exculpate the enticer, as it is said "Neither shalt thou spare" (Deut. 13:9). And if he is aware of a ground for the enticer's condemnation, he must not refrain from declaring it, as it is said, "Neither shalt thou conceal him" (ibid. 13:9). Whence is the prohibition inferred, forbidding a layman to entice to idolatry ? From the text "And all Israel shall hear and fear"<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* The prohibition is implicit in the conclusion of this text. “And they shall not continue to do wickedness like this in thy midst.”</i> (Deut. 13:12).
If one enticed others to worship him, and said to them "worship me", and they worshipped him, he is stoned; but he is not stoned if they did not worship him, even though they accepted his statement and said "yes".<sup class="footnote-marker">**</sup><i class="footnote">** They said it in derision.</i> But if he enticed people to the worship of another person or to any other form of idolatry, and the one he addressed accepted his teaching and said "yes, let us go and worship", even though the latter did not yet carry out his intention, both the enticer and the enticed are stoned, as it is said, "Thou shalt not consent unto him nor hearken unto him" (Deut. 13:9), implying that one who does consent and hearken is liable to punishment.
What is meant by a prophet who prophesies in the name of idolatry ? He is one who asserts "This particular idol or particular star told me that it is a duty to do this and this or not to do it'. Even if his statement coincided with the law, so that he declared unclean that which is actually unclean and pronounced clean that which is clean, he is put to death by strangling, provided that he had been warned in the presence of two witnesses, as it is said, "or that shall speak in the name of other gods, that same prophet shall die" (Deut. 18:20). The prohibition is implied in the text "And make no mention of the name of other gods" (Ex. 23:13).
It is forbidden to engage in a controversy with, or refutation of, one who prophesies in the name of idolatry. Nor is he asked for a sign or token. Should he, on his own initiative, perform such a sign, we pay no heed to it nor reflect upon it. Whoever gives consideration to such signs, (thinking) that possibly they are true, violates a prohibition, as it is said "Thou shalt not hearken to the words of that prophet" (Deut. 13:4). A false prophet is put to death by strangling, even though he prophesied in the name of the Lord, and neither added to, nor took aught away from His commandments, as it is said, "But the prophet that shall speak a word presumptuously in My name, which I have not commanded him to speak, or that shall speak in the name of other gods, that same prophet shall die" (Deut. 18:20).
Whether one prophesies what he has not received in a prophetic vision, or, having heard the words of another prophet, declares that the message was directly communicated to himself—in either case, he is a false prophet and is put to death by strangling.
Whoever refrains from slaying a false prophet because of his high standing, his mode of life being consistent with the prophetic calling, violates a prohibition, as it is said, "the prophet hath spoken it presumptuously; thou shalt not be afraid of him" (Deut. 18:22). Likewise, whoever refrains from declaring grounds for his condemnation, or stands in fear and awe of his words, is included among those who transgress the prohibition "Thou shalt not be afraid of him" (Deut. 18.22). The false prophet may only be tried by the Court of seventy-one judges.
He who makes a vow in the name of an idol or swears by it, is punished with stripes, as it is said, "And make no mention of the name of other gods" (Ex. 23:13); and this is so, irrespective of whether he swore by it for himself<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* Swearing in the name of an idol to do something.</i> or for an idolater<sup class="footnote-marker">**</sup><i class="footnote">** Swearing in its name to induce an idolater to do something.</i>. It is also forbidden to cause an idolater to take an oath by his object of worship. The mention of the name of an idol, not by way of oath, is also forbidden, as it is said, "Make no mention" (Ex. 23:13).
A person should not say to another "wait for me beside that idol", or give a similar direction. The names however of any idol mentioned in the Scriptures may be uttered, such as Peor, Bel, Nebo, Gad, etc. It is forbidden to give others an occasion to make vows or confirm them in the name of an idol. That person only is punished with stripes who himself makes or confirms a vow in the name of an idol, that is, swears by its name.

Chapter 6

One who practises communion with ghosts or familiar spirits of his own free will and presumptuously, incurs the penalty of excision. And if witnesses were present and a warning had been previously given, he is put to death by stoning. If the offence had been committed unwittingly, he brings the appointed sin-offering. How is communing with ghosts practised ? The practitioner stands up, offers a certain kind of incense, holds in his hand a myrtle twig, and waves it. He pronounces softly certain words known to the practitioners of this art, till the one who consults him fancies that someone is conversing with him, and answering his questions in words that sound as if they came from beneath the ground in exceedingly low tones almost inaudible to the ear and only apprehended by the mind. Or he takes a dead man's skull, burns incense to it and uses arts of divination till one hears a sound as if a voice, exceedingly low, came from under his armpit and replied to him—all acts of such nature constitute communion with ghosts. Whoever does any of these things is put to death by stoning.
How is communion with spirits practised ? The practitioner puts the bone of a bird called <i>Yadua</i> into his mouth, offers up incense and performs other acts till he falls down like an epileptic and utters predictions of future events. All these are species of idolatry. Whence is it inferred that they are prohibited ? From the text "Turn ye not unto the ghosts nor unto familiar spirits" (Lev. 19:31).
He who, of his own free will and presumptuously, offers any of his offspring to Molech, incurs the penalty of excision. If he does so unwittingly, he brings the appointed sin-offering. If the offence was committed in the presence of witnesses and after warning, he is put to death by stoning, as it is said "Whosoever…. that giveth of his seed unto Molech shall surely be put to death; the people of the land shall stone him with stones" (Lev. 20:2). Whence is it inferred that this is prohibited ? From the text "And thou shalt not give any of thy seed to make pass to Molech" (Lev. 18:21), and it is further said, "There shall not be found among you any one that maketh his son or his daughter pass through the fire" (Deut. 18:10). What is the procedure ? A great fire is kindled. The father takes anyone of his offspring and delivers him to the priests who are fire worshippers. Those priests give back the son to the father, after he had been delivered into their hands, that he may be passed through the fire with his father's consent. The father it is who passes his son over the fire with the priest's permission. He makes his son walk through the flames on his feet, from one side to the other. Not that he burns the child in honour of Molech, as sons and daughters were burnt in the worship of another species of idolatry, but merely passing (the child) through the fire constituted the service of the idol called Molech. Therefore, he who performs this ritual to an idol other than Molech, is not liable.
The penalty of excision or stoning is not incurred unless the father delivers his son to Molech and makes him pass through the fire on his feet, leading him through. If he delivered him to Molech but did not make him pass through the fire, or if he made him pass without having delivered him to Molech, or if he delivered him to Molech and made him pass through the fire but did not lead him through, he is not liable. Nor is he liable unless he delivers some of his offspring only and leaves the others, as it is said, "Because he hath given of his seed to Molech"; "of his seed", but not all his seed.
One is liable for leading any of his descendants through the fire to Molech, whether they are legitimate or illegitimate, whether sons or daughters, their children or grand-children, or any descendants—all these being included in one's offspring. But if he led his brothers, sisters, ancestors, or himself, through the fire to Molech, he is not liable; or if he led his offspring, while asleep or blind, he is not liable.
The pillar, which the Torah forbids is a structure at which all gather, even if the purpose is to worship God, for such was the custom of the idolaters; as it is said, "Neither shalt thou set thee up a pillar" (Deut. 16:22). Whoever sets up such a pillar, is punished with stripes. So too, in regard to the "figured stone" mentioned in the Torah—any one who prostrates himself on it, even to worship the Lord, is punished with stripes, as it is said "Neither shall ye place a figured stone in your land to bow down yourselves upon it" (Lev. 26:1)—it having been the custom of idolaters to place a stone before an idol that the worshipers might prostrate themselves upon it. We may not do the like unto the Lord. One is however not punished with stripes unless he spreads out his hands and feet on the stone so that he lies completely stretched out across it. This is the prostration mentioned in the Torah.
This rule applies to all territories except the Temple, where it is permitted to prostrate oneself on the stones, as it is said, "in your land" (Deut. 26:1), which means that in your land you may not prostrate yourself, but you may do so on the cut stones in the Temple. Hence, all Israelites have the custom to spread mats, or any kind of straw or stubble over the stone floors of synagogues, to serve as a partition between their faces and the stones. If a worshipper was unable to procure anything which would separate him from the stone, he should go elsewhere to prostrate himself, or turn on his side and incline, so that his face will not touch the stone.
Whoever prostrates himself to God on cut stones without extending his hands and feet is not punished with the statutory stripes (for violating a scriptural prohibition) but receives stripes for contumacy. If however he prostrates himself to an idol, whether with hands and feet extended or not, he incurs the penalty of death by stoning, as soon as he put his face to the ground.
He who plants a tree near the Altar or in any part of the Temple Court, whether the tree belongs to a species that does not bear fruit or is one that produces edible fruit, and even if he had planted it to adorn the Temple and enhance its beauty, is punished with stripes, as it is said, "Thou shalt not plant thee an <i>Asherah</i> of any tree near unto the altar of the Lord, thy God" (Deut. 16:21). The reason for the prohibition is that it had been the custom of idolaters to plant trees by the side of an idolatrous altar, so that people might assemble there.
It is forbidden to erect wooden colonnades within the Temple, like those in courtyards, although they are built structures and not planted trees. The prohibition is an extreme precaution grounded on the terms of the phrase "any wood" (Deut. 16-21). All the colonnades and cornices projecting from the Temple walls were of stone and not of wood.

Chapter 7

An affirmative precept enjoins the destruction of any idol, articles subsidiary to its worship, and everything made for its sake, as it is said, "Ye shall surely destroy all the places (wherein the nations that ye are to dispossess served their gods) (Deut. 12:2); and it is further said "but thus shall ye deal with them, (ye shall break down their altars") (ibid. 7:5). In the land of Israel, it is a duty actively to pursue idolatry till we have exterminated it from the whole of our country. Outside the Holy Land, however, we are not so commanded; but only that whenever we acquire any territory by conquest, we should destroy all the idols found there, as it is said, "And ye shall destroy their name out of that place" (Deut. 12:3); that is, in the Land of Israel, thou art enjoined actively to pursue them but not outside the Holy Land.
An idol, articles subsidiary to its worship, sacrifices offered to it, and anything made for its sake, are forbidden to be used, as it is said, "And thou shalt not bring an abomination into thy house" (ibid. 7:26). Whoever makes use of any of these things is punished with stripes twice; once, for violating the prohibition "thou shalt not bring etc." (ibid. 7:26), and once, for violating the prohibition "and there shall cleave naught of the devoted thing to thy hand" (ibid. 13:18).
No use may be made of a beast that has been wholly offered up to an idol. This prohibition applies to its dung, bones, horns, hoofs and hide, and every part of it. Hence, if a mark on the hide indicates that it came off a beast that had been offered up to an idol—as, for example, a circular perforation which idolaters used to make over the heart, through which that organ was extracted—all the hides with this characteristic are forbidden to be used. And so with all similar indications.
What are the distinctions between an idol belonging to an idolater and one belonging to an Israelite ? An idol belonging to an idolater is forthwith prohibited to be used: as it is said, "the graven images of their gods shall ye burn with fire" (Deut. 7:25); as soon as it has been made, it becomes his god. But an idol, the property of an Israelite, is not prohibited till it has been worshipped, as it is said, "and setteth it up in secret," (Deut. 27:15); that is, performs mysterious rites that constitute its mode of worship. Articles used in idolatrous worship, whether belonging to an idolater or to an Israelite, only become forbidden after they have been so used.
Whoever makes an idol for others, although he is punished with stripes, is nevertheless permitted to use the remuneration for his labour—and this is so, even if he made the idol for an idolater, in which case it becomes forthwith prohibited. The reason is that an idol does not become forbidden till it is completed; and the last tap of the hammer is worth less than a <i>perutah</i> (the smallest coin). If one purchased broken metal from an idolater and found an idol among the pieces—even if the purchaser had already paid the price, provided that he has not yet taken possession of the article—he returns it to the idolater. The same is the rule if he had taken possession but had not paid the price; for, although taking possession affects transfer of property from a gentile, the case here is analogous to a purchase under error. If, however, he had paid the price and also taken possession, he should cast the idol into the Dead Sea. So where an idolater and a proselyte inherited the property of their father who had been an idolater, the proselyte may say to the idolater: "Do thou take the idol and I will take money; do thou take the prohibited wine and I will take fruit." Once, however, these (prohibited articles) have come into the proselyte's possession, they are forbidden to be used.
Figures made by gentiles as ornaments are permitted to be used, but those which they made for worship are forbidden. For example, all figures found in villages are forbidden, on the presumption that they were made for worship. But as for those in a city, if they are placed at the city gates, and the hand of the figure holds the form of a staff, bird, globe, sword, crown or ring, the presumption is that such a figure was erected for worship, and its use is forbidden. Otherwise, the figure is presumed to be ornamental and its use is permitted.
Images, found discarded in the streets or among broken metal, may be used; needless to add, this is the rule also in the case of fragments. But if one finds a hand of an idol or its foot or any of its limbs, discarded, it is forbidden to be used. For as it is known for certain that the limb was part of a figure that had been worshipped, its prohibited status continues till one is sure that the gentiles annulled it as an object of worship.
If one finds articles bearing the figure of the sun, moon, or dragon, whether they are gold or silver vessels or robes of scarlet embroidered with any such figure, or earrings or finger rings so engraved, they are forbidden to be used. Other articles with these figures are permitted, the presumption being that the figures are ornamental. Other figures than those enumerated, on any vessels, are presumed to be ornamental, and the vessels may be used.
An idol, anything subsidiary to its service, or anything offered to it, however small, inhibits the use of objects with which it had become so completely mixed up that its identity is lost. For example, if an idol became mixed up with ornamental figures, even if it be but one idol among many thousands of such figures, all have to be destroyed<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* Literally: cast into the Dead Sea.</i><sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* Literally: cast into the Dead Sea.</i>. So, if a cup used in idolatry had become mixed up with a large number of cups, or a piece of meat of an idolatrous sacrifice has become mixed up with several pieces of other meat, they must all be destroyed. So too, if a hide that had been perforated over the heart, had been mixed up with many hides (and cannot be identified), all the hides are forbidden. If one transgressed and sold an idol or any of its utensils, or anything offered to it, the monetary proceeds received are forbidden to be used; and, as in the case of the idol itself, any portion of those proceeds, however small it is, renders all monies with which it is mixed up, likewise forbidden; as it is said, "And thou shalt not bring an abomination into thy house and be accursed like unto it" (Deut. 7:26). Whatever thou obtainest from an idol, or from its utensils or from its offerings is forbidden like the idol itself.
When an idol or an idolatrous tree has been burnt, its ashes are forbidden to be used. The live ember of an idol is forbidden, but the flame may be used, because it is without substance. Where it is doubtful whether an object is idolatrous, it may not be used. But where there is a double doubt,<sup class="footnote-marker">**</sup><i class="footnote">** That is, when it is doubtful whether the article in question even belongs to a group of objects any of which is only doubtfully idolatrous.</i> it may be used. For example, a cup used in idolatrous worship was inadvertently dropped into a store full of cups (and cannot be identified);—all the cups are forbidden to be used, on the principle that an idol or any one of its subsidiary articles, however small, renders everything with which it has become mixed up, forbidden. But if one of these cups was afterwards removed and became mixed up with two other cups, all three are permitted. If a ring belonging to an idol became mixed up with several rings, and two of these fell into the ocean, all the rest are permitted to be used, on the assumption that the idolatrous ring was one of the two that were lost. If it was mixed up with one hundred rings which were subsequently divided into two lots—forty in one, sixty in the other—and the forty accidentally became mixed up with other rings, all in this lot are permitted to be used—it being assumed that the idolatrous ring was in the larger original lot. If the sixty rings became mixed up with other rings, all are prohibited.
Whether an idolatrous tree was itself worshipped or an idol was placed beneath it—in either case it is forbidden to sit in the shadow cast by its trunk. It is however, permitted to sit in the shadow of its twigs and leaves. If there is another way by which to travel, one must not pass under such a tree. But if there is no other way, one may pass beneath it, running.
Young birds that nest on an idolatrous tree and no longer need the mother-bird's care are permitted to be taken for use. But eggs as well as unfledged birds that still need the mother-bird, are forbidden to be taken and used, because the idolatrous tree is, as it were their "base". The nest itself, situated on the tree top, is permitted, because the bird has brought its constituents from elsewhere.
If one took wood from such a tree, it may not be used. An oven heated with such wood must be allowed to get cold. Then it should be heated with other wood that is lawful, after which, bread may be baked in it. Bread baked in it before it had cooled, may not be used. If it became mixed up with other loaves, the price of the forbidden bread must be cast into the sea, so that one does not enjoy any of it, while the loaves are permitted to be used.
If a weaver's shuttle had been made from the wood of an idolatrous tree, cloth woven on that shuttle is forbidden to be used. If such cloth became mixed up with other pieces of cloth, its price is to be cast into the sea and all the pieces of cloth may be used. Vegetables may be planted beneath an idolatrous tree, whether in summer, when they need shade, or in the rainy season; the reason being that both the forbidden shade of the idolatrous tree, and the soil which has not become forbidden, cause the vegetables to grow, and a product of two factors, of which one is forbidden while the other is permitted, is always permitted. Accordingly, a field fertilised with manure belonging to an idol, may be sown. A cow, fattened with vetches belonging to an idol, may be used for food. And so, in similar cases.
Meat, wine or fruit, set aside to be offered up to an idol, does not become forbidden, even after having been brought into the idolatrous temple, till it has been actually presented to the idol. Once this has been done, it is regarded as an idolatrous offering; and even if it is again taken out, it remains for ever forbidden. Any thing found in an idolatrous temple, even water or salt, is, by scriptural enactment, forbidden to be used, and one who partakes of it, in the minutest quantity, is punished with stripes.
A garment, utensils or coins on the hand of an idol, if found in a position betokening contempt, may be used; if the position indicates respect, they are forbidden to be used. For instance, a purse found suspended about its neck, a garment folded and lying upon its head or a vessel leaning over its head, may be used, because the position indicates contempt, and so in similar cases. If the article found on its head is such that the like of it is offered up on the altar, it is forbidden to be used. These distinctions only apply to things found outside the place of worship. But if one found any such thing within an idolatrous place of worship, whether in a position indicating respect or contempt, whether it is suitable to be offered up on the altar or not—in short, whatever is found within such a place, even if it be only water or salt, is forbidden to be used. In the case of Peor and Mercury, anything found with them, within or without their respective places of worship, is forbidden to be used. This too is the rule with regard to the stones of Mercury; a stone that evidently belongs to it is forbidden to be used.
A bath or a garden belonging to an idol may be used, if no gratuity need be given, but may not be so used, if such has to be given. If it is the joint property of the idol and others, it may be used, even if a gratuity has to be given to the priests, provided that no fee is paid.
One may bathe in a bathhouse where there is an idol; because it has been set up there as an ornament and not to be worshipped, as it is said, "their gods" (Deut. 7:16); that is, when they are honoured as gods, not however, when they are treated with contempt, as in this case where the idol stands over the drains, and everyone urinates before it. But if such constituted its mode of worship, it is forbidden to enter such a place.
If a knife belonging to an idol had been used to slaughter a beast, the carcase is permitted, because the act of slaughtering caused the beast to depreciate in value. But if the animal had been dangerously ill, the carcase is forbidden, because the value of the beast has been enhanced, and this enhancement is due to the use of a utensil belonging to an idol. So too, one may not cut meat with such a knife. But if the meat is cut in such a way as to spoil and destroy it, it is permitted.

Chapter 8

Anything which cannot be handled or made by a human being, even though it is worshipped, is permitted to be used. Hence, mountains and hills, trees originally planted for their fruit, public springs and cattle, though worshipped by idolaters, are permitted to be used. Fruits that had been worshipped, while they were unsevered, may be eaten as also flesh of a beast that had been worshipped. Needless to add, a beast that had only been set apart for idolatrous purposes may be eaten, whether it had been set apart to be worshipped or to be offered up as a sacrifice. The rule that the beast does not become forbidden to be used, applies if one had done nothing to it for the sake of idolatry. But if one has done anything to it, however insignificant, he renders it forbidden. For example, if one slaughters a beast and severs either of its vessels (the trachea or oesophagus) for the sake of idolatry, or exchanges it for an object of idolatrous worship, he renders it forbidden. Such is also the rule if one exchanges it for something for which an idolatrous object had been exchanged; for all the things successively exchanged have become monetary equivalents of an idolatrous object. These rules only apply to a beast that is the property of the individual who did these acts. But if one slaughters, with idolatrous intent, a beast belonging to another person, or exchanges it for an object of idolatrous worship, it does not become forbidden, since a person cannot cause that which is not his property to become forbidden. A man who prostrates himself to the soil in its natural state does not render in forbidden. But he renders it forbidden, if he digs in it pits, ditches or caves.
If one prostrates himself to water carried by a wave, he does not render it forbidden. But if one took water in his hand and prostrated himself to it, he renders it forbidden. Mountain rocks that have become loosened and have been worshipped while still in their original situation, are permitted to be used, because they have not been handled by a human being.
If an Israelite set up a brick, in order to worship it, but did not do so, and a gentile came and prostrated himself before it, he renders it forbidden to be used, the setting up constituting the act (requisite to show the Israelite's intent that is should be worshipped).<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* Otherwise, the gentile could not render prohibited that which does not belong to him (VII. 4).</i> So too, if he set up an egg and a Gentile came and prostrated himself before it, he renders it forbidden to be used. If he cut a pumpkin or any thing similar, and worshipped it, he renders it forbidden to be used. If he worshipped half a pumpkin while the other half is still attached to it, the latter is forbidden to be used; because it is uncertain whether it is to be regarded as accessory to the half that was worshipped. A tree that was planted, from the outset, for the purpose of being worshipped, is forbidden to be used. This is the <i>Asherah,</i> mentioned in the Torah. If a tree had already been planted, and then was cut down and trimmed to serve as an idol, or even if a branch of it was forced into the ground and covered with soil or if it was grafted on another tree, and in either case produced twigs, these twigs are to be severed and are forbidden to be used, but the rest of the tree is permitted. So too, if any one worships a tree, although its trunk does not become forbidden, all twigs, leaves, shoots, and fruit which it produces, during the time that it is worshipped, are forbidden to be used. If Gentiles guard the fruit of a tree, declaring that it is intended to be converted into strong drink for a certain idolatrous temple, and they actually do make a strong drink of the fruit and drink it on their feast, the tree is forbidden to be used, because it is assumed to be an <i>Asherah</i> (idolatrous tree) and they deal thus with its fruit, because such is the ordinance of the <i>Asherah.</i>
A tree, beneath which an idol was set up, may not be used, as long as the idol is there. Once the idol has been removed, the tree is permitted to be used, because it is not the object worshipped. A house which a gentile erected, with the original intent that it be worshipped, or a house already erected, that anyone worships, is forbidden to be used. If it had already been erected and was, for idolatrous purposes, plastered and ornamented so that it was renovated, the renovation is to be removed and may not be used, because it was made for idolatrous worship, but the rest of the structure is permitted to be used. If an idol was brought into a house—as long as it is there, the house is forbidden to be used; after it has been removed, the house may again be used. A stone, originally hewed to be worshipped, is forbidden to be used. If it had already been hewed and was then painted and decorated, that it might be worshipped, even if the decorations are in the stone itself and, needless to say, if these are only superficial, the added decorations are to be removed and are forbidden, since they were made for worship, but the rest of the stone is permitted to be used.
A stone upon which an idol was set may not be used as long as the idol is on it. After the idol had been removed, it may be used. If one owned a house adjoining an idolatrous temple, and the house fell down, it may not be rebuilt. How should the owner act ? He should withdraw within the bounds of his own property and there rebuild the dwelling. The intervening empty space should be filled up with thorns or dirt, so that the area of the idolatrous temple will not be enlarged. If there was a party wall belonging to him and to the idol, he should consider the wall as divided in halves. The half on his side may be used. That on the side of the idol is wholly forbidden. Its stones, wood and earth are all forbidden to be used.
How are idols and other things such as its utensils and offerings, that are forbidden on its account, to be destroyed ? They are to be ground to powder and then scattered to the winds, or burnt and cast into the Dead Sea.<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* <i>that is</i>, utterly destroyed.</i>
Objects, in the making of which human hands have had no part, such as mountains, cattle, trees, though worshipped, may nevertheless be used. The covering of any such objects, however, is forbidden to be used. Whoever makes the least use of such covering is punished with stripes, as it is said, "Thou shalt not covet the silver or the gold that is on them" (Deut. 7:25). Any cover of an idol comes within the category of its appurtenances.
An idol belonging to idolaters which they had annulled (repudiated as an object of worship), before it passed into an Israelite's possession, may be used, as it is said "the images of their gods ye shall burn with fire" (Ibid. 7:25); that it is to say, only if they are treated as divine at the time when they come into our hands, are they to be destroyed, but if the idolaters had already declared them null, they are permitted to be used.
An idol belonging to an Israelite can never be nullified. Even if an idolater is part-owner, the latter's nullification is of no avail, but it remains for ever forbidden to be used and must be concealed. So too, if an idol belonging to an idolater came into an Israelite's possession and was subsequently nullified by the idolater, the nullification is of no avail; the idol remains for ever forbidden. An Israelite cannot nullify an idol even with the idolater's permission. An idolater, who is a minor or mentally defective, cannot nullify an idol. If an idolater nullified an idol, belonging to him or to other idolaters, even if he did so under duress, and even if it was an Israelite that forced him, the object loses its idolatrous character, provided that the gentile who annulled it is actually an idol-worshipper. Nullification by one not actually an idol-worshipper is of no avail. The nullification of an idol nullifies its accessories. If the accessories were nullified, they may be used, but the idol itself remains forbidden as hitherto, until it has been nullified. Offerings to an idol can never be nullified.
How does one nullify an idol ? If one chipped the tip of its ear, the tip of its nose, or its finger-tip, hammered in its face, even without loss of substance, or sold it to an Israelite who is a worker in metals, it is nullified. But if one pledged it or sold it to an idolater, or to an Israelite who is not a metal worker, or if <i>débris</i> fell upon it which the owner did not clear away, or if it had been stolen by robbers and no attempt has been made to reclaim it, or if one expectorated or urinated before it, or dragged it or threw ordure at it, it is not nullified.
An idol abandoned by its worshippers during a time of peace is permitted to be used, because it has been nullified (by the abandonement). If this has taken place in wartime, it remains forbidden, because the abandonment was on account of the war. If an idol had got broken of itself, its fragments are forbidden to be used, until the idol is nullified. Hence, if one finds fragments of an idol, they may not be used, for possibly the idolaters had not nullified it. If it consisted of parts that an unskilled person can put together, each of them must be separately nullified. If an unskilled person cannot put them together, the nullification of any limb of the idol makes all the fragments null.
An idolatrous altar that was damaged remains forbidden to be used till the larger part of it has been shattered by idolaters. A sacrificial hearth<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* According to Rashi, Aboda Zara 16a <i>sub voce</i> <span>בימסאות</span> “hearth” stones for for sacrifices.</i> that was damaged is permitted to be used. What is the distinction between a hearth and an altar ? A hearth consists of a single stone; an altar, of many stones. How are the stones of the idol Mercury nullified ? As soon as an idolater has used them in erecting a building or in paving a road, and so forth, they are permitted to be used. How is the <i>Asherah</i> (an idolatrous tree) nullified ? As soon as the idolater plucked a leaf from it, cut off one of its shoots, took from it a stick or rod, or removed the bark when this was not necessary, it loses its idolatrous character. If this procedure was needed by the tree, it remains prohibited, but the shavings are permitted to be used. If the tree belonged to an Israelite, whether the scraping was necessary or not, the tree as well as the shavings are for ever forbidden to be used, because the idol of an Israelite can never lose its idolatrous character.

Chapter 9

Three days before the idolaters' feast, it is forbidden to buy of them or sell to them anything durable; likewise to borrow of them or lend to them; repay to them money that had been borrowed or exact from them payment of a loan, secured by deed or pledge; but the payment of a personal loan (for which there is no pledge or deed) may be exacted, as it is equivalent to recovering from them what might otherwise be lost. Perishable products, such as vegetables or cooked food, may be sold to them, up to the day of their feast. These restrictions apply to Palestine. In other countries, they are only enforced on the feast day. If these rules were violated, and one engaged in commercial transactions with them during these three days, the proceeds may be used. But the proceeds of transactions with them on their feast day are forbidden to be used.
A gift may not be sent to a gentile on his feast day, unless the sender knows that the recipient neither professes nor practises idolatry. So too, if a gentile sent a gift to an Israelite, on his feast day, the latter should not accept it. If he apprehends that this might cause ill-will, he should accept it in the sender's presence, but not use it till he has ascertained that the gentile neither practises idolatry nor professes it.
If the gentiles' feast lasts several days—three, four or ten—all of them are counted as one day, and the restrictions apply to them all as well as to the three preceding days.
The Nazarenes are idolaters.<sup class="footnote-marker">**</sup><i class="footnote">** They are not so regarded by Jews living in Christian countries.</i> The first day of the week is their festival. Hence it is forbidden in Palestine to have commercial intercourse with them on the fifth and sixth day in each week; and obviously on the first day itself, this is everywhere forbidden. A similar rule applies to all their feasts.
The day on which idolaters meet to appoint a king, when they offer up sacrifices and sing hymns to their idols, is a feast day for them, just like their other feasts. But if an idolater institutes a personal feast day, an which he thanks his idol and lauds it, such as on his birthday, or the day when he trims his beard or the locks of his head, lands after a sea voyage, leaves prison, or gives a banquet in honour of his son, and so forth, commercial and social intercourse is only prohibited on that day, and only with that individual. So too, if idolaters, who have suffered a bereavement, keep the day of death as a solemn day, the prohibition only applies to intercourse with the individuals who so observe it, and is limited to the day. Whenever, in connection with a death, utensils are burnt and incense is offered up, it is certain that idolatry forms an element in the obsequies. Commercial and social intercourse on a feast day is prohibited with those only who worship an idol on that day, but is permitted with those who make merry and eat and drink on it, observing the day as a custom or keeping it out of respect to the sovereign, but not accepting it as a religious feast.
Things, specifically appropriated to the worship of a particular idol in a certain locality, may not be sold at any time to the worshippers of that idol in that place. Things not so specially appropriated may be sold, if no mention is made of the purpose for which they are to be used. But if the gentile explicitly states that he buys them for idolatrous purposes, they may not be sold to him, unless first rendered unfit to be offered up to the idol; for the gentiles do not offer up to an idol any thing defective.
If things specially appropriated to idolatry have been mixed up with things not so appropriated, as, for example, pure frankincense with the black variety, the whole may be sold, provided no mention is made of any intended idolatrous purpose. And we do not apprehend that the idolater will sort out the pure frankincense for idolatrous use; and so with analogous cases.
Just as those things may not be sold to gentiles, which confirm them in idolatry, so beasts or things may not be sold to them which involve danger to the public; such as bears and lions, military arms, fetters and chains. Military arms are not to be sharpened for them. Whatever is forbidden to be sold to a gentile, may not be sold to an Israelite who is suspected of reselling it to a gentile. So too, it is forbidden to sell articles of a dangerous character to an Israelite who is a robber.
Israelites who live among gentiles, and have made a covenant of peace with them are permitted to sell military arms to the king's servants and forces, since the latter use these weapons to defend the country against its enemies, and so protect us who live among them. On the day when the population of a city is celebrating a feast in honour of an idol, it is permitted to travel outside the city, but not to enter it. If the celebration is outside the city, walking within the city is permitted.
A traveller from one place to another may not pass through a city where an idolatrous celebration is taking place. This is only so where the road (through the idolatrous city) is the only one leading to the traveller's destination. If there is also another road and he happened to be on the first road, he may use it.
It is forbidden to work with gentiles in the erection of a niche in which an idol is to be set up. But if one violated this rule and built it, he may use his wages. There is no objection to the building of a palace or a courtyard which contains (or will contain) such a niche.
If, in a city celebrating a feast to its idol, some shops are decorated while others are not, the contents of the decorated shops may not be used, the presumption being that they are decorated in honour of the idol. But the goods in the undecorated shops may be used. One may not become a tenant of shops that are the property of an idolatrous corporation, since this would be to the advantage of idolatry.
If one sells a house for purposes of idolatry, the purchase money is forbidden to be used and must be cast into the Dead Sea. But if idolaters overpowered an Israelite, took his house by force and set up an idol in it, its purchase money may be used; and the owner draws up and registers a claim in the gentile courts. Flutes belonging to idolaters may not be used for music at obsequies (of Israelites).
One may attend a fair of gentiles and make purchases there of cattle, heathen male and female slaves, houses, fields and vineyards. The purchaser draws up the records of sale and registers them in the gentile courts, since he is, as it were, salvaging his property from them. This however, only applies to purchases from a private individual who does not pay market dues. But purchases from a dealer are forbidden to be used, since the dealer pays toll which goes to the idol; and so the purchaser is benefiting idolatry. In case this rule was violated and any thing had been bought from a dealer, if the purchase is a domestic animal, its hoofs must be hacked off below the joint of the leg; if, it is a garment or utensils, they should be suffered to decay; if it is coin or metal plate, they should be cast into the Dead Sea; if a slave, he is neither rescued from a pit nor raised from it.<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* Idolaters who recognised no law were not to be aided nor persecuted. See Aboda Zara 13B.</i>
When an idolater gives a feast to celebrate the wedding of his son or daughter, it is forbidden to partake of the banquet. An Israelite is even forbidden to eat there his own food or drink his own liquor, as he would be consuming it in the company of idolaters.<sup class="footnote-marker">**</sup><i class="footnote">** on their idolatrous feast.</i> For how long is he forbidden to eat with them ? From the moment when the idolater begins to busy himself with preparations for the feast; and the prohibition is in force, during the time that the feast is held and continues for thirty days after its termination. If the idolater gives a second feast, in honour of the marriage, even after the expiration of thirty days from the conclusion of the former feast, the prohibition extends for a twelve-month. The purpose of this separation is to avoid idolatry, as it is said, "…. and one will call thee and thou wilt eat of his sacrifice; and take of their daughters unto thy sons, and their daughters will go astray after their gods and make thy sons go astray after their gods". (Ex. 34:15-16).
An Israelite woman should not suckle the infant of a non-Israelite mother, for she would be bringing up a child to idolatry. Nor should she act as a midwife to a non-Israelite woman; but she may attend professionally for a fee, so as to prevent ill-will. A gentile woman may be engaged as midwife to an Israelite woman or as wet-nurse for her babe, provided the gentile nurse is under the mother's supervision, so that she will not kill the infant.
To do business with pilgrims to idolatrous shrines, while they are on their journey thither is forbidden, but is permitted with those who are returning, providing they are not travelling in companies, the members of which are closely attached to each other; for in this case they may have it in mind to return to the shrine. If an Israelite is proceeding to an idolatrous shrine, one may do business with him while he is on his way thither, for possibly he may turn back; but it is not permitted when he is returning. It is forbidden to trade with an apostate Israelite while he is on his way to an idolatrous shrine or returning thence.
If an Israelite went to an idolaters' fair, it is forbidden to trade with him on his return journey, for fear that he may have sold an idol there, and the price of an idol in an Israelite's possession may not be used. If the price is in an idolater's possession, it may be used. Hence, trading is permitted with an idolater on his return from an idolatrous shrine, but not with an Israelite when he comes from such a shrine, nor with an apostate Israelite either on his journey thither or on his return.

Chapter 10

No covenant is to be made with idolaters, with the purpose of making peace with them and permitting them to worship idols, as it is said "thou shalt make no covenant with them" (Deut. 7:2); but they must either renounce their idolatry or suffer death. It is forbidden to show them mercy, as it is said, "nor show mercy unto them" (ibid.). Hence, if one sees a heathen who worships idols perishing or drowning, one is not to save him. If he was observed to be dying, he is not to be rescued. It is forbidden however, actively to destroy him, or thrust him into a pit or do any thing similar, since he is not waging war against us. These rules apply to a heathen. But as regards informers and Israelite infidels, it is a duty to take active measures to destroy them and hurl them into the pit of destruction—the reason being that they persecute Israelites and turn the people away from following God.
Hence you learn that it is forbidden to heal idolaters even for a fee. But if one is afraid of them or apprehends that refusal might cause ill-will, medical treatment may be given for a fee but not gratuitously. A "denizen proselyte",<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* Who observes the 7 Noachide precepts.</i> whose life we are commanded to preserve, is to be healed without charge.
Houses and fields are not sold to them in Palestine. In Syria, houses are sold to them, but not fields. Houses are let to them in Palestine, provided they do not form a settlement; less than three families (living in one location) do not constitute a settlement. Fields are not let to them there; but in Syria they are let to them. And why were they (the Sages) so stringent with a field ? Because it would have two consequences: The land would be exempted from the payment of tithes; and it would give idolaters advantages from the soil of Palestine. Outside that land, houses and fields may be sold to them—it not being our country.
Even where (the Sages) permitted the letting of a building, they did not permit it to be let for residence, because the tenant would bring an idol into it, and it is said "Thou shalt not bring an abomination into thy house" (Deut. 7:26). But buildings may be let to idolaters to be used for storage. The fruits of an orchard or field etc., may not be sold to them, while pendent on the tree or attached to the soil. But the owner may sell them the fruits after they have been severed, or on condition that he shall sever them and he does sever them. Why have these restrictions been imposed on sales ? Because it is said "thou shalt show them no favour" (Deut. 7:2), which may be rendered "do not permit them a settlement in the land"<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* <span>תחנם</span> from <span>חנה</span> to settle”.</i>;—if they have no land, their residence will be temporary. It is forbidden to speak of them eulogistically—even to say, 'how comely is this gentile, and <i>a fortiori</i> it is forbidden to speak in praise of his acts—or to hold dear any thing that belongs to them, as it is said. "Thou shalt not show them favour" (ibid.); that is, "they shall have no favour in thine eyes", as this would induce a feeling of attachment to the idolater and cause us to learn from him his evil ways. So too it is forbidden to make gifts to them; these may however be bestowed on a denizen proselyte, as it is said "unto the stranger that is within thy gates, thou shalt give it, that he may eat it; or thou mayest sell it to a foreigner" (Deut. 14:21). A sale may thus be made to a foreigner but not a gift.
For the sake of peace, indigent gentiles receive maintenance like poor Israelites; and for the sake of peace, they are not hindered when gleaning or gathering forgotten sheaves or the produce of the corner of the fields (Lev. 23:22; Deut. 24:19). For the sake of peace, we greet them even on their feast. But at no time do we give them a double greeting,<sup class="footnote-marker">**</sup><i class="footnote">** Peace, peace be unto thee’ (I Chron. 12:19).</i> nor do we enter an alien's home on his festival in order to greet him. If one meets him in the street, one salutes him in a low tone and with a grave mien.
The foregoing rules apply to the time when the people of Israel live exiled among the nations, or when the gentile's power is predominant. But when Israel is predominant over the nations of the world, we are forbidden to permit a gentile who is an idolater to dwell among us. He must not enter our land, even as a temporary resident; or even as a traveller, journeying with merchandise from place to place, till he has undertaken to keep the seven precepts which the Noachides were commanded to observe; as it is said, "They shall not dwell in thy land" (Ex. 23:33)—even for a time. If he undertakes to observe these seven precepts, he becomes a denizen proselyte. We only accept a denizen proselyte, at the time when the law of the Jubilee is in force.<sup class="footnote-marker">***</sup><i class="footnote">*** The <span>ראב״ד</span> disputes this dictum.</i> But at the period when the law of the Jubilee is in abeyance, only a proselyte of righteousness (a full proselyte) is accepted.

Chapter 11

(We) should not follow the customs of the gentiles, nor imitate them in dress or in their way of trimming the hair, as it is said, "And ye shall not walk in the customs of the nation (which I cast out before you)" (Lev. 20:23); "neither shall ye walk in their statutes" (Lev. 18:3); "Take heed to thyself that thou be not ensnared to follow them" (Deut. 12:30). These texts all refer to one theme and warn against imitating them. The Israelite shall, on the contrary, be distinguished from them and recognisable by the way he dresses and in his other activities, just as he is distinguished from them by his knowledge and his principles. And thus is it said, "And I have set you apart from the peoples" (Lev. 20:26). He shall not put on a garment like that specially worn by them nor let the lock of his hair grow in the way they do. Thus, he shall not cut the hair of the head at the sides, leaving the hair in the centre untouched as they do—this is called "growing the forelock". Nor shall he cut the hair in front from ear to ear, leaving the hair at the back to grow, as they do. He shall not rear edifices resembling idolatrous temples for the gathering of multitudes, as they do. Whoever does any of these or similar things is punished with stripes.
When a gentile has his hair cut by an Israelite, the latter must leave three finger breadths on each side of the forelock, uncut.
An Israelite, having access to royalty, who has to appear before gentile sovereigns, and to whom it would be a disgrace not to look like gentiles, is permitted to put on apparel like theirs, and cut his hair in front, after their fashion.
Israelites may not resort to divination like the gentiles, as it is said, "neither shall ye practice divination" (Lev. 19:26). What is divination? The following are examples. To say: "Since my piece of bread dropped out of my mouth or my staff fell from my hand, I shall not go today to such a place, for if I go, my business will not be successfully accomplished"; or, "since a fox ran past me on the right, I shall not today go outside the door of my house, for if I do, a cheat will accost me"; or when people hear a bird twittering and say; "It will happen thus and not thus"—"it is good to do this, and bad to do that"; or when people say: "Kill this cock because it crowed in the evening"; "kill this hen because it crowed like a cock"; or if one sets for himself a sign and says, "If a certain thing happens to me, I will follow this course of action; it it is does not happen, I will not do so",—as Eleazar, Abraham's servant did—these and all things similar are forbidden. Whoever does any thing as a result of any of these happenings is punished with stripes.
To say: "This dwelling which I built has turned out lucky for me; this woman that I married was a blessing to me; from the moment that I bought this beast, I became rich;" or to ask a child, "What verse art thou learning", and if the child recites a verse from the Blessings, to rejoice and say: "that is a lucky sign"—all these and similar things are permitted. For, as the person did not adjust his activities in accordance with them nor refrained from doing aught because of them, but only regarded them as signs of what had already happened, such acceptance is permitted.
What is a diviner ? One who does any act, so that he may fall into an ecstatic state and his mind be withdrawn from all externals, after which he foretells future events, saying "This will, or will not, come to pass", or "It is proper to do this", or "Beware of doing that". Some diviners make use of sand or stones; one bends down to the earth and screams; another fixes his gaze on a brass mirror or a lamp; and then they imagine things and speak accordingly. Another carries a staff in his hand, leans on it and strikes with it till his mind is in a state of abstraction and then he speaks; the prophet refers to this when he says, "My people ask counsel of their stock and their staff declareth unto them" (Hosea. 4:12).
It is forbidden to practise divination or consult a diviner. The difference between them is that one who consults a diviner is punished with stripes for contumacy; while the diviner himself who does any of these or similar things receives stripes according to the Scriptural statute, as it is said "There shall not be found among you anyone…. that useth divination" (Deut. 18:10).
What is an "observer of times" ? The term applies to these who assign seasons declaring that astrologically a particular day is favourable, while another day is unfavourable; that a cetain day is propitious for the execution of a specific work and a certain year or month is unfavourable for a specific thing.
It is forbidden to be an "observer of times"<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* Astrologer.</i> even if he committed no overt act but only uttered the lies which fools imagine are words of truth, words of the wise. And whoever is influenced in his actions by astrology and arranges his work or journey to take place at the time fixed by the astrologers, is punished with stripes, as it is said "Ye shall not observe times" (Lev. 19:26). So too, a conjurer who deceives the eyes and pretends to the beholder to be doing something extraordinary which in reality he does not do, is included in the category of "observers of times" and is punished with stripes.
What is a charmer ? One who utters words that are not part of any spoken language and are meaningless, foolishly fancying that these words are helpful. These charmers go as far as to say that if one utters certain words over a snake or scorpion, it will become harmless, and if one utters certain words over a man, he will not be hurt by the reptiles. The charmer, while speaking, holds, in his hand, a key, stone or other objects—all this is forbidden. The charmer himself who held any object in his hand or did any act beside speaking, even if he only pointed with his finger, is punished with stripes according to the Scriptural statute, as it is said "There shall not be found among you …. a charmer" (Deut. 18:11). But if he only uttered words, and neither moved his finger nor his hand nor held any thing in his hand, he, as well as the person over whom the charmer uttered those sounds and who sits in his presence, fancying that he is deriving some benefit, are punished with stripes for contumacy; the latter because he took part in the charmer's folly. All those strange and uncouth sounds and names do no harm, nor have they power to do good.
If one was stung by a scorpion or a snake, it is permitted, even on the Sabbath, to whisper a spell over the part affected, so as to soothe the patient and give him reassurance. Although the procedure is absolutely useless, it has been permitted because of the patient's dangerous condition, so that he should not become distraught.
One who whispers a spell over a wound, at the same time reciting a verse from the Torah, one who recites a verse over a child to save it from terrors and one who places a scroll or phylacteries on an infant, to induce it to sleep, are not in the category of sorcerers and soothsayers, but they are included among those who repudiate the Torah; for they use its words to cure the body whereas these are only medicine for the soul, as it is said, "they shall be life unto thy soul" (Prov. 3:22). On the other hand, any one in the enjoyment of good health is permitted to recite verses from the Scriptures or a psalm, so that he may be shielded by the merit of the recital and saved from trouble and hurt.
What is a necromancer? One who starves himself and goes and spends the night in a cemetery in order that the dead shall appear to him in a dream and instruct him on matters about which he enquires. Others again put on special robes, utter certain words, offer a special incense and sleep alone, so that a particular dead person shall appear to them in a dream and converse with them. Whoever does anything, in order that the dead shall come and instruct him, is punished with stripes, as it is said, "There shall not be found among you…. a necromancer" (Deut. 18:11).
It is forbidden to consult one who professes to have a ghost or a familiar spirit, as it is said, "There shall not be found among you one who…. consulteth a ghost or a familiar spirit" (Deut. 18:11). Hence, it is learnt that while one who professes to have a familiar spirit is punished with death by stoning, whoever consults such people violates a prohibition and is punished with stripes for contumacy. If he regulates his activities according to their instructions, he is punished with stripes according to scriptural statute.
The wizard incurs the penalty of death by stoning, provided he actually practised witchcraft. A juggler, however, who only makes it appear that he did something, which he did not do, is punished with stripes for contumacy. For though the prohibition of witchcraft is included in the text "There shall not be found among you one who consulteth a ghost…." (Deut. 18:10), it is an offence for which a judicial sentence of death is the penalty prescribed, as it is said "Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live" (Ex. 22:17) and therefore stripes are, according to the Scriptural statute, not inflicted.<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* on the principle that the severer supersedes the lighter penalty.</i>
These practices are all false and deceptive, and were means employed by the ancient idolaters to deceive the peoples of various countries and induce them to become their followers. It is not proper for Israelites who are highly intelligent to suffer themselves to be deluded by such inanities or imagine that there is anything in them, as it is said "For there is no enchantment with Jacob, neither is there any divination with Israel" (Num. 23:23); and further, "For these nations that thou art to dispossess hearken unto sooth-sayers and unto diviners; but as for thee, the Lord, thy God, hath not suffered thee so to do" (Deut. 18:14). Whoever believes in these and similar things and, in his heart, holds them to be true and scientific and only forbidden by the Torah, is nothing but a fool, deficient in understanding, who belongs to the same class with women and children whose intellects are immature. Sensible people, however, who possess sound mental faculties, know by clear proofs that all these practices which the Torah prohibited have no scientific basis but are chimerical and inane; and that only those deficient in knowledge are attracted by these follies and, for their sake, leave the ways of truth. The Torah, therefore, in forbidding all these follies, exhorts us, "Thou shalt be whole-hearted with the Lord, thy God" (Deut. 18:13).

Chapter 12

The corners of the head are not be shaved as the idolaters and their priests used to do, as it is said "ye shall not round the corners of your heads" (Lev. 19:27). One incurs a separate penalty for each corner. Accordingly, if one shaves both temples, even at one time and after one warning, he is punished with stripes twice. Whether he shaves the corners only, leaving the rest of the head untouched, or shaves the entire head at one time, he is punished with stripes, because he shaved the corners. The liability attaches to the man who shaves. But the man who is shaved is not punished with stripes, unless he assisted the barber. One who shaves the corners of a male child's head is punished with stripes.
A woman who shaves the corner of a man's head, or had the corner of her head shaved is not liable, for it is said, "ye shall not round the corners of your heads, neither shalt thou mar the corner of thy beard" (Lev. 19:27). Whoever is bound by the latter prohibition, is bound by the former. And since the latter prohibition cannot apply to a woman, neither does the former apply to her. Hence, (non-Israelite) male slaves of an Israelite, because they have beards, are forbidden to round the corners of their heads.
All the prohibition of the Torah are binding on women as well as men, with the exception of those relating to marring the beard and rounding the head, and that a priest shall not defile himself by contact with the dead, (Lev. 21:1 et seq.). Women are exempt from the obligation of affirmative precepts, performed at definite periods and not continuously, with the following exceptions: to sanctify the advent of the holy (Sabbath) day (Ex. 20:8); to eat unleavened bread on the first two evenings of Passover (Ex. 12:15); to eat of the Paschal lamb (Ex. 12:8); to slaughter it (ibid. 12:8); to assemble (on the Feast of the Tabernacles, every seventh year to hear the Law read) (Deut. 31:12); and to rejoice on the festivals (Deut. 16:14). These precepts are binding on women also.
A person whose sex is undetermined<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* Pseudo-hermaphrodite.</i> and one who has the characteristic marks of both sexes<sup class="footnote-marker">**</sup><i class="footnote">** Hermaphrodite.</i> are of doubtful status. They are subject to the stringencies of both sexes and bound to observe all obligations (imposed on either sex); but if they transgress such prohibitions), they are not punished with stripes.
Although a woman may shave the corners of her head, she may not shave the corners of a man's head or that of a male child.
How much of the locks over the temples is to be left, the sages have not definitely. stated. We have heard from our elders that at least forty hairs must remain. These locks may be removed with scissors; only destruction with a razor is forbidden.
The idolatrous priests had the custom of removing the beard. The Torah, accordingly, forbade this practice. There are five parts of the beard that must not be removed; the hair upon the upper and the lower jaw, on the right as well as on the left side, and the peak of the beard. Removal of the hair at any one of these places involves the penalty of stripes. If one removes all of them at one operation, he is punished five times, but only if he uses a razor; as it is said, "thou shalt not mar the corner of thy beard" (Lev. 19:27), which refers to the use of the razor—this involving complete destruction of the hair, but there is no liability for cutting the beard with scissors. The person shaved is not punished with stripes, unless he assists. A woman may use a razor to remove any hair that she has on her face. Nor is she liable to punishment for shaving a man's beard.
The moustache, that is, the hair upon the upper lip and also the hair hanging down from the lower lip, may be removed with a razor. But although permitted, Israelites have the custom of not removing this hair completely but only a portion—enough to save one from being incommoded while eating or drinking.
The removal of hair from the rest of the body, as, for instance, from the armpit and privy parts, is not forbidden by the Torah but by the Scribes. Whoever removes it is punished with stripes for contumacy. This rule is limited to localities where women alone remove this hair—the object being to prevent a man trimming himself in a fashion peculiar to women. But in localities where it is customary for members of both sexes to remove hair of this description, a man who does so, is not punished with stripes. The removal of hair from other limbs with scissors is everywhere permitted.
A woman may not adorn herself with men's special ornaments; as for instance, by placing a mitre or helmet on her head, or putting on a coat of mail or anything similar, or cutting her hair short, after the fashion of a man. And a man must not adorn himself in the modes peculiar to women, as, for example, by wearing garments of bright hues, or golden jewellery, in localities where such garments or jewels are only worn by women. In these respects, the custom of the country governs. A man who has put on women's adornments or a woman who has adorned herself in the modes peculiar to men, is punished with stripes. Whoever plucks out white hairs in his beard or in his head from among the dark, is punished with stripes—even if he has removed only one hair—the offence being the use of adornments peculiar to women. So too, one who dyes his hair a dark colour, even if he has only dyed a single white hair, is punished with stripes. One whose sex is undetermined and an hermaphrodite may not put on woman's apparel nor cut the hair of their heads in men's fashion; but if they do so, they are not punished with stripes.
Tattooing, mentioned in the Torah (Lev. 19:28), consists in cutting the flesh and filling up the cut with pigment, ink or other printing matter which leaves an indelible mark. This was a custom of the heathens who used so to mark themselves for idolatry, as much as to say that the tattooed was a slave sold to the idol and marked for its service. As soon as one prints with any material that leaves an indelible mark, having previously made an incision in any part of the body, whether it be a man or woman, that person incurs the punishment of stripes. If he wrote on the flesh (by incision), without marking with printing matter, or marked with printing matter without writing (by incision), he is not liable. He is only liable if he has written (by incision) and made tattooing marks, as it is said, "nor print any marks" (Lev. 19:28). This rule applies to the tattooer, but the person whose flesh is tattooed is not liable unless he assisted by some act. If he did nothing, he is not punished with stripes.
Whoever makes a single incision in his flesh for the dead is punished with stripes, as it is said, "ye shall not make any cuttings in your flesh for the dead" (Lev. 19:28). The law is the same, whether it be a priest or an Israelite who does this. If one made a single incision for five dead persons, or five incisions for one dead person, he is punished with stripes five times, provided that he received a separate warning for each case.
<i>Gedidah</i> (cutting) and <i>Seritah</i> (Making incisions) are identical. And even as the idolaters used to make incisions in their flesh for their dead—as an expression of grief—so they used to wound themselves for the sake of idolatry, as it is said, "And they cut themselves after their manner" (I. Kings 18:28). This procedure too was forbidden by the Torah, as it is said, "ye shall not cut yourselves" (Deut. 14:1). There is this distinction however. Where the incision was for the dead, whether it was done with the hand or with an instrument, the offender is punished with stripes. But if it was for the sake of idolatry, he is only liable if he cut himself with an instrument; but if he did so with his hand, he is not liable.
Included in this prohibition is the rule that in one city there shall not be two courts of law following different procedures; for such a course would lead to strife, as it is said, "Ye shall not cut yourselves" (Lev. 19:28) which has been interpreted "Ye shall not divide up into factions".
One who makes a bald spot on his head for a dead person is punished with stripes, as it is said "Nor shall ye make a baldness between your eyes for the dead" (Deut. 14:1). Whether it was an Israelite or a priest that made the bald spot for the dead, he is only punished with stripes once.<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* Although the priest was specially enjoined (Lev. 21:5), he is only punished once.</i> If one makes four or five bald  spots<sup class="footnote-marker">**</sup><i class="footnote">** At different times, if made at one time, a separate warning for each bald spot is not required.</i> for one dead person, he is punished with the statutory number of stripes according to the number of bald spots, provided he received a separate warning for each spot. Whether he made the bald spot with his hand or with a salve, or dipped his fingers into a salve and placed them upon his hand in five different places at one time, he is punished with stripes five times, because he made five bald spots, even if he had only received one warning since all the five bald spots were made at one time. He is liable for making a bald spot in any part of his head just as much as if he made it in a line with the part which is between the eyes, as it is said, "They shall not make baldness upon their head" (Lev. 21:5). How large must the bald spot be (to constitute a violation of the law)? A spot on the head which looks the size of a split pea and which is free of hair.
He who makes a bald spot on his head or a cut in his flesh, because his dwelling collapsed or because his ship was wrecked, is exempt from punishment. That person only is liable who does these things for the dead or makes a cut in his flesh for idolatry. When one makes a bald spot on the head of another person or a cut in another person's flesh, or tattoos another person, and the subject of the operation assists, if both act with knowledge that it is unlawful, both are punished with stripes. If one of them acted unwittingly while the other had guilty knowledge, the latter only is punished with stripes, the former is exempt.