Mishneh Torah, Foreign Worship and Customs of the Nations
משנה תורה, הלכות עבודה זרה וחוקות הגויים
Yad-Hachazakah, edited by Elias Soloweyczik; London, 1863
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH002108866

Mishneh Torah, Foreign Worship and Customs of the Nations



Chapter 1

In the days of Enos, the sons of men fell into a great error; even the counsel of the wise men of that generation was perverted; and Enos himself was also one of those who laboured under that error. Now their error consisted in this; they said: Whereas God has created these stars and orbs to guide the Universe—has placed them on high, and imparted glory to them, inasmuch as they are servants, which administer before Him—they must be worthy of being praised and glorified, and of having homage paid unto them. Moreover it must be the pleasure of God, blessed be He! that those should be exalted and revered whom he has made excellent and venerable, just as it is the pleasure of a king that those who attend on him should be revered; which indeed is reverence paid to the king himself. As soon as this idea entered their mind, they began to build temples to the stars, to offer sacrifices unto them, to praise them, to glorify them with words, and to bow down to them, in order that they (the worshippers) might thus (according to their erroneous notion), obtain the favour of the Creator. Such was the radical principle of idolatry, and this is what these worshippers who understood its principles used to say; not that they asserted that there was no other God except that star which was the object of their adoration. Now this is what Jeremiah said: <i>Who would not fear Thee, O King of nations? for to Thee doth it appertain; forasmuch as among all the wise men of the nations, and in all their kingdoms, there is none like unto Thee. But they are altogether brutish and foolish, the stock is a doctrine of vanities</i>, (Jer. 10. 7, 8). That is to say: All know that Thou art by Thyself the only God; yet their error and their folly consist in their fancying that vain thing (<i>i. e.</i> the worshipping of that vain stock of idol) to be Thy pleasure.
But in the lapse of time, false prophets arose among the sons of men, who said, that God had commanded them, saying: Worship ye such and such a star, or all the stars; Offer sacrifices and drink-offerings to the same, in such and such a manner; Build a temple for the same, and make an image of the same, to the end that the whole of the people, women, little ones, and all the other inhabitants of the land, may bow down to it.—And so he (the false prophet) revealed unto them some image, which he invented in his own heart, saying unto them, that this was the image of such and such a star, which was revealed to him in his prophecy. And in this manner they began to make images in temples, under trees, on the tops of mountains and on high hills; to assemble together, and to bow down to the same; saying at the same time to the rest of the people, that this image had the power of working good and evil, and that consequently it was right to worship it, and to fear it. Moreover their priests used to say unto them: By this service ye will increase and prosper; and so and so ye ought to do; and so and so ye ought not to do. And then other imposters too began to appear and to say, that the star itself, or some orb or angel spoke unto them, saying: Worship ye me in such and such a manner, (the manner in which it was to be worshipped having been revealed to them by the same); and do ye so and so; and do ye avoid so and so. And so the thing spread over the whole world, namely, the worshipping of those images, in various manners of worship, one different from the other, the offering of sacrifices, and the bowing down unto the same. Thus after another lapse of time, the glorious and awful God came into utter oblivion both in the conversation and in the minds of all men existing, so that they knew Him no more; and, in consequence of this, the whole people of the land, the women and the little ones, knew only that image of wood and stone, or that temple built of stones, which they were trained from their infancy to bow down unto, to worship, and to swear by the name thereof. Even the wise men who were among them, as, for instance, their priests and the like men, imagined that there was no other God, except the stars or orbs, for the sake of which, and in the likeness of which, those images were made; but as to the Rock of the Universe—there was no man who comprehended or knew Him, except a few individuals then existing, as for instance, Enoch, Methuselah, Noah, Shem and Eber; and in this manner the world was continually performing its evolutions, until he, the pillar of the world, was born, namely, Abraham our father.
 As soon as this mighty champion of religion was weaned, he began to revolve in his mind (whilst still a child), and began to reflect day and night, and to wonder, how it was possible that this orb should move continually, if there was no one who caused it to move. But now, who is it that causes it to revolve—it being quite impossible that it should revolve by itself?—He had however neither teacher, nor any one who could explain the matter to him, but was on the contrary plunged, in Ur of the Chaldees, among those foolish worshippers of idols; his father, his mother, and the whole of the people being worshippers of idols, yea he himself being then a worshipper in common with them; but still his mind was revolving and contemplating, until he arrived at the way of truth, and became sensible of the line of righteousness, by his own correct reasoning; so that he arrived at the true knowledge that there was but one God, and that it was He who conducted the orb, and who created everything; and that among all the beings existing, there was no God except Him. He moreover knew that all his contemporaries, laboured under an error, and he knew also that which led them into this error, namely the error of worshipping those stars and images, until the truth was lost from their minds. Now Abraham was forty years old when he comprehended his Creator. As soon as he comprehended and knew Him, he began to raise objections against the men of Ur of the Chaldees, to enter into controversy with them, and to say unto them: The way in which ye walk, is not the way of truth; moreover he broke the images, and began to proclaim to the people, that it was only the God of the Universe whom it was right to serve, and to offer sacrifices and drink-offerings, to the end that all future generations might comprehend Him; and also that it was right to destroy and break in pieces all images, in order that the rest of the people might no longer fall, through them, in the same error with those, who imagined that there was no other God beside these. As soon as he prevailed over them by his arguments, the king sought to slay him; but a miracle was wrought for him, and so he went to Haran, and began to stand up and to proclaim with a loud voice to the whole world, and to reveal to them, that there was but One God of the whole Universe, and that Him only it was right to serve; and so he continued preaching and assembling the people from city to city, and from kingdom to kingdom, until he reached the land of Canaan, still continuing to preach; for it is said:<i> And called there on the name of the Lord, the everlasting God</i>, (Gen. 21. 33). Now when the people happened to assemble around him, and to raise difficulties against his precepts, he used to explain to every one of them in proportion to his (the disputant’s) intellectual capacity, until he brought him back to the way of truth; and so thousands and myriads assembled around him, who constituted the men of the house of Abraham; and he (Abraham) planted this great and radical principle in their hearts, and also composed books on the subject, which he transmitted to his son Isaac, who continued to teach and to admonish. Again Isaac made it known to Jacob, and appointed him a teacher of the same; and so he too became a teacher and supporter of all those who joined him. Now Jacob, our father, instructed all his children; but Levi he set apart and appointed to be the head; moreover, he established him in an academy, to teach the way of God and how to observe the commandments of Abraham, directing his children that there should never cease to be a leader from among the sons of Levi, in order that this doctrine might not be forgotten. And thus the thing was continually gaining strength among the children of Jacob, and among those that joined them, so that there grew up in this world a nation who knew the Lord; until the Israelites had been a long time in Egypt, when they began again to acquire their (the Egyptians’) manners, and to worship idols like them; except the tribe of Levi, who persevered in the commandments of the fathers; so that the tribe of Levi never worshipped idols. Indeed the radical principle, which Abraham had planted, was almost uprooted, and the children of Jacob had nearly relapsed into the error and perversion of the generality of men. But because the Lord loved us, and because He wished to keep the oath which he had sworn unto Abraham, our father, He created Moses our Teacher, the head of all prophets, and sent him to us. As soon as Moses, our Teacher, began to prophesy, and as soon as the Lord had chosen Israel for his inheritance, He crowned them (<i>i. e.</i> the Israelites) with his commandments, and revealed unto them the way of worshipping Him, and also what ought to be the proceedings against idolatry, and all its mistaken followers. 

Chapter 2

The principle commandment against idolatry is not to serve any created being, neither an angel, nor an orb, nor a star, nor any of the four elements, nor any thing created of them. Although the worshipper knows that the Eternal is the true God, and he adores this created being in the manner in which Enos and his contemporaries originally worshipped, he is an idolator; and it is against this that the Divine law cautions, saying: <i>And lest thou lift up thine eyes unto heaven, and when thou seest the sun, and the moon, and the stars, even all the host of heaven, shouldst worship them and serve them, which the Lord thy God has divided unto all nations under the whole heaven</i>, (Deut. 4. 19)—signifying: lest the eye of thine imagination should swerve and fancy that these planets lead the world, and that they were allotted by God to the whole universe to be ever-living and existing, never to perish—as it is the ordinary course of nature—and lest thou say that they are to be adored and worshipped; against this erroneous notion Scripture enjoins, saying: <i>Take heed to yourselves, that your hearts be not deceived, etc., etc.</i>, (Ibid. 11. 16); which means to convey—Lest you be misled by the false idea to worship these as mediators between you and the Creator.
Many books have been composed by the idolators on idol worship, as regards its principle and its rules and practice. These books we are prohibited by the Holy One, blessed be He! from reading altogether, nor to meditate therein or in part thereof. We are even not allowed to look at the likeness of such an image, for Scripture says: <i>Turn ye not unto idols</i>, (Levit. 19. 4). In the same sense Scripture cautions us: And that thou inquire not after their Gods; saying, <i>How did these nations serve their Gods?</i> Viz.:—that thou shouldst even not inquire into the manner of idol worship, although thou does not follow it, for such an inquiry might ultimately lead to practice, and to follow their example; as it is said: <i>Even so will I do likewise</i>, (Ibid).
All these prohibitory laws are comprised in the one subject, which is not to turn after idols; and he who turns after them in a practical way is amenable to the infliction of stripes. It is not only prohibited to turn in thought after idolatry itself; but also every thought which might lead man to uproot one of the principles of the Divine law we are cautioned not even to harbour within our heart, nor for a moment entertain in our imagination; because man’s mind is confined, and not all capacities are able to arrive at the perfect truth. Should every man be carried away by the imaginations of his heart, such short-comings of intellect would prove ruinous to society: for instance, sometimes he will incline to idolatry, at other times his mind will waver regarding the unity of the Creator, whether he exists or not; what is above and what is below; what was before creation and what will be at the end. Again he will doubt prophecy, whether it be true or not, and also waver whether the law be from heaven or not; and since he is not acquainted with the logical rules, by which truth is already established, he will degenerate into infidelity, and it is this against which Scripture cautions, saying:<i> And ye shall not seek after your heart, and after your eyes which lead you astray.</i> Viz.: That none of you should be led away by his limited understanding, imagining that his own ideas [unaided by revelation] are able to attain truth. Thus our sages explained the phrase <i>after your heart</i>, signifying infidelity; <i>after your eyes</i>, signifying profligacy.

Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11




 We are prohibited from following enchantment as the heathens do; for it is said: <i>Ye shall not use enchantment</i>, (Levit. 19 26.) But what is enchantment? For instance, people say because a piece of bread has fallen out of my mouth, or a stick has dropped from my hand, I shall abstain from going to a certain place; for were I to go I should not accomplish my object, or because a fox crossed the path on my right hand, I shall not quit my house to-day; for if I were to go I am sure to meet with a deceiver, or those who are listening to the chirping of birds, and say that such a thing will happen and such a thing will not happen; such a thing is advisable to do, and such a thing is not; or others who advise to kill a cock because it crowed like a raven, or to kill the fowl that crowed like a cock. Others again make omens for themselves; saying, for instance, if such and such a thing should happen to me, I will do a certain thing, and if it should not happen to me, I will not do that thing, as Eleazer the servant of Abraham; and similar divinations are all prohibited, and whoever follows any of these enchantments is amenable to the infliction of stripes.



What is meant by “observers of time?” For instance, such as calculate time by astrological observations; saying, such a day is an auspicious one, and such is not; such a day is lucky for a certain undertaking, or such a year or such a month is unlucky for such an undertaking.  
We are not allowed to follow “the observers of times,” though without committing an act; we thereby propagate such deceptions which the credulous ignorant mistake for truth and wisdom. And whoever acts according to astrological observations, and regulates his work or his pursuits according to the time fixed by the stargazers, is amenable to the infliction of stripes, for Scripture says: <i>Ye shall not observe times</i>, (Levit. 19. 26). Also he who practices optical illusions, so as to make the spectators believe that he does something extraordinary miraculous, which in fact he does not, is included amongst those who observe times, and is amenable to the infliction of stripes. 






All these practices are falsehoods and deceptions, which were used by the idolators of yore to mislead the vulgar ignorant, and to be guided thereby; and it is unfit for Israelites who are endowed with superior wisdom to be carried away by such follies, nor to entertain the least idea that they are of any avail, for. Scripture says: <i>Surely there is no enchantment in Jacob, neither is there any divination in Israel</i>, (Numb. 23. 22). Again it is said: <i>For these nations, which thou shalt possess, hearkened unto observers of times and unto diviners; but as for thee, the Lord thy God has not suffered thee so to do</i>, (Deut. 18. 14); and he who believes in these and similar things, and imagines in his heart that they are truth and wisdom, but only prohibited by the Divine law, belongs to the class of fools or weak-minded, or to the category of ignorant women and children whose intellect is deficient. But men of wisdom and enlightened minds must be convinced by incontestable evidence that all these things prohibited by the Divine law are not matters of wisdom, but void and futile, by which the weak-minded are led away and for which they abandoned all the ways of truth; hence the Divine law in cautioning against all these follies, says: <i>Thou shalt be perfect with the Lord thy God</i>, (Deut. 18. 13).