Mishneh Torah, Fasts
משנה תורה, הלכות תעניות
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.org



Mishneh Torah, Fasts

Chapter 1

It is a positive commandment from the Torah to cry out and to sound trumpets for all troubles that come upon the community, as it is said, "upon an enemy who attacks you and you sound trumpets (Numbers 10:9)."  That is to say, every matter that troubles you like famine, plague, locusts, and so forth, cry out because of them and sound the trumpets.

But if they do not cry out and sound trumpets, but rather say: "What has happed is the way of the world, is merely happenstance". This is a cruel way, and it causes them to stick to their bad deeeds. And the trouble will add other troubles. About this it is written in the Torah (Not an exact quote, seems to be referring to Leviticus 26, 27-28): "but walk contrary unto Me  then I will walk contrary unto you in fury". That is, when I will bring upon you troubles, if you will say that it is happenstance I will increase the fury of this tear.

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5

There are days on which all Israel fasts because of the misfortunes that occurred on them in order to arouse the hearts to open to the ways of repentance and that this be a reminder of our evil deeds and the deeds of our ancestors that are like our deeds that caused these misfortunes for them and for us.  In remembering these things we return to goodness, as it is written, "And you shall confess your transgressions and the transgressions of your ancestors...(Leviticus 27:40)"



And all of Israel has the custom to fast at these times. And on the thirteenth of Adar, in memory of the fast [that the Jewish people] fasted in the days of Haman, as it states (Esther 9:31), "the matters of the fastings and their cry." And if the thirteenth of Adar happens to be on Shabbat, the fast is brought in early and one fasts on Thursday, which would be the eleventh. But if one of the four other fasts happens to be on Shabbat, it is pushed to after Shabbat. When falling on Shabbat Eve (i.e., Friday), one fasts on Shabbat Eve. And on all of these fasts, there is no trumpeting and the Neilah prayer is not prayed. But the Torah is read in the morning and afternoon prayers, over "Vayhal Moshe" (Exodus 32:11). And everyone may eat and drink on the night (preceding the fast), with the exception of Tisha B'Av.   