Tanna DeBei Eliyahu Rabbah
תנא דבי אליהו רבה
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Tanna_DeBei_Eliyahu_Rabbah
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Tanna DeBei Eliyahu Rabbah



Chapter 1

1. <i> And He drove</i> (וי<b>גרש</b>) <i>the Adom (Man)</i> (Bereshis 3:24) - from here learn that The Holy One Blessed Be He gave to him (Adom) a divorce (גירושין) like a woman <small>(that is like husband would give a divorce document to his wife whom he wishes to divorce)</small>. <i>And He placed from the east</i> (מ<b>קדם</b>) <i>of Gan Eden the Cheruvim </i>(type of Angels) - from here learn that the Cheruvim came before (קדמו) of all of the Act of Creation. <i>with a bright blade of a revolving sword</i> - this is Gehinnom (Hell). <i>to guard the way</i> - this is Derech Eretz <small>(literally the 'Way of the Land', different meanings, here Basic Human Decency, Proper Conduct or similar)</small>. <i>of the Tree of Life</i> - we learn that Derech Eretz comes before (i.e. has priority) over the Tree of Life. And there is no 'Tree of Life' except Torah, as is said <i>it is a Tree of Life for all whose grasp on it (Mishlei 3:18).</i>
2. Blessed is the Lord, blessed is He, who recognizes at the start what will be in the end. And He proclaims from the beginning the ending from before that He made <small>(i.e. created)</small>. And He knows that which He made and what it would be destined to do. And He foresees for good and He does not foresee for evil. He is rich and is happy with His portion. And in His wisdom and His understanding, He created His world, and He prepared and afterward created in it a Man (Adom), and flung him before Him. And He calculated until the end of all the generations and foresaw that his (man's) descendants would be angering. He said if I were to guard in him the first debts <small>(i.e. seek payback in regards to sins)</small>, the world would not stand. It is on me to overlook the first (sins), so He does. Where can you know this is so? When (The Nation of) Israel was in the Desert, they rotted in their actions <small>(by the sin of Golden Calf)</small>. He stood to overlook all that They had done, as it says "And Hashem passed (ויעבור) in front of him (Moshe) [Shemos 34:6]. Do not read he passed (ויעבור) rather he forgave (ויעביר). Learn that He forgave all the evil in front of him. And it should be known to you that so was with Mordechai in the time that Esther spoke not properly; since she said "but I have not been called to come in to the king etc." [Esther 4:11]. And he (Mordechai) responded to her "For if you remain silent etc." [Esther 4:14]. And when she repented and spoke to him properly, "Go, gather all the Jews" [Esther 4:16]. He looked past her words <small>(i.e. her original words, forgiving them)</small> as it says "And Mordechai passed" [Esther 4:17]. <small>(The verb עָבַר has multiple meanings, literally to pass or take away, here the meaning is its use in the following verse)</small> and he said: "Who is like God, who forgives iniquity, and overlooks transgression (וְעֹבֵ֣ר עַל־פֶּ֔שַׁע)" [Micha 7:18]. "Your eyes did see my unshaped flesh (for in Thy book all things are written)" etc. [Psalms 139:16] that teaching says in the future The Holy One Blessed Be He will sit in the Big House of Study of His. And the Righteous (צדיקים) will sit before him, and He will say to them 'My children, this generation such Torah it did and such I did with them righteousness, but I will not mention their sins, and they do not go upon my heart', as it says "and the former things shall not be remembered" etc. [Isaiah 65:17]. <small>(Continuing the interpretation of the cited verse)</small> "These days were formed, but not one from them" [Psalms 139:16] <small>(the verse ends as written ולא אֶחָד בָּהֶם not one from them, yet is read וְלוֹ אֶחָד בָּהֶם which means and to him one from them both connotate a unique day)</small>. This refers to the day of Shabbos for Israel. How so? A man does work all six days and rests on the seventh. He has amity with his children and the people of his house. Mans returns to do work in the face of his enemy all six days, and rests on the seventh, forgetting all pain, as it is so with the ways of man - a good day he forgets the bad day. A bad day he forgets the good day. The Holy One Blessed be He says to Israel did I not write to them in my Torah, "You should not remove this Book of Torah from your mouths" [Joshua 1:8] even though you do work all six days, Shabbos you should make fully Torah. From here, it is said a man should arise early and learn on Shabbos. And go to the Synagogue and to the House of Study. And he should read Torah verse, then learn in the Prophets, and afterward go to his house and eat and drink to fulfill that which it says "[But you, the righteous one,] go and eat your bread in joy, and drink your wine with a good heart, (for G-d has already accepted your good deeds) [Ecclesiastes 9:7]. Accordingly, there is no refreshment to the Holy One Blessed be He except only with those who make Torah, therefore that it says "For all those things has my hand made, (and so all those things came to be, says the Lord:) but to this man will I look, to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my word." [Isaiah 66:2]. From here it is said what a man says (i.e. when learning Torah) he should grasp in his hand in order that he does not have to handle the embarrassment and shame at the time when they say to him 'Stand and arrange (וערוך) the Verses you said and arrange (וערוך) the Mishnayos you have learned. And so it is explicit in the Tradition by King David, "Hashem, in the morning you hear my voice, in the morning I arrange before you (אֶעֱרָךְ־לְךָ) and I hope" [Psalms 5:4].
Alternatively, "These days were formed, but not one from them" [Psalms 139:16] is refering to Yom Kippur for (the nation of) Israel. {continuing} 

Chapter 2

One thing after another, the days were created, and not one of them is the seventh day forever, according to this world six thousand years, two thousand years, two thousand Torah, two thousand years, the son of David will die, and in our seasons many will go out, what went out, and will come in to work within two thousand years of the death of the son of David (more than 100 years) as it is said God did what he planned (Lamentations 2:17) and just as we make a shemitah once every seven years, so the Almighty will make a shemitah for the world one day which is a thousand years as it is said that a thousand years are in your eyes as yesterday (Psalms 90:4). And says And there was one day (Zechariah 14:7), this is the seventh day of the world, and at evening there was light (Zechariah 14:7), this is the world to come, which is said to be every month in its month, and every Sabbath in its Sabbath (Isaiah 66:23 ) And a psalm is said for the Sabbath day to the world that is all Sabbath. Another thing is a psalm a song for the Sabbath day that shuts off from the world. Another thing is a psalm a song for the Sabbath day is the seventh day to the world. And for the evening of the Sabbath it is the world to come in which there is no death for the eternal and the eternal, and in it there is neither sin nor iniquity nor plagues And no rebellions, but each and every one rejoices with his wisdom and understanding. How do you know that he did go out and learn from the Holy One, blessed be He, who rejoices in David in this world and the glory of heaven in the next world that was said and these are David's last words and ending "The utterance of is David the son of Ishai, and he utterance of the person who stands" on the mountains of learning, who accepted upon themselves the yoke of Torah and the yoke of mitzvot. What is your payment in front of Me? That you will be called 'the anointed of the God of Yaakov, and the sweet singer of Israel'. Happy is the person who sets themselves as an ox to the yoke, and as a donkey to the burden, and sits and meditates every day in Torah, always, immediately the Spirit of God rests on them, and the their Torah gets inside them, as it is written "Ho, everyone who thirsts, come for water" (Isaiah 55:1), and any mention of water really means Torah. How so? Explanation: a person reads Torah, prophets, writings, Mishnah, Halakhot, Agadot, and Midrash; and spends much time sitting, and little time in business, immediately the spirit of God is within that person, and His message are in that person's tongue, as it is written "The spirit of Ad-nai has spoken through me, His message is on my tongue" (II Sam 23:2). Happy is the person that plays with the words of the Torah and sits and chews on them like an animal that chews the cud on the field.  ... 

Chapter 3

David, King (may his memory be blessed), further said: "My fear is within my joy, and my joy is within my fear; and my love ascends above them all. Therefore, the Holy One, blessed be He, made a covenant with me that I should be proficient in the Scripture, in the Mishnah, in the laws, and in the aggadahs, as it is said, 'For is not my house so with God? For He has made an everlasting covenant with me, ordered in all things, and sure; for all my salvation, and all my desire, will He not make it to grow' (2 Samuel 23). And there is no covenant but the Torah, as it is said, 'My covenant was with him, life and peace' (Malachi 2). Ordered in all things, in the Scripture, in the Mishnah, in the laws, in the aggadahs, and protection, so that the words of Torah should be preserved by me forever and for all eternity. "For all my salvation and all my desire, will He not make it to grow." From here they said: Every Torah scholar who increases in Torah study and does not derive sustenance much, it is a good sign for him. And if you say, 'If the Holy One, blessed be He, loves His Torah, why does He not sustain him?' You should say that if He enriches him, he may become presumptuous about the words of Torah. Therefore, every Torah scholar who increases in Torah study and does bring-in much produce (wealth), it is a good sign for him, for the Holy One, blessed be He, loves his Torah, that if He enriches him, he may become presumptuous about the words of Torah. And this is explicitly stated in the Kabbalah by Solomon, King of Israel: 'Two things I ask of You; deny them not to me before I die: Remove far from me falsehood and lies; give me neither poverty nor riches; feed me with the food that is needful for me' (Proverbs 30). 'Lest I be full, and deny You, and say: "Who is the Lord?" Or lest I be poor, and steal, and profane the name of my God' (Proverbs 30). Blessed is He who chose the Torah and the Talmud (and the Sages), and their disciples, and the disciples of their disciples, and their children, and the children of their children, until the end of all generations, and He establishes upon them the measure with which a man measures, it is measured unto him. Just as they sit in synagogues and study halls and in every open place, and read for the sake of heaven, and He sees into their hearts, and they uphold the Torah according to its prescriptions, so that they do not forget it from their mouths and from the mouths of their children and the children of their children forever. So did the Holy One, blessed be He, choose them and their children and the children of their children until the end of time, as it is said: 'And I will make My covenant between Me and you, and I will multiply you exceedingly' (Genesis 17). So said the Lord, 'My spirit that is upon you, and My words which I have put in your mouth, shall not depart out of your mouth, nor out of the mouth of your seed, nor out of the mouth of your seed's seed,' said the Lord, 'from henceforth and forever' (Isaiah 59). But the sons of rebellious Israel are not like this. In their youth they are soft, and in their old age they are hard. What does the Holy One, blessed be He, do when they are still soft? He raises them up and burns them in the great study hall and in His great yeshiva, [as it is said: 'And all the wicked shall be stubble, and the day that comes shall set them ablaze' (Malachi 3). For none of them shall have a hand to bear or a hand to lay down, but every man's sword shall be against his brother's, and he shall burn the chariots with fire' (Zechariah 9). And there is none but the wicked], as it is said: 'And the sons of Belial said: "What shall this one save us?" And they despised him and brought him no present' (1 Samuel 10). And it says: 'And every man of Belial said: "What will this one save us?"' (1 Samuel 10). The Sages said: Anything that is destined to occur in the end has already been done in part today. There shall be a session for the Holy One, blessed be He, in His study hall, and the righteous of all time shall sit before Him,  There has already been a part of the session for the righteous in this world for David, King of Israel, who illuminated his face with the halachah before the righteous who sat before him. And so it will be in the future for the righteous, whose lives will be without sorrow and without the evil inclination, to live with the son of David in this world. And in the World to Come, there has already been a part of life without sorrow and without the evil inclination for the righteous, such as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and Jabez, and Jether, and all who are like them. In the future, the Holy One, blessed be He, will resurrect the dead, whether in the time of the son of David or in the World to Come, for there has already been a part of the resurrection of the dead in this world by the hand of the righteous, Elijah and Elisha, and Ezekiel son of Buzi. In the future, there will be honor and strength for the righteous in the World to Come, for there has already been a part of honor and strength for the righteous in this world, such as Jehoshaphat, King of Judah. In the future, there will be eating, drinking, and joy for the righteous. And there will be no plague nor suffering nor distress, for there has already been a part of eating, drinking, and joy for the righteous in this world. In the future, the Holy One, blessed be He, will make peace among the righteous and among His people Israel, for there has already been a part of peace in this world by the hand of the righteous. 

Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9

Izevel, the daughter of Etba"al king of the Tzidonim and the wife of Achav, at the first time that she was brought before Achav taught him the ways of idol worshippers and because of her he was brought to become an idolater. 

Chapter 10



Chapter 11

























The people of Israel are similar to a ship. If there is a hole in the lower hold, one does not say, ‘Only the lower hold has a hole in it.’ Rather they must immediately recognize that the ship is liable to sink and that they must repair the hole down below.

Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25

[1] "And God spoke all these words, saying, I am the Lord your God, etc." (Exodus 20:1-2) Blessed is the Place, blessed is He, who chose Israel from all His handiwork and acquired them as a complete acquisition and called them sons and servants to His name. Sometimes He speaks with them as He speaks with the many, and sometimes He speaks with them as He speaks with the individual. And why all this? Only because of the love with which He loves them and because of the joy with which He rejoices in them. Therefore, He speaks with them in the singular and in the plural. Therefore, I would say that every single one of Israel is obligated to say, When will my deeds reach the deeds of my forefathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, for the forefathers did not acquire this world and the world to come and the days of the son of David except through their good deeds and Torah study. And so the Sages taught in the Mishnah, Every single one of Israel is obligated to say, For my sake the world was created, and a person should not say in his heart to himself, The world to come is nothing but chaos and void, therefore I will follow the stubbornness of my heart and eat and drink and enjoy in this world, and afterward I will depart from this world. And if he does so, about him it is said, The fool says in his heart, There is no God, and if he is a scholar, wisdom and understanding are withheld from him, and if he turns himself to other matters, about him the verse says (Isaiah 32:6), For a fool speaks folly, etc. And similarly, a person should not see the many in distress and say, I will follow the stubbornness of my heart and eat and drink and enjoy in this world, and if he does so, about him the verse says (Isaiah 22:13), And behold, joy and gladness, killing cattle and slaughtering sheep, eating meat and drinking wine, eat and drink for tomorrow we die. What is written after it? And it was revealed in the ears of the Lord of Hosts, if this iniquity will be atoned for you until you die. So far, the intermediate measure. But in the measure of the wicked, what is written about them? The verse says (Isaiah 56:12), Come, I will fetch wine, and we will fill ourselves with strong drink, and tomorrow will be like this day, even greater, much more. What is written after it? (Isaiah 57:1) The righteous perishes, and no one takes it to heart, etc. What is the matter of what follows? Peace will come, they will rest on their beds, he who walks uprightly, etc. From here the Sages said, Even a sage from Israel who is like Moses, who was a father to sages and a father to prophets, and pious like Aaron his brother, should not say, Here I am in joy in my house, and peace be to you, my soul, but he should leave his house and be with the community in distress. But how does a person acquire his Father in Heaven and the world to come? You should say that he acquires for the Holy One, blessed be He, through good deeds and Torah study, and the Holy One, blessed be He, grants him this world and the world to come and the days of the son of David. And these are the good deeds by which a person acquires for the Holy One, blessed be He, and the world to come within them: through love and brotherhood and fear and peace and friendship, and through truth and peace, and through lowliness of knee, and through humility, and through much sitting and little commerce, and through serving sages, and through the discussion of students, and through a good heart, and through proper conduct, and through no and no, and yes and yes. We learned from our father Abraham that at the beginning of his deeds he had fear before the Holy One, blessed be He, as it is said (Genesis 15:1), After these things, the word of the Lord came to Abram in a vision, saying, Do not fear, Abram, I am your shield, and they do not say to a person, Do not fear, except to one who truly fears Heaven. And his parable, to what is it likened? To a king who said to his son, My son, go and kill all these bandits, and do not take anything from their wealth if they fall into your hand, so that they will not say, The king’s son did not go out to kill these bandits except to take their wealth. Immediately he went out and killed all the bandits. Upon his return, his father went out to meet him and said to him, Blessed are you, my son, and may you have satisfaction in the world, for you did not benefit at all from their wealth. Now come with me, and I will give you all the precious vessels in the world and fine stones and pearls from my treasury. And so it was likened to our father Abraham, when he went out to kill the kings, upon his return the king of Sodom went out to meet him, and it seemed to the king of Sodom that Abraham would not return anything to him. He requested and said to Abraham, Please give me the people, and take the possessions for yourself (Genesis 14:21-22). Immediately, Abram said to the king of Sodom, I have lifted my hand to the Lord, etc., if from a thread to a sandal strap, and if I take anything of all that is yours, etc., and I have already sworn that I will not take anything of all that is yours. And Abraham said to the king of Sodom, Fool of the world, do I need your silver and gold and all your precious vessels? I will cast it all before you to the ground, and you will see that I did not benefit at all from your wealth, except only what the young men ate, etc. At that moment, Abraham sanctified the name of the Holy One, blessed be He, and stood and returned all the possessions of Sodom and Gomorrah. Immediately after these things, the word of the Lord came to Abram in a vision, etc., Your reward is very great. And so we learned from Isaac that at the beginning of his deeds he truly feared Heaven, for Isaac was seventy-five years old when Abraham entered his eternal home, and Isaac said, Woe is me, perhaps I do not have good deeds like my father had, what will become of me before the Holy One, blessed be He? Immediately, the mercies of the Holy One, blessed be He, were stirred for him, and He stood with him at that moment, as it is said (Genesis 26:24), And the Lord appeared to him that night, etc. And so we learned from our father Jacob that at the beginning of his deeds he had fear before the Holy One, blessed be He, as it is said (Genesis 28:17), And he was afraid and said, How awesome is this place, etc. And so we learned from our early forefathers that at the beginning of their deeds they had fear before the Holy One, blessed be He, as it is said (Exodus 14:31), And the people feared the Lord, etc. Thus you have learned that in reward for the fear that our holy forefathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob had of the Holy One, blessed be He, and in reward for the faith that Israel believed in the Holy One, blessed be He, when they were in Egypt, they were redeemed from Egypt, and the sea was split for them. And so it will be in the future, that the Holy One, blessed be He, will come and redeem Israel from among the nations and bring them the days of the son of David and the days of our redemption, as it is said (Micah 4:10), Be in pain and labor, daughter of Zion, like a woman in childbirth, etc., and you will come to Babylon, there you will be rescued, there the Lord will redeem you from the hand of your enemies. And all the sins of Israel are left in Babylon, and they ascend pure to the land of Israel, as it is said (Zechariah 5:9), And I lifted my eyes and saw, and behold, two women coming out, etc., and they lifted the ephah between the earth and the heavens. And I said to the angel who spoke with me, Where are they taking the ephah? And he said to me, To build a house for it in the land of Shinar, and it was established and set there, etc. And why is its name called Shinar? Because it shakes off all the sins from it. Therefore, it is said, To build a house for it in the land of Shinar. What is, And it was established and set there on its base? This verse refers back and applies to the Tabernacle that was hidden in its place, and so the Ark with the tablets inside it, and the chest that the Philistines sent as a gift to the Holy One, blessed be He, and Aaron’s staff, and the flask of the anointing oil, and the jar of manna, as it is said (Exodus 16:33), And Moses said to Aaron, Take one jar and put there a full omer of manna, etc., and Aaron placed it before the Testimony for safekeeping, so that Jeremiah the prophet would say to them, This is the manna that I fed Israel in the wilderness. The Ark and the tablets within it, how so? As it is said (Deuteronomy 5), These words the Lord spoke to all your assembly on the mountain from the midst of the fire, etc., He said to them, These are the words, they are the Ten Commandments that I spoke with you at Sinai. And why was the Tabernacle hidden until this day? Because the righteous made it with the generosity of their hearts, and it is difficult before the Holy One, blessed be He, to destroy all that the righteous made with the generosity of their hearts. And in the future, the Holy One, blessed be He, will come and dwell within it as in the first measure, as it is said (Song of Songs 4:16), Awake, north wind, and come, south wind, etc., I have come to my garden, my sister, my bride, I have gathered my myrrh with my spice, etc. (Another interpretation) I have come to my garden, these are the synagogues and study houses, my sister, my bride, this is the congregation of Israel, I have gathered my myrrh with my spice, these are the Torah, Prophets, and Writings, I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey, these are the Midrash, laws, and legends, I have drunk my wine with my milk, these are the good deeds that the sages of Israel store up for them, and afterward, Eat, friends, drink, and be drunk, beloved ones.

Chapter 26

This is what God said to Israel: My children what do I seek from you? I seek no more than that you love one another, and honor one another, and that you have awe for one another