Mishnah Gittin
משנה גיטין
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.org

Chapter 1



Chapter 2

When a person who brings a Get from a foreign country declares, "It was written, but not signed in my presence," or the reverse, or, "The whole [Get] was written, but only in part attested in my presence," or, "Only half of the writing [of the Get] but the whole of the signatures were written in my presence," it is void. Also in case one [witness] says, "It was written," and another, "It was signed in my presence." When two say, "It was written in our presence," and one, "It was signed in my presence," it is also void. But R. Jehudah declares it valid. When one declares, "It was written in my presence," and two declare "It was signed in our presence," it is valid.
If it were both written and signed in the day time,  or that both writing and signatures were done at night, or that it was written at night, but signed by day, it is valid. If it were written by day, but signed at night, it is void, but R. Simeon declares it valid; for he established it as a rule "That all documents written by day and signed at night are void, except letters of divorce."
The writing of a Get may be done with any material, with ink, paint, ruddle, gum, or with vitriol black, and with every other indelible material, but not with any liquor, the juice of fruit, nor with any delible material. It may be written on any thing, even on a leaf of an olive tree or on a cow's horn. In the latter case, however, the husband is bound to give her [the wife] the cow along with it. He may write it on the hand of a slave, but then he must give her the slave also; but R. José prohibits the writing of a Get on any thing endowed with life, or on edible articles.
A Get may not be written on any thing that is yet attached or fixed to the soil. If it was so written, and it was afterwards severed from the soil, and then signed and delivered to the woman, it is valid. But R. Jehudah declares it void, for it must be written and signed on what is detached from the soil. R. Jehudah ben Beterah saith, "It must not be written on papyrus, on which an erasure or abrasion appears, nor on unfinished vellum, because it affords opportunity for falsification;" but the sages permit it.
All are qualified to write a Get, even deaf and dumb, or foolish persons and minors. A woman may write her own Get, and the husband his acquittance [for the amount of the Ketubah he has paid her], because the validity of legal documents depends solely on the signature of the attesting witnesses. All are qualified [to act as missionaries or agents] to bring over a Get, except deaf and dumb or foolish persons, minors, a blind person, and a non-Israelite.
When a minor received [a commission to deliver] a Get and became of age [before he delivered it], or a deaf person whilst in that state, and who afterwards recovered his hearing, or a blind person who subsequently recovered his sight, or a demented person, who was afterwards cured, or a non-Israelite,  who subsequently became a proselyte, the Get is void. But when a person received it whilst in possession of his faculty of hearing, and before he delivered he became deaf, and again recovered his hearing, or a person who could see, had become blind, and again recovered his sight, or a person of sound mind who had become demented, and was cured: the Get is valid, because the rule is, that when the commencement and end of the act took place, whilst the person was in possession of his faculties, it is valid.
Those females who are not considered competent witnesses to testify to a woman in respect to the decease of her husband, are to be credited when [as messengers] they bring over a Get to her, viz., her mother-in-law, the daughter of her mother-in-law, her rival, the wife of her husband's brother, and her husband's daughter. Why is this difference in respect to the evidence as to a Get, or as to the death of a husband? Because there is [in the first mentioned case] a document in existence to confirm the evidence. A woman may bring her own Get with her, but she must declare at the same time, "It was written and signed in my presence."

Chapter 3



Chapter 4

If a man sends a bill of divorce to his wife via a messenger, and then catches up with the messenger, or sends another messenger after the first to say to the first messenger, "the bill of divorce that I gave to you is cancelled," then the bill of divorce is cancelled.  If the husband beats the messenger to the woman's home, or sends a second messenger who beats the first there, and says to her "the bill of divorce that I sent you is cancelled," then it is cancelled.  From the moment that the bill of divorce reaches the woman's hands, it can no longer be cancelled.
At first, a man [who had already sent his wife a bill of divorce by means of a messenger] would set up a religious court in a different place [from where the wife lived] and cancel the bill of divorce.  Rabban Gamliel the Elder established that this should not be done, for the sake of the repair of the world.  At first, a man could use a different name for himself, his wife, his city, or her city.  [That is, a man could use a nickname on the bill of divorce.]  Rabban Gamliel the Elder established that one should write one's name and any other name that he has and her name and any other name that she has for the sake of the repair of the world.
A widow may only collect [the debt owed from her Ketubah] from the property of orphans if she swears an oath [Shavua]. They stopped swearing, so Rabban Gamliel the Elder instituted that she may promise [Neder] whatever they desire, and she can then collect her Ketubah. 
Witnesses sign on a Get, because of societal concerns [Tikkun Olam]. 
Hillel instituted the Pruzbol because of societal concerns [Tikkun Olam]
A slave that was kidnapped and then ransomed, if [he was ransomed] in order to be a slave, he becomes a slave. If [he was ransomed] to be a free man, he does not become a slave. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: In both cases, he becomes a slave [nevertheless]. A slave whose master mortgaged him to others, and then frees him, the baseline law is that the slave is not obligated at all [to be a slave to the person he was mortgaged to]. But as a community service, they force his [second master] to [also] free him, and [the slave is forced to] write a [debt] document for his money's worth to him. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: [The slave] does not write [a debt document], but only a [document of] freedom.
One who is half [Canaanite] slave and half free-man, serves his master every other day and serves himself every other day. These are the worlds of Beit Hillel. Beit Shamai said to them: You have repaired it for his master, but not repaired it for him! To marry a slave-girl is impossible ([i.e. forbidden), for he is half-free. [To marry] a free woman is impossible, for he is half-slave! And was not the world created for the sake of reproduction, as it says (Is. 45:18) "Not for emptiness did He create it, but for settlement He formed it." Rather, for the sake of repairing the world, we force his master and he makes [the half-slave] into a free-man, and writes a writ [of release] for half his value. Beit Hillel retracted (their statement) and ruled according to the words of Beit Shamai.
Someone who sells his slave to a non-Jew or to someone outside the land of Israel, [the slave automatically] goes free. We do not ransom captives for more than they are worth, for the sake of the community. We do not help captives escape, for the sake of the community. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: [Not for the sake of the community, but] for the sake of the captives. We do not buy religious books, tefillin, and mezuzot from the non-Jews for more than their worth, for the sake of the community.
If someone divorced his wife because of her bad reputation, he may not remarry her. If it was because [she made a] vow, he may not remarry her. Rabbi Yehuda says: If the vow was known to the public, he may not remarry her. If it was not known to the public, he may remarry her. Rabbi Meir says: Any vow that required the inspection of a rabbi [to determine if it can be annulled], he may not remarry her. If it does not require inspection of a rabbi, he may remarry her. Rabbi Eliezer says: This was only forbidden for that [i.e. both prohibited a remarriage]. Rabbi Yossi b'Rabbi Yehuda said: There was an occurrence in Tzidan, where one man had said to his wife, "I swear [in the form of a konam swear] if I do not divorce you, and he divorced her. The rabbis allowed them to remarry, for the sake of the community.
If someone divorces his wife because she is incapable of having children [an ilonit], Rabbi Yehuda says: He may not remarry her. The Rabbis say: He may remarry her. She marries someone else, and she had children with that man, and she sues for her ketuba [from the first, on the basis that she is in fact capable of having children], Rabbi Yehuda says: We tell her, "The less you say, the better, [because then your first husband can claim the divorce was under false pretenses, rendering your current children as mamzerim]."
If someone sells himself and his children to a gentile, we do not redeem him.  But we redeem the children after the death of their father.  If one sells his field to a gentile, and a Jew buys it back from him, the buyer brings the first fruits from it, for the sake of the repair of the world.

Chapter 5



Chapter 6

When one person says to another, "Receive this Get for my wife," or, "Bring this Get to my wife," he may, if he likes, take it back again; but when the wife said [to the messenger], "Receive for me my Get," the husband cannot resume it. Therefore, should a husband say to the messenger, "I do not wish that you should receive it for her [as her messenger], but go and give it her [as my messenger]," he may, if he likes, resume it again. Rabbon Simeon ben Gamaliel saith, "Also, when the wife said, 'Fetch me my Get,' the husband cannot take it back."
A wife who had said, "Receive for me my Get," must produce two [sets or] pairs of witnesses; two must testify [and say], "She uttered this [order] in our presence," and two more to say, "The messenger received the Get, and tore it up in our presence;" the same witnesses may however testify to the truth of both assertions, or one of the first and one of the second pair of witnesses may conjoin with them a third person to bear testimony. A betrothed girl may either receive her Get herself, or her father may receive it for her. R. Jehudah saith, "That right cannot be possessed at the same time by both parties; but her father only has a right to receive her Get." Any female who is too young to take proper care of her Get, cannot be divorced at all.
When a female minor said, "Receive my Get for me," the Get is ineffective until it has reached her hands. Therefore, should the husband wish to revoke the Get, he is at liberty to do so, because a minor has not the power of appointing a messenger [or deputy]; but if her father said [to the messenger], "Go and receive my daughter's Get," the husband cannot revoke it. When a husband says, [paragraph continues] "Give this Get to my wife in the place N. N." and the messenger gave it her elsewhere, the Get is void. [But if the husband had only said] "My wife is in the place N. N." and the messenger gave it her in another place, it is valid. When a woman says, "Receive for me my Get in such a place," and the messenger received it for her in another place, it is void; but R. Eleazar declares it valid. If she said, "Bring me my Get from such a place," and he fetched it from elsewhere, it is valid.
When a wife says, "Bring me my Get," she may [if married to a priest] continue to eat heave till the Get has been delivered into her hands. When she said to a messenger, "Receive my Get for me," she may not, from that instant, eat any longer of the heave. If she said, "Receive my Get for me, and bring it to the place N. N." she is permitted to eat heave till the time the Get can have reached that place; but R. Eleazar prohibits it immediately.
When a husband says, "Write a Get, and give it to my wife," or, "Divorce her," or, "Write a letter [‏אגרת‎] and give it her," they are to write the Get, and give it her. If he said, "Release her," or, "Provide her her maintenance," or, "Do with her as is customary," or, "Do with her as is proper," what he has said amounts to nothing. Formerly, it was held that when a criminal was led out with an iron collar [to the place of execution], and he said, "Write a Get for my wife," they should write it, and deliver it to her. It was afterwards decided, also those that are about going to sea, or to travel with a caravan [in the desert]. R. Simeon Sazuree saith, "Also those who are dangerously ill."
If a person who was cast into a pit, called out from thence, that whoever should hear his voice should write a Get to his wife, they shall write it and deliver it to her. When a person in health says, "Write a Get for my wife," he must be considered as if joking with her. It once happened that a person in health said, "Write a Get for my wife," and then went on his roof, from whence he fell and died; Rabbon Simeon ben Gamaliel saith, "The sages decided upon that occasion, that if he fell down with premeditation [on his part] the Get is valid, but not if the wind blew him down."
If a husband says to two [men], "Give a Get to my wife," or to three, "Write a Get, and give it to my wife," they shall write, and deliver it to her. If he said to three, "Give a Get to my wife," the latter can depute others to write it, because he constituted them a tribunal. Such is the dictum of R. Meir, and this doctrine R. Hanina of Ono brought with him from prison; [he said] "I have received a tradition, that when the husband said to three men, 'Give my wife a Get,' that they may depute others to write it, because the constituted them a tribunal." R. José saith, "We tell this emissary, We [also] have a tradition, that when a husband had said even to the Great Tribunal in Jerusalem, 'Give my wife a Get,' the latter are bound to study [the laws of Get], write a Get, and deliver it to the wife." When a husband says to ten [men], "Write ye and deliver a Get to my wife," one of that number shall write, and two others sign it, but if he said, "Write it all of ye," then one shall write, and all must sign it. Therefore, if one of them should die, the Get becomes void.