Be'er Mayim Chaim
באר מים חייים
merged
http://www.sefaria.org/Be'er_Mayim_Chaim
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-http://www.sefaria.org



Be'er Mayim Chaim

Chapter 1

Because this is the primary mistake by which people commonly err, accordingly I will show you three corroborating texts from the Talmud, followed by the Halachic deciders, that the prohibition applies even when true. It is written in Moed Katan 15a: "From where do we know that if someone denies the authority of an agent of the Beis Din and the agent comes and testifies to this, that it is not Lashon Hara? It is written: 'Will you gouge out the eyes of those men?' (Bamidbar 16:14)" In Rashi's commentary on the phrase "...if someone denies the authority..." he elaborates that they insulted the agent of the Beis Din and the agent testified that they insulted him. Based in this the Talmud brings its proof from the text 'Will you gouge out the eyes...' which was directed to the agent. It goes without saying that the agent related events to Moshe Rabbeinu (which is supported by Rashi's commentary on '...the eyes...'), so we see that the agent of the Beis Din is permitted in these circumstances to speak. Observe that according to Rashi's explanation this issue relates to Lashon Hara, and the agent knew himself that the account was true, in that Datan and Aviram insulted him when they said 'Will you gouge out the eyes of those men?' (like a man who attributes his own affliction to his friend, as Rashi in Chumash explains). Notwithstanding all this, it is implied clearly from the Talmud that if he weren't an agent of the Beis Din he would be forbidden to speak of it. Even according to the text of the Rosh and the Ran, who relate the issue to Rechilut as we will explain later, nonetheless regarding the conclusion in law we don't find that they disagree with Rashi. Just like how according to their view the Talmud relates to the issue of Rechilut and you must conclude it's forbidden even where true except that he is an agent of the Beis Din (as we will elaborate with Hashem's help later in the beginning of part 2), so too will be the law regarding Lashon Hara. Thus the prohibition of Lashon Hara applies even on the truth.