Rabbeinu Chananel on Horayot
רבינו חננאל על הוריות
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Rabbeinu_Chananel_on_Horayot
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Rabbeinu Chananel on Horayot



Daf 1a



Daf 1b



Daf 2a

The teaching of the court: In cases of positive commandments, such as Pesach or circumcision, or in negative commandments that do not involve karet (excision) or a chatat (sin offering), such as bloodshed and similar matters, there is no communal offering at all. However, if the court ruled erroneously (under conditions not mentioned above) and a minority of the community acted based on their ruling, the same applies to an individual—each one brings a sin offering. This follows the ruling of the Sages who said that an individual who acts based on the erroneous ruling of a court is liable. If the court issued a ruling and they themselves acted on it, but not a single member of the community followed suit, then they do not bring the bull offering. Instead, each individual who acted brings their own personal offering, as it is stated, “and they [the community] acted”—action depends on the community, and the ruling depends on the court. If the court issued a ruling and an individual acted willfully based on their ruling, knowing that their ruling was against the law and that “there is no wisdom against Hashem,” the individual is exempt from bringing an offering. But if the individual erred in fulfilling the commandment to listen to the words of the sages, they are liable to bring an offering. The same applies to the community or its majority—if they erred in fulfilling the commandment to listen to the words of the sages, the bull offering is brought. If they erred again in the same ruling, such as knowing they permitted a prohibition but forgetting the details of what was permitted, the same law applies. The guiding principle is: any time the court’s mistake exempts the community, the bull offering is brought by the court. However, for personal sin offerings, the individuals remain obligated.
What has been explained here suffices for opening an understanding, from which one can delve further. The primary discussion of all this can be found in this chapter (Daf 4b) in the teaching, “If the court erred unintentionally, and the entire community acted unintentionally.”