Ohev Yisrael
אוהב ישראל
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Ohev Yisrael

Title



Approbations



Introduction



A Song in Honor of the Author



Bereshit



Noach



Lech Lecha



Vayera



Chayei Sara



Toldot



Vayetzei



Vayishlach



Vayeshev



Hannukah



Miketz



Vayigash



Vayechi



Shemot



Vaera



Bo



Beshalach



Tu B'Shevat



Yitro



Mishpatim



Parashat Shekalim



Parashat Zachor



Parsaht Zachor and Purim



Parashat Parah



Parashat Hachodesh



Comment 1

"This month is for you the first of the months etc. Midrash: This is similar to a king who betrothed a woman and wrote for her a small gift. Since it came the time to collect it (The Gift), he (The King) wrote for her a large gift. So to this world is likened to betrothal (from God to the Jewish People), as it says (in the verse) "I will betroth you to me forever." And (God only gave them the moon alone. As it says (in the verse) "This month is for you." However, in the days of Messiah there will be (a) marriage. As it says (in the verse) "For He who made you will espouse you". At that time he will give them (the Jews) everything. As it says (in the verse) "And the wise will shine like the shine of the sky, and the ones who lead the many in the way of righteousness (will shine) like stars forever and ever. This is the end of the words of the Midrash:
To explain and understand the essence of the intention of the sages 

Terumah



Tetzaveh



Ki Tisa



Vayakhel



Comment 1



Comment 2

<b>Six days shall you do work, etc.:</b> Behold in this parshah, the holy Torah has the warning (prohibition) of Shabbat precede the building of the tabernacle; yet in Parshat Ki Tissa, it has the building of the tabernacle precede the observance of Shabbat!?! But this can be explained on its simple level as follows: That in truth the Sages, may their memory be blessed, said that the tabernacle came to atone for the sin of the golden calf. This is as can be seen from all of the verses that were stated in the building of the tabernacle that are to repair [it] are in the exact same language [used] when they sinned, as it is found in the Midrash in the Torah commentators, see there. However it appears that in truth, even if the Jewish people had not sinned with the calf, they would have still made the tabernacle, as God, may He be blessed, said to Moshe (Exodus 25:8), "They shall make a sanctuary for Me, and I will dwell in their midst." For the tabernacle was built in the aspect of a copy resembling the sanctuary above, the chamber across from the chamber, etc. And the Holy One, blessed be He, commanded to make the sanctuary below in order to draw down the manifestation of the Divine Presence among the descendants of Israel, His treasured nation. However afterwards, when they made the calf, another reason and intention was added for them in the building of the tabernacle, and that is atonement; which was added on the first reason, which was to bring down the manifestation of the Divine Presence among them. But behold the observance of Shabbat is also a reparation for the sin of the calf. This is as the Sages, may their memory be blessed said (Shabbat 118b:2), "Anyone who observes Shabbat, etc. even if he worships idolatry, etc. is forgiven." So Shabbat is a personal reparation for any Jew who observes Shabbat in accordance with its status and its law; then he will be forgiven for his sin. But the offering for the tabernacle is a general reparation. Hence in this parshah, which was after the Yom Kippur subsequent to the sin of the calf, the holy Torah had the observance of Shabbat precede the building of the tabernacle, so it mentioned the personal reparation before the general reparation. But it did not do this in Parsha Ki Tissa, for that was still before the sin of the calf. There the Torah had the building of the tabernacle, which is the place for the manifestation of the Divine Presence, precede before the observance of Shabbat. And see the holy Ohr HaChaim, may his memory be blessed, who spoke a little about this.

Pekudei



Vayikra



Tzav



Shmini



Tazria



Metzora



Achrei Mot



Kedoshim



Emor



Behar



Bechukotai



Bamidbar



Nasso



Beha'alotcha



Sh'lach



Korach



Chukat



Balak



Pinchas



Comment 1



Comment 2

And the daughters of Tzelofchad ben Chefer approached etc - look, it is written "Joyfully shall you draw water from the fountains of salvation" (Isaiah 12:3). Salvation is called in the aspect of the High Holy Crown, which is where exists the fountain/origin of salvation, lovingkindness and compassion. And the two springs that come from it are Yud and Hey, which are Chochmah and Binah. And from there comes the Flow and the Salvation to the five aspects that are called the Five Salvations. And this is what we say in Havdalah "the cup of salvations I raise etc" since just as the cup is a vessel that receives the  wine that is poured into it, so too is the level of "the one who claims needs to show proof", which is the Higher Sovereingty, as it were. This is the vessel to receive the Five Salvations, through the aspect of "the tzadik is the life of the worlds", since he is connected to all, and joyfully draws, and this is the secret of "the tzadik is the life of the worlds". The sages have said that JOY is a metaphor for the covenant, which is the Flow and Filling of the cup of salvation, and "the one who claims needs to show proof" is the one that wants to raise oneself up to their source and their root of Holiness. And the holy Zohar says that the five fingers around the cup are a hint of the five salvations that come from the Upper World, which is the World of Freedom, as known to those who know. ... And those are symbolized by the letters mem-nun-tzadi-pei-chaf, which are both simple and double. And those five salvations are called "daughters of Tzelofchad", and this is the explanation of the verse "and the daughters of Tzelofchad approached": they approached themselves to their higher root, that are the five salvations spoken of above, since they are called daughters that surround the Shechinah since they receive the flow from the Higher Source. And they are called daughters of Tzelofchad - [break this word into] tzalap chad [one mark], those who are one since they have no dispersion, in the secret meaning of two rays that do not separate. OR you can also say - daughters of Tzelofchad [break this word into] tzel pachad [shadow of fear] since the five letters mem-nun-tzadi-pei-chaf are double they are the hint to the Holy Strengths, and from there come Fear and Awe into those who hate Israel and all who do evil, that they are unable to come to the higher holiness. They are not able to do evil to Israel, because they [Israel] desire and want those five salvations, which are symbolized by the settling and inheriting the holy land. And that they [the daughters] were able to go up to their Source and their High Root so as to make the flow descend and fill up the cup of salvations, which is the secret of the Holy Sovereignty. And their desire was to bring about salvation and redemption, which is the messianic times, which is "and the daughters of Tzelofchad ben Chefer approached", since it is known that the secret of Exile is to raise the 288 (Refech) holy sparks, hinted in the letters of Chefer. And "Son of Gilead" - through Yaakov Our Father who called him Gal-ed, and this is also a hint to the world of freedom, in which there is the sweetening of the judgments, and there one is an E"D (witness) that the ability of changing Names for God is how we conquer our enemies, which are the ones that try to cross over the GaL (wall of stones), like the way Lavan the Aramean tried to fool Yaakov, crossing over the wall of stones to do evil to Israel. OR one can say Ben Gila"d, E"D (witness) Ayin and Dalet. Ayin and Dalet are augmented in the verse Shema etc Echad, which are the letters of E"D. Since we are with the Blessed One and we unify God's name, above and below, and we give witness to God's unity, Blessed be the Name.And what is left of the letters of Shema is SH"M, and from Echa"d, A"CH; so we can make the combination ASHMA"CH (which is Shem Ach due to our witnessing of the unity of the Holy Blessed One, and this is Ben Gil"ad, that it becomes revealed to us the Name A"ch brother/ an idea of God as Brother, through the E"D written augmented.) Ben Machir - Ben Machir with patach - that he will recognize and know and reveal and publicize the Holy One of Blessing to Israel. And as it is written "For a child has been born to us, a son has been given us. And authority has settled on his shoulders...in token of abundant authority and of peace without limit" (Isaiah 9:5-6). Ben Menashe. From the expression "God has made me forget completely my hardship" (Genesis 41:51). That is, through him Israel forgot completely all their hardship in exile. And these are the names of his daughters: the five salvations spoken above, each with her specific name, due to the good action that each has. The name of the first is Machl"ah - from the expression machul lah - it is forgiven to her, there is the source of Forgiveness (Selichah); or the expression "forgiven to the righteous." The name of the second is to be read together with the name of the first: Machla"h Noa"h, meaning constantly advancing [n"a] sickness from the seed of Israel due to the sweetening of judgments. The name of the third Chogla"h: from the expression Cha"g La"h (a festival to her), happiness and rejoicing there. The name of the fourth Milka"h: the revealing of the holy sovereignty (Malkhut). The name of the fifth Tirtza"h: a hint that Kneset Israel (?) is happy in the presence of the Holy One of Blessing, to do all according to their will after the revelation of the higher light, the world of freedom. And to become sorry (metzerah), wanted (ratzah) from the sweetening of judgment, and all becomes Compassion. And THIS IS the explanation of "and they stood (fem. verb) - the five salvations spoken of above. In front of Moshe - the aspect of Awareness (Da'at). And in front of Eleazar haKohen - the higher (sphere). And in front of etc, why will the name of our father be diminished etc give us a holding etc - since through Israel Sh"en A"ch (the name Brother) is remembered (and expanded) influencing (the world) - this is "among the brothers of our father". A"v (father) is an expression of will, like "and they did not want" Av"u (Judges, 19:25; I Samuel 15:9) - our will is that we have a holding on the aspect of Brother A"ch remembered/male. And this is "among the brother of our father". And this is "they brought their claim to Moshe" - the world of freedom, the 50 levels of Binah. In front of Hashem - specifically. "And Moshe spoke to Ad-nai" - the aspect of Awareness. "

Matot



Masei



Devarim



Comment 1

These are the words that Moses addressed to all Israel on the other side of the Jordan etc after he had defeated Sihon king of the Amorites etc (Deut. 1:1 - Deut. 1:4) - One needs to understand: isn't explained in the words of our sages that whenever the expression "these" is used it cancels what came before? And what is cancelled here with "these"? Also, at first glance the expression "on the other side of the Jordan" is unnecessary, since we already know it, given that we read the end of Mas'ei (Numbers 36:13). Also, what is the need for the Torah to give the indication "after he defeated Sihon"? Didn't we know this already?

Shabbat Chazon



Vaetchanan



Eikev



Re'eh



Shoftim



Ki Teitzei



Nitzavim



Ha'Azinu



For Shabbat



For Pesach



For the Seventh Day of Pesach



For the Shabbat After Pesach



Comment 1



Comment 2



Comment 3

<b>The reason for saying Pirkei Avot</b> between Pesach and [Shavuot] is because every Jew is obligated to purify himself during the days of counting (the Omer), as the Jewish people purified themselves then from the impurity of Egypt. As it is known from the holy Zohar, the seven weeks are like the matter of the seven days of menstrual impurity. And that is why we say Tractate Avot then, so as to see and understand all the good character traits that are mentioned there, and to yearn and desire, "When will I do this, even I?" As well as to repent fully before God, may He be blessed. And that is why there are five chapters, corresponding to the five overall gates of understanding, each of them consisting of ten - these are the fifty gates of understanding, the world of repentance. And these days are called Mi according to the nations of the world; and they also concede that these days are good and fortuitous for healing. And Mi (the numerical count of the letters, <i>mem</i> and <i>yod</i>) is the number fifty (the number of days from Pesach to Shavuot). But what is essential is that these days are good and fortuitous for the healing of the soul. And so may it be His will that God should heal, and we shall be healed, Amen!

For Shavuot



For Tu B'Av and Yom Kippur



For the Days of Awe



Haftarah for Rosh Hashanah



For Sukkot



For Shemini Atzeret



Selections on Nach

Hosea



Jeremiah



Psalms



Proverbs



Omission for Shabbat HaGadol



Miscellany



For Completion of Mishnah



Shir HaShirim



Haftarah of Ki Tisa



Selections

Parashat Bereshit



Parashat Noach



Parashat Lech Lecha



Parashat Vayera



Parashat Chayei Sara



Parashat Toldot



Vayetzei



Parashat Vayishlach



Parashat Vayeshev



Hannukah



Parashat Miketz



Parashat Shemot



Parashat Vaera



Parashat Mishpatim



Parashat Terumah



Selections for Shabbat



Parashat Pekudei



Parashat Vayikra



Parashat Shmini



Parashat Bamidbar



Parashat Balak



Parashat Matot



Parashat Vaetchanan



Parashat Eikev



Nitzavim



Days of Awe



Sukkot



Shemini Atzeret



Parashat V'Zot HaBerachah



Selections

