Kol HaTor
קול התור
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Kol HaTor



Chapter 1





The Gaon began revealing secrets of the Torah when he was 20 years old in 5500 [1740], during the first hour of the morning on Friday in the 6th millennium. Then, the spirit of God, the spirit of the mashiach, began to move in his holy spirit, to uncover mysteries in the Torah little by little in accord with the mission of the first mashiach. These were revelations of the deep mysteries and profound secrets associated with the footsteps of the Mashiach, and no secret was hidden from him [the Gaon]. As is known, the Gaon then began traveling to the Holy Land at the beginning of the second hour, that is in 5542 [1782]. That was the period when Rabbi Eliyahu became very agitated. Like a storm, he turned his attention to the ingathering of exiles.
Generally speaking, the beginning of the Redemption, otherwise known as the footsteps of the Mashiach, began the first hour of Friday morning in the 6th millennium, that is the year 5500 [1740], and from hour to hour the footsteps have continued to progress from many aspects. As is known, every hour consists of 41 years and 8 months, counting from the time that the bonds on the Mashiach’s steps were loosened, as it says, [Ps. 116:16] “you loosened my bonds” and as revealed in the sentence: [Ps. 81:6-7] “He appointed it as a testimony in Yosef... I have removed his shoulder from the burden; let his hands stay away from the kettle.” Beginning with the second hour (i.e., from 5042 [1782]), the entire House of Israel entered the picture, both as a whole, and with regard to each individual member of the nation, as an order from above, of the Mashiach of the beginning of the Redemption, namely, Mashiach ben Yosef.
Through his holy spirit, Rabbi Eliyahu, the Vilna Gaon, knew exactly where the name and destiny of each member of Israel were hinted at in the Torah, each man according to the flag of his forefathers, according to the root of his soul, and the merit of his forefathers. The Gaon knew this on the basis of hints which he understood based on the use of gematria [numerology, a system in which every letter of the Hebrew aleph-bet has a numerical value] and notrikun [acrostics--a system in which sets of letters, such as the initial or final letters of the lines, taken in order, form a word or phrase]. He even found many hints (52 hints) regarding himself and his own great and holy mission in connection with the ingathering of exiles (see below, Chapter 3).
