Shulchan Arukh, Choshen Mishpat
שולחן ערוך, חושן משפט
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Shulchan Arukh, Choshen Mishpat



Siman 1

In these time judges judge the laws of  confessions to a loan, loans, kesuba of a woman, inheritance, gifts, and cases which damage anothers money(assets, or income) because these cases are common always. Case which are not common even though there is a loss of money for example a animal that wounds another animal, or cases which are common but don't have a loss of money  such as paying double (when fined for stealing an item) and such is the case with all fines that the sages instituted like a fine for when someone blows in into his friends ear and scares him, or hits his friend, and so to in any case where they required one to pay more then the principal amount of damage or where you would be required half the damage we don't judge them. they may only be judged by specialist who have smicha in Israel. Except in the case where you pay half the damage for damage caused by pebbles (such as when an animal walks and it kicks up pebbles and they cause damage) because this is a loss of money, and not a fine (a fine is extra punishment to the value of a principle damage) 

Siman 2



Siman 3

There is no Beit Din with less than three. And three is called, "Beit Din," even with regular people. (because it is not possible that not one of them knows the logical processes of law, but if none of them know, they are invalid to judge. (Tur in the name of his father, the Rosh, in the beginning of Sanhedrin) but in any case, they are able to accept the [possibility of] error, and send them before a teacher.) (Maharam Paduah, Section 43) And they may judge a man against his will if the defendant refuses to go down to judgement or if he does not want to be judged with the prosecutor in his town. But, if he wants to be judged with him in his town, but does not want to be judged by the three judges that the prosecutor chose, then he [the defendant] chooses one judge, and he [the prosecutor] chooses one judge. Note: Like what is taught later on in Section 13. And it seems to me that this is specifically with judges that were not set, but if there are judges that were set in the city, he may not say, "I will not be judged before them, rather with this [judge], I choose," and this is the practice in our town. And see later Section 22 end of paragraph 1.

Siman 4



Siman 5



Siman 6



Siman 7

A court of three of which one is a convert is inelligible to judge an Israelite unless his [the convert's] mother  (or father) is from Israelites and a convert can judge his fellow convert even though his [the judge's] mother is not from Israelites.
A mamzer (a child born from incest or adultery), and even if all three are mamzers, these are elligible to judge for everything; and so too if each of them were blind in one of their eyes they would be elligible, but one who is blind in both of his eyes is inelligible.
Some say that he is not worthy to judge unless he is 18 or older and has brought two hairs [to demonstrate that he has reached puberty], and some say that he is elligible from 13 and older even if he has not brought to hairs.
A women is inelligible to judge.






A court of 3 requires that there be in each of them 7 things: Wisdom, humility, fear (of heaven), hatred of money, love of the truth, love of the creations to them and possessors of a good name (See Chapter 8 Section 1).

Siman 8

Anyone who appoints a judge who is not proper and not wise in the wisdom of the Torah and not fitting to be a judge, even though is completely desirable and has other good traits, behold this person who appointed him violates a negative precept. Hagah: And it is forbidden to appoint an ignoramus as a judge with the assumption that he will ask a wise man every time. (B"Y) And cities that there is not in them wise men who are fitting to be judges, or where they are all ignoramuses, and they need judges to rule between them so that they not go to courts of idol worshipers, we appoint the best and wisest among them (based on the opinion of the people of the city), even though they are not fitting to be judges. And since the people of the city accepted (them) upon themselves, nobody else is able to disqualify them. And similarly, every community is able to accept upon themselves a Bais Din even though they are not fitting according to the Torah. (B"Y quoting Tshuvos HaRashb"a) And any judge who was appointed because of silver or gold, it is forbidden to stand before him. And not only that, rather it is a commandment to belittle and deride him.

Siman 9



Siman 10

The judge needs to be deliberate in judgement, so that he will not rule on it until he processes it and deals with it, and it is clear to him like the Sun. And one who is haughty of heart in ruling, and who jumps and rules on the judgement before he investigates it well to himself, until it is clear to him like the Sun - he is an idiot, evil, and haughty of spirit.

Siman 11



Siman 12



Siman 13



Siman 14



Siman 15



Siman 16



Siman 17



Siman 18



Siman 19



Siman 20



Siman 21



Siman 22



Siman 23



Siman 24



Siman 25



Siman 26

It is prohibited to go in for judgement before gentile judges or a gentile court, even if they were to judge according to how Jewish law would rule in a particular case, and even if both parties - the plaintiff and defendant - had agreed to go in for judgment by these judges. It is nevertheless prohibited, and any who use these courts is a rasha (evil one), and it is as if they have insulted and raised their hand against the Torah of Moses. 

Siman 27



Siman 28

1. Anyone who knows testimony that another has a use for, and is fit to testify, is obligated to testify if he is called to testify in court. This is true whether he is solo or has another witness with him. If he withholds his testimony, he is exempt from judgement by man but is liable by the laws of the heavens. A solo witness should only testify on monetary matters where he may require an oath or for a matter of prohibition where he is causing someone to separate from the prohibition. If the prohibition was already done, however, he should not testify because he is merely gossiping about the individual. A person is prohibited from testifying regarding a matter he does not know, even if it was told to him by a truthful person. Even if one were to tell him to merely stand with another witness, but not actually testify, in order to intimidate the borrower who will think he has two witnesses and get the borrower to confess, the witness may not do so.
2.  A person is permitted to place a cherem in the synagogue on anyone who knows testimony for him to come and testify. He cannot, however, force them to swear. If they don’t testify, they will carry their sin. Nevertheless, if the court sees a need to have them swear to say the truth, they may do so. See earlier 17:3 and later 71:7-8. There are those that say that when a cherem is placed, even relatives and the party himself must testify. There are those that disagree and this is the primary ruling. See Yoreh Deah Siman 232 regarding a king who commands the placement of a cherem for testimony.
3. If a gentile calls a Jew to secular court, and there is a Jew who is the only one that knows testimony for the gentile, and it is a situation where secular courts obligate payment based on a solo witness, the Jew is prohibited from testifying for him. If he testifies, we place a shmuti on him. The witness is not obligated to pay, however, because he can say I testified truthfully. If, however, one can determine that he testified falsely, he is obligated to pay. If the party admits that the testimony was true, we do not place a shmuti on him. If the gentile originally designated him as a witness, it is a desecration of God's name not to testify and he must testify for him.
4. If a Jew calls a gentile to court who denies the claims, and the gentile has a solo witness, he may testify for him. All the more so can two witnesses testify because even a Jewish court would obligate payment based on their words. The same applies in a situation where we would take away money based on a solo witness, and he can testify. Two relatives are like one witnesses because under our laws we do not take away money based on a solo witness.
5. If a scholar knows testimony for a Jew and is called to testify in front of a court that is inferior to him, he is not obligated to go and testify in a monetary case unless they send someone to him to have him testify. If, however, there is a possibility of having someone refrain from violating a prohibition, he is obligated to go and testify. Anyone who has a proof via witnesses is required to make the effort to bring them to court. If the court knows that his adversary is tough, and the plaintiff claims that the witnesses are afraid of testifying because of the adversary and he has proof to this claim, the court may force the adversary to bring those witnesses. The same applies to similar issues that arise for a tough person. Ideally, witnesses must stand while testifying. If a witness is a scholar, we have him sit. See later at the end of this Siman.
6. Ideally, the judges should sit while accepting testimony. They must understand the language of the testimony and they may not hear it via a translator. If they understand what the witnesses are saying, they may use an interpreter if they don’t know how to respond. See earlier 17:6.
7. We intimidate the witnesses in front of everyone. We inform them of the power of false testimony and the embarrassment a false witnesses faces in this world and the next and that he is considered lowly in the eyes of the one that hired him.
8. They subsequently have everyone go outside and they leave the eldest of the witnesses. They tell him, “tell us how you know that this person owes money to this one.” If he says, he told me he is liable, or so-and-so who is valid and reliable told me he owes him money, he has said nothing. He must say that he himself saw the lending of the money or say that the party confessed in front of me that he is liable.
9. They then bring in the second witness and examine him. If he testifies the same as the other witness, we give and take on the matter and conclude the case.
10. If the witnesses relate their testimony in the exact same fashion, we must be consider the fact that they are lying and conspired to testify. The judge must extensively investigate them. If one witnesses says his testimony and the second says "I say the same thing," it would not work unless he went overseas and he cannot testify explicitly.
11. A testimony sent in writing to the court is not testimony because the Torah states, “al pi shenayim edim”- it must be from their mouths and not from their writing. This is in fact our custom, not like those who allow it for otherwise valid witnesses who are not mutes.
12. We can decide monetary cases based on testimony from a document- even if the witnesses are not around- so that we do not ultimately shut the door on borrowers. See later 61:2 with respect to what is a considered a document. Also see later 46:10. 
13. A person may testify so long as he has a recollection of the matter. We are not concerned that he does not remember it as well because of the significant passage of time, even if he only remembers the testimony via a writing provided to him. If he wrote it in his documents so as to remember, and then forgot, and now only remembers because of the writing, he can still testify, so long as he remembers the actual matter once he sees the writing. See later 46:10.
14. Similarly, if the witness remembers the matter only after someone else reminded him, he may still testify. This is true even if the person that reminds him is the second witness. If, however, the party reminds him and he remembers, he may not testify. If the witness is a scholar, he may testify even if the party reminded him because the scholar certainly would not testify if he did not remember.
15. We do not accept testimony if the party is not in court. If they accepted the testimony, they cannot rule based on it. They can re-testify in front of the party. If they changed their testimony from the original testimony, we follow the second testimony that was in front of the party, even if they testified originally with a cherem, because any testimony not in front of a party is as if it was given outside of court. There are those that disagree and say that once testimony has been accepted outside the court, it is okay after the fact. Therefore, if the party is strong and the witnesses are afraid to testify in front of him, we can accept the testimony not in front of the party, and judge accordingly. However, if it is possible to force the strong party in the way that was explained in paragraph 5 of this Siman, that would be preferred. There are those that say that the concept of not accepting testimony if not in front of the party is only by monetary cases, but not for quarreling and fighting where we are concerned that if they testify in front of the parties they will fight with one another and with the witnesses. The Geonim instituted that for such a case we accept testimony not in front of the parties and we do not reveal the identity of the witnesses. It seems to me that this is only where the court does not want to judge strict law and punish, but instead wants to quiet the fighting and rule based on the needs of the particular dispute. If, however, they want to punish and judge one of them, they must accept the testimony in front of him, as will be explained in Even Haezer 11:4.
16. If a party or the witnesses were sick, we may accept testimony not in front of the party. If the witnesses wanted to go overseas, and the party is sent for but does not come, or he is not in the city, we may accept testimony not in front of him. If they did not tell the party, however, they may not accept, unless there was a concern that the witnesses would leave by the time they told him, as will be explained later. If the defendant is sick, we do not accept testimony if not in front of him, even if there is a concern that his properties will transfer to his orphans and the plaintiff will not be able to litigate with them, as will be explained in Siman 110. There are those that say that any time they send after someone and he does not come to court, we can accept testimony not in front of him if they began the claims in front of him, or even where they did not begin the claims if it’s a situation where he is required to be judged in front of those judges, as was explained in Siman 14. Similarly, if there is a pressing need and it is impossible to accept the testimony later, such as where the witnesses or plaintiff were sick and in danger of dying or where the witnesses are going overseas and we cannot wait to tell him, we may accept even without sending for him. This seems correct based on that which is ruled later in 140:10.
17. If Reuven makes a claim against Shimon and Reuven's witnesses are in a different place, the court will tell Shimon that he can decide whether to go to the place of the witnesses so that they can testify in front of him or, alternatively, a court in the place of the witnesses will accept their testimony not in front of him and relay it to this court where the parties are and they will judge based on such acceptance of testimony. The same applies where he located his witnesses in another city and there is no time to send for the other party or they will not be able to find them again. The court may accept the testimony not in front of the parties, and judge based on that testimony. This is the widespread custom in our countries, notwithstanding the fact that there are those that argue and hold one cannot accept testimony not in front of the parties if they did not send for the party first, even in a situation where there is a concern that the testimony will be lost if they insist on accepting in front of the party. That is not our custom- rather, we have the aforementioned custom.
18. The entire concept of not accepting testimony if not in front of the parties was only said where the plaintiff brings witnesses supporting his claim. We do, however, accept testimony from witnesses that are brought to exempt a party.
19. We do not accept witnesses against a minor, even if in front of the minor, because in front of a minor is the equivalent of not in front of him. The specifics of this rule will be explained in Siman 110.
20. Two people are not qualified to accept testimony. If they accepted testimony, it is meaningless.
21. The acceptance of testimony requires three experts who are familiar with the rules of valid and invalid witnesses and are careful that each testimony conforms with the other, as the Mishna says, “one must be careful with his words lest he learn to lie from them.” Anyone who accepts testimony and is not fit to judge, is as if he accepted false testimony. One cannot judge based on such a document. Rather, they rely on the actual witnesses.
22. It is appropriate for those that accepted the testimony to publicize who the witnesses are in the document of the acceptance of testimony. However, there is no harm if they did not write who the witnesses are.
23. If the community wants to institute that the two scribes accept the testimony and collect based on their words or if they want the signature of the scribe to count as two witnesses if a witness that was called to testify had to leave, such rules would be valid because on all these matters the public has permission to institute as they see fit in their cities.
24. If one claims that he has two sets of witnesses and one set says that they do not know anything, the party does not forfeit his rights and may be bring the second set. We only accept testimony during the day. If they accepted it at night- even where the witnesses were being chased overseas, we may not judge based on that acceptance of testimony. If, however, the parties accepted the right to accept testimony at night, we may even accept in the first instance.
25. We cannot accept testimony before the defendant responds to the plaintiff because the defendant may confess and we will not need the witnesses. There is no need to burden the court.
26. If the court was standing while accepting the testimony from the witnesses, what’s done is done. If they were leaning, it is even permitted in the first instance because leaning is like sitting. In Siman 17 we explained that today we have the custom to seat the witnesses.

Siman 29

1- Once the witnesses have testified in court (and it is past kidei dibur), they cannot retract. How so? If the witness said I erred, I made a mistake and now I remember the matter differently or I said it out of fear, we do not listen to him- even if he provides a rationale to his retraction. Similarly, he cannot add a condition to his testimony. (There are those that say he may add a condition) (Tur in the name of the Rosh). However, in a situation where it is clear that he erred, such as where the court demanded he bring witnesses to testify that he is not a fraudster, he brings them and the court asks him do you know him as a fraudster, and they say yes, and the party responds “you know that I am a fraudster?!” and they say we said you are not a fraudster, we believe their latter statement because it is assumed that a person does not bring witnesses to harm him and they certainly erred. Similarly, in any error that witnesses often make, they themselves are believed and there is no issue of re-testifying. Similarly, if they don’t contradict the substance of their words, such as where there words were vague and can be interpreted in one of two ways- one more probable than the other, we can conform their testimonies in any practical way in the same manner that we explain two witnesses that contradict each other in order that the testimonies conform. <i>RAMA: In a situation where they placed a cherem in the synagogue that anyone who has testimony should testify before he leaves the synagogue, and the witnesses come after they leave the synagogue and say we didn’t recall at the time but now we remember, they may testify since they were originally silent and never said they did not know (Mordechai). Even in a case where they said they don’t know, if they can provide a rationale as to why they said it, they may testify since they did not say the reverse of what they said later (Beis Yosef in the name of the Rambam and the Tur)</i>
2. Witnesses that claimed they testified falsely are believed with respect to themselves and must pay any loss they caused through their testimony.
3. Although generally saying I did not see is not a valid proof, where two people were together and one says I did not see, it is as if he told the other you did not see and it is considered a contradiction. <i>RAMA:If, however, a witness says so and so was with me and that person says he was not with him, that is not a contradiction, because a witness does not pay attention as to who is with him at the time of the incident. (Teshuvot of the Rosh).</i>

Siman 30

<b>Witnesses On Monetary Matters Do Not Require an Interrogation and the Testimony Must Be Complete</b>: Paragraph 1- Witnesses on monetary cases do not require an investigation, with the exception of witnesses on a physical altercation. How so? If the witnesses said this person lent this person money in this year, even if the month, place and type of money- whether it was this coin or that coin- do not conform, the testimony is valid. If it appears to the judge that this is a dishonest case, he must investigate in order to produce a true ruling. <i>RAMA: See earlier Siman 15. With respect to witnesses testifying on a prohibited act, see Even Haezer 17:21 and 42:4 regarding whether an investigation is required. Also see 14:4.</i>
2. Although monetary witnesses do not require interrogation, if they contradict each other on any of the interrogations, their testimony is void. If, however, they contradicted each other on the mere inquiries, the testimony is valid. How so? If one said he borrowed money in Nisan and the second says it was in Iyar or one said it was in Jerusalem and other said it was in Lud, the testimony is void. Similarly, if one said he lent him a barrel of wine and the other said it was oil, the testimony is void because they contradict each other on an interrogation. If, however, one said the maneh was black due to its age and the other says it was white (and the plaintiff is making a claim on both) (Tur) or where one says they were on the top row and the other says they were on the bottom, the testimony is valid (if the places are close enough that they can see one another) (Tur). Even if one says he lent him a maneh and the other says it was 200, he is obligated to pay because a maneh is included in 200. Similarly, if one said he has the value of wine in his possession, and the other says of oil (and the plaintiff is claiming both) (Tur), he would pay the lesser of the two. The same applies in anything similar. (R"an)(Any situation where we can explain the words of the witnesses in a manner that they will not contradict each other, we explain their words, as was explained in 29:1.)
3.  If Reuven claims 1500 gold coins and bring five witnesses: one says I saw him lend him 100, one testifies on 200, one testifies on 300, one testifies on 400 and one testifies on 500, if they all testified a specific testimony, such as where the first says it was on the first of Nissan in the first year, the second says it was a different time, etc., he must pay 700 and swear a biblical oath on the 100 with a roll-over oath on the remaining 700. If, however, they all testified on the same day and contradict each other, he must only pay 200. Similarly, if they testified without specifying, we view it as a contradiction in order to be lenient on the defendant, because the burden of proof is on the party taking money.
4. If a witness testifies that I saw this incident and so and so was with me, and that persons says I did not see it and I was not with you, that is not considered a contradiction. (See above at the end of Siman 29).
5. If one claims that his adversary has 200 gold coins in his possession as a deposit in order to make a profit for him, and the adversary denies the whole thing, but there is one witness testifying that he heard from the guardian that he has 50 and another witness testifies that he heard from the guardian that he has 150, he has been established as a liar for that money and must pay the 200.
6. In monetary cases, witnesses may join together even if they did not see the incident together. How so? If one said he lent him money in front of me on this and this day or he confessed in front of me, and the other witness says he lent him in front of me or confessed in front of me on a different day, they may join together. Similarly, if one said he lent him in front of me and the second says he confessed in front of me or the first says he confessed in front of me and the second says at a later time that he lent him in front of me, they may join together. (The same applies for a testimony on the violation of a prohibition) (Mordechai). (See Even Haezer Siman 11 and 143:10).
This - that a loan following a loan can be combined is where the plaintiff claims two manim- one that he lent him on Sunday and the second on Monday. If, however, the lender admits that he only lent him one maneh, we evaluate whether it is possible to say that one erred regarding the time of the loan. For example, if one says it was on the second of the month and the other says it was the third of the month in a situation we can say they are both testifying about the same day and they erred regarding whether the prior month was a full month, we can combine the testimony by saying that they are testifying on the same maneh. If it is clear that they are testifying on two different maneh, one of them is clearly lying and we would have the defendant take a biblical oath and he would be exempt. <i>RAMA: If one witness testifies that Reuven gave Shimon land via a kinyan and the other witness testifies that Shimon made an appropriate chazaka, we can combine them because it is like an admission after an actual loan. (Teshuvos HaRosh)</i>
8. If one claims 200 from a document and the other says he paid it back and he brings two witnesses, one saying he paid him 100 in Nissan and the other saying in Tishrei, they can combine. If the document was made prior to Nissan we assume one maneh has been paid back. Similarly, if the lender confessed in front of one that he was paid back 100 in Nissan and confessed in front of the second that he was paid back in Tishrei, or one testifies that he paid back a maneh and the second testifies that he confessed in front of him, they can be combined and the lender cannot say it was for a different debt.
9. Witnesses do not have to testify together for monetary cases. Rather, one comes in front of the court and they listen to his words today. When the second witness comes at a later date they listen to him and then combine the two and remove the money from the possessor.
10. Similarly, if one testimony was in writing and one was oral, they can be combined. If the one that did not write says I made a kinyan from him on this matter, and the lender did not come and ask me to write it, they can be combined to make it a loan in a document and the borrower cannot claim he paid back. (See later at the beginning of Siman 51.)
11. If one testified in this court and the second testified in another court, one court may join together with the other court and combine the testimony. <i>RAMA:Others that simply heard the matter, however, cannot combine, because it is hearsay.</i>
12. Similarly, if two witnesses testified in this court, then testified in another court and then testified in a third court, one person from each court may come and combine to form a new court to judge on what they heard. A judge who two testified in front of, however, cannot combine with one of the witnesses that testified in front of him.
13. Each witness must testify on a complete matter. If, however, each testifies on a partial matter, it is meaningless. How so? If they are coming to testify on someone that he is an adult and one testifies that he saw a hair on the right side and the second one testifies that he saw it on the left side, it is of no effect because each witness only testified on a partial sign. Even if two witnesses testify on each hair it would be of no effect because each set only testified on a partial matter. If, however, a solo witness testified that he saw two hairs on the subject’s right side and another witness testified that he saw two hairs on the left side, we would combine the two. The same applies to anything similar.
14. With respect to testimony via knowledge but not actual observance, it will be explained in Siman 90 (6 and 16) that there are those that say that is a valid testimony. (In monetary cases there is no distinction between matters that will eventually become known and those that will not.) (Rabbeinu Yitzchak bar Sheshet)

Siman 31

<b>The Laws of Numerous Sets of Witnesses:</b> Paragraph 1- In a situation where two sets of witnesses contradict each other and one witness from each set comes and testifies on another matter, the testimony is not valid because it is certain that one of them is a false witness. If each set comes in its own, we can accept their testimony.
2. If a lender has two documents against a borrower- one of a maneh and one of 200, and the borrower denies both documents and one of these sets have signed on one of the documents and the second set has signed on the other, the borrower only pays a maneh and swears on the rest while holding on to a holy item if the documents were produced together. We then take away and tear the document of 200. If the lender only produces one document he may collect it. If he subsequently produces the second document, he can also collect that one. <i>(There are those that say that it is beneficial for him to burn the smaller document so that the borrower does not make the lender swear that he has two documents where these witnesses have signed on. If two lenders each produce a document against a borrower where each set has signed onto one of the documents- one set per document, and the borrower denies both of them, each lender may swear and collect. They must swear even if the fact that the lender is believed is included in the documents.)</i>
3. If one lender produces the documents at the same time against two borrowers, each borrower takes a heses oath and will be exempt. If one confesses, the lender may collect from unencumbered property. If the lender only produces one document, he may collect with it. He can then subsequently produce the second document and collect with it as well.
4. One who brings witnesses who are contradicted and then brings other witnesses who are also contradicted- even up to 100 sets- and he ultimately produces unimpeached witnesses, we may judge based on those last witnesses. With respect to a document, however, if two individuals come and say the lender asked us to forge the document, the lender can never collect with it even it its signatures are verified, unless the document’s witnesses themselves testify on what they wrote.

Siman 32

<b>Witnesses Who Witnessed a Confession Must Relate the Words As Is and a Case Where a Party Says He Was Kidding:</b> Paragraph 1- If Reuven says in front of witnesses that he owes Shimon a maneh, the witnesses should not testify simply that Reuven confessed in front of them that he owes Shimon a maneh. Rather, they should say the words exactly as is because it is possible that Reuven can exempt himself by saying he was kidding or that his intention was so as not to make himself look wealthy in the manner that will be explained in Siman 81. The court will be able to evaluate whether or not these claims would work for these words.
2. One who hires false witnesses in order to transfer a maneh from Reuven to Shimon is exempt under human law but liable under heavenly law. <i>RAMA: This only applies where he did not, in fact, owe him money. If, however, Reuven did owe Shimon money, but the witnesses happen to be false, he would be exempt even under heavenly law, but would violate “midvar sheker tirchak.” [Meaning, stay away from a lie]. The same applies if he did not hire them but simply convinced them to testify falsely (Tosefos). This all applies to a case where the individual hires false witnesses for a friend and the friend does not confess. If, however, he hired false witnesses for himself and illegally transferred money or if the plaintiff confesses, he is required to remove the stolen item from his friend’s hand (Beis Yosef). If he claims it was done properly, but the witnesses admit they testified falsely, they would be liable to pay, as was explained above in 29:2 and will be explained later in Siman 38.</i>

Siman 33

<b>Disqualified Testimony Due To Familial Relationship or a Woman or Slave, 18 Seifim:</b> Paragraph 1- Any individual who is disqualified from judging is also disqualified from testifying with the exception of one who likes or hates a litigant who is qualified to testify notwithstanding his disqualification from judging.
2- The following are the rules of disqualifications: Brothers, whether paternal or maternal, are first connections to first connections. Their children are second to second. Their grandchildren are third to third. A third with a first is always valid, and certainly a third with a second is valid. A second and a second, however, and certainly a second and a first, are disqualified. Therefore, a grandfather with his grandsons is disqualified because a father and son are a first and first just like a person with his brother. A great-grandfather with his great-grandson is valid because it is a third with a first. The same rule applies to females. How so? Two sisters or a brother and sister, whether paternal or maternal, are first and first. Their children, whether male or female, are second and second. Their grandsons and granddaughters are third and third. (Tur) There are those that says a third and first are disqualified <i>RAMA: and this is the appropriate ruling. There are those that say it is only a rabbinical disqualification, although the other disqualifications are biblical. The practical difference is in a case of witnesses to a marriage, as will be explained in Even Haezer Siman 42 (Mordechai). There are those that says that one’s mother’s relatives are also only rabbinically disqualified.</i>
3- You are disqualified to the husband of any woman you are disqualified from and you are disqualified to the wife of any man you are disqualified from because a woman is like her husband. According to the view that a third and first are disqualified, his wife would be valid because that is far-fetched. <i>(Nevertheless, if they are judging on a case where her husband will obtain a benefit from the ruling, he is disqualified from testifying for her because whatever a woman acquires is acquired by her husband.) (Mordechai)</i>
4- The husbands of two women who are disqualified from one another as a second and a second may testify for one another because we do not use the principle of a woman is like her husband twice in a case of second and second. <i>(However, they ideally should not sign together on a document)</i>. If, however, they were a first and a first, such as where one married a woman and the other married her daughter or where they married sisters, they cannot testify for one another because there we do use the principle of a woman is like her husband twice. We even use the principle of a woman is like her husband twice in a case of a first and a second in that just as he is disqualified from testifying for the son of his wife’s sister, so too is he disqualified from testifying for his wife’s sister’s daughter’s husband. He can, however, testify for the son of his wife’s sister’s husband that he had from another wife. There are those that say that we do not use the principle of a woman is like her husband twice in a case of a second and a first <i>(and it seems to me to rule this way).</i>
5- You may testify for the other relatives of a person that you cannot testify for because he is your relative’s husband, such as his sons and brothers. Similarly, you can testify for the other relatives of a woman you cannot testify for because she is your relative’s wife.
 6- The father of the groom and father of the bride may testify for one another. <i>RAMA: There are those that say that although they are valid for testimony, they are prohibited from judging because they are like those that like or hate a litigant. The litigant may say he does not accept him, even if he is an affixed judge (Hagahos Mordechai in the name of the Itur). It seems to me that his rulings are valid after the fact. (Mahari"k)</i>
7- Stepbrothers may testify for one another because they are not related at all.
8- A man with his wife is a first with a first. Therefore, he cannot testify for her son, son’s wife, daughter, daughter’s husband, father, mother, mother’s husband or father’s wife.
9- An arus is disqualified from testifying for his bride <i>(in the name of the Rambam). If, however, he testifies for her relatives, we would not disqualify the testimony. This is only with respect to actual erusin, but he would not be disqualified in the case of a mere engagement. However, if he plans to testify that she should obtain rights to money, he may have a stake in the matter. (Hagahos Ashiri)</i>
10- This, that we disqualify the testimony of relatives, is not because we assume they like each other as we see that they are disqualified to testify whether for or against the relative. Even Moshe and Aharon are disqualified from testifying for one another. Rather, it is simply a rule from the Torah.
11- Converts have no familial relationship with each other. Even twin convert brothers may testify for one another because a convert is like a newborn child.
12- If the wife of someone you cannot testify for because he is your relative’s husband died, you are no longer related and are a valid witness, even if she is survived by children. <i>RAMA: However, if the ruling was already given while he was still related, he cannot re-litigate with this testimony of the non-relative because once the ruling is given it is final. (Beis Yosef)</i>
13- If someone knew testimony for a party before he became his son-in-law and he then subsequently became his son-in-law, he is disqualified. Similarly, if he knew the testimony while he was a son-in-law and the party’s daughter then died, he is disqualified. If, however, he knew testimony before he became a son-in-law, then he became a son-in-law and then the party’s daughter died, he is a valid witness because the beginning and end were in a valid state, notwithstanding the disqualification in the interim.
14- If someone is dying and distributes his property in front of witnesses that he is related to but are not related to his children, the distribution is meaningless since they were related at the time the testimony was given over. There are those that say they are valid witnesses.
15- The concept of the beginning and end being in a valid state does not apply to a monetary disqualification. If the witness had a stake in the matter at the time he witnessed the incident because of a benefit he would obtain, he is able to remove himself from the matter in a way that he will no longer obtain a benefit and then he may testify.
16- Witnesses that are related to a cosigner are disqualified from testifying for the borrower, whether the borrower wanted to exempt himself by denying the loan and they will testify that he did borrow the money or if the borrower claims he paid back and they will testify that the borrower confessed that he did not pay back. <i>RAMA: The relatives of a murder victim can testify against the murderer. (Hagahos Ashiri; Mordechai). Similarly, the relatives of an assault victim can testify against the perpetrator to force him out of the synagogue or some other similar punishment because there is no gain for the victim in such a testimony.</i>
17- Witness that are related to each other or to the judges are disqualified.
18- If the public appoints witnesses and institutes that no testimony is valid without them, they may testify for their relatives since they were accepted. (See later 37:22). <i>RAMA: If, however, they appoint witnesses without specifying, the intention is not that they may testify for those they are otherwise disqualified from. Similarly, judges appointed in the city may not judge for their relatives (Rivash) and this is the custom.</i>

Siman 34

<b>Witnesses Disqualified Due to Sin. 35 Seifim:</b> Paragraph 1- A wicked person is disqualified from testifying. Even a valid witnesses that knows his colleague is wicked, but the judges are unaware, is prohibited from testifying with him, even though the testimony is accurate. All the more so in a case where a valid witness has testimony for a party and he knows that his co-witness is a false witness, is he prohibited from testifying with him.
2. Who is considered wicked? One who violates a prohibition that is deserving of lashes. All the more so in a case where he is deserving of court-prescribed death. It does not matter if he violated it out of desire or out of spite. If one violated a prohibition that is not deserving of lashes, he is rabbinically disqualified from testifying.
3. If the sin he violated was rabbinical, he is rabbinically disqualified. There are those that say that one is only disqualified for a rabbinical sin that was done because of desire of money.
4. Those that have a buried a body on the first day of Yom Tov are able to testify, even if a nidui was placed on them and they repeated the violation because they believe they are doing a mitzvah and the nidui was simply for atonement purposes. The same applies to any prohibition where we are able to say that he violated it out of error. See earlier Siman 24. One who lifts his hand to strike his friend is rabbinically disqualified from testifying.
5. One who violates an oath, whether it was an oath in vain, a false oath on a monetary matter or an oath of commitment, is disqualified from testifying, even if he merely violated a cherem that the public placed on him. There are those that say that he is only disqualified if he violated an oath he made regarding an event in the past because at the time of the oath it was a lie, but an oath for a matter in the future, such as I will or will not eat this item, would not disqualify him. If witnesses testify on someone that he violated his oath, he is not believed to say he is still valid because the violation was a mistake or was done under duress.
6. If a butcher produces a neveilah or treifah animal, he is disqualified from testifying. See Yoreh Deah Siman 119 where this matter is explained.
7. Thieves and robbers are disqualified from testifying from the time of the theft or robbery until they repent, even if they returned the item. See earlier Siman 29. One who divvies up with a thief is not disqualified from testifying. See later Siman 92 regarding at what point a guardian who denies receiving a deposit is disqualified.
8. A witness who was impeached, even on a monetary case where he reimbursed the party, is biblically disqualified from all testimonies. At what point is he disqualified? From the time he testified in court, notwithstanding the fact that he wasn’t impeached until a later date.
9. Witnesses on a document cannot be impeached unless they said in court that the document was written on its date and was not delayed. If, however, they did not say that, even if the document has a date of 1 Nissan in Jerusalem and witnesses testify that the document’s witnesses were with them in Babylon on the date of this document, the document and the witnesses are both valid because it is possible that they wrote it and postdated it. We say that when they were in Jerusalem on 1 Adar they wrote this document and postdated it for Nissan. If they said we wrote it on its date and they were impeached and there are witnesses that know the date they wrote the document or there were witnesses that saw the document on a certain date, their impeachment would disqualify them retroactively from the date that we know the document had been signed because signed witnesses are considered as if their testimony was investigated in court at the time of the signature. If, however, there were no witnesses that saw them sign or saw the document on an earlier date, the witnesses will only be disqualified from the time they testified in court that this is their handwriting and it was written on its date because it is possible that it was actually signed on the date it they testified in court and they had the document around for many years and they lied and said it was written on its date. Witnesses that deliberately signed on a predated document as disqualified from testifying.
10. One who lends with interest is disqualified from testifying. Both the lender and borrower are disqualified. If it was literal interest, they are biblically disqualified. If it was rabbinical interest, they are rabbinically disqualified. There are those that say the only the lender, and not the borrower, would be disqualified if lending with avak ribbis.
11. One who lends money of orphans out with interest, even literal interest, would not be disqualified from testifying because he thinks he is doing a mitzvah by having the orphan’s property turn a profit.
12. If a witness that signed on a document had died, and witnesses testify that the deceased would lend to other Jews with literal interest and it is well-known that he was a guardian or the agent of a gentile we assume that he lent the gentile’s money with interest. Similarly, if he was a guardian, we assume he lent the orphans’ money with interest. If, however, he did not have such a reputation, we do not make this assumption until it becomes clear to us. If witnesses testify on a person who is known as valid that he lent with interest, he would not be disqualified because we assume he lent in a manner that was not prohibited or that he erred and thought the manner he did it in was not prohibited.
13. One who violates rabbinical theft is rabbinically disqualified from testifying. How so? If he stole a found-item from one was who deaf, a fool or a minor or if he is a chamsan- one who takes land or movable items without the owner’s permission and pays for it. The same applies if he is a shepherd of his own animals- whether of small or large animals. He is disqualified because there is an assumption that he participates in theft and allows his animals to graze in the fields and gardens of others.
14. A tax-collector is assumed to be disqualified because we assume they take more than they are entitled by law of the land. The collectors of the king’s tax, however, is assumed to be valid. If it is known that he took more than he was entitled to- even just one time, he is disqualified. There are those that say that the definition of a tax-collector is one who collects a tax based on his decision-making with no affixed amount. Therefore, we presume it is invalid because we assume he plays favorites with some individuals and is difficult with others. Therefore, the city-appraisers who place a tax on the all the people in the city based on their estimation must be careful not to flatter one person while mistreating another and thereby disqualifying themselves from testifying and taking oaths.
15. A sharecropper that took a small amount of the early fruits in Nissan or Tishrei, prior to the conclusion of its work and some say for a fruit that’s work was finished, even without the knowledge of the owner, is not a thief and is able to testify because a field-owner is not strict about this. The same applies to anything similar.
16. Those that teach birds how to capture other birds from a nest in a populated area are disqualified from testifying because we assume they are stealing other’s birds. The same applies to those that sit idle and then grab fruits when shmitah comes and start participating in commerce because we assume they are doing business with fruits of shmitah. The same applies to those that that gamble with stones assuming they have no other trade because they are not participating with the settling of the world and have the status of those that eat from gambling, which is quasi-theft. This does not only apply to stones, but also to those that play with nut-shells and pomegranate shells. Similarly, this does not only apply to birds but even to those that play with domesticated animals, wild animals and any type of birds and say whoever’s comes first or defeats its opponent will receive double. The same applies to any similar game assuming he has no other trade other than this game, and he will be disqualified from testifying. These are all rabbinical disqualifications.
17. One who is not familiar with Chumash, Mishna or the ways of the worlds is in the category of wicked and is rabbinically disqualified from testifying. Therefore, we do not give or accept testimony from an ignoramus unless he is established as someone who participates in mitzvos and good deeds and goes in the straight path and is civilized, notwithstanding the fact that he is an ignoramus and is not familiar with Chumash or Mishna. In sum, any scholar is assumed to be valid until he is disqualified and any ignoramus is assumed to be invalid until he is established as someone who goes in the right path. Anyone who accepts the testimony of an ignoramus before he is established as going in the right path or before witnesses come and testify that he keeps the mitzvos and is civilized, is a fool and will have to answer for his actions in the future because he is destroying Jewish money based on the words of the wicked.
18. Low-lives are rabbinically disqualified from testifying. These are people who walk and eat in the market in front of everyone. People like this go naked in the market when they are working on a disgusting matter or something similar in that they do not have any shame and are considered like dogs and do not care about testifying falsely. Included in this are those that publicly accept charity from gentiles, even though it is possible for them to be supported privately. They degrade themselves and have no care. All of these are rabbinically disqualified. Anyone who accepts payment to testify has his testimony nullified just like someone who takes payment to judge as was explained above in 9:5. No formal announcement is required. The ruling and testimony are void automatically. If he returns the money, his ruling and testimony are valid because it is not like other disqualifications where a formal announcement and repentance are required. It is merely a fine that the rabbis instituted that any action he takes should be void if he accepts payment. This all applies to witnesses that already saw the incident and are obligated to testify just as a person is obligated to judge between two litigants. However, it is permitted for someone who is not required to testify to accept payment to go and see the future incident. If a judge already ruled and a party brings him a gift for advocating for him, he is prohibited from accepting the gift. Anything a person testifies because of fear of pain has no substance.
19. A gentile and slave are disqualified from testifying.
20. One who hates another and says publicly “I will go and hand over your money to the authorities” is disqualified from testifying.
21. A mamzer, a person with crushed testicles, a person with a cut-off penis and one who is uncircumcised because his brothers died from circumcision are all allowed to testify.
22. Snitches, heretics and mumarim are of a lower level than gentiles and are disqualified from testifying. A snitch cannot testify, even if the victim forgave him, until he repents. An apostate who agrees to repent is valid immediately even if he has not yet done it.
23. The testimony of one who is biblically disqualified is void even if they did not make a formal proclamation in the synagogues and study halls. If one who is rabbinically disqualified testified before a formal announcement, the testimony is valid. Even a biblical disqualification should only be used in a case where we are certain, but not in a case of doubt, such as where he testified in court and witnesses subsequently came and testified that he violated a sin that would biblically disqualify him but we are unsure whether he violated it before his testimony or after. In such a case, we keep the individual in his original status and anything that he testified on is valid until we know that he violated the sin before his testimony. If an individual required a formal announcement for a rabbinical disqualification and he received a public punishment for the sin, such as his removal from the synagogue, it is as if they made a formal announcement.
24. If they testified about someone that he violated a specific sin, even though he did not receive a warning and therefore does not receive lashes, that individual is disqualified from testifying. This is true where he violated a sin that all of the Jews know is a sin. If, however, they saw him commit a sin on something that is close to a mistake, they must warn him first and then disqualify him. How so? If they saw him tying or untying on Shabbos they must inform him that this is a desecration of Shabbos because most people don’t know this. Similarly, if they saw him doing work on Shabbos or Yom Tov, they must tell him that it is Shabbos because he may have forgotten. Similarly, one who consistently plays with stones or becomes a tax collector or a collector that adds for himself, the witnesses must inform him that anyone that does this is disqualified from testifying because most people don’t know these things. The same applies to anything similar.
25. A person cannot disqualify himself due to sin. Rather, witnesses must testify against him because a person cannot establish himself as wicked. Nevertheless, we would not make him a witness in the first instance as is discussed later in 92:5. Similarly, we do not disqualify based on a rumor or mere suspicion such as where someone is suspect in the area of immoral relations because he often secludes himself with forbidden relations and rumors have spread. Such a person is valid for all testimony with exception of testimony for a woman. For the laws of those that are suspected, see Yoreh Deah Siman 119.
26. If a borrower testified against a lender that he lent him with interest and the borrower has another witness join with him to disqualify the lender, although a person cannot establish himself as wicked, we can split his words and we believe him with respect to the lender but not with respect to himself. Similarly, if he testifies that so and so had sexual relations with him- even if consensual, or he testifies that so and so had sexual relations with his wife or animal, he and another person may join together and testify to disqualify him. The same applies with respect to a theft victim who may testify against the thief just like a borrower can testify against the lender, so long as he gets no gain out of his testimony.
27. There are those that say that where one takes an oath to contradict a solo witness, that witness and the party that was the recipient of the oath may join together to disqualify the person that took the oath. The same applies if he took an oath to two counterparties, and they can testify against him to disqualify him. There is no distinction whether he swore to both in one oath or one after the other. There are those that disagree and hold that even if there were two counterparties who each had their own witness, they would not be able to join together once he stood in judgement and he swore on the testimony. Prior to this, however, they are able to testify against him.
28. If two witnesses testify about a person that he is disqualified based on one of these sins and two others come and testify that the person repented or received lashes, the individual is valid. If, however, two come and contradict the witnesses and say he never committed this sin and is not disqualified, the disqualification is in doubt. Therefore, he may not testify. We would not transfer money on the basis of his testimony and he may not judge until it is known that he repented. Two witnesses that testified about a person that he is invalid, such as where one said he stole and the second said he lent with interest, may combine together to disqualify him.
29. Anyone who is liable to receive lashes, once he receives the lashes in court, he returns to his valid state. With respect to other witness disqualifications that are due to money that was taken or stolen, however, even if he paid back, he must repent. He would remain disqualified until it is know that he has repented from his evil ways. When do we know a person repented from lending with interest? Once they tore up their documents on their own and made a full repentance and agreed not to lend with interest- even to a gentile. He must return any interest he took to its owners. If he doesn’t know who he took it from, he must perform public needs. There are those that say that this only applies to one who often committed theft or robberies. With respect to someone who only committed theft or robbery on occasion, however, as soon as he returns what he stole, he has repented. This is only where he returned it on his own. If, however, he only returned it because the court forced him to, his return will not help until he repents.
30. When does repentance for those that play with rocks occur? Once they break their stones and perform a complete repentance and commit not to play- even without money.
31. When does repentance for those that train birds occur? Once they break the vessels they use to trap the birds and perform a complete repentance and commit not to do trap again- even in the desert. There are those that say that both in this case and in the case of playing with rocks, they must return the profits they made.
32. When does repentance for those that deal in shmitah fruits occur? Once shmitah occurs and they refrain. They cannot just repent with words. They must write, “I so and so the son of so and so, gathered 200 zuz of shmitah fruits and I am giving them away as a gift to the poor.”
33. When does repentance of one that committed a sin with an oath occur? Once he comes to a court that does not recognize him and says “I am suspect” or when he is obligated to take an oath in a court that does not recognize him for a significant sum of money and he chooses to pay and not take the oath.
34. With respect to repentance of a butcher who supervised himself and a sold a treifah, he must wear black, cover himself in black and go to a place that is unfamiliar with him and return a lost item of significant value or get rid of a trefiah in his possession of a significant value. See Yoreh Deah Siman 119.
35. The repentance of an impeached witness is to go to a place that is unfamiliar with him, and they give him a significant amount of money to testify falsely and he does not want to.

Siman 35

1. <b>The Disqualification of the Blind, Deaf, Foolish and Minors, 14 Seifim:</b> Paragraph 1- A minor is disqualified from testifying, even if he was smart and wise, until he brings two hairs following his 13th birthday. If a long time passed from this 13th birthday before they had a chance to check for hairs and when they checked they found two hairs, he has the status of adult from the time he turned 13. If he had a full beard he does not require checking.
Paragraph 2- If one reaches the age of 20, has not yet brought two hairs and shows signs of being sterile, he is an adult and may testify. If he does not show signs of being sterile, he may not testify until most of his lifetime has passed.
Paragraph 3- If one is 13 years old and brings two hairs but is not familiar with commerce, his testimony is invalid for matters regarding land. With respect to movable items, however, his testimony is valid.
Paragraph 4- If one knows testimony while he was a minor and testifies as an adult, the testimony is of no effect. There are some matters, however, that we may rely on the testimony of an adult regarding things he witnessed as a child. These are such matters: He is believed to say this is my father’s, teacher’s or brother’s handwriting. There are those that say that he is only believed regarding these individuals, but not for anyone else.
Paragraph 5- He is also believed to say I remember that they treated the wife of so-and-so with the custom of a virgin when she got married. He is also believed to say this place was a place where a grave was plowed over.
Paragraph 6- He is also believed to say, (even if he is a solo witness) (Tur), we would go until here on Shabbos because the laws of techumim are rabbinical (Hagahos Alfasi). (The same applies to other rabbinical prohibitions). He is also believed to say that so-and-so left school so he could dip and eat terumah in the evening, that he shared the terumah with us, that the witness personally would bring challah and other priestly gifts to so-and-so the Kohen or that the witness’s father said this family is kosher and this family is not (or that they made some kind of sign to inform others that one member of the family married someone who was disqualified) (Tur, as will be explained in Even Haezer Siman 2).
Paragraph 7- If a gentile or slave testified on any of the above cases after he converted or was freed, he is not believed.
Paragraph 8- One who is insane is disqualified from testifying. An insane person is not just someone who walks around naked, breaks vessels and throws stones, (rather) it is anyone who goes out of his mind and his senses are consistently lacking on any matter, even though he can speak and act appropriately on other matters. Such a person is disqualified from testifying and is included in the category of the insane.
Paragraph 9- הנכפה <i>(One who often collapses from a disease that drives him out of his mind), is disqualified from testifying while collapsed, but is valid while healthy. This is true whether he collapses from time to time or consistently collapses without any set time, so long as his senses are not always distorted because there are those that often collapse and are out of their mind even while healthy. We must extensively evaluate the testimony of one who collapses often.</i>
Paragraph 10- Those that are very foolish and cannot recognize contradictory matters and do not understand topics that the rest of society does, and similarly those that frighten quickly and go out of their mind or are exceedingly crazy, are all included in the category of the insane. This topic is something that is dependent on the perception of the judge because it is impossible to explain these rules perfectly in writing.
Paragraph 11- A deaf person is disqualified from testifying, whether he can speak but not hear or hear but not speak, even if he is sane, because he needs to testify in court with his mouth and be able to hear the words of the judges and the intimidation they place on him. Similarly, if he became mute- even if he can be checked in the same fashion we check when it comes to divorce and we can see that his testimony matches up- and he testifies in front of us in writing, it is not valid testimony in any case with the exception of testimony for a woman because we are lenient when it comes to avoiding the chaining of a woman to a marriage.
Paragraph 12- One who is blind in both eyes is disqualified from testifying, even if he recognizes voices and people and his testimony matches up.
Paragraph 13- If one was deaf, insane or blind at the time he received the testimony, and was healthy at the time he testified- or vice-versa- he is disqualified. If, however, he was healthy at the time he received the testimony and at the time he testified, he is valid, even if he became deaf, insane or blind in the interim since he was valid at the beginning and at the end.
Paragraph 14- A woman is disqualified from testifying. One who was born without genitalia and a hermaphrodite are disqualified out of doubt. Anyone whose validity is in doubt, is disqualified from testifying. <i>RAMA: All of these disqualified individuals are disqualified even in a place where there are not a lot of valid witnesses (Rashba and the Rambam and the Beis Yosef). This is all strict law, but there are those that say that there is an ancient regulation that in a place where there are not a lot of men, such as a synagogue for women or some other temporary place that has lots of women, but not men, such as testifying that so-and-so woman wore these clothing and they belong to her and men don’t pay attention to these matters, women are believed. Therefore, there are those that write even a solo woman, a relative or a minor are believed when it comes to the assault and degradation of a scholar or other cases of quarrel and snitching because it is not standard practice nor there is enough time to call valid witnesses (Mahar"ik, Mahar"am m'Rezburg and the Kol Bo). This is all where the plaintiff claims that he is certain in his claim. (Mahar"ik, and see above Siman 28 Seif 15 and in the Rama there).</i> 

Siman 36

<b>Many Testified and One Was Discovered To Be a Relative or Disqualified, 2 Seifim:</b> Paragraph 1- If there were numerous witnesses and one was discovered to be a relative or otherwise disqualified, the entire testimony is void. When is this true? In a situation where they all intended to testify. If, however, they did not all intend to testify, the testimony can be sustained with the remaining witnesses. How do we investigate the matter? The court would ask them if when they saw the incident they were there with the intention to witness or merely to see the incident. The court would separate anyone who says they came to testify. If a relative or someone otherwise disqualified is found among those that intended to testify, their testimony is void (even if they were not aware of each other). If all of the witnesses were valid- both those that intended to testify and those that did not but happened to see- and their testimony conforms, we would rule based on their testimony. <i>RAMA:  They are not, however, able to write a document regarding the incident even if they witnessed a kinyan and the presumption of a kinyan is that it should be writing, because the party did not call them for that purpose. (Teshuvos HaRashba) (and see above Siman 39, Seif 5)</i> There are those that say that even if they intended to see in order to witnesses they would not be disqualified unless they came to court and actually testified because two elements are required: intention to see for the sake of testifying and actually coming to court and testifying. <i>RAMA: If a document contains the signature of a disqualified witness, thereby voiding the entire testimony, the valid witnesses may still testify by themselves in front of the court if they are reminded of the testimony by viewing the document. The court would then document their testimony and it would be considered a formal document (Rosh). A public regulation that has the signature of a disqualified witness or a document that contains the signature of a party, is still valid with other witnesses because these individuals did not have the intention of testifying. (Rivash) (See later 45:12-13). If the plaintiff called valid witnesses and relatives or those otherwise disqualified were standing there, the testimony of the valid witnesses would not be disqualified even if the disqualified witnesses had the intention to testify and actually testified. Similarly, when a party is in need of testimony and puts a cherem on those that know testimony to come and testify and both valid and disqualified witnesses testify, the testimony of the valid witnesses would not be void because the party’s intention was only for those that are capable of testifying.</i>
2. If a relative testified with a non-relative and the non-relative is unaware that the other witness is related, (Tur in the name of the R"if) there are those that say that the testimony of the non-relative is valid and would require the party to take an oath. The witness is believed to say he is unaware of this fellow witness’ relationship so long as he is not often together with him. If, however, the non-relative is often together with the relative, he is not believed. There are those that disagree with this and say that the testimony of the non-relative is void, even if he was unaware of the relationship of the other witness <i>(since the disqualified witness testified with him in court). (Tur)</i>

Siman 37

<b>Disqualification Due To a Potential Benefit, 22 Seifim:</b>1. A person is disqualified from any testimony in which he gains some kind of benefit by testifying. Therefore, if two people are partners in land and a third party attempts to remove the land from one of the partners by claiming that the individual who sold the land to them had originally stolen it from him, the other partner may not testify on behalf of his partner to disqualify the plaintiff’s witnesses. His testimony would not even help for his partner’s portion unless he removed himself from the field and they made a kinyan to give his portion to this partner. If the kinyan was not done until after the third party comes, it would still be valid. The testifying partner must accept that if his creditor were to come and collect from the partner that he would pay the partner the value of the taken land. He should make a condition that if a third party were to come to claim the land based on other claims, such as saying it was stolen from him or something similar, then he would not indemnify his partner. If, however, the plaintiff is only making a claim on partner’s share, such as a claim that the partner sold it to him, then he may testify because he has no stake in the testimony at all. 
2. If one makes a complaint in connection with a field that grows fruits, the sharecropper cannot testify because the sharecropper wants the field to remain in the hands of the current owner so that he could take his share of the fruits. If the field has no fruits he may testify assuming he gains no other benefit from the testimony. (Tur)
3. If witnesses admitted that they had a portion of a debt they had already testified on, the admission is of no effect. (If, however, they admitted to it before the testimony, the testimony is void). (Beis Yosef).
4. If Reuven calls two defendants claiming that he lent to them, and one the defendants denied the loan while the other confessed that both he and his co-defendant are liable, the one who confessed is not believed regarding his co-defendant if they accepted the money as partners. The party who confessed will be liable for the entire amount. 
5. If one produces a loan document against three defendants and they all claim they have already paid it back, if each one owed 10 gold coins individually and the co-defendants had no partnership in it, each one’s testimony may be used for his co-defendants.
6. If one of the partners makes a claim that negatively affects him and his partner, he has the believability of a solo witness and will obligate his partner to take an oath or will exempt the counterparty from taking an oath. If both partners testified to their detriment, they are believed regarding their other partners. (See later 77:5). 
7. There is no issue with selling a loan to one of the witnesses. (See later 123:11-12 regarding whether an inheritor and his relative may testify). 
8. Pashranim (mediators), judges and guardians are allowed to testify. (See above Siman 23 regarding the laws of judges and pashranim, as well as later 46:24. For the laws of guardians see later Siman 290).
9. Hekdesh-treasurers are able to testify as long as neither them nor their relatives have any right to the hekdesh properties or their fruits. <i>RAMA: All the more so are the treasurers’ relatives allowed to testify, notwithstanding the fact that the treasurer may hand out the money as he sees fit, according to the opinion that a kickback is not considered money. Although the treasurer may subsequently distribute the money to his poor relatives we would not void the testimony because there was no recognizable benefit at the time of the testimony. (Beis Yosef in the name of the Ritva)</i>
10. Testimony is valid in a situation where in his current state the witness gains no benefit from his testimony but if he were to become rich then he would gain benefit.
11. If Reuven has a loan document out against Shimon, and Reuven gave it over to Levi via handing it over and writing down the gift, and Shimon was one of the witnesses on the gift, Shimon is disqualified. (See later 66:21-22 regarding whether one of the signed witnesses who buys the loan is considered as having a stake in the matter). 
12. If a renter has the rent in his hands and says 'whomever this land belongs to should come and collect the rent', the renter may testify for the individual who rented it to him. Once the renter has already given the rent to the owner, he can no longer testify for the owner because if land were to be given to the complainant, the renter would need to pay another rental. If the owner returns the rent money to the renter so that he can pay whomever wins the case, the renter may then testify for him. <i>RAMA: This is all in a case where there are witnesses that the renter lived in the house. If, however, there are no such witnesses, the renter is believed in all cases because he has a migu that he could have remained silent. (Mordechai)</i> [Note: A migu is a reason that a claim that would otherwise be rejected by a Jewish civil court should be accepted based on the fact that the litigant could have prevailed in the case based on a different claim were he disposed to lie. To be effective, the logic underlying the migu must be impeccable and there are a variety of cases in which the Migu argument is invalid].
13. If a complaint is brought against a borrower to remove land in his possession and the borrower does not have other land in his possession that is the value of the debt, the lender and co-signer cannot testify to keep the land in the borrower’s possession. If the borrower does have other land in his possession equal to the value of the land, the lender and co-signer may testify for him. <i>There are those that say that a co-signer who is a kablan (contractor) cannot testify in any situation. (Tur)</i>
14. An original buyer may testify for a subsequent buyer of the same seller to keep the second property in the subsequent buyer’s hands so long as the seller has another unencumbered field equal to the value of the field of the original buyer or the second buyer has another field that he purchased from the seller. <i>RAMA: Similarly, the second buyer cannot testify for the original buyer unless the seller had land equal to the value of the original purchase. (Tur)</i>
15. If Reuven sold Shimon an unsecured field and Yehuda brings a claim against Shimon to remove the field from his possession, Reuven may not testify for Shimon even though the field was unsecured because Reuven wants the land to stay in Shimon’s possession so that Reuven’s creditor may collect a debt and Reuven will not be considered a “wicked borrower who does not pay back.” <i>This is only applies where Yehuda’s claim is via the seller. If, however, the claim is via the buyer in that Yehuda says that Shimon owes him money, then Reuven may testify for Shimon. (Tur)</i>
16. If Reuven sold an unsecured cow or garment to Shimon and Yehuda brings a claim against Shimon to remove the item from his possessions on the basis that Reuven obtained it from a thief, Reuven may testify for Shimon because he gets no benefit if the item remains in the hands of Shimon since Reuven’s creditor may not collect moveable items (even if they were designated as the method of collection). In modern times, even if the borrower were to place a lien on moveable items together with real property, the lender would still not be able to collect from the moveable items that were sold. <i>RAMA: If, however, Yehuda claims that Reuven himself stole the property, then Reuven would not be able to testify if it is a situation where Yehuda would need to pay Shimon because of the regulation instituted for commerce purposes and Yehuda would then be able to go and collect the money from Shimon. (Tur)</i>
17.  If Reuven stole a garment or field from Shimon, and Yehuda brought a claim against Reuven saying that this field or garment is his, Shimon would not be able to testify that this is not Yehuda’s field or garment because Shimon just wants the field or garment to remain in Reuven’s possession because it might be easier to remove it from Reuven’s possession than it would be to remove it from Yehuda’s possession. Similarly, if Reuven sold or bequeathed the stolen field to Levi and Yehuda brings a claim against Levi, Shimon cannot testify that it does not belong to Yehuda. If Shimon sold the stolen garment to Levi, Shimon gave up on reclaiming it and Yehuda brings a claim against Levi, Shimon may testify that it is not Yehuda’s if Reuven had died because this garment will never go back to Shimon since the buyer already acquired it with the giving up of hope and the transfer of possession and Reuven the thief had died, so there is no one to collect the money from. If, however, Reuven was still alive, Shimon may not even testify on the garment because there is a benefit to him for the garment not to go to Yehuda so that he can bring a proof that Reuven stole it and Reuven will have to pay. Similarly, if the garment was in the possession of Reuven’s inheritors, Shimon may not testify because it will eventually go back to Shimon if the inheritors can maintain possession. The same applies to anything similar. Even in a case where Reuven died, Shimon may only testify if the sale was unsecured. If, however, the sale was secured, Reuven’s estate would be liable and thus Shimon has a stake in the testimony. Now that the rabbis have instituted that a creditor may even collect from a moveable item, a victim of theft may not even testify in a case where the thief died and the sale was unsecured because the victim still has a stake in the testimony. <i>RAMA: This all applies only where Shimon wants to testify that the field or garment does not belong to Yehuda. If, however, he wants to testify that it belongs to Reuven, he may testify in every case because once he confesses that it belongs to Reuven he can no longer bring a claim that it is his. Thus, he does not have a stake in the testimony. (Tur)</i>
18. If a person brings a claim on a bathhouse or city street against the citizens of city, a citizen of the city cannot testify or judge until he removes himself with a complete kinyan. <i>RAMA: There are those that say that is impossible to remove one’s self from an item which is a public good (Tur; Rambam) unless they have another similar item. (Rosh) This is the primary ruling.</i>
19. If a city had its Torah stolen, since the Torah is intended for listening purposes, which a person cannot possibly remove himself from, we would not use the city’s judges nor would we bring a proof from the people of that city. The same applies to anything similar. <i>RAMA: See above 7:12 which states that if the city has another Torah, it would be permitted. The same applies to anything similar, such as a synagogue or other books or something similar, in which case the judges of that city may rule on the case.</i>
20. If one says give money to the poor people of my city, we cannot use the judges of that city nor can we bring a proof from the people of that city. When is this true? When the poor people rely on the city and the city distributes charity to them. Even if two people from that city were to say we will give the set amount and we will testify, we would not listen to them because there is still a benefit to them for these poor people to become wealthier since they rely on the people of the city. The same applies to anything similar. (See above Siman 7 for the laws of taxes in a city).
21. These matters are dependent on the perception of the judges and the depth of their understanding. They must understand the primary rules, know the consequences of each matter and dig deeply to see if this witness gains any benefit from this testimony. The witness may not testify nor may he be a judge, even if it is an incredibly distant benefit.  
22. Today we have the custom to accept witnesses from the public regarding their institutions, agreements, consecrations and any other topics. They are even valid for their own relatives because they accepted them. <i>RAMA: We do not use the principle of two is like 100 on any matter which is dependent on the city custom. Rather, we follow the majority. The same applies to anything similar where we do not need literal witnesses. Similarly, we do not use the principle of “we did not see is not a proof.” Rather, not seeing is in fact a proof. (Mahari"k) With respect to living status or something similar in connection with the needs of the city, we can even judge via distant hearsay because the entire public has a stake in the testimony anyway. (Teshuvos Maimoni) See later Siman 156 and 163 regarding these laws. City activists who were appointed to deal with public or private needs have the status of judges and we cannot appoint one who is disqualified from judging due to wickedness.</i>

Siman 38

<b> Some of the Laws of Impeachment:</b> 1- If two witnesses testified about an individual that he owed so and so a maneh and two others come and contradict or impeach the witnesses, the alleged borrower is exempt. If witnesses testified in court that one owed his adversary a maneh and they later said they testified falsely, their original testimony stands because once they testify they cannot re-testify. They are, however, believed with respect to themselves and they must pay whatever loss they caused the defendant. <i>RAMA: The Mechaber summarized in an area where he should have discussed at length. Although we do not judge the laws of impeached witnesses today because it is a fine, there is still a practical importance to the laws in that an impeached witness can no longer testify as was explained above in Siman 34, whereas witnesses who were merely contradicted are valid witnesses as was explained above in Siman 31. Thus, the author of the Tur wrote a significant amount of rules regarding impeached witnesses and anyone who wants to study them should look there.</i>

Siman 39

<b>Writing a document for the borrower without the lender, and on which admissions we write, 17 Seifim:</b>  When someone lends money to another before witnesses, or someone admits before witnesses that he owes another money, this is called a verbal loan, and the lender cannot [unilaterally] collect from the borrower's real estate. When someone lends another money with a written deed, he may collect from the borrower's real estate, even if the deed does not specifically mention a lien, since we rule that [omission of mention of] a lien is considered to have been a mistake on the part of the writer of the deed. If there are witnesses that the loan was effected with a "kinyan sudar", then even without a deed the lender may collect from the borrower's real estate. <i>RAMA: See later, chapter 61 Paragraphs 2 and 10 for the definition of a deed. And see later at the beginning of chapter 225 for the laws of [omission of mention of] a lien being considered an error of the scribe.</i>
2. When someone lends to another before witnesses, they do not write down their testimony to give to the lender, so that the lender should not revert the written loan to a verbal loan [and claim on both], unless the borrower instructs them: "Write him a deed, sign it and give it to him." Even if he says this to them, they should still double-check with him after they have signed the deed, and only then do they give it to the lender. There are also those who rule that the witnesses do not have to double-check with him.
3. The above refers to a case where [the loan was effected] without a kinyan sudar. But the borrower used a kinyan sudar to obligate himself a maneh to the lender, [the witnesses] write a deed and give it to the lender even without an explicit instruction from the borrower, because it is assumed that a kinyan will be written down. Even if much time has passed before the lender approaches the witnesses and asks them to write him a deed, they may write it and give it to him, and they do not need to worry that the borrower has already repaid the debt, as long as they specifically note the time of the kinyan, or write, "We delayed in writing this document." Even if the borrower dies before writing the deed, and even if the due date of the debt has passed, they may write the deed after his death. Similarly if the lender died and his heirs come to the witnesses to write a deed for them, they may write it. There are those who differ and say that if this happens after 30 days [for a debt with no specified due date], they should not write a deed, and if there is a due date specified, they should not write a deed after that date, lest the borrower has already repaid. <i>RAMA: If the borrower did not give explicit instructions to write and hand over a deed to the lender, but the witnesses did so anyway, it is worth no more than a ledger entry (Teshuvas Rashb"a 1:211). Nonetheless, some say that if the deed was written, it is admissible evidence. See above, chapter 46, paragraph 10. This that we require explicit instructions from the borrower only applies when he is obligating himself in a debt, but if he is forgiving a debt owed to him, or releasing someone of the obligation to pay him, there is no need for this. See later, chapter 81, paragraph 29.</i>

Siman 40

1. <b> The Law of One Who Obligates Himself to His Friend, 2 Seifim:</b> If one unconditionally obligated himself monetarily to another, he is required to pay, even if he was not otherwise obligated. How so? If one tells witnesses “you are witnesses that I owe so and so a maneh,”;  if there are no witnesses but he writes in a document “I owe you a maneh”; or if he does not say “you are witnesses” but says in front of witnesses “I owe you a maneh via a document”- since he said the term “document” it is as if he said you should be witnesses for me- in all such cases he is required to pay even if both parties admit, and the witnesses are aware, that he did not in fact owe the other anything, because he has obligated himself in the same fashion a co-signer can obligate himself. <i>All the more so in a case where one writes “I accepted such and such sum of money from you with respect to the debt you owed me” would he waive his right to the loan even though we know he did not in fact accept any money. (Beis Yosef, Seif 73, in the name of the Ritvah)</i>
2. If a borrower writes a document in his own handwriting with witnesses testifying on it and he hands it over to the lender, the document has the status of a formal, valid document. Similarly, if the borrower wrote the document without witnesses, but handed it over to the lender in front of witnesses, the loan is considered a documented loan so long as his handwriting is not forgeable and the witnesses who witnessed the handing over of the document read the document. There are those of the Geonim who rule that the borrower must tell the witnesses who witnessed the handing over to sign and testify that it was handed over in front of you.

Siman 41

1. <b> The Laws of One Who Lost His Loan Document or Had It Erased, 4 Seifim:</b> If a lender’s loan document is deteriorating and will ultimately be erased, he may arrange for witnesses and go to a court who will verify the document. <i>RAMA: There are those that say that even if the document was completely erased the witnesses may testify since they know what is written in it. (Tur, in the name of the Rambam [the Rashbam] and Nikutei Yosef, Get Pashut). Witnesses testifying on a document may testify even if not in the presence of the parties. (Rabbeinu Yerucham in the name of the Rashbah).</i> The witnesses on the document themselves, however, may not write another document for the lender. They may, however, come to court and the court will verify the document. How do they verify this document? They draft another document that says, “we, the court of so and so, so and so and so and so, had produced in front of us by so and so a document that was erased and had such and such date with so and so and so and so as witnesses.” If the court wrote that they processed the witnesses’ testimony and the testimony conformed, the lender can collect with this document that they wrote for him and he would not need any other verification. If the court did not write this language, the lender would need to bring an additional proof on the original witnesses until their testimony is verified. (Until here is the opinion of the Rambam)<i>RAMA: If the witnesses are not verified, it is as if the lender produced an unverified document.(HaMagid, Chapter 23).</i> There are those that say that it must state in the verification that they tore up the original document because otherwise we are concerned that the lender will go to another court who will process another verification for him and then he can collect and recollect. With respect to a gift document that was erased, however, we would write another document even though the first has not been torn up. <i>RAMA: We would use the original date and not the date the court is writing the new document on (Beis Yosef in the name of Tosefos)</i>. In a case where the gift was secured or in a case of a transaction document, however, the court must tear up the original document or write in the second document that this document is not intended to allow for collection from properties sold to a third party or to collect from unsold properties, but simply to enable this particular field to remain in the hand of the gift-recipient or the buyer and prevent the gift-giver or seller from reclaiming it.
2. If one had his loan document erased, he may arrange for witnesses who will come to court and verify the document. This is only where there are witnesses that it was erased accidentally. If, however, the lender deliberately erased the document or he left the document in an unsafe place where it was erased, they would not verify the document for him because the fact that he left it in an unsafe place indicates that it was certainly paid back.
3. If one had a document and misplaced it and comes to court to have the document replaced, we would not write it, even if he brought the witnesses from the original document who testify that they wrote the document and gave it to him. Therefore, a court should not duplicate any document unless they see a particular need for it such as the case of an erased document. If the court wrote the outline of a document for someone and that person comes to court with it, the court would not collect based on that document until he produces the substance of the document unless there was a written reason as to why they made another document, such as because the previous document was erased or something similar and the witnesses knew the document was lost. If, however, the witnesses did not know it was lost, they would not write another document for him. Even if there are witnesses that a document was misplaced, we would not write another document because we are concerned the lender will find it unless there are witnesses testifying that the document was burnt. <i>RAMA: This is only true with regards to loan documents. With respect to unsecured transactional documents, however, we would write another document if the original was lost. We do not, however, duplicate a document for no purpose (Teshuvos HaRosh, Klal 68, Seif 16, 21, 23, 24). In the case of a will that contains gifts to many, where one person comes to court and asks that they document his particular gift, we would write it for him because such a document would not work to collect money with because it is not a formal document and the orphans can claim they paid it back (Teshuvos HaRashbah, Siman 978 and Teshuvos HaRamban, Siman 83)</i>. We would, however, write a new document if the original document was in the hands of a third party who misplaced it because there is no concern the lender may find it considering it was not in his possession (<i>Teshuvos HaRashbah, Siman 978 and see below 253 and see there Seif 2</i>). If the borrower was overseas, and the lender is concerned taking the document because he is afraid he may lose it on the road, he may come to court who will write another document and the lender will leave the original document in the court in his city. The court in the borrower’s city would inform the court in the lender’s city once the loan has been paid back and the court would tear up the original document in their possession.  If the duplicate document was misplaced while he was traveling to the borrower and witnesses are aware of the loss, they would go in front of court and testify that it was misplaced and they would return the document in their possession. <i>RAMA: (Tur) Any document that is duplicated is written letter for letter from the original. They would write on it that it is a duplicate. A court is not required for the duplication. Even two witnesses are able to duplicate (and even if they are related to one another). (Rivash, Siman 413) (This is a hosafah from the Sm"a and it is not correct what is written in Siman 100, 18)</i>
4. If one had a documented debt owed by his counterparty and he lost the document but the witnesses are accessible, and the borrower claims he paid back, the borrower would be believed with a heses oath even if a kinyan was made. The borrower is believed with a heses oath to say he paid back even if the payment deadline had not passed because the lender no longer possesses the document and we are concerned that the borrower paid back, which is why the document was ripped up or burnt. Even if a third party produced the document and the borrower claims he had dropped it after paying back the loan, he would be believed with a heses oath and would be exempt from paying, even if  the deadline for payment had not yet passed, because once the lender no longer has the document we do not apply the principle that a person does not pay back before the deadline. If, however, the lender gave the document as a deposit to a third party, and the guardian is the one that produces the document, the borrower is not believed to say he paid back and the document fell from him and the third party found it, even if the guardianship was not done in front of witnesses. <i>RAMA: If one has documents in a city that was conquered, we can assume they were lost and we would write another document. Even if the borrower were to strongly protest we would not concern ourselves. (Maharik, Shoresh 116).</i>
5. One who obligates himself to his fellow through a document and the document is lost, the witnesses are believed even though they acquired from him. If the claim the debt is paid off, this is a Heses oath. And even if the payment deadline had passed and the time for payment (or redemption) has not arrived....

Siman 42

1. <b> One Can Write a Document In Any Language and the Laws of an Unspecified Coin, 15 Seifim:</b> We do not write a loan document on something that is forgeable. If they wrote the document on it, the document is invalid, even with respect to an immediate collection. <i>This is only true with respect to a loan document. With respect to a kinyan document, however, it would be valid (R"an Perek 2 Gittin). Any document that is not made as the Rabbis instituted is invalid, even if there is no rationale to invalidate it. Therefore, if one were to make a tied-up document today it would be invalid. (Nimukei Yosef according to the opinion of the Rosh). There are those that disagree and we rule like those opinions. (Ramban and many other Poskim) (See later 44:1). </i>
2. A document can be written in any language and any script so long as the scribe is careful that there is no modification in that text.
3. The appropriate way to draft a document is to pay attention to the vov’s and zayin’s so that they are not stuffed between words lest a party forge the document and add a vav or zayin. The letters should not be far apart from one another lest a party erase one letter like a hey or ches and leave the leg in place of a vov. One must be careful with anything similar in any other language and any other script (Tur). Therefore, a scribe must be careful when writing a document to have the letters looks similar to each other and the writing should be straight and equal in all aspects so that the letters are not too far apart from each other. The scribe should not press the writing together too much nor should he press in one area and give space in another area. Therefore, witnesses are not permitted to sign until they investigate all the words of the document well and when the document is produced in front of the judge, the judge must investigate all the words and compare each letter. If the judges sees any aberration, the party may not collect with it until (the judge) investigates the matter well. (Any issue which can be explained by an erasure, is attributed to an erasure) (Nimukei Yosef). If the judge needs to strike the document-holder to get him to confess, he may to do so in order to have the true ruling emerge. There are those that say that this only applies where we are coming to take money from inheritors or buyers in which case we rule that we may set forth claims on behalf of them. If, however, the court is taking money from a borrower, seller or gift-giver directly and the defendant does not claim that there is anything wrong with the document, we would not make the claim for him.
4. The scribe must be careful not to write any number from “shalosh” to “eser” at the end of the line, lest a party turn ten into twenty or three into 30. <i> RAMA: If the scribe wrote “shlosha” or “asara” that is fine because there is no concern of forgery. (Beis Yosef in the name of Tosefos and others)</i> If the number ends up on the last line, the scribe must repeat the matter a few times until it occurs in the middle of line. Similarly, the scribe must be careful not to write it number form, such as “beis” or “daled” so that party does not turn it into a “chaf” or “reish.” <i>RAMA: If the scribe does not follow this, the document is forgeable and invalid. If, however, he wrote gematriot (i.e. math equations) or acronyms where forgery is impossible, the document is valid. (Hagahot Mordechai, Gittin)</i>
5. If the top of the document says one thing and the bottom says something else and it is possible to maintain both points, we would maintain them. If, however, they contradict each other, such as where the top says a maneh and the bottom says 200 or vice-versa, we follow the bottom so long as it is not the last line in a case where the document does not conclude with “everything is affirmed and verified.” <i>RAMA: With respect to taking away from the document-owner, however, we would make a deduction from the last line. (Nimukei Yosef in the name of the Ritva and the Rama). If the sum at the bottom was deleted, the whole document is invalid because it is possible that the bottom said only one dinar. (Hagahos Ashiri).</i> There are those that say if the top was counting out the amounts and the bottom contained the sum which was less or more than the top, we would say they certainly erred in the calculation and we would follow the listed out numbers. This view appears correct. When is it true that we follow the bottom? Where one amount is not dependent on the other. If, however, the document says “100, which is 200” or “200, which is 100” the document-owner would only be able to collect 100- the lower of the two- because the document-owner is in the inferior position.
6. If a letter from the bottom was erased but it was possible to deduce what was missing based on what was on top, we would make the deduction from the top. For example, if the top said a party owed Chanani and the bottom said Chanan the bottom would learn from the top and the party would pay Chanani. If, however, there were two letters missing, we would not make the deduction. For example, if the top said Chanani and the bottom said Chen- even if the top word had six letters and only two were missing from the bottom – we would not make the deduction. Given that we do not make the deduction and we know the document was erased, the document is now disqualified and one cannot collect with it. With respect to one letter, however, we would make the deduction, even if the top word only had two letters and we are using it to deduce half a word. If something was missing but there was no erasure, and the top said Chanani and the bottom said Chen, that is certainly a retraction because a scribe would not err on two letters, and the party must pay Chen.
7. If the top said the measurement of safel (1.5 seah) and the bottom said the measurement of kafel (1.5 kav), we would follow the bottom because a kafel is less than a safel. If the top said kafel and the bottom said safel, we are concerned that a fly caused the leg of the kuf to turn into a samach and the party can only collect a kafel. The same applies to anything similar because the document-owner is in the inferior position.
8. In all the above cases where we say the document-owner is in the inferior position, if the document-owner were to take possession of his adversary’s moveable items, we would not take it away from him. <i>RAMA: All the more so would we say that when it comes to possession of a receipt, the document-owner has the superior position because he is already the possessor, (Nimukei Yosef in the name of the Ra'ah) and not like those that disagree and say that even by a receipt we use the principle of the document-holder being in the inferior position. (There, in the name of the Ritva his student).</i>
9. We do not use the principle of the document-owner being in the inferior position except in the aforementioned cases where the document has not been completely voided. If, however, the issue is one that voids the document, the principle would not apply. For example, if the document says so and so owes so and so a maneh by Pesach, the borrower must pay him by the first Pesach and he cannot say I will pay him by Pesach in years from now. The same applies to anything similar. <i>RAMA: There are those that say this is only for matters that can be attributed to a mistake. With respect to a matter that the giver erred on, however, such as where he used a language for a gift that is of no effect, the document is certainly void.(Teshuvos HaRashba; Maharik, Shoresh 94).</i>
10. There are many commentators that write that today where we have the custom to write “this document is not an asmachta and not an outline,” we would say the document-owner is in the superior position for any doubt arising out of the language of the document. <i>RAMA: If language is included in a document to bolster the document-owner’s status and is understood by the average listener this way, we would judge accordingly, even though it is bolstering the document-owner’s status. (Beis Yosef, in the name of the Teshuvos HaRashba)</i>
11. If a document says so and so owes so and so such and such amount of such and such currency and the amount was erased and unrecognizable, the lender may only collect two of that currency.
12. If a document says “selaim,” and the lender says it was five while the borrower claims it was two, the borrower must pay the two and take a heses oath on the rest. If the lender were to grab the difference, we would take it back from him.
13. If a document says so and so borrowed from so and so silver, the borrower would need to give a minimal piece of silver of the lightest weight. If the document says silver currency and silver perutos were used in that locale, the borrower must give one perutah. If silver perutos are not used in that locale, the borrower would give the smallest amount of silver currency that is used there. If the document says dinarim of silver, the borrower would give silver that is worth two dinar of gold. If the document says gold in dinar, the borrower would give gold worth two gold dinar. If the document says silver in dinar, the borrower would give pieces of silver worth two silver dinar. If the document says gold, the borrower would give a piece of gold that is the lowest weight of gold. If the document says gold currency, the borrower would give the smallest amount of gold currency that is used. If the document says gold dinarim or dinar of gold, the borrower would give two gold dinar. If the document says gold in dinarim, the borrower would give gold that is worth two dinars of silver. (<i>In today’s age there is no distinction between saying “dinarin” or “dinari.”) (Magid, end of Melaveh)(And it seems to me that we give him the lesser one)</i>
14. If one produces a document against another with a sum of 110 dinar or selaim (<i>and the currency is undefined - Tur</i>) and it was written in Bavel, the lender would collect Babylonian currency. If it was written in Israel, the lender would collect Israeli currency. If no location is written in the document and the lender produced the document in Bavel, he would collect Babylonian currency. If the lender produced the document in Israel, he would collect Israeli currency. If the lender attempts to collect the currency where he produced the document and the borrower claims he owes him silver that is worth less than this currency, the lender would take an oath and collect. <i>RAMA: If, however, the borrower proves that they originally lived in a place with a less valuable currency, he only has to give the lesser currency. (R"an end of Ketuvot)</i> If the document says 100 silver but does not say if it is selaim or pundyon, the lender would collect whatever the borrower desires.
15. If the document simply says an amount, we would follow the custom that they typically use in that locale. For example, there was a document that said 600 and zuzim and it was unclear whether it was 600 istira and a zuz or 600 zuz and a zuz, we rule that the borrower gives 600 istirii, which is less. We would not, however, entertain that it was 600 perutos because people don’t include a sum total of perutos in a document. We follow any language that is often in used documents, even if it was not an institution of the Rabbis but a language that the common-folk use in that locale. Even if the language was not written, we would judge the case as if it was. <i>RAMA: The same applies for any institution by the community or any city custom. (Rambam, Ishot Perek 23) If one raises an orphan in his home and writes “my son” in a document or the orphan writes about the individual that raised him “my father” or “my mother,” it is not considered forged and it is a valid document because it is appropriate to write this considering that he raised him. (Teshuvos Maimoni, Siman Mishpatim, Seif 48)</i>

Siman 43

1. <b>The Date Must be Written in a Document and the Specific Laws of Postdating and Predating, 29 Seifim:</b> The date of the loan must be written in the document so that we will know which third-party buyers the lender may collect from because the lender cannot collect from buyers that purchased from the borrower prior to the loan. If there is no date in the document, the lender may collect with the document but he cannot collect from third-party buyers because the buyers can argue that they purchased the land prior to the loan. There are those that say if the third-party purchased the land after witnesses had seen a written and signed document, the lender may collect from them. <i>A receipt without a date is valid. The receipt-holder is in the superior position. (Teshuvos HaRosh, 20, 73)</i>
2. If the scribe omitted mentioning that the years in the document were from creation of the world, (<i>Beis Yosef who heard it from the Poskim</i>) or even if he omitted the 5,000 or the hundreds and just wrote the ones, the document is valid. <i>RAMA: If, however, the scribe wrote the thousands and the ones, but omitted the hundreds or tens, the document is invalid. *Rivash, Siman 322)</i>
3. If the scribe wrote thousands but omitted “five,” the document is valid.
4. If the scribe wrote “on the fourth, on the 20th day of Shevat,” and omitted “of the week,” the document is valid.
5. If the scribe wrote “on the 4th day of the week, on the 22nd of Tishrei,” and those days do not conform because Wednesday in Tishrei of that year fell out on the 24th, the document is still valid.
6. A document written in the borrower’s handwriting does not require a date.
7. Predated documents are invalid because the lender may illegally collect from third-party buyers. Thus, the Rabbis penalized the lender and he can only collect unencumbered land with a predated document as a gezeirah lest he collect from the predated date. If the borrower claims he paid back, we apply the same rules as we do for other documents. If the borrower claims the loan never occurred, the borrower is established as a fraudster. <i>There are those that say that the document is completely invalid. (Tur, in the name of the R"i; and the Rosh; and the Rivash, Siman 382; and see the Rivash regarding delay, and what he wrote in his books, see there.</i>
8. When do we say the lender may collect from unencumbered lands? Where the witnesses did not intentionally predate the document. <i>RAMA: (Tur; and the R"an in the name of the Raz"ah; and Rebbe Shimon ben Beteira) There are those that say that witnesses are believed on this issue, even if we have a copy of their signatures from another source. The same applies to any error that witnesses often make and they are believed to say they erred. (R"an). There are those that disagree. [see in the Tur two opinions </i>If, however, the witnesses intentionally predated the document, the lender can certainly not even collect from unencumbered land because the witnesses are invalid witnesses who signed falsely.
9. If a gift-document should have said “year 58” but said “year 57,” and it’s evident from within the document that it was the scribe’s error because the document says “give to so and so, my son-in-law,” and the recipient was not the giver’s son-in-law yet, and one of the signatories was a person who is pious and great in Torah, none of this would save the document from being disqualified. Nevertheless, if the witnesses are around and we don’t have their signatures from another source, they can sign another document from this second date. If we have their signatures from another source, they are no longer believed, but the recipient of the gift is believed to say it was an error migu [<i>Ed. Note: The source for migu is provided by the Gemara in Ketuvot 22a which empowers a father to testify about his minor daughter's husband.]</i> that he could have said it was a good document and that the kinyan was made in year 57.
10. A predated document that stated before the signatures, “this document was written on such and such date but not signed until such and such date,” is a valid document.
11. Even if the witnesses had observed the lender lend to the borrower and the borrower told them to write and sign a document and give it to the lender, if there was no kinyan, the witnesses would write the date the document was handed over and not the day of the loan.
12. Postdated documents are valid because they hurt the document-owner’s ability in that he can now only collect from the date of the document. The document is valid, even if it did not state that it was postdated. When is this true? Where the document says “that I will acquire.” If, however, it does not say “that I will acquire,” the document is invalid (and the same is written in Siman 258) unless it explicitly says “we wrote the document and delayed it.” <i>One should not delay any document in the first instance because it appears like a falsehood. (Rabbeinu Yerucham) </i>
13. This, that a postdated document is valid, is only with respect to loan documents. With respect to transactional documents, however, even a postdated document is invalid unless (it is written) the delay was explicit. <i>(The Shach, see above, any shtrar is not allowed to be postdated initially, etc)</i>
14. A document whose date falls out on Shabbos or the 10th of Tishrei is considered a postdated document and is valid. We are not concerned that it may be predated and was really written on Sunday or the 11th of Tishrei. Rather, we uphold the status of the document because it’s well known that one cannot write a document on the Shabbos or the 10th of Tishrei and that is why they delayed it. There are those that say that if the borrower tells the lender to swear to him, the lender is obligated to swear. This is only true for a verified document. If, however, the document was unverified, the document-holder has the burden of proof.
15. Any document that appears in front of us is assumed to be given on the date that it is written except where something negative occurred that calls its status into question, such as where the document fell, in which case the document-holder would not be able to collect if there was no kinyan until he brings a proof that he received the document on the date that was written, because a negative occurrence affected the document’s status.
16. If a document was written at night and signed on the following day, the document is valid because the day follows the night. If, however, it was written by day and signed at night, the document is invalid. When is this true? When they were not dealing with that topic. If, however, they were dealing with the topic, the document is valid. This is only where the party did not immediately take the item with a kinyan. If, however, the party took the item with a kinyan, the document is valid, even they did not sign until much later. Therefore, if witnesses observed a kinyan and delayed writing until later and they remember the date of the kinyan, they should write the date from that day. If they do not remember, they should write the date the document was written.
17. There are those that say that this that a document is valid where they were dealing with that topic is only with respect to loan documents. With respect to obligatory documents- where a party obligates himself with a kinyan or document- however, the document would not be valid.
18. When the witnesses write the date of the kinyan, they juxtapose the date of the kinyan [note: version of the Shach and Sma] to that day. They write, “we made a kinyan from so and so on such and such date and we wrote and handed over the document to so and so.” When they write the current date, they juxtapose the writing to the date. They write, “we made a kinyan from so and so and we wrote and signed on this date and gave it to so and so.” If they don’t do it this way, it appears like a falsehood. <i>(If, however, they simply wrote “in such and such place we made a kinyan from so and so” it does not appear like a falsehood.) (Rabbeinu Yerucham; Tur)</i>
19. If the witnesses do not remember the date of the kinyan, they cannot say we are certain that it was in Tishrei but we are just not sure what date, so we will write the beginning of Cheshvan, because that has the appearance of a falsehood. There are those that say that if the witnesses remember that they made a kinyan in the beginning of Tishrei, the middle of Tishrei or the end of the Tishrei, they can write the first-third of the month, the middle-third or the last-third.
20. If witnesses received testimony in one country and were documenting their testimony in another country, they do not write the place they received the testimony but the place they are signing. This is only true where they are not writing the date of the kinyan, but the date of the writing. If, however, they remember the date of the kinyan and are writing it, then they should write the locale where the kinyan took place, because if they were to write the place where it was written, they would be found to be fraudsters and will be disqualified. When they write the place of documentation, they write, “this is what so and so told us and we wrote it in such and such place.” If, however, they are writing the place where the testimony was handed over, they write “so and so told us” or “we made a kinyan from so and so in such and such place and we wrote and signed it and handed it over to so and so.”
21. This that we said, that the witnesses write the place of documentation even if the kinyan was in another place, is only where there is no distinction in the currency used in the place of the kinyan and the currency used in the place of the documentation or even if there is a distinction but they write in the document “the currency that is used in such and such place.” If, however, there is a distinction between the currency used in the place the testimony was given and the place of the kinyan and the document does not say it is the currency used in such and such place, the witnesses should only write the place where the testimony was received because the party owes the currency of that locale and if they were to write another place, the party would owe the currency of the place where the document was written.
22. A document that does not state where it was written is still valid. <i>(Pay attention to the above, Siman  42, Seif 14)</i>
23. If Reuven and Shimon both had a document against Levi and on Reuven’s document it said 5 Nissan and on Shimon’s it simply said Nissan, and Levi only has one field that cannot cover both loans, we would give the field to Reuven because Shimon’s document may have been written at the end of Nissan. Similarly, Shimon cannot collect from third-party buyers who purchased land from Levi in Iyar or later because the buyers can tell Shimon that they left him a place to collect his loan- the field that Reuven collected illegally because Shimon’s document was before Reuven’s. Therefore, if Reuven and Shimon were to write a joint power-of-attorney, they would be able to collect from third parties who purchased land in Iyar or later.
24. Even if a receipt were to omit the document-witnesses and the date of the document, since the sum of money in the document and receipt are identical we say the receipt was written on this document.
25. If a document dated Nissan was produced against someone, and that individual produces a waiver document dated 18 Nissan, the waiver has the power to nullify the debt.
26. If Reuven produced a document against Shimon dated on a specific date and Shimon produces a receipt on that document with the same date, the document-holder is in the inferior position.
27. If Reuven produced a loan document on Shimon dated 5 Nissan and Shimon produces a receipt that was written on 5 Nissan which states that Reuven waived all claims he had on Shimon until that date, Reuven may collect with such loan document because common usage of “until” does not include that date. If, however, the document stated that Reuven waived all claims that he had against Shimon until now, the matter is in doubt and we would not take away money based on doubt.
28. If two documents were created in a leap year and one simply says Adar and the other says the second Adar, and the borrower does not have enough property for both loans, we would give the property to the document that says Adar. If both documents simply said Adar, it is as if they were both written in the first Adar and we would give the land to the document-holder with the earlier date of the month. (See Orach Chaim Siman 427 regarding how we write it. See Even Haezer Siman 126). Any date that is written in a document, such as “until Pesach” or “until the harvest” is judged the same way we judge the case with respect to vows.
29. If a document says “until after Pesach,” that means until most of the days between Pesach and Shavuos had passed. (Until then, day 21).

Siman 44

1. <b> The Laws of Summarizing the Document On the Last Line and How We Verify Erased and Hanging Letters, 11 Seifim:</b> When writing a document, one must repeat the content of the document in the last line because (<i>we do not deduce anything from the last line - Tur</i>) due to the fact that the witnesses are not capable of ensuring that their signatures are immediately juxtaposed to the text. We are concerned that the witnesses left space the size of a line and a forger wrote what he wanted there. If the document did not review the content, it would not be disqualified over this, but we would not be able to deduce anything from the last line. <i> RAMA: This view is not like those that say that the entire document would be disqualified because it was not written in the way the Rabbis had instituted, even though there is no logical reason to disqualify it. (Tur, in the name of the Rosh; Tosefos) This, that we do not deduce from the last line, is only in a situation where we are concerned of a forgery. If, however, the last line negatively impacts the party that produces the document, we would deduce from it because it was certainly not forged. (Nimukei Yosef, in the name of the Rivta and the Ra"a)</i>
2. If the entire document was written in the handwriting of the party that is obligated, we would deduce from the last line. If, however, the document was in the hand of another person and the obligated party signed on bottom, we would not deduce from the last line.
3. If the document concluded at the end of a line and the witnesses distanced their signature a full line and signed in the middle of the second line, we would not deduce anything from half of the last line nor from the complete line before it. <i>RAMA: [This is] if something was discovered to have been written in the half row before their signatures or the row before it. This is only where the witnesses signed one on top of the other. If, however, they signed one following the other, the entire document is invalid as will be written later in 45:10.</i>
4. If the document states “this is affirmed and verified,” we would deduce from the last line (<i>and they would not need to repeat the content on the last line - Tur)</i>
5. If a document has erasures, hanging letters or words that were written over, it would need to be verified before the document states “affirmed and verified.” <i>They would not have to write “and this is their verification.” (Mordechai; Tosefos)</i>  If these edits were not verified, the document would not be disqualified. We would just not deduce from them. <i>RAMA: There are those that say that an unverified erasure would invalidate the entire document because perhaps something negative was written against the document-holder and it was erased, unless it is evident what was erased, in which case the entire document would not become invalid. (Tur; Nimukei Yosef)</i> If the edits were in the essence of the document- i.e., the name of the borrower or lender or the amount of money- the document would be invalidated if they did not verify the edits. If the edits were in the date and were unverified, the document has the status of an undated document.
6. If a document has a scrape in the back or between the lines in a place where they have the custom to document repayment on the back or between the lines, the document is valid, but we must intimidate the document-holder. There are those that invalidate the document.
7. There are those that say that we would not verify erasures other than with a writing that is identical to the writing of the document, but not with a writing that is lighter [in content] than the writing of the document.
8. If the erasure was in the penultimate line and was the size of “affirmed and verified” or larger, the document would be invalid, even if the erasure was verified, because perhaps a party erased and replaced with a forgery and then verified in the space between the text and the witnesses. This is only true where there is no line-size space between the witnesses and the document in which case we are concerned that the party added something in the space the witnesses had left. If, however, there is a line-size space, the document is valid and we are not concerned that they had left two lines of space and the party added what he wanted in one line and left the other line-size space blank. This is only where the witnesses are established as knowledgeable. Otherwise, we would in fact be concerned.
9. Nowadays, we have the custom to write the verification of erasures and hanging letters after “and they have made a kinyan” because today the practice is for all documents to say “affirmed and verified” so it is impossible to forge, we deduce from the last line and we do not need to review the content of the document on the last line. Thus, a document that does not say “affirmed and verified” would be invalid. Witnesses should not sign a document unless it says “affirmed and verified.” If the document says “affirmed and verified” twice, it is still valid <i>(but one should not do it in the first instance. Teshuvos HaRosh, Klal 68, Siman 18)</i>
10. If a document had written on a scrape in its verification, “nun vov” and they checked and investigated the document letter by letter and could not find those two letters, the document is valid.
11. If a document contains erasures and the witnesses forgot to verify them at the end of the document and they wrote “affirmed and verified” and one witness signed, but before the second witness signed they discovered that they did not verify the erasures, the way to correct this document is to write, “we are witnesses that after one of us had signed before verifying such and such erasure contained in the documents, we verified appropriately and everything is affirmed and verified” and then both witnesses sign. <i>(All the more so would a document be valid if they wrote something below their signatures and signed again). (Mordechai)</i>

Siman 45

1. <b> That Witnesses Must First Read the Document and the Laws of A Document on Paper and the Witnesses on Erased Paper, 23 Seifim:</b> Witnesses sign on the bottom of the document and not from the sides or on top.
2. If the head of the court knew the substance of the document and had his scribe read it to him, he may sign the document even though he did not read it himself since the judge believes his scribe and intimidates his scribe. No other person <i>(or other head of court or scribe - Tur)</i> is permitted to do this. The witness much read the document word for word. <i>RAMA: There are those that say that two may read in front of the witnesses and the witnesses will sign. (Tur; Rosh; Hagahot Maimoni, Perek 24) If the witnesses do not understand the language of the document, those reading it should translate the document and the witness can sign. (Beis Yosef) This seems to me to be the primary ruling. There are those that say we can read in front of the public and have the witnesses sign because people are afraid of lying in public so it has the status of the head of court with his scribe. (Hagahot Mordechai and Ashiri, Chapter 2 of Gittin)</i>
3. If a confession was given in a party’s handwriting but the document was a gentile form, and it is clear that the party cannot read it and there are witnesses that he did not read it, the party still obligates himself to whatever is written in it.
4. If witness do not know how to sign and they carved out a space on empty paper and the witnesses signed via impression, we would give them mardus lashses and the document would be invalid. <i>(There are those that say the document is valid.) (Tur and the Maggid, Chapter 24, in the name of the Rashba; and also see the R"an Perek 2 of Gittin)</i>
5. In a place where they have the custom to have the scribe sign based on the word of the witnesses by writing, “so and so the son of so and so signed with the handing over of the pen” or the document states “so and so the son of so and so commanded to sign” and the people of the city accepted that this form of testimony qualifies as the testimony of a witness, the document is valid. If the people of the city did not accept this form of testimony, it is of no effect. Any document that is produced in front of us where the witnesses testify on their signature would be verified because there is a chazaka that witnesses do not sign on a document unless they read the document and know how to sign. If the witnesses are in front of us and we know that they cannot read, but they said one who knows how to read read it to them, we would rely on their testimony. <i>(If the witnesses do not say this, we would investigate their testimony orally. If it conforms to what is written in the document, we would verify the document.) (Tur)</i>
6. The witnesses should be careful not leave a two-line space from the text. If they left a two-line space, the document would be invalid even if it said “affirmed and verified, ” it was known that nothing was added or forged and the space was filled with dots of ink, so that they don’t say the witnesses signed on the dots and not on the text.
7. This that we said that if the witnesses leave a two-line space the document is invalid is only with respect to collecting from encumbered properties or non-encumbered properties where the borrower claims he paid back. A party, cannot, however, claim the incident never occurred.
8. The aforementioned two lines refers to the size of the witnesses’ handwriting, which is large, but not the scribe’s handwriting because anyone who forges does not go to the scribe.
9. These two lines include the lines and their airspace, such as the lamed on the top line and the chof on the bottom line, which comes out to two lines and three airspaces.
10. There is one that says that if the document finished in middle of a line and they left that line and another line and then began signing on the third line, the document is invalid because a party can write what he wants on that half line and then recap the substance of the document on the last line. Similarly, if they finished the document at the end of a line and the witnesses distanced a full line and then began in the middle of the second line, the document is invalid if they signed one after the other on that half-line because a party can write “so and so borrowed a maneh from so and so” on the empty half-line before the signature and the document would be one which has the text and witnesses on the one line which is valid, and the party will cut off the entire top of the document. <i>RAMA: See 44:3. If the document concluded in the middle of a line, the witnesses can sign, one next to the other, on the remaining half of the line and we would then deduce from the half line before their signature and the line on top because there is nothing at all to be suspicious of. (Beis Yosef in the name of the Rashbatz)</i>
11. If there is a blank space before the witnesses’ signatures, they must be careful to sign one after the other on the same line because a party may write what he wants on the blank space before their signatures and cut off the top, and the document will be one in which the text and witnesses are on the same line. What should the witnesses do? They should fill the blank space with ink. We would not say that the witnesses have signed on the filled space unless the filled space was between the document and the witnesses. If the witnesses began signing in the middle of a line and they cut off the space before the signature, the document would be invalid because perhaps something that hurt a party or a condition was written there and the party cut it off. If, however, the document said “affirmed and verified” above at the end of the line, the document would be valid so long as the witnesses sign one under the other. If, however, they signed one following the other, the document would be invalid because perhaps the document was one where the text and witnesses were on one line, the party cut it, it was blank on top and the party wrote what he wanted to.
12. If a document had many witnesses and one of them was a relative or otherwise disqualified or two of the witnesses were related to each other and the witnesses are not around and they have a clear testimony that they all sat down to sign with the intention of testifying, the document is void. If they do not have such testimony, the testimony can be verified with the remaining witnesses because it is possible the valid witnesses signed and they left room for the elder to sign and a relative or someone otherwise disqualified signed without their knowledge, even if the disqualified witness was the first to sign. <i>RAMA: No relative or disqualified witness should sign on a document in the first instance. (Tur) There are those that say that a document with a disqualified witness is invalid unless the last two witnesses are valid. (Tur, in the name of his father the Rosh; and see Siman 100:23)</i>
13. If a document is disqualified due to the signatures of disqualified witnesses and the valid witnesses remember the testimony by viewing the document, the valid witnesses may testify and the court will write as what was written in the document, and it will be considered like the first document.
14. If the witnesses were more than two-lines removed from the text and the space between the text and witnesses were filled with relatives or disqualified witnesses, the document is valid because it cannot be forged. If the court saw the document before it was filled with relatives or disqualified witnesses, there is nothing that can be done to validate the document. If, however, it was filled with relatives before it came to court, the document would be valid, even if the lender filled it on his own without the knowledge of the borrower. There are those that say this only applies where they filled it with the knowledge of the borrower. If, however, they filled the document without the borrower’s knowledge, it would be invalid.
15. This, that we validate a document without a kinyan where it was filled with relatives or disqualified witnesses, is only if it was filled in on the day it was written. If, however, it was filled in the next day or later, the document would be invalid, even if filled in with the knowledge of the borrower.
16. If after a document was paid back, the party claimed the document was invalid because the scribe distanced the signature more than one line from the text, his claim is of no effect.
17. One who obtains a claim via a gentile has the status of the gentile with respect to collecting from a document where the witnesses are more than two lines from the text if the gentiles have the custom to collect with such a document.
18. If a document is produced where the entire document is on one line and the witnesses are on another line, it is invalid because perhaps the witnesses distanced one line from the document, the party cut off the entire document and wrote this document on that line, thereby having the witnesses be signed on that line. <i>RAMA: Similarly, if the document was on two lines but the first line does not begin at the beginning of the parchment, we are concerned that they perhaps finished the document in middle of the line and left the remainder blank as well as the line below it, the witnesses signed, the party cut the entire document and forged what he wanted on the line and a half, thereby having the witnesses be signed on it. (Mordechai)</i>
19. If the entire document with the witnesses was on one line, the document is valid because there is nothing to be concerned about. If, however, the document and the witnesses were on one line and there were two witnesses on another line, we are concerned that perhaps a party cut the entire document above which the lower witnesses had signed on, in the line between the document and witnesses he wrote a document with its witnesses and with the witnesses on the second line he’ll say his intention was to increase the amount of witnesses. Therefore, when a document like this comes in front of us, we would not verify it from the witnesses on the second line but from the witnesses on the first line.
20. If a document is produced with the text and witnesses on erasure, the document is valid, so long as there is no distinction between the document and the place where the witnesses have signed. If there was some kind of distinction, we are concerned that perhaps a party erased and wrote what he wanted to and the fact that it was erased twice explains the distinction. Therefore, witnesses should not sign on an erased document unless it was erased in their presence because otherwise we are concerned that the place to sign was erased twice and the place of the document was only erased once, and when the party erases the document a second time and writes what he wants, it will come out that the document and place of signature have both been erased the same two times. <i>RAMA: They must be careful to have everything erased on the same day, because a one-day old erasure is not comparable to a two-day old erasure. (Beis Yosef)</i>  If there is a space between the signature of one witness and the other the size of “We the witnesses signed on erasure while the document was on paper,” the document is disqualified because perhaps the document was on paper, the witnesses were on erasure and between the witnesses it stated “we the witnesses, etc.” and the party erased it, erased the document and subsequently wrote what he wanted. <i>(If, however, there is no erasure at all, the document is valid, even if there is a large space between the signatures.) (Beis Yosef in the name of the Rivash, Siman 49)</i>
21. If a document is on paper and its witnesses are on erasure, the document is disqualified because the party might erase the document and forge it, resulting in the text and witnesses both on erasure. If the witnesses write, “we the witnesses signed on erasure while the document was on paper,” the document is valid, so long as they wrote it between the signatures of the first and second witnesses. If, however, they wrote it before or after their signatures, the declaration would be of no effect.
22. If a document is on erasure and its witnesses are on paper, the document is disqualified, even if the witnesses wrote “we the witnesses wrote on paper and the document is on erasure” because ultimately the party can erase the document and write what he wants. Although it will have been erased twice, it would not be evident because a one-time erased document, which would allow us to see the distinction, is not adjacent to it.
23. In a locale where they have the custom to document repayment between the lines, one must be careful that there should be no scrape between the lines because if there were, we would be concerned the party paid back and it was erased. All the more so are we concerned in a case where the repayment was between the lines on erasure because perhaps the repayment was more than documented and the party erased it and wrote what he wanted. If there are witnesses that the repayment is the borrower’s handwriting, the document is valid because there is nothing to be concerned about.

Siman 46

1. <b>Witnesses That Said We Were Minors or We Were Disqualified or the Document Was Given on Trust and All the Laws of Verifying Documents, 38 Seifim:</b> If one produces a loan document against his counterparty, so long as the document has not been verified the borrower can claim the document is a forgery and he never instructed anyone to write it. Even if the borrower confesses and says it is true that he instructed it to be written but he paid back, it was given on trust or he wrote it with the intention to borrow but he never borrowed or anything similar, he is believed because if he wanted he could have said the loan never occurred and the document is only verified on his say-so. He must swear a heses oath and will be exempt. If the lender later has the document verified, the document will be like any other document. <i>(See later at the beginning of Siman 82).</i>
2. There are those that say that this - that we believe a borrower with a migu - is only where the document does not contain a believability clause for the lender. If, however, the document does contain a believability clause, there would be no migu. There are those that say that even if the document contains a believability clause the borrower is believed <i>(with a migu that he could have claimed the document was forged. This opinion is logical.) (Tur)</i>
3. What is the verification process? The witnesses of the document come and testify in front of three judges- who may even be laymen- that this is their signature and the judges will write on the bottom, “we were three who sat as one and so and so and so and so came and testified in front of us regarding their signatures and it became clear to us that this is their signature. We uphold and affirm as is appropriate,” and they sign on bottom.
4. We cannot verify a document other than in front of three individuals because it is considered judgement. Therefore, we do not verify documents at night. <i>RAMA:  If two people verified a document, there is no verification. (Mordechai, Perek 'Hasholeach'; Hagahot Mordechai, Kedushin; Nimukei Yosef, Perek 'Chazakat HaBatim') There are those that write that now that we have the custom that a designated Rabbi verifies documents solo, this kind of custom supersedes the strict law. This is in fact the widespread custom in these countries. The rationale seems to me to be that we hold that a solo expert has the status of three laymen with respect to the rabbinical verification of documents and is therefore considered a court as was explained earlier in Siman 25. Although we do not have expert individuals today, with respect to verification of documents, however, we can rely on this. This is what seems to me to be the reasoning behind the custom.</i>
5. We may verify a document even if not in the presence of the parties. Even if the party is standing and yelling that the document is forged and should not be verified, we would not listen to him.
6. Although the document is verified, the court must recognize the signature of the two witnesses or two of the judges. If they do not, the document does not have the status of being verified. There is, however, a purpose to the verification in that because there are two witnesses and three judges that have signed on it, it is much easier to find someone who recognizes the signatures.
7. A document can be verified in one of five ways: (i) the judges recognize the witness’ handwriting, (ii) the witnesses sign in front of the judges, (iii) the witnesses that signed on the document come and each one says, “this is my handwriting and I am a witness on this matter,” (iv) witnesses come and testify that this is the handwriting of these witnesses and they may testify this testimony in writing and do not need to testify verbally, (Rivash, Seif 382) or (v) their handwriting is produced from other documents and the court will compare this writing to the writing in other documents and determine that those witness’ handwriting is the same as these witnesses. We do not verify a document from other documents except from two documents of two fields where the owners consumed a public consumption for three years without any fear or trepidation from any claim in the same manner that all field-owners consume their fields or from two kesubos, so long as the documents are produced from a third party and not from this individual who is looking to verify the document because he may have forged all of them. <i>(We would not verify the documents if they were produced from the party’s hand, even if both documents were verified. (Tur; Beis Yosef in the name of Rashi) There are those that disagree. (R"an according to the opinion of the Rambam) </i> Similarly, we can verify a document from a single document that was protested against- <i>(there are those that say that even if no one protested, but the document was simply verified as we have later in seif 37)</i>- and was affirmed in court just as we verify from documents of two fields or two kesubos. <i>RAMA: There are those that say we can verify a document from a book that the witness wrote but not from a letter that he wrote. (Rivash, Siman 136) There are those that say that we cannot even verify from a book unless he signed it at the end, in which case we can verify from the author’s signature. (R"an, Chapter 2 of Kesuvos)</i>
8. If the court wrote, “we sat as three and the document was verified in front of us," the document is verified even if they did not write the form of verification they used. The custom is to write the form of verification used.
9. When a document is verified with others testifying that this is the witness’ handwriting, if one witness testifies on one signature and a second testifies on the other, the document is not verified because we require two witnesses on each one of the signatures. If there is a third witness among them who will testify on the signature of both witnesses, the document is verified.
10. If one signed on a document and comes to court to testify on his own handwriting and he recognizes his signature with certainty but does not remember the testimony at all and he cannot recall that this party ever borrowed from this one, he is prohibited from testifying on this handwriting that is in this court because a person does not testify that this is his handwriting but that this party owed that party the actual money in the document. The handwriting is merely a form of reminding him of the incident, but if he does not remember he cannot testify. Thus, if a document was produced in court and witnesses come and say this is our handwriting but we never knew of such testimony and we have no recollection that this party borrowed from or sold to the other, the document would not be verified and the witnesses have a status of the deaf until they recall their testimony. Any judge who does not judge accordingly does not know between his right and left when it comes to monetary law. If, however, the witness’ handwriting was produced from another place or there were other witnesses that testified that this was their handwriting, we would verify the document and we would not pay attention to the words of the witnesses that say we don’t recall the testimony because the document is being verified without their words. This is the reason we are able to verify all documents and we do not require to bring the witnesses and ask them if they remember the testimony or not because even if they were to come and say we don’t remember the incident, we would not listen to them since we can verify the document without their words. These were the words of the Rambam. There are those that disagree and say that even if they do not recall that the party borrowed or that they ever signed on this document and we do not have their handwriting from any other source, since they are testifying that this is their handwriting, we would verify the document based on their words. Under this approach, when the witnesses themselves are coming to testify that this is their handwriting, if they forgot the loan and do not remember signing this document at all, we would require two witnesses on each signature. Therefore, we would need each witnesses to testify on his signature and on his co-witness’ signature or a third party should join them and testify on both their handwriting in order to have two witnesses on each signature. <i>RAMA: We do not require a witness to remember his testimony except in a case of a solo witness or with two witnesses when it comes to verifying the document. With respect to two witnesses that sign on the document, however, if they did not remember the incident at all and the document was not written as was instituted, there would still be a testimony of witnesses (Mahar"iv, Siman 94; Hagahot Mordechai, Kesuvos) and if the document was verified we would follow whatever is written in it. Although this document does not have the status of a complete document, it is considered a document with respect to not having the testimony considered as written testimony as was explained above in 28:12. (Teshuvos Rashba, Siman 1000; Rabbeinu Tam) There are those that disagree as was explained above in the beginning of 39:3. </i>
11. If one of the witnesses says this is my handwriting and he and another testified on the second witness’ handwriting, the document would not be verified because ¾ of the money is being collected via the testimony of one witness.
12. Similarly, if the brother or father of the first witness testifies with another on the handwriting of the second witness, the document would not be verified because ¾ of the money is being collected via the testimony of relatives.
13. If two people signed on the document and one of them died, we require two individuals from the street to testify on the deceased’s signature. The surviving witness cannot join with another to testify on the signature of the deceased because that would result in ¾ of the money being collected via him. If only one other witness is found with the surviving witness, the surviving witness may write his signature even on pottery in front of witnesses and set it forth in court until his signature is established in the court- <i>(all the more so would it be effective if there are witnesses that can verify the surviving witness’ signature- (Nimukei Yosef, Perek Chazakat HaBatim)</i> so that the witness will not be need to testify on his signature. He can then subsequently testify with the other witness regarding the deceased’s signature.
14. If the court does not recognize the witness’ signature or the signature of the judges who signed on the verification and one of the witnesses of the document testified on his handwriting and two witnesses testify on the signature of one of the judges or the judge himself and another witness with him testified on his handwriting, it would be of no effect because that which this person is testifying on is not the same as to what the other witness is testifying on. This witness is testifying on the maneh in the document, whereas the judge is testifying on the witness’ signature. <i>(Similarly, if the handwriting of the scribe and one of the witnesses is verified, there would be no verification). (Beis Yosef, in the name of the R"i)</i>
15. If two of the verification judges testify on their own handwriting, the document is verified.
16. If one witness from the market testifies on the witnesses in the document and one judge testifies on his signature, they would combine because the witness and judge are testifying on the same matter. The same rule applies where the judge does not testify on his signature but two individuals from the market testify on the judge because all of the testimonies are one and the same.
17. The witnesses on verification may be related to the witnesses on the document. Moreover, if a father that signed died while his child was a minor, the child may join with another witness and testify on his father’s signature after he becomes an adult. Similarly, one may testify on his brother’s or his teacher’s handwriting that he saw while he was a child. There are those that say he may only testify for the aforementioned examples where he was frequently with them. With respect to the handwriting of another, however, one is not believed to testify while he is an adult about a signature that he recognizes from his youth.
18. The witnesses of verification must not be related to the judges of verification. There are those that permit it. <i>RAMA: The verification witnesses may be related to the witnesses that testify on the signatures of the judges who verified the document. (Beis Yosef) The verification witnesses may not be related to one another. (R"an, end of Perek 2 of Kesuvos)</i>
19. Verification witnesses that are related to the lender or borrower are disqualified. There are those who permit it. <i>RAMA: Verification judges that are related to the borrower or lender - their verification is disqualified. (R"an, Chapter 2 of the Laws of Gezerot; Rivash, Siman 382; Rosh, Klal 80:4; Nimukei Yosef; Mordechai, Perek 2 of Kesuvos)</i>
20. <i>(R"an, there)</i> Judges who sign on a document verification may sign even without reading the document. They do not have to read what is in the body of the document, but they still need to see who the borrower and lender are so that the borrower and lender are not related to the judges or the witnesses testifying in front of them. There are those that say that they do not need to read it at all; <i>(so long as they write who the verification witnesses are so that if they were disqualified to the lender or borrower they will later be able to realize it.) (Nimukei Yosef, in the name of the Ritva)</i>
21. Judges who judge on conditions or other areas with respect to the actual loan must not be related to the witnesses on the document.
22. The verification judges must not be related to the judges that judge the actual loan. There are those that allow them to be related.
23. Verification witnesses may be related to the judges on the loan.
24. If three individuals sat down to verify a document and two of them recognize the witness’ signatures while one does not recognize the signatures, prior to the judges signing the two who recognize may testify in front of the one who does not recognize, and he can then sign the verification. Once the two that recognized have signed they cannot testify in front of the third judge and have him sign. They are permitted to write the verification of the document before the document is verified because the writing is not the primary aspect of the verification; the signing is. There are those that disagree.
25. If witnesses came and testified that at the time of the verification the judges were not in one siting but that each judge accepted the testimony by himself, the verification is invalid. <i>The judges themselves are not believed to say that they were not together and that they did the verification improperly. (Teshuvos Ramban, Siman 94)</i> There are those who validate such a verification.
26. If three individuals sat to verify the document and two witnesses came and protested that one of the judges is a thief or something similar, and two other witnesses came and testified that the judge repented, if the witnesses of repentance testified before the other judges had signed the verification, the judge in question may sign with him because they are three valid judges. If the witnesses of repentance testified after the other judges had signed, he cannot sign with them because it is as if he was not there at the time the other two had signed.
27. When is this true? Where the witnesses protested due to the judge’s sin. If, however, they protested regarding a flaw in his lineage, such as where they said his mother was never freed and he is a slave or she did not convert and he is a gentile, and we discovered after the other two judges had signed that there was in fact no flaw in his lineage and that he is valid, he may sign with the other judges because this is merely a revelation to what which was true earlier.
28. If they wrote the verification and it turns out one of the judges on the verification is invalid, they cut up the verification but the document itself remains in its valid state.
29. If three individuals sat to verify a document and one of them died, they must write, “we were three sitting as one and one is no longer with us” so that an observer does not say a court of two verified the document. This is true even if the verification says “in court” because the observer will say perhaps they believed two qualifies as a court. If there is some implication that they were three, the language is not required. There are those that say that if they did not write “and one is no longer with us” the document is still valid. Nevertheless, everyone agrees that if the verification states, “a court with three sitting,” nothing else is required, the two remaining may sign and it suffices. <i>RAMA: If all three signed they do not need to write, “three were sitting.” (Nimukei Yosef; Rivash; Shach; Rashba; R"an) Even if the verification merely states “this document was verified property” that is enough. (Teshuvos Ramban, Siman 91).</i>
30. Even in a case where one of the judges did not die we have the custom to write “and one is not with us” in order to make it easier on the judges so that only two have to sign. <i>RAMA: If the validation says “we were three…” and three judges signed and one of them turned out be a relative or otherwise disqualified, there are those that say the validation is valid because we presume that three others sat down and only two of them signed and the third individual who was related or disqualified signed later (Rivash) as was explained above in 45:12 with respect to other documents. There are those that say the validation is invalid. (Rosh) A verification that says “we are witnesses” is valid because since we see that three signed we can observe that it was a court. (Rivash)</i>
31. The verification by the court must be adjacent to the handwriting of the witnesses, on the side of the document or on the back opposite the writing. <i>Therefore, if the paper had little room on bottom they can write the verification on the side or on the back. (Rambam; Magid)</i> If there was a one line and a two airspace space between the verification and the document, only the verification itself would be disqualified because perhaps the party will cut off the verified document and forge what he wants and forge two witnesses on that line resulting in a forged document with verification.
32. <i>(This Din is in the name of the Rambam, and see also the Perisha)</i>If they had the verification one, two or more lines removed from the document and they filled up the entire space with scrapes of ink, the document is valid because it cannot be forged. We are not concerned that the court verified the scrapes; rather we assume they verified the substance of the document. There are those that say that we do have this concern.
33. A document that has the document and witnesses on erasure and the verification below on the paper, we do not verify the document using the verification judges. Rather, we verify with the witnesses that are above because perhaps the verification was far removed from the document, the space was filled with scrapes of ink, the party cut off the substance of the document and wrote the document and witnesses on the erasure. There are those that permit verifying it with the verification judges.
34. If a witness signed a document before becoming a thief and then later became a thief, he cannot testify on his own handwriting. If, however, there are others who testify that they recognize the witness’ signature and they saw his signature on this document prior to his becoming a thief, the signature is valid. If, however, they did not see the signature until after the witness became a thief, the document would not be valid because we are concerned that the witness forged it now and signed. <i>RAMA: If there are no witnesses that recognize the thief’s signature, he can write his signature and we will verify based on that as was explained above in Seif 13. The same is true if the witness became an apostate after signature. He is treated just as if he became a thief. (Beis Yosef in the name of the Ritva)</i>
35.  If a witness signed on a document before becoming a party’s son-in-law and then later became his son-in-law, the witness cannot testify on his own handwriting. Others, however, may testify that they recognize his signature, even if they did not see it until after he became the party’s son-in-law. There are those that say that this is only where the document was produced by a third party. If, however, the document was produced by the witnesses, they cannot testify on their signature.
36. If a witness signed when he was healthy and now has become mute, he cannot testify on his handwriting but others may testify on it.
37. If two people signed on a document and died and their handwriting has not been produced from another source and two individuals come and say that this is the witnesses’ handwriting but they were minors or otherwise disqualified, they would be believed and we tear up the document unless a party argues that he should be given a set time to verify the document. If there were witnesses that this was the deceased’s handwriting or their handwriting was produced from another document that was called into question and later affirmed in court, we would not tear up the document. There are those that say that we do not require the document to have been called into question because it suffices that it was affirmed in court, even if the document was not called into question. <i>RAMA: This is all where the witnesses have already died. If, however, the witnesses were alive and two other witnesses come to disqualify them and say that the witnesses were disqualified, even the document itself would be disqualified notwithstanding the fact that their signature has been produced from another source. (R"an; and the Tur in the name of Tosefos) There are those that disagree and say the document is valid. (Ibid., in the name of his father, the Rosh) This, that the latter witnesses are not believed where the handwriting of the document witnesses is produced from another source, does not mean that the document is valid to collect with. Rather, if a party were to grab movable items on the basis of it, we would not take it away from him. (Tur in the name of Rashi; the Rosh) </i>If the witness’ handwriting was not produced from another source, and the witnesses said this is our handwriting but within kidei dibur they said we were forced by threat of life, we were minors, we were disqualified due to familial relationship and we are no longer related, he nullified the document in front of us or the document had a condition that we did not see fulfilled, the witnesses are believed. Even if one witness says there was no condition and the other says there was a condition and it was not fulfilled, the second witness is believed and only one witness remains. <i>If the document says, “we the witnesses testify that there is nothing omitted from the document,” they cannot say there was a condition because witnesses cannot re-testify. If they say, however, that this that they said that there was no omission was not meant to nullify any condition but just that nothing was omitted from actual sale, they would be believed. (Tur) Similarly, they may explain their words in the document in any manner that does not contradict their words. (Nimukei Yosef) If, however, the witnesses said they were forced via monetary threat, the document was given on trust or they were disqualified due to sin, they would not be believed even if they’re claiming they subsequently repented. Although they are not believed to void the document, they are believed with respect to themselves and they would be obligated to pay the borrower the loss they caused him by signing. If they said that at the time they signed that they were unaware that the document was given on trust and it later became clear to them that it was, they would be believed. If their handwriting was produced from another source or there are witnesses that this is their handwriting, they would not be believed regarding anything they say to void the document except if they said the party nullified the document in front of us.</i>
38. Witnesses that signed on a document and said that the borrower was a minor at that time, are not believed. <i>RAMA: There are those that say that this, that witnesses that signed on a document are considered as if their testimony was investigated and they cannot retract, is only with respect to two witnesses. If only one witness signed, however, he may retract. (Rivash)</i>

Siman 47

1. <b>One Who Claims the Document Was Given On Trust or Was Paid Back, 2 Seifim:</b> If a lender says that the document in his possession was given on trust or was paid back, the lender owes other people money and has nothing else to pay them back with other than this document, the document contains a believability clause and the document was affirmed in court or was being held by a third party, the lender is not believed. Even if we were unaware at the time of his admission that he owed others money and we only discovered this later, he would not be believed since he is coming to negatively impact others. The lender is not even believed where he is negatively impacting himself too, such as where the document is for 200 and he only owes others 100. If after the lender said the document was given on trust, he paid back his creditor and he now wants to use this document to collect from the borrower we analyze the situation. If he said it was given on trust when his creditor came to collect from this document then we say his intent was certainly just to push away his creditor. <i>(If, however, he confessed that the document was given on trust without his creditor making a claim) (Tur), then he cannot retract and collect with the document.</i>
2. If the lender says this document is accurate in that the borrower told the witnesses to write it for 1,000 dinar but he trusted me to only claim 500 dinar, the document is valid. If, however, he says that witnesses erred when they wrote 1,000 dinar, the document is considered like pottery. Even if the document contained a believability clause, the borrower would take a heses oath and be exempt. <i>(If one says that the a document in his possession belongs to others, see later Siman 99.)</i>

Siman 48

<b>That We Write the Outline of Documents, 1 Seif:</b> If a scribe desires to write outlines of documents so that they will be accessible to him, he may do so. He can write everything that is contained in the document: the names of the borrower and lender and the description of the money. He must leave the place for the date blank so that the document will not be predated. With respect to a document that was written for one loan and was paid back, however, one cannot re-borrow with it even if it was all on the same day and was therefore not predated because once the lien is waived one cannot re-borrow with the document. If the borrower paid back a portion of the loan, he cannot use the same document to re-borrow that portion because that lien on that portion was already waived. <i>RAMA: There are those that say that concept of the lien being waived only applies for the original kinyan. Thus, if the borrower made a second kinyan, he may re-borrow with the document. (Mordechai, Perek 'Kol HaGet') This applies even if they did not actually make a kinyan but the borrower simply gave the document to the lender in front of witnesses according to the view that the witnesses of transfer are primary even with respect to ordinary documents. (Mordechai Perek 'HaKotev') (See later Siman 51.</i>

Siman 49

1. <b>The Witnesses Must Be Familiar With The Names of the Borrower and Lender and the Laws of Errors In Names and Calculations, 10 Seifim:</b> If the borrower or lender have two names, there is no need to write anything other than the primary name. If they only wrote the secondary name, the document is valid. They do not need to write a suffix of a party’s name or the fact that he is a Kohen or Levi unless there were two individuals in the city with the same name.
2. The witnesses must be aware that the name of the borrower is in fact so and so the son of so and so. They must know the name of the seller in a sale document. In the case of a loan document without a kinyan, they must also know the name of the lender. If the witnesses do not recognize any of the foregoing, even a woman or relative would be believed to say that this is the individual's name. In a case where they relied on a woman or relative and it turns out the witnesses erred, we would believe this error occurred where the witness is a scholar <i>(because it is not the practice of scholars to investigate the specifics) (Beis Yosef, in the name of the Rashbam). There are those that say this is only true with respect to a woman because scholars are not familiar with women considering that it is not their practice to gaze at women, as will be explained in Even Haezer Siman 110. With respect to other matters, however, there is no distinction between a scholar and anyone else. The author of the Shulchan Aruch wrote in his sefer Beis Yosef that this view is in fact the primary view. Thus, it is a bewilderment that he takes the opposite approach here).</i> With respect to other individuals who do have the practice to investigate the specifics, we would not accept them because they certainly were cautious originally and now they are retracting and lying. <i>RAMA: The same applies with other errors by the scribe where it is obvious that there was an error, and the document would be valid. We say that that the scribe erred just as we say with respect to the lack of a lien in a document (The Rosh Klal 58, Siman 32) (as was explained above in the beginning of Siman 39.)</i>
3. We can write the name of anyone whose name was established in a city for 30 days. We are not concerned that he may have changed his name for fraudulent purposes.
4. If an individual was called by a name and responded to it, we assume that is his name with respect to anything that negatively impacts him. For example, if he referred to himself as Reuven, and he wrote a document against himself saying Reuven borrowed from Shimon and now claims that his name is not Reuven, if they called him Reuven and he responded, he is obligated to pay, notwithstanding the fact that his name has not been established as Reuven for 30 days in the city.
5. If a document is produced in front of us and the borrower claims that he does not owe anything and perhaps a fraudster used my name as his name and confessed to this loan or if the borrower says I do not owe this person money, but rather another person, and this lender is a fraudster who used my creditor’s name as his own, since it is not established that there are two people in the city with identical names, we do not pay attention to the words of the borrower.
6. If someone had a nickname established in the city and they wrote a document using that nickname and it later became known that he had another nickname, in a case where they erred in the name of the borrower or lender and wrote Reuven instead of Shimon or vice-versa or in a case where they erred with respect to the amount of money, they should write another document. <i>(The same applies to any other error).</i> We do not say the witnesses have already performed their mission. <i>(There are those that say that even in a case where the witnesses wrote a valid document, the concept of the witnesses already completing their mission would not be applicable) so long as the kinyan has not yet been documented and the document has not been given over to its owner. (R"an, Perek 'Hamekabel') There are those that say that the entire concept of the witnesses completing their mission does not apply to documents. (Nimukei Yosef, in the name of the Rashba) </i> There are those that say that in a case where it is obvious that there is a scribe’s error, the document is valid even if they did not write another one.
7. If two individuals in the city both had the name Yosef ben Shimon, neither of them can produce a document against the other if the document contains a kinyan because the defendant can say that this document that you are producing against me is mine and I returned it to you when you paid me back for the money you owed me. <i>RAMA: The Mecahber’s words contradict each other because there is no distinction between a document with a kinyan and one without if the reasoning for the foregoing is that one can say this document is mine and I returned it to you. There are those, however, that explain the reasoning that one cannot produce a document against the other (to be used) because we write documents for a borrower even if not in the presence of the lender so we are concerned that the party that produced it is the borrower. This concern would only apply to a document that contains a kinyan as we said above at the end of Siman 39. That is why the Mechaber wrote that this only applies for a document that contains a kinyan, Thus, his words are contradictory).</i> A third party cannot produce a document on either of them because each one can say it was not written against me but against the other, unless the document’s witnesses themselves come and say that this is the document we testified on and this is the party that we testified was involved in the loan. If other witnesses testify in that way, the loan has the status of a verbal loan. If one of the Yosef ben Shimons was a minor on the date of the document, we would collect from the other. What is the way to rectify this issue? They should write the names of their grandfathers. If their grandfathers also had the same name, they should write some other sign. <i>RAMA: There are those that say that if they are from different cities then they can produce a document against each other because they must write the name of the borrower’s city or the lender’s city in the document. (Tur, in the name of Rabbeinu Yeshayah) There are those that say that we do not write the name of the city in the document (Rambam, Perek 17; Tur, Siman 61) and this is in fact the custom. However, if they are from two different cities and they wrote the name of the city of one of them, this is certainly no worse than a sign and there is no room for error. This is what appears correct to me. If there are two Yosef ben Shimons in one city and one of their fathers had died and in the document it says yv’s, shli’t or nr’v like we write for someone who is alive and the witnesses wrote “Yosef ben Shimon shli’ta told us” that would qualify as a sign. If, however, the document says, “I, Yosef ben Shimon shli’t” or something similar, “borrowed from so and so…” and the witnesses signed below, that would not qualify as a sign because perhaps the second Yosef ben Shimon wrote this with trickery and the witnesses did not pick up on it because they are not signing on everything in the document. (Beis Yosef in the name of the Rashba)</i> If, however, they were to produce a document against a third party, that third party would not be able to say 'I did not owe you but instead owed the other person who has the same name as you', because we assume that the person who produced the document is the rightful owner of the document. <i>RAMA: If, however, Yosef ben Shimon did not produce the document, he would not be able to take away money from the borrower (Nimukei Yosef in the name of the Ritva), even if the borrower confesses that he owes one of them, unless the two Yosef ben Shimons were to write a power-of-attorney to each other. </i> If the borrower is in possession of a receipt from one of them, neither of them can make a claim against the borrower because the borrower can tell each one that you wrote this receipt for me. If, however, they were to write a power-of-attorney to each other, one of them would be able to collect because the borrower admits that he only paid one back. If the borrower claims he paid back both of them but only demanded one receipt because it would suffice to show that receipt to whichever one comes to him to claim the loan, the claim would be valid and the power-of-attorney would not be effective.
8. When is this true? Where they do not put third generations in either documents or receipts. If, however, they put third generations in documents but not in receipts, the receipt-holder has the burden of proof.
9. If one lender lent to both Yosef ben Shimons in two different documents and the documents contained three generations so each one’s document was recognizable and the lender [version of the Sma and Shach] had a verified receipt stating that the document of Yosef ben Shimon was paid back but the receipt did not have a third generation and both documents were discovered among the lenders’ torn up documents, the documents’ strength has been weakened and both documents are assumed to have been repaid.
10. If one Yosef ben Shimon borrowed from a third party and a field that was purchased by one Yosef ben Shimon from the other was discovered or the two Yosef ben Shimons were partners in a field, the lender cannot collect from the field by saying that had he lent the current owner then he certainly can collect and had he lent the other, considering that the other did not have unencumbered land, the current owner has purchased his lien. Similarly, where the two are partners, the lender cannot claim half of the land on the basis of the fact that he is owed that amount in either instance because a debtor’s properties are only mortgaged as a co-signer to the loan and a co-signer is only indebted to the lender in an instance where the lender can claim from the borrower himself. Since in this case the lender cannot claim from the borrower himself, he cannot collect from his properties either. In effect, in a case where one is a co-signer to two Yosef Ben Shimons- whether there are two lenders or one lender- the lender cannot claim from the co-signer just as he cannot claim from the borrowers.  

Siman 50

<b>A Document That Says “I Borrowed a Maneh From You”, 1 Seif:</b> If a document with witnesses states, “I so and so borrowed a maneh from you,” whomever produces this document may collect the maneh. If, however, the document does not have witnesses but was written with the borrower’s handwriting, the borrower is believed to say he did not borrow from the document-holder but from someone else who dropped it and the document-owner simply found it because the borrower would have been believed to say he paid it back. <i>RAMA: The same applies to a court ruling that states that a person is obligated to pay his adversary and he would be required to pay the individual that produces the ruling. (Mordechai; Piskei Raknati; Teshuvos Maharam) The same applies to a document that states that so-and-so owes money to so-and-so or to whomever produces the document and the borrower would be obligated to pay whomever produces it. This only applies if the person producing the document is making his claim via the so-and-so, unless the document explicitly stated that there is no distinction whether the person is claiming via so-and-so or not. (R"i) If a receipt was written on any person with respect to this document, no person may subsequently collect with the document. (Nimukei Yosef in the name of the R"am and the Ritva) If a document states that a person is obligating himself to anyone who produces this document against him, he is obligated to pay the person who produces it, even if it was known that he never owed him anything, because he obligated himself (Teshuvos HaRosh, Klal 68, Siman 9 and 11) as was explained above in Siman 40. See later 60:10.</i>

Siman 51

<b>1. A Document With Only One Witness or One Disqualified Witness, 7 Seifim:</b> A written witness and an oral witness (without a kinyan) (Tur) may be combined. If the witness that did not write his testimony said that he made a kinyan from the party on this issue and the lender did not request he write his testimony, the witnesses can be combined to make the loan a documented one and the borrower would not be able to claim that he paid back. If the party that testified orally says that the document was given over in front of him, the document is a complete document and can be used to collect from encumbered properties. <i>RAMA: This is only true where they are able to say that the document was also given over in front of the written witness so that you now have two witnesses on the transfer. If, however, the document was only given over in front of one witness, (Beis Yosef in the name of the Rosh) the witnesses would not be combined to allow for collection from encumbered properties, even if there were two separate documents which each had one witness and were each handed over in front of one witness. (Tur)</i>
2. If one produces a loan document on another with a single witness and the borrower claims he paid back, he is obligated to swear but he is unable to do so and therefore must pay. If the borrower says that the lender should swear that he did not pay back, the lender must swear. If, however, the borrower claims he never borrowed, he would swear to refute the witness and would be exempt. There are those that say that the borrower is believed with an oath, even in a case where he claims he paid back.
3. If a document only contained two signatures and one of them turned out be a relative or otherwise disqualified, the document has the status of pottery, even if there were witnesses to the transfer. <i>RAMA: There are those that say that it has the status of a document with only one witness. This is only in a situation where the entire testimony would not become void as will be explained shortly.</i>
4. If a document contained numerous witnesses and one of them was discovered to be a relative or otherwise disqualified and the witnesses are not around to be interrogated, and there is clear testimony that they all sat down to sign because they had the intention to testify, the document is void. Otherwise, the testimony can be verified with the remaining witnesses because it is possible that the valid witnesses signed and left space for an elder to sign and this relative or disqualified witness signed without their knowledge. <i>(All of this was already explained above in 45:12).</i>
5. If a will was discovered to have a relative or an otherwise disqualified witnesses <i>(and is voided in the manner that was explained)</i>, the non-related witness may come in front of the court and testify if he remembers the testimony. If there is another witness that heard the will being given from outside, he can join with this witnesses to testify even though the deceased did not designate them as witnesses.
6. If one writes all of his property to two different individuals in one testimony and the witnesses are related to one of the recipients but not the other, the document is invalid because it is one testimony unless the recipient whom the witnesses are disqualified to withdraws himself from that money.<i>(Oral witnesses in such a case may testify for the recipient who is not their relative). (Mordechai Perek 2 of Gittin; Teshuvos Ritva; Beis Yosef Siman 37, 14)</i>  If, however, one document says “I gave Reuven this courtyard and I gave Shimon this courtyard,” and the witnesses are related to one but not the other, the gift is valid with respect to the recipient that they are not related to because these are two separate testimonies, notwithstanding the fact that it is one document. <i>RAMA: Similarly, if a document had two or three matters written in it and the document was voided for one matter, the other matters would not be voided. <i>(Moharam Padua Siman 44)</i></i>
7. If a document was given over in front of two witnesses, the lender can collect from encumbered properties with it, even if the witnesses <i>(did not)</i> sign the document. Nevertheless, if the witnesses that signed were discovered to be disqualified- even if only one witness was disqualified- the document is invalid even if it was given in front of two valid witnesses because it is inherently forged.

Siman 52

1. <b>A Document That Contains Interest or a Ripped Document, 2 Seifim:</b> A document that contains explicit interest cannot be used to collect the interest but may be used to collect the principal, even from encumbered properties. If, however, the lender included the principal with the interest, the document is invalid because the lender will come to also collect the interest. <i>RAMA: If the defendant confesses, however, he must pay back the principal. (Maharik Shoresh 17) And there are those that say that he is exempt because we fine the lender and therefore the borrower does not have to pay. (Ibid, in the name of the Mordechai; and so also writes Tosefos there and in other places) If, however, the lender lent the money via a messenger and the messenger made the document and included the principal with the interest, the lender may collect the principal because he can say to the messenger, “I sent you to benefit me and not to harm me by including the principal with the interest.” (Maharik there) See Yoreh Deah Siman 161 for more on these laws.</i> If a document is brought in front of us with a tear made by a court, which is a tear in the place of the witnesses, date and the substantive parts of the document or if it was torn vertically and horizontally, the document is invalid. If it is evident that the tear was done with a knife, the document is invalid even if it was not done vertically and horizontally. If the document was torn into two, it is worse than a court-made tear and would be invalid. <i>RAMA: If there are witnesses that the document was torn accidentally, the document has the same rules as a case where the document was erased, as was explained above in Siman 41. If the tear was not court-made but [version of the Sma] it appears to the judge that the court tore it and a party added to the tear in order to hide the court-made tear, one could not collect with it. Otherwise, we would not be concerned. (Baal HaTerumos there 57)</i>
2. If a document was erased or blurred out and the form was still recognizable, the document is valid. Otherwise, it would be invalid. If the document rotted or was made like a sieve, it is valid. <i>RAMA: If a moth or mice ate the document at the top, so long as the names of the lender and borrower and the primary part of the context is at the end, the document is valid. (Teshuvos HaRosh Klal 68 Siman 29; Teshuvos Maimoni on Mishpatim Siman 62)</i>

Siman 53

1. <b>Not To Modify the Document, 1 Seif:</b> If a person has a document against his friend for one maneh and he says to modify it to two documents of 50 each or if he has two documents of 50 each and says to make one document of 100 for him, we would not listen to him. <i>RAMA: It is forbidden to modify the document, even if they know that the first loan has not been paid back, unless they have the consent of the borrower. (HaMagid, Perek 23; Rabbeinu Yerucham)</i> Even if a lender has one document of 100 and says to tear it up and replace with a document for 50, we would not listen to him, because the borrower may have paid back the 100 and the lender gave him a receipt and now the lender will produce the document of 50 and say this is a different document and he will be able to collect with it.

Siman 54

1. <b>The Laws of Asmachata, Whether We Write a Receipt and How We Write a Receipt (And the Laws of a Payment Via Receipt), 5 Seifim: If one paid back a portion of his debt and the lender so desires, the court will create a document for him of the remainder that the borrower owes him. They will write the new document with the original date, but not with the original witnesses on the document <i>RAMA: Even if the borrower consents. (Rashbam) Following the date of repayment, however, the witnesses can make another document with the consent of the borrower. (Hagahos Ashiri) </i>If the lender wants, they will write a receipt for him. <i>The lender must pay the cost of having the scribe write the receipt. If the lender does not have a document and the borrower asks for a receipt, the borrower must pay the cost. (Nimukei Yosef)</i></b>
2. If one comes to pay back his loan and the lender says he lost the document, the borrower may not say that he will not pay back until the lender returns the document. Rather, the lender will write a receipt for him and the borrower will pay back the entire debt. The borrower does have the power to place a general cherem on anyone who hides a document and claims that it is lost. If the borrower claims with certainty that the document is in the lender’s possession and that the lender is leaving it in his wallet, the lender must take a heses oath that he lost the document. Following the oath, the borrower will pay the debt and the receipt will be written.
3. If the lender says he does not have the document in his possession right now but it is in another city and he will write a receipt, there are those that say that we do not listen to him because the document is in existence so the borrower does not have to pay back until the lender returns the document. <i>RAMA: All the more so would the borrower not be required to pay back until the document is returned in a case where the lender has the document in his possession and does not want to return it. Even if the borrower swore to pay back he would be exempt from complying with the oath. (Teshuvos Rashba, Aleph 110) If the lender says to pay him back first and then he will return the document and the borrower says to first return the document and then he’ll pay him, the borrower is in the right. (Ibid., and in Siman 113) It seems to me that if the lender does not trust the borrower he may give the document to a third party until the repayment has been completed. If one owes another a maneh in a document and confesses to 50 but has a claim on the other 50 and the possessor of the document says to give him the 50 the borrower admits to and he will bring a proof for the other 50 and the defendant says that he is not paying anything back until the lender returns the document, if the plaintiff has the ability to bring his proofs now and proceed with the case with the defendant, (See above Siman 24) then the defendant is in the right. If, however, it is impossible for the lender to bring his proofs now or be judged now, as determined by the court, and there is no trickery involved or where the court needs to be patient in ruling, the plaintiff is in the right and the borrower must pay what he admits to immediately and the lender will provide a receipt. (Ibid., Siman תתק"ל) If a document states that it shall remain in force so long as it has not been torn up with a tear of the court and does not contain a confirmation of repayment on the document, a receipt would still be effective. (Maharik, Shoresh 89) </i>When writing a receipt, if they recall the date of the document, they would write “receipt on the document dated such and such.” If they do not recall the date, they would simply write “on the document whose amount was such and such” and they would not write a date on the receipt lest the witnesses postdated the date of the loan in the document, which may result in the date of receipt preceding the date of the document and the lender will produce the later loan document and collect with it. Therefore, witnesses should not write a date in the receipt unless they remember the date of the loan. A receipt that simply says, “so and so paid back so and so” nullifies that any document that the lender has against the borrower. <i>RAMA: Similarly, if a borrower has witnesses that so and so has a repaid document in his possession, such so and so would not be able to produce a document against the borrower and say that it was a different document that was paid back. Rather, all of this lender’s documents have the status of being repaid. (the Rosh in his Teshuvos, Klal 18, Siman 19)</i>
4. If the document and receipt are dated for the same day, the law was explained in 43:26.
5. If the receipt just says “dinarim,” it nullifies any document that has dinar in it. If, however, it says “such and such dinarim” and the amount was erased or if the amount was written on erasure and was not verified, we would judge it as if it had the lowest possible amount under that language.

Siman 55

1. <b>The Laws of One Who Paid Back a Portion of His Debt and One Who Gives His Document to a Third Party, 2 Seifim:</b> <i>(The words of the Rambam, Perek 11 מה' מכירה)</i>One who paid back a portion of his debt and gave the document to a third party and said “if I do not pay you back by such and such date, give the lender the document” and the borrower did not pay at that time, the third party should not give over the document because this is an asmachta, which is not a valid kinyan. [<i>Ed. Note: An Asmachta is a conditional commitment or promise that a person makes, but actually has no intention of keeping. The agreement is not considered binding, and the commitment is considered null and void.</i>] If they made a kinyan on it in a prestigious court, the party would acquire the document, so long as his rights were being held by the court and an unforeseen occurrence did not occur. How so? If the court is holding on to his document or receipt and they made a kinyan from him that if he does not come by such and such date, then it should be given to his adversary, and the day comes and he does not show up, the court would give it. If he was held up by a river or by a sickness, they would not give it. The same applies to anything similar, so long as it was in a prestigious court. <i>RAMA: There are those that say that we do not require the court to hold on to his document if they have a made a kinyan in a prestigious court, which is three individuals who are experts in the laws of asmachta. (Tur in the name of the Rosh and the Moharam) See later Siman 207. If a third party gives over a document to the lender that he was not supposed to, we excommunicate the third party until he accepts any damages that result to the borrower because of this. (Teshuvos Rashba Aleph 52) If the court is aware that it was returned illegally, they would not judge on the basis of that document. (Beis Yosef in the name of Rashba) If the court was unaware and they took all the money from the borrower and it subsequently became known that the third party returned the document illegally, the third party is exempt because it is an indirect damage. (Teshuvos Rashba Aleph 52)</i>
2. When is it true that we give the document to a party’s adversary? Where he says, “If I do not pay back by such and such date, the money that I gave shall be considered a gift and the document shall remain in its original state,” because otherwise it would be a document whose lien was waived for the portion that was paid <i>(See Siman 100:4) (and the lender would not be able to collect anything other than unencumbered properties). (Beis Yosef in the name of the Rosh)</i>

Siman 56

1. <b> Laws of a Third Party, 7 Seifim:</b> A third party, so long as he has the item that was given to him in his possession, is believed as if there were two witnesses, even if he is related. He is not required to take an oath. <i>RAMA: Even if the handing over to the third party was written in a document, we do not say that they are not relying on the concept of a third party. Rather, here too the third party would be believed. (Beis Yosef in the name of the Rashba)</i> Even if the timeframe given to hand over the document has passed and the third party has not given the document, he still is a third party and he is believed. The third party is believed even if one of the parties contradicts him and says he never made him a third party. The third party is even believed where both parties contradict him so long as there is no dispute between the parties and the third party regarding the amount of money in his possession, because otherwise the third party would have a stake in the matter and would not be believed <i>RAMA: In a case where the third party does not have a migu. If, however, the third party has a migu, he is believed. (Mordechai, Perek 'HaChovel') [Ed. Note: A migu is a reason that a claim that would otherwise be rejected by a Jewish civil court should be accepted based on the fact that the litigant could have prevailed in the case based on a different claim were he disposed to lie. To be effective, the logic underlying the migu must be impeccable and there are a variety of cases in which the Migu argument is invalid.] The parties may force him to swear, even with an uncertain claim. (Hagahos Mordechai, Gitin)</i> If the third party had the document, produced it in court and says it was paid back, he would be believed even if the document was verified because had he wanted he could have burnt or torn the document. Similarly, if the third party died and a writing was discovered in the third party’s possession saying the document that he had was paid back, the document is considered paid back even if there are no witnesses on the writing. <i>(See later Siman 65 with respect to these laws)</i>. If, however, a writing was produced from the lender’s possession saying that so and so’s document was paid back, it is treated as a joke, even if it was written in the lender’s handwriting. <i>(The plaintiff must pay the expenses of the third party). (Hagahos Mordechai)</i>
2. If witnesses contradicted the third party and said this was not the condition you were made a third party over, the witnesses would be believed. When is this true? Where the third party says, “on this and this day the third-party-item was handed over to me with such and such condition,” and the witnesses contradict him. If, however, he simply says this is the condition on the item which was given to me, he would be believed, even if the witnesses say that there was no such condition when it was handed over because the parties may have come to the third party later and made the condition after it was handed over. Even if the third party does not make this claim, we make the claim for him so that he will not be contradicted by witnesses. <i>RAMA: With respect to a third party, there is no distinction between a case where both parties gave it to him or just the lender gave it to him to be a third party. (Beis Yosef in the name of Teshuvos HaRashba)</i>
3. The third party should only give over the item in court and explain the terms of the handing over to the third party because a disagreement may arise among them and when the item is produced by the third party he will only be believed like a solo witness [version of the Sma]. Therefore, the court must write and sign the details. <i>RAMA: This - that the third party is believed like a solo witness even though the item is not his possession - is only where the parties have removed themselves from him and do not have any complaints against him. If, however, they have complaints with respect to the handing over of the item, the third party now has a stake in the matter and has no believability at all. The same applies if the third party was related or otherwise disqualified. (Tur)</i>
4. If a document is produced by a third party and the borrower claims that the document is forged or was paid back and they cannot verify the witnesses’ signatures, the third party is not believed, even if he testified that the lender and borrower gave it to him and told him such and such amount was remaining in the document that was required to be paid back.
5. If a document was given over to a third party so that the borrower would pay back by such and such date and the time has passed and the borrower claims he paid back in time or the borrower died, we assume the document has not been paid back and the third party will return the document to the lender. If the borrower had died, the lender can only collect with an oath as is the rule for anyone who comes to collect from orphans. If one obligated himself to another in a document with a kinyan and the obligated party deposited the document with another and died, the third party should not give the document to the lender nor return it to the borrower’s inheritors.
6. If a third party was created via a messenger, such as where the borrower came with another who had a collateral or document in his possession and that other person tells the third party that the lender made him a messenger to bring this to you and hand it over on such and such condition, and the third party accepted the item and the lender later comes and contradicts the messengership and says he never made this individual a messenger for this matter, the third party can do what the messenger told him to. <i>RAMA: If the lender does not contradict the messengership, but the third party does not want to accept it and the item remains in the possession of the messenger, the messenger does not have the status of a third party but that of a messenger and he must return the item to the party that gave it. (Beis Yosef in the name of Teshuvos HaRashba) The third party must always comply with the terms of the handing-over, even if one of the parties later has a claim on it. How so? If Reuven agreed with Shimon, who owed him money, on a (payback) date and deposited the document with Levi on the condition that if Shimon does not pay back by a certain date then Levi will return the document and be able to collect everything in one shot and Shimon did not pay by the prescribed time, Levi must return the document even if he knows that Shimon has claims on this because he is not a judge- just a third party. Therefore, he must return the document to Reuven and before he produces it he should describe in front of witnesses how the document came to him and what the conditions were. The witnesses will write and sign the details and provide it to the third party who will give it to Shimon, and Shimon can now claim what he wants. (Tur in the name of Teshuvos HaRosh, Klal 105, Seif 6) And therefore, any third party who returns a document should not be concerned that he acted improperly or that he was not an expert in the laws of a third party unless there was some other negative factor. (Teshuvos Rashba, Siman תתק"א)</i>
7. If a woman was transacting within the home or a guardian was appointed on the homeowner’s properties and the homeowner died and the woman or guardian knows that the homeowner was in possession of other’s properties that was now in their possession and they know who it belongs to, the woman and guardian must return each one of their properties. If they did not return the properties and they were brought to court, they would be believed with a migu.

Siman 57

1. <b>The Law That One Is Prohibited From Retaining a Repaid Document, 2 Seifim:</b> One is prohibited from retaining a repaid document in his home <i>(and the same applies for a document whose lien has been waived). (Teshuvos HaRosh, Klal 78)</i> If a party does not want to return a repaid document, it is appropriate to place a nidui [i.e. may shun him] on him until he returns it. A party may not hold on to the document in order to obtain reimbursement of the cost of the scribe. <i>RAMA: And in a place where the borrower does not pay for the scribe’s wages, the lender is not required to return the document so long as he tears it up. (Beis Yosef, Siman 61 in the name of the Rashba)</i> A lender may, however, hold on to a document of a maneh even though the borrower has paid back 50. The lender must write a receipt on top of the document for that which was repaid or write a separate receipt and provide it to the borrower.
2. A document that one borrowed with and repaid cannot be reused to borrow again, as was explained in Siman 48. If the borrower says he paid back and the lender says it is true but the lender gave the borrower the money back, the lender has admitted that the lien has been waived and he cannot collect with the document. If, however, the lender says I returned the money to you so that you could exchange it because the money would only be accepted in a pressing situation, the document is still valid.

Siman 58

1. <b>One Who Produces a Loan Document Against His Adversary, 4 Seifim:</b> If one produces a verified loan document against his adversary and the adversary says he paid it back and the lender admits that he was paid but says there was another verbal loan that was still outstanding and he accepted the money for that other loan and this document remains in its valid state, the lender is believed if the borrower did not pay back in front of witnesses. The lender may collect without an oath if the document contains a believability clause. If the borrower later brings a claim that the lender took the money illegally, the lender would take a heses oath and be exempt. If the document does not contain a believability clause, the lender may only collect with an oath. If the borrower did not personally pay back but sent the money via a messenger, the messenger is required to pay back the borrower that sent him, whether the borrower had said to take the document  <i>(And see later Siman 130, Seif 5)</i>and then give the money or give the money and then take the document. <i>(Ibid.) RAMA: There are those that say that since the messenger is required to pay, the lender cannot hold on to the money if he says the borrower owes him for something else, unless the lender claims the messenger gave it to him for that other debt. There are those that disagree and hold that the lender may claim the borrower owes him for something else in all cases. (Mordechai, Perek 'HaKotev Shtei Hedeyot') Similarly, if one gave a deposit to another, and the guardian says that the deposited item belongs to a third party who owes the guardian money and the guardian claims that such third party gave the depositor the item as a messenger, the guardian has the right to claim up to the value of the item with a migu that he returned the item, notwithstanding the fact that the depositor will need to reimburse the third party. If, however, he says that the depositor did not mention the third party and simply deposited the item with him but the guardian claims that the item really belongs to the third party, the guardian cannot hold on to the item since we cannot prove that the third party owed the guardian money. (Rivash, Siman 293) There are those that say this is only where the item came to the guardian as a deposit. If, however, he grabbed it from the depositor and he has a migu, the guardian can say that the owner of the item owed him money and the depositor would be liable to pay the owner because he was negligent. (Beis Yosef, end of Siman 84 in the name of the Ritva; and the Ritva writes more in Perek HaKotev, see there)</i> If, however, the borrower did not mention that the messenger should take the document, the messenger would be exempt <i> since the borrower did not tell the messenger to give the money in front of witnesses. (Tur)</i>
2. If the borrower claims he paid back in front of so and so and so and so and those individuals come and testify that he paid back but did not mention the document, and the lender responds that it was a different loan that the borrower paid him back for, the document is void. <i>RAMA: There are those that say that the document is not completely void and if the lender were to grab the money we would not take it away from him. (Tur, in the name of the Rosh and the R"an) This seems to me to be the primary ruling. </i> When is this true? When the witnesses testify that the borrower gave the money to the lender as repayment. If, however, they saw the borrower gave the money but did not know if it was for repayment, a deposit or a gift and the lender says the payment never occurred, the lender has been established as a liar and the document is void. If the lender says the repayment was for a different debt, he would be believed and he would swear and collect what is in the document because he was not paid back in front of witnesses and since he could have said the money was a gift he is believed to say it was repayment for a separate debt. <i>RAMA: There are those that disagree and say that even in such a case the document has been weakened. (Tur, in the name of Rabbeinu Tam and the Rosh; and so writes the Rav the Magid in the name of the Ramban; and so write the R"an) And this seems to me to be the primary ruling because the burden of proof is on the party taking away the money. This is all where the money was given in front of two witnesses. If, however, it was given in front of a solo witness, we do not say the document was been weakened. (Tur, in the name of the Ramban) And see later Siman 70.</i>
3. If the borrower says 'this debt was for the value of the ox I purchased from you and you collected the value of its meat', and the document-holder says 'it is true that I collected that money but it was for a different outstanding debt', because he admits that the debt was for the ox and he collected from the ox, the document is void if there were witnesses that the borrower paid him the value of the ox. There are those that write that even if there are no witnesses that the borrower repaid from the ox, the borrower can take a heses oath that he paid back. <i>(The primary view is the first opinion). (If it is known that the borrower gave some of the money on one debt, the lender cannot claim that other money was for a different debt). (Maharik, Shoresh 120)</i>
4. If one owes another two debts and the borrower pays back without specifying, the lender has the ability to say 'I accepted it for such and such loan'. Moreover, even if the borrower were to say at the time of repayment, “here is the money for such and such loan,” and the lender accepts it without comment, the lender may later say that he took the money for a verbal loan or another debt. <i>(See later Siman 83, Seif 5).</i>
5. If the borrower gave the lender a maneh to give to another creditor, the lender may keep the money for himself.

Siman 59

1.<b> A Verified Document Where the Borrower Claims It Has Been Repaid and the Lender Says He Does Not Know, 1 Seif: If a lender produces a verified loan document and the borrower claims he paid it back and the lender says he is unsure, the lender cannot collect with it. If the lender later says 'I investigated my records and I now remember with certainty that the document is unpaid', he may collect with it.</b>

Siman 60

1. <b>The Laws of a Lien on Movable Items Via Real Property and the Laws of a Lien On an Item That Has Not Yet Come Into Existence, 12 Seifim:</b> If one comes to collect a debt from the borrower and the borrower does not have the funds corresponding to the entire debt, the borrower may collect from real property that the borrower had at the time he borrowed from this lender, which he later sold or gave away. With respect to real property that the borrower purchased after he borrowed from this lender that he later sold or gave away, however, the lender may not collect such land. If the document states that the borrower is mortgaging properties that he has already purchased and those that he will purchase in the future, the lender may also collect from them. There is no security, however, on movable items, even those that the borrower had at the time he borrowed, which for the time being he has sold or given away, and the lender may not collect from them. If the document states, “the borrower is mortgaging the movable items that the borrower has via his real property and it is not an asmachta nor is it the outline of the document”- see later Simans 113 and 202 – then the lender may collect from movable items that he had at the time he borrowed just as the lender may collect from the real property. If the document states, “the borrower is mortgaging the movable items via the real property that he currently owns and that he will own in the future and it is not an asmachta nor is it the outline of the document,” the lender may even collect movable items that the borrower purchased subsequent to the loan which he later sold or gave away just as he may collect from real property. This is all the law under the Talmud. Today, although we have the custom to write in all documents that the borrower is mortgaging movable items via real property, the custom is not to collect from movable times which the borrower sold, gave away or gave as collateral because of a “market regulation.” Even under this custom, if the borrower had a loan document on a third party which he sold, the lender may collect from that loan because the “market regulation” is not applicable considering this is an uncommon case. Similarly, if the borrower gave away all his properties to a third party and did not retain anything for himself, it is clear circumstantial evidence that he did it just to avoid the debt and the “market regulation” is inapplicable. See later 99:6.
2. If one obligated himself to an unspecified amount, such as where he obligated himself to support or clothe his friend for five years <i>(or where there is no set amount of years) (Beis Yosef, in the name of the Rashba)</i>, the Rambam is of the opinion that he is not obligated, even if a kinyan was made. All those that came after the Rambam disagreed with him and said that he would be obligated and this is how we rule. See later at the end of Siman 207.
3. If one obligated himself to support his friend and the giver wants to provide fruit whereas the recipient demands money, the recipient is in the right. If the giver explicitly conditioned to support the recipient on the giver’s table and the recipient does not want to eat with him, the giver only is required to give him based on the cost of having the recipient eat in the giver’s home. <i>RAMA: If, however, the hold-up is not coming from the one being supported but from the obligated party, the obligated party must give the complete cost of the food. (Beis Yosef, in the name of the Ritva) If the recipient gets sick, the giver does not have to pay his medical expenses and must only pay the value of the food that the recipient received while healthy. (Beis Yosef, end of Siman 207 in the name of the Ritva, Perek 'HaNoseh') There are those that say that where one simply agrees to support his friend, the language implies he will support him his entire lifetime or so long as he needs it. (R"an, Perek Mi She'Achazu; Beis Yosef in the Tur Even HaEzer Siman 114 inb the name of the Rashba) There are those that say that if one simply agrees to support the other or provide him with 100 gold coins for the year, he will be exempt from just one year of his agreement. (Teshuvos HaRosh 26, Siman 24) If one accepts to support his friend based on his prestige, the court will evaluate what the recipient was accustomed to prior to the obligation. (Teshuvos HaRosh, Klal 75; Tur Siman 207) Dress is not included in the category of food unless the giver says he will feed and support because clothing is included in support. (Beis Yosef in the name of the Rashba) If one writes to his friend that he will support him for a set amount of time or give him 100 dinar and he supported him a little bit but then stopped, the giver does not need to provide 100 dinar. Rather, he must reimburse for the difference between the value for the food given and 100 dinar, but no more than 100 dinar, because he certainly did not intend to give 100 dinar unless he did not provide any support. (Beis Yosef, in the name of the Rashba) If Reuven accepts on himself to support Shimon and his wife and began supporting them and Shimon’s wife died, Reuven is exempt from providing her support. Even if Reuven had set up a set amount for the support of Shimon’s wife, he is still exempt from that portion. (Teshuvos HaRashba) </i>
4. If one obligates himself simply to support his friend or to support him on his table and the giver dies, the inheritors are required to support him in the same manner the deceased was required to <i>(because “his table” is not literal).</i>
5. If two individuals obligated themselves to support one person, the law is the same as where two individuals borrowed from one person. See Even Haezer 114:7.
6. If one obligates himself for a matter that is not yet in existence or is not available to him, he is still obligated notwithstanding the fact that one cannot make a kinyan on a matter not yet in existence because that is only with respect to a kinyan made in the language of a sale or gift. Even where one writes a lien on a field, mortgages all of his properties or even gives it as a collateral, it is of no effect. When one uses a language of being obligated however, such as where he says “you are my witnesses that I am obligated to so and so, such and such,” he would be obligated, so long as they made a kinyan from him. If Reuven produces a document with a kinyan against Shimon which says, “because I gave him 100 gold coins and mortgaged all my properties for him to collect from,”<i>( but did not obligate himself personally) (Beis Yosef)</i> and Shimon claims that at the time the document was written against him he did not have the money and a person cannot make a kinyan on something not yet in existence and the gold coins in the document are coins that people generally transact with, the coins cannot be acquired via chalipin [barter]. If that country does not generally transact with those gold coins, they could be acquired via chalipin  - see later 211:6- but they must have been in Shimon’s possession at the time of the kinyan. If it is unknown whether it was in his possession, the plaintiff has the burden of proof. <i>RAMA: If the plaintiff claims with certainty that it was in the defendant’s possession and the defendant denies it, the defendant must swear. (Tur, in the name of the R"if) The defendant is believed to say he gave it already it with a migu that he could have said it was not in his possession at the time of the loan. However, this is all according to the reasoning of the R"if and some others. Many others, however, disagree with this and hold that anyone who says 'I gave so and so, such and such', is an admission by a party and has the status of 100 witnesses. We do not investigate how it was given because once he was confessed we assume he gave it in an effective manner and the recipient would acquire it. (Tur, in the name of the Raavad; the Rosh, end of Klal 36; R"if and see in the Beis Yosef)</i>
7. If Reuven lent a maneh to Shimon and some time after that, Shimon wrote a document for Reuven with a kinyan that states, “because I borrowed from so and so, such and such, I am obligated to him and I am giving my land as collateral,” so and so would acquire the collateral.
8. If Reuven produced a document that Shimon borrowed from Levi, Reuven claims that Levi was Reuven’s messenger and Levi just used his own name and Reuven did not object, Shimon claims that he has no privity with Reuven because Reuven does not have a power-of-attorney from Levi, (Tur) Levi admits to Reuven that he was a messenger and Levi’s admission does not cause harm to any others, we would force Shimon to pay Reuven. If Levi were to waive the loan to Shimon, the loan would not be waived.
9. If Reuven lent money to Levi and at the time of the loan Reuven tells Levi that the witnesses should write the document in Shimon’s name but give the document to Reuven, and when Reuven makes a claim from Levi at the prescribed time Levi claims that he has no privity, Reuven is in the right. If Reuven makes a claim against Shimon that he should write a sale document on this document that is written in Shimon’s name, we would not force Shimon to do so. Even if Shimon were to agree to write the sale document, he may retract. If, however, Reuven told the borrower at the time of the loan, that he is giving the loan on the condition that you write a document for me in Shimon’s name and when I decide you will replace it with one in my name, we would force the borrower on this point. Even if Reuven did not explain his words and just told the witnesses in front of the borrower that they will write another document for him, we would obligate the borrower to write another document in Reuven’s name. If a document was written in Reuven’s name and at the end before the witnesses’ signature the document states, “this money is from the congregation’s property,” and Reuven claims that since it was written in his name the congregation must have given him this document on money that he had entrusted with them and the congregation contradicts him, the congregation is in the right.
10. If Shimon owed a maneh to Reuven and they compromised to have Shimon create a loan document for Levi of 20 dinar and subsequently Reuven created a waiver document for Shimon on all monetary claims, and Shimon now claims that because it was not Levi who lent him money, but Reuven, and Reuven has waived all monetary claims, this debt is included, Shimon is in the right.
11. If one lends another with a collateral on real property and the lender instructs to write the property in the name of the lender’s minor son, and now the borrower is claiming that the lender has no privity with him, there is no substance in the borrower’s words.
12. If a woman claims on real property that her husband left behind that half of it is from money that she inherited from her father’s home and the documents are written in both of their names, the woman is in the right. If the documents are written exclusively in her name and she claims they’re all hers, they all belong to her.

Siman 61



Siman 62



Siman 63



Siman 64



Siman 65



Siman 66



Siman 67



Siman 68



Siman 69



Siman 70



Siman 71



Siman 72



Siman 73



Siman 74



Siman 75





"You have a Maneh of mine from a certain loan, and another Maneh from another loan which I lent you at a different time, such and such," and the defendant responds: "I have none of your money, for I paid you back for the first loan such and such, and for the second such and such" and the Beth Din realized from their claims that he still owes him twenty dinars from those two loans -- it is like [the case in the Talmud where] there are two witnesses who testify that he owes fifty, for the Beth Din are witnesses to what he has admitted that he still has not repaid, and the defendant makes a biblically ordained oath on the remainder. Rem"a: And specifically in the case where the Beth Din realized that the defendant admitted to still owing some of it according to his own accounting, but if he is obligated in the remainder because his claim is not believed -- that is not a partial admission (Bet Yosef in the name of the Rashb"a) and see below 87:5.

Siman 76



Siman 77



Siman 78



Siman 79



Siman 80



Siman 81



Siman 82



Siman 83



Siman 84



Siman 85



Siman 86



Siman 87



Siman 88



Siman 89



Siman 90



Siman 91



Siman 92



Siman 93



Siman 94



Siman 95



Siman 96



Siman 97




It is forbidden for a borrower to take a loan and spend it unnecessarily or waste it to the extent that the lender will have nothing from which to collect the debt. If he does so, he is called wicked. When a lender recognizes that the borrower has this trait, it is better not to lend to him at all than to lend and later need to pressure him for repayment, which would repeatedly violate the prohibition of "Do not act toward him as a creditor."

Siman 98



Siman 99



Siman 100



Siman 101



Siman 102



Siman 103



Siman 104



Siman 105



Siman 106



Siman 107



Siman 108



Siman 109



Siman 110



Siman 111



Siman 112



Siman 113



Siman 114



Siman 115



Siman 116



Siman 117



Siman 118



Siman 119



Siman 120



Siman 121



Siman 122



Siman 123



Siman 124



Siman 125



Siman 126



Siman 127



Siman 128



Siman 129



Siman 130



Siman 131



Siman 132



Siman 133



Siman 134



Siman 135



Siman 136



Siman 137



Siman 138



In what case does the above apply? When they are gripping the edge of the garment, such that neither of them is holding 3 (fingers) by 3 -- then we split it, even if the garment is embroidered with gold and the gold is nearer to one of them, yet he cannot say "split it horizontally; so that the gold will be in my portion", rather we split it lengthwise, so that they will receive it equally. But if each has some of it in his hand, and he says "all of it is mine" and he says "all of it is mine", he receives until the point that his hand reaches and he receives until the point that his hand reaches, and the remainder is split equally, and they swear upon it, as we shall explain, and each one of them can make the other swear that what they took they took lawfully, by way of the oath upon the remainder.

Siman 139



Siman 140



Siman 141



Siman 142



Siman 143



Siman 144



Siman 145



Siman 146



Siman 147



Siman 148



Siman 149



Siman 150



Siman 151



Siman 152



Siman 153



Siman 154



Siman 155























They must distance a fixed threshing floor fifty cubits from the city so that the wind does not bring the chaff while they are threshing and damage the people of the city. And if the threshing floor existed prior to the building of the city, the people of the city may remove it and pay him its value. If it is doubtful [which came first] he must remove it without payment. And from here there is one who learned with regard to a Duke from a city that decreed against the Jews that the Jews living in certain small villages must live under his rule or he will expel them all, that they must fulfill the directives of the duke in order to remove the potential damages to the many, and that first they must go to the Duke and only after can they sue the other Jews if they were damaged by this (Hagahot Mordecai, Kiddushin). And similarly, a person may not put a threshing floor on his own property unless there are fifty cubits in each direct, so that the chaff does not damage his friends plants or furrow. 

Siman 156

The ruling on someone who goes to his friend's house and on someone who brings goods to another city. It contains seven sections: If one of the members of an unopened alleyway- there are those who say that one does not have the power to object in an alleyway and all these laws only apply to courtyards- was to become a doctor, craftsman, blood-letter, document scribe or non-Torah schoolteacher, the other members of the alleyway can object because additional people will be entering and exiting the courtyard. Even if every member of the alley would agree except for one, that one person may stop him. Similarly, if one owns a house in a courtyard-partnership, he may not rent to any of these individuals. To sell to such people, however, there are those who say it is permitted and the members of the alley will then litigate with the purchaser, provided, however, that he may not sell to a gentile who will not listen to the judgement.
Neighbours in a courtyard can object to a store in the courtyard and say they cannot sleep because of the sound of the people entering and exiting. Rather, he must do his work in his store and sell in the market. They cannot, however, object and say we cannot sleep because of the sound of the hammer or mill once he has already established his behavior and they did not object. There are those who say that even initially one cannot object to what someone does in his own store and home. This is only applies to healthy individuals. If they are sick and the sound damages them, however, they may object.
Similarly, one can teach Torah to Jewish children in his home and the neighbours cannot object and say we cannot sleep because of the sound of the children. The same applies to any mitzvah activities and the neighbours cannot object.
If one member of an alleyway or courtyard become a craftsman and none of the others objected because he was already established, and people were entering and exiting and the other members were silent, he would not obtain any rights. The other members have the right at any time to say they cannot sleep because of the sound of people entering and existing, because this damage is like smoke and dust, which one cannot obtain rights to.
Members of an alleyway may force each other not to have among them a tailor, tanner or any other craftsman. If there was such a craftsman in the alleyway and no one objected, or if there was a bathhouse, store or mill and another member came and made another one opposite the existing one, the current owner cannot stop him and say he is cutting of his livelihood. Even if the new individual is from another alleyway, they cannot stop him because they already have that craftsman among them. There are many that say that in the case of a courtyard or an alleyway that is not open, they would be able to object, even in such a case. The craftsman himself, however, would not be able to object and say you are cutting off my livelihood. If one who lives in another country and wants to set up a store next to this store or a bathhouse next to this bathhouse, however, the members would be able to prevent him. If he pays government taxes with them, they would not be able to stop him. There are many who say that even in such a case he has no right to enter any alleyway that has people from his trade, because a member of that trade has the right to prevent him from entering since he is from another city. In the case of another alleyway, however, he cannot object because the new individual pays taxes. The people of the city have the right to object in all cases and say we cannot sleep because of the sound of people entering, notwithstanding the fact that they already have such a craftsman. If one did not yet pay taxes and now he wants to work and will pay taxes, there are those who say his fellow craftsman can stop him until he rents a house and becomes like a member of the city. There are those that say that one who gives the “king’s gift” is not considered to have paid taxes, until he gives taxes to the ruler of this particular city that has jurisdiction over them. In all these cases, there is no distinction between a scholar and others, other than in the case of peddlers which will be discussed shorty. There are those that say that if the people of the city need the scholar’s Torah, they cannot object, even if there is another scholar in the city because “the jealousy of scholars creates an increase in wisdom.” If a scholar brings his merchandise to the city, everyone is required to refrain from selling until the scholar sells his wares. If there is a gentile who is selling, so there will be no gain to the scholar, everyone is permitted to sell. See Yoreh Deah Siman 243. If one has a business arrangement with a gentile, there are those places that rule that others are prohibited from interfering with his livelihood and doing business with that gentile, and there are some places that do not rule that way. There are those who permit another Jew to go to that gentile to lend him, do business with him, bribe him and take property from him because a gentile’s property is considered ownerless. There are those who prohibit it. Even where a Jew regularly does work with a gentile, it would be prohibited for another Jew to compete and do the work at a cheaper price. If he wants to do it, we would rebuke him. Nevertheless, if he violated and did the work we would not remove the money from him. See later Siman 227. If two individuals live together and one wants to lend with interest to a gentile, the other cannot object. The same applies to anything similar. See later 228:18.
Residents of a country cannot stop peddlers traveling through cities because it is an Ezra-regulation to have peddlers traveling through cities so that perfume will be readily accessible to Jewish girls. Thus, it seems to me that this only applies to those who sell perfume or something similar, but in other cases there is no distinction between peddlers and anyone else. They cannot, however, set up a permanent stand and sit there without permission from the people of the city. If he is a scholar he can set up anywhere. The same rules that apply to scholars apply to schoolteachers.
Residents of a city can stop merchants who bring their wares to sell in the city from selling them individually as storekeepers do. If they only sold on market-days, the people of the city cannot stop them, so long as they sold in the market. They cannot knock on doors, however, even on a market-day. If they have an outstanding loan in the city, they can sell the amount needed for sustenance, even if it is not a market-day, until their debt is repaid and then they will leave. The same applies to lending with interest to gentiles, and the people of the city may stop them. They cannot stop them if they come on a market-day and lend with interest to the people who are gathered there to go to the market, however. If they have an outstanding loan in the city, they can lend until they make enough money for sustenance in order that they can collect their debts. There are those that say that this that people of a city can stop people of another city, is only is there is no loss to the consumer because they are selling just as the others in the city are selling and their merchandise is no better than those of the people in the city. If they were selling at a cheaper price or if their merchandise was better, however, in which case the consumers are benefiting, the seller-merchants cannot object, so long as the consumers are Jews. If only gentiles were benefiting, however, this would not apply. When merchants brings other merchandise that the city does not have, even though it is no cheaper or better than the existing merchandise, the people of the city cannot object. If members of the city fled to a settlement because of a concern of danger, the people in the settlement cannot stop them from making enough profit for them to live until the danger passes. Based on the small amount of commerce they are involved in, they will carry the burden of the public. If they are included in the city-tax, the members of the city cannot stop them. Similarly, if they come to expel someone from the city who does not have the right to live there, they cannot expel him until he collects his debts, and he can profit in the meantime the amount required to live. There are those who say that this that the merchant is only required to pay taxes based on his transactions is only where they are not allowing him to live there. If they are allowing him to live there completely, however, he must pay taxes as if he was a full resident or he must leave. There are those who disagree with this. If people of a city are involved in commerce in another city, it is not in their power to force them to give as much taxes as they want. Rather, we tell them give such and such amount or we object to them transacting in their cities. If people from another city come to spend in another city and not cause any gain to the people of the city, the people of the city do not have the right to object, notwithstanding the fact that the market rate will increase. All this only applies when others are coming to transact in a city that they do not live in, and that is why the members of the city have the right to object even though they are willing to pay taxes because they were not part of the tax base until now. If they want to come live in that city and pay taxes like a member of the city, however, there are those who say they have the right to do so because a person has the right to live in whatever place he wants. The original residents did not acquire the rights to the city. There are those who disagree and say that they do have the right to object, specifically in today’s age where we live under the jurisdiction of other nations and there is a fear that if there are more residents, something negative can arise from such other nations and thus one who wants to live there have the status of a “pursuer.” Everyone agrees that if the people of the city have the ability to close the doors, to have the rulers object to immigrants coming or some other way of preventing people from moving in, they have the right to do so. There are those places that have a custom to create a cherem against people coming to move there, in which case they have the power to force immigrants via cherem, but not by law. They can decree that no one may transact with those people coming to live there without permission. If the city has a Rabbi, he may make a decree on any student of his who is coming to live there. There are those who say that a cherem against immigration would not take effect on a scholar because he can live wherever he wants to. If they voided the cherem for one person and they gave him permission to live there for a set time, we do not say the entire cherem is voided and they can force him out later. If Reuven and his children lived in one settlement and made a bona-fide claim that they obtained rights, the obtainment of rights would be valid and they can object to Shimon living there. If Shimon claims with witnesses that he was afraid to object because Reuven and his children would snitch to the government, Reuven would not obtain rights. If Reuven was a snitch but his sons were not, however, they would obtain rights, because the son of a thief has the power to obtain rights. We apply the same rules with respect to obtaining rights to live as we do to obtaining rights to real property. There is an ancient custom that if one traveled from a city for 12 months and indicated that he has no intention of returning, he had lost his rights. If he did not indicate that he did not intend on returning, however, he would not lose his rights until he was away for three years. If he indicated that he had the intention of returning, he would not even lose his rights after three years. There are those who say that even where he did not indicate intention either way he would not lose his rights. If people of a city had the rights to live and they were driven out one time for the city and some of them subsequently returned and reestablished the city, the others will have no claims against him. See the end of Siman 149 with respect to someone who has obtained rights against the public with respect to a mitzvah.

Siman 157

<b>Two people that share a courtyard and are coming to divide [it], how should they build the wall. And there are 13 clauses in it.</b> A shared courtyard that is subject to the law of division, or that they divided willingly even though it is not [large enough to be] subject to the law of division - each one of them may compel his fellow to build a wall in the middle so that his fellow not see him when he is using his portion. And even if they remained like this many years without a partition, he may compel him to make a partition anytime he wants. <i>Gloss: And even if there is a custom in the city not to make it, they do not follow it and compel him to make it (Tur in the name of the Rosh, and Nimukei Yosef at the beginning of Bava Batra). And even if one of them said, "I assumed possession like this without a wall, and you pardoned me," it is not effective unless there are witnesses that they pardoned each other for the damage to visual privacy. [Then] they may no longer protest (Tur in the name of the Rosh).</i>
A place that is not subject to the law of division, in which those sharing it wanted to divide it - even though they acquired it from [each other] - each one can retract about it, as this is [only] a verbal acquisition. But if each one chose his portion, one wanting direction x and one wanting direction y, and they acquired it from each other like this, they can not retract. And likewise, if this one went by himself and assumed possession over his portion and that one went by himself and assumed possession over his portion - even though they did not acquire it from [each other] - none of them may retract towards his fellow. Some say that even if he assumed possession not in front of his fellow and did not say to him, "Go and possess and acquire it," he acquired it. And even if only one assumed possession, the other one acquired the other portion. <i>Gloss: And see below in Paragraph 171, about the laws of the places of synagogues.</i>

Siman 158



Siman 159



Siman 160



Siman 161



Siman 162



Siman 163

The residents of a town can force one another <i>(even the minority can force the majority - Rabbneu Yerucham 6:31)</i> to put up a wall with gates and a bolt for the town; and to build a synagogue and to buy a book of the Torah, Prophets and Writings so that anyone from the community may read from them. <i>Gloss/Rema: And the same is true for all the needs of the town and see Orachot Chaim 55 - Laws of Hiring a Cantor for the People of the Town; and also ibid., 53. And the residents of the town can force one another to provide hospitality for guests, distribute charity to them and to contribute to the charity container (Mordekhai on Bava Barta: Chapter 1; Teshuvot Maimoni on Mishneh Torah, Acquisition 59). And see above Choshen Mishpat 4 and Choshen Mishpat 7 regarding whether if the people of the town have a case with an individual, they can judge him. And... And regarding expenses that were spent to get rid of a talebearer, all of the residents of the town are obligated to give towards this (Rosh in a responsum, Principle 6: 21, 27  and repeated below Choshen Mishpat 288). And with a matter that the community is not able to be in agreement about, all the heads of households that pay taxes should convene and accept upon themselves that each one proclaim his opinion for the sake of heaven, and [then] go according to the majority. And if the minority [refuses to go along], the majority can force them [to comply] - even through the laws of the idolaters - and to extricate money form them, and they must give their portion. And backed by the ban (cherem), the opinion of one who refuses to state his  opinion is nullified, and we follow the majority of those stating their opinion (Responsum of Mohoram, Sefer Kinyan 27; Hagahot Maimoniot on MT, Prayer 11). And see Yoreh Deah 256, as to when he is obligated to give to the charity container.</i>

Siman 164



Siman 165



Siman 166



Siman 167



Siman 168



Siman 169



Siman 170



Siman 171



Siman 172



Siman 173



Siman 174



Siman 175



Siman 176



Siman 177



Siman 178



Siman 179



Siman 180



Siman 181



Siman 182



Siman 183



Siman 184



Siman 185



Siman 186



Siman 187



Siman 188

A non-Jew cannot become an agent for anything in the world, so too, a Jew cannot become an agent for a non-Jew for anything.

Siman 189



Siman 190



Siman 191



Siman 192



Siman 193



Siman 194



Siman 195



Siman 196



Siman 197



Siman 198



Siman 199



Siman 200



Siman 201



Siman 202



Siman 203



Siman 204



Siman 205



Siman 206



Siman 207



Siman 208



Siman 209



Siman 210



Siman 211



Siman 212



Siman 213



Siman 214



Siman 215



Siman 216



Siman 217



Siman 218



Siman 219



Siman 220



Siman 221



Siman 222



Siman 223



Siman 224



Siman 225



Siman 226



Siman 227

Chapter 227 (Topics): Until what amount is considered forgiven or requires return of the defrauded funds; and a representative that errs; and brothers that that erred in dividing (an inheritance). In this chapter are 39 sections.                                One is prohibited from defrauding his friend, whether in buying from him, whether selling to him. Whichever of them defrauds, whether it is the buyer or seller, violates a negative commandment. 
How much must the defrauding be, for one to be required to return it? One sixth, exactly. How so? If one sold an item worth six for five, or an item worth seven for six; or worth five for six, or worth six for seven; these are cases of defrauding. And the item is purchased and the party that defrauded is obligated to return the defrauded amount to the one defrauded. 
If the defrauded amount is less than this (1/6) by even the smallest amount, for example an item worth seventy went for 60 plus one perutah, he is not obligated to return anything; as anything less than exactly one sixth, as a rule is forgiven by all.

Siman 228

Just as there is oppression in commercial transactions, so too is there oppression with words. And verbal oppression is more serious than financial oppression, because money can be returned, whereas words cannot be returned; and one has to do with a person's self, whereas the other [just] has to do with their money. So one who cries out (in prayer) over being verbally oppressed is answered immediately. <i>Gloss...</i>



One must be careful not to give a negative nickname to another person. Even if the person is regularly called by that nickname, if your intention is to embarrass them, then it is prohibited. 

Siman 229



Siman 230



Siman 231



Siman 232



Siman 233

One who sells to his friend one species of  fruit and gives him a different species, there is no sale and both can exchange back items. How so? He sold him white wheat and they were found red, or vice versa. Or wine and it was found vinegar or vice versa. Or olive trees and they were found sycamore or vice versa. However, if he sold nice looking wheat and they were found bad, the buyer can return them even if he was not tricked about the price. The buyer cannot give them back even if they became more expensive. If the buyer sold bad wheat and they were found to be nicer, even if there was no deceit around the price, the seller can retract and the buyer cannot retract even if they were made cheaper. If he sold him bad and they were found to be bad, or if he sold him nice and they were found to be nice 

Siman 234



However, one who sells to his friend something that is prohibited to eat from the Rabbis, if they were fruit that existed, he returns the fruit and receives his money. If he ate them, then he ate them and the seller does not return anything to him.
Any prohibition against benefit whether it is from the torah or it is from the Rabbis, he is returned his money and there is no aspect of laws of a sale at all.

Siman 235



Siman 236



Siman 237



Siman 238



Siman 239



Siman 240



Siman 241



Siman 242



Siman 243



Siman 244



Siman 245



Siman 246



Siman 247



Siman 248



Siman 249



Siman 250



Siman 251



Siman 252



Siman 253



Siman 254



Siman 255



Siman 256



Siman 257



Siman 258



Siman 259



Siman 260



Siman 261



Siman 262

<b>About which thing is one obligated to announce [its finding] and which thing is it the finders. And there are 21 paragraphs about it.</b>

One who finds a lost object is only obligated to announce something that has an identifying mark on itself, or when its location, its knots, its amount, its measurement or its weight is fitting to give as an identifying mark. But if it has no identifying mark, even in its location - such as if it is clear that it was not placed there intentionally, but rather came there in the manner of being dropped: If it something that can be assumed that its owners noticed very soon [after] it fell from them - either because of its heaviness or because of its significance and he is always feeling for it, so he notices when it falls - it is surely the finders. As behold, [the owner] abandoned [it] immediately when he knew that if fell, for it has no identifying mark. Hence it came to the hand of [the finder] permissibly, as its owners had abandoned it. But if [the object was] not [like this, the finder] is obligated to return it - even though [the owners] abandoned it afterwards - since it came to his hand before [its] abandonment.



If one found scattered produce: If [they are] in the manner of being [intentionally] placed, he should not touch them; if [they are] in the manner of being dropped, they are surely [the finders].
One who finds bread [from the kitchen] of a homeowner, dyed wool fleeces, pieces of meat or fish that have an identifying mark - and likewise anything that has an identifying mark - is obligated to announce [it]. 
One who found small bundles [of grain] in a public area, they are certainly his - since they have no identifying mark. But if he found them in a private area: If they came there in the manner of being dropped, they are surely his. But if it was in the manner of being placed, he is obligated to announce [them], as their location is an identifying mark. But if he found large bundles - whether in a public area or whether in a private area - he must take and announce [them]. <small>Gloss: As their location is an identifying mark. However a location in which everyone is accustomed to place [their items] there, such as a barrel on the riverfront, is not an identifying mark - since everyone unloads their barrels there....</small> 

Siman 263



Siman 264



Siman 265



Siman 266




One may kill an "evil cat" which harms children.

Siman 267



Siman 268



Siman 269



Siman 270



Siman 271



Siman 272



Siman 273



Siman 274



Siman 275



Siman 276



Siman 277



Siman 278



Siman 279



Siman 280



Siman 281



Siman 282



Siman 283



Siman 284



Siman 285



Siman 286



Siman 287



Siman 288



Siman 289



Siman 290



Siman 291

An unpaid guardian is exempt from taking an oath from theft and loss (of the object) and is not obligated to pay with the exception of negligence.





If someone deposited money or objects with his friend [to watch them], and when he comes to reclaim them the friend says "I don't know where I put the thing," or "I don't know where I buried the money, give me time to find it, " he is considered negligent and must pay immediately.

Siman 292



Siman 293



Siman 294



Siman 295



Siman 296



Siman 297



Siman 298



Siman 299



Siman 300



Siman 301



Siman 302



Siman 303



Siman 304



Siman 305



Siman 306



Siman 307



Siman 308



Siman 309



Siman 310



Siman 311



Siman 312



Siman 313



Siman 314



Siman 315



Siman 316



Siman 317



Siman 318



Siman 319



Siman 320



Siman 321



Siman 322



Siman 323



Siman 324



Siman 325



Siman 326



Siman 327



Siman 328



Siman 329



Siman 330



Siman 331

One who hires workers and said to them "work from dawn till dusk", cannot force them to do so if that is not the custom of the area, even if he adds to their salary. This is because he did not make this stipulation at the moment he hired them. [Rema: (meaning that it was not the case that) there was not a particular custom in the city or that he said to them "I hire you according to Torah law and you are obligated to leave from your houses at sunrise and work until nightfall" (Tur 331:4). (In these cases) on the eve of Shabbat the worker goes home early so he can fill a barrel of water and roast a small fish and light the Shabbat candles (Tur 331:5 based on the Talmud Yerushalmi). If there was no custom in the city but the majority of the men in the city come from an area where there is a custom, we go according to the custom of the city from which they come. If they came from a place where the custom is to work from dawn to dusk to a place where that is not the custom, or the reverse, we go according to the custom of the place in which they were hired (Nemukei Yosef on the beginning of Chapter 7 of Bava Metzia, "One Who Hires Worker", based on the Talmud Yerushalmi). Something is not a custom unless it a common practice and has been done many times, however, something which has been done only once or twice is not considered a custom (Rivash siman 475).]
A place that is accustomed to nourish, nourishes; to provide in dried figs or dates and it is like he has fulfilled his obligation in them, he will provide; everything according to the custom of the state. 

Siman 332



Siman 333





When does the above apply? With regard to work that does not involve an immediate loss. If, however, the work involves an immediate loss - e.g., he hired the workers to remove flax from the vat, or he hired a donkey to bring flutes for a funeral or for a wedding or the like - neither a worker nor a contractor may retract (a maid or a servant of the employer considered an immediate loss since the employer is not able to do the work himself, therefore he suffers a loss) unless he is held back by forces beyond his control -e.g., he became ill (him or his wife or his children) or he heard that a close relative died. (However the employer does not have to pay the full wage, but only for their work, they {the workers} have the upper hand. If the employer re-employees the workers after the circumstance is over without specifying anything, and they come back to do their job then he pays them in full and does not deduct anything. If not, then the employer deducts all the sick or unfortunate days, even though he didn't back out. The same ruling is for a teacher who fell ill, you deduct the sick days. However if the worker or teacher already received their payment then some say that he does not have to return. A teacher who backs out is considered 'immediate loss' the same applies to a scribe who accepted to write a book and backed out in the middle, is considered 'immediate loss'. Teachers are classified like other workers who need to act as is customary to start and to finish work, as explained in Siman 331. He is prohibited from doing other work while he is teaching or to stay up at night excessively or to minimize or add in food, and whoever changes has the 'lower hand' and is removed. A teacher who was hired for a set period of time has the laws of a worker. If he was hired to teach a book or half a book then he has the laws of a contractor, see Siman 33, 34 &amp; 35 regarding the laws of a teacher.) If the worker is not held back by forces beyond his control, and he retracts, the owner may hire others on their account or deceive them. (If he found other workers to hire and he deceived the original workers then he has to pay them based on his last agreement.) What is meant by deceiving them? He tells them: "I agreed to pay you a sela; take two so that you will complete your work." Afterwards, he is not required to give them anything more than he originally agreed. Moreover, even if he gave them two, he can compel them to return the additional amount. (A volunteer can back out, even if it causes 'immediate loss'.)
What is meant by hiring others on their account? He hires other workers who complete their task so that he will not suffer a loss. Whatever he must add to pay these later workers beyond the amount the first workers agreed upon, he may take from the first workers. To what extent are the first workers responsible? For their entire wage. Moreover, if they have money that is in the employer's possession, the employer can use that money to hire workers to complete their work until he pays each worker 40 or 50 zuz a day although he originally hired the worker at three or four zuz. (If the employer does not hire other worker's on the expense of the first workers, then they are not responsible to pay for the damage. Some say, be is nly allowed to hire new workers on the previous ones expense, up to 40 or 50 zuz, is only if the employer has their tools, but nothing else. The limit of 40 or 5 zuz only applies to an 'immediate loss' that is not monetary like a teacher or similar. If the loss is monetary then the workers have to cover the cost of all of the damage.)
When does the above apply? When there are no workers available to hire at the wage to be paid the original workers. If, however, such workers are available and the original workers tell the employer: "Go out and hire from these to complete your work so that you will not suffer a loss," whether a worker or a contractor is involved, the employer has only complaints against them. To determine the wage that should be paid, we follow these guidelines: For a worker, we calculate the work he already[ performed and for a contractor, we calculate the work that must be performed

Siman 334

One who hires a worker to water the field from this river, and the river stops up for half the day, if there isn’t any way to stop or even that his way is to interrupt and the worker knows the way of the river, the loss of the worker and the employer doesn’t give him anything, even though that also the employer knows the way of the river. But if the worker doesn’t know the way of the river, and the employer knows, he gives the worker workman’s comp. Note: and similarly in every case of extraordinary circumstance that happens to the worker, whether the two of them knew that the way of the compulsion to come or the two of them didn’t know, it comes to be the loss of the worker. But if the employer knows and the worker doesn’t know, it comes to be the loss is of the employer. And if a naturally occurring complete disaster comes consider above siman 321. Someone that rents a house to live in it, and dies within the time of the rental, doesn’t have to pay only the time that he dwelled in it, because  the owner of the house comes to be like the worker, and he should have made it a condition. There are those who disagree. Therefore, if he received all the rent payment, there is no need to return them all, so it seems to me. If they run away because of a change in weather, it comes to be like the other forces, and it comes to be the loss of the worker or the teacher. 


Who that hires a teacher for his son, and the student is sick, if it isn’t a chronic sickness [and the same applies if the boy dies], and even if it is regular and the teacher is from the city and is aware of it, the loss is of the teacher. But if it is a regular sickness, and the teacher is not aware of it, for example that he isn’t from the city, the loss is on the one who hires him, and he gives to him all the owed wages. [Note: of all the students of Torah find it more comfortable for them to learn than to have their nights filled with nothingness. And consider below, Siman 335. etc]

Siman 335



Siman 336



Siman 337

A worker who does labor in a food-related industry may eat from what he does, even if he doesn’t work on it with his arms and legs, but only carries it on his shoulders, it is forbidden to prevent him from eating.

















A worker is not permitted to do work at night and to hire himself out in the day. He cannot go hungry or undergo privations and yet feed his children with his food because he lessens his employer’s work. At a diminished strength he will not have the strength  to do the employer's work. 

Siman 338



Siman 339

The Mitzvah is to give a hired worker a wage in its time, and after that, he transgresses a negative commandment; whether paying man or for a beast or tools. But for paying for ground, there are those who that say that there is no transgression.  

Which time is this, hired by day, the time to give it to him is all night; if it is not given to him, he [the employer] transgressed it in the morning because of the prohibition of holding onto the wages (from Vayikra 19:13). Hired by night, the time to give it to him is all day; it is not given to him, he [the employer] transgressed it in the evening, because of “At this day you shall give him his hire” (Devarim 24:15). Note: And the workers to them, that there isn’t making work until night, since that investment upon him a hot transgression upon him because of “At this day you shall give him his hire”; at night, and if he made work until night, he has time even though that his didn’t pay him according to his proper fee. 
Hourly workers, if its paid to him on the day he has to pay him every day; if its paid to him at night he has to pay him every night.
A weekly worker, monthly worker, yearly worker, weekly worker, he will go out on height of the day every same day; he will go out on the height of the night every same night.
He gives shawl to the artisan to fix it as a contractor, and he finished it, all the time that the shawl is in the hand of the artisan you do not transgress [by withholding pay]. He [the artisan] gave it to him [the owner of the garment] even in the middle day, until the sun sets [you have until the sunset to pay for the mend], he transgressed because of Bal Talin/Don’t withhold, that contractor is like his hiring to repay on time. 

Siman 340



Siman 341



Siman 342



Siman 343



Siman 344



Siman 345



Siman 346



Siman 347



Siman 348

It is forbidden to steal even if it is a small amount according to the judgment of the Torah and it is forbidden to steal, even if it is in a playful manner, even on the condition of returning it or in order to repay double or in order to cause pain.  Everything is forbidden in order that he not accustom himself to this. 
Anyone who steals even on par with a penny’s worth transgressed not stealing and he is obligated to pay, one that steals money of a Jew or who steals money of a non-Jew and one that steals from the great or from the small. Note: a gentile’s mistake, for example to mistake in counting or repaying his loans, is permitted, and provided that he doesn’t know, so that there is no blasphemy. And there are those who say that it is forbidden to mislead him except if he makes the mistake from his own, and then it’s allowed. 

Siman 349



Siman 350



Siman 351



Siman 352



Siman 353



Siman 354



Siman 355



Siman 356

It is forbidden to purchase a stolen object from a thief. Purchasing such an object is a grave sin as he is enabling sinners and causing him to steal again, for if he would not find customers he would not steal. (Likewise, it is forbidden to assist a thief with anything that enables him to steal)

Siman 357



Siman 358

Any item that is assumed to be stolen, it is forbidden to buy it. And so, if the majority of that item is stolen, we don't buy it. Therefore, we do not buy wool, milk, or kids from shepherds. However, we do buy milk and cheese from  them in the wilderness, but not in the settled area. And it is permitted to buy four sheep or four shearings of wool from shepherds, from a small flock, or five from a large flock, since it is not assumes to be stolen. In general, anything that the shepherd would sell if the owner was monitoring him is permitted to buy, and if not, is forbidden.

Siman 359

It’s forbidden to steal or exploit (even) any amount, whether from a Jew or a non-Jew; And if it is an object that is not concerning, it is permitted; such as to take from the package or [taking a splinter] from the fence to brush his teeth with; and even this is prohibited by the Jeruselamite (Talmud), as a quality of fervency.
It is prohibited to steal, even on condition of fair payment from (for) it. And there is one who says, (that) this is if the payments are not evident; because if they are evident, since they (the payments) are preferred over the object since they attain a right for him and he would confer them onto the owners by way of another.
Anyone who steals from his friend, even a penny-worth, is considered as having taken his soul.
Even if he's in dire danger and needs to steal from his friend in order to save his soul, he should not take it unless with the intent to pay.
Even the one who takes via borrowing, without the knowledge of the owners, is called a thief.

What is a robber? Someone who takes a person's money by force, such as snatching things from his hand or entering someone's property against the will of the owner and taking objects from there, or taking someone's slave or animal and using them, or going down to someone's field and eating of its fruits, and so on:

Siman 360



Siman 361



Siman 362



Siman 363



Siman 364



Siman 365



Siman 366

 A Robber Who Comes to Repent, Whether We Accept from Them; this has four sections:  A well-known robber (who was thoroughly engaged in this and for whom repentance is difficult) who comes on their own to repent: if the robbed item still exists, one should not accept it, in order not to prevent them from repenting, but if [the robber] wanted to fulfill Heavenly standards and returned it, we do not prevent the person who was robbed from accepting it. Rema’s gloss: Similarly, if [the robber] did not come on their own to repent, but was sued by the person they robbed, then we do require them to return it. 
 For shepherds, tax collectors, and customs collectors, repentance is difficult, because they robbed the masses and do not know to whom to make restitution. Therefore, they should use it for public necessities, such as wells, ditches, and caves. 

Siman 367



Siman 368



Siman 369

Paragraph 1- It is forbidden to purchase from robbers and bandits, and to derive benefit from their money; and what is Dina deMalkhuta Dina (government law) - 11 paragraphs. One is prohibited from a purchasing a robbed item from a robber. One is prohibited from assisting the robber to change the item so that he acquire it because anyone who does such a thing or something similar strengthens the hands of sinner and violates the negative commandment of, “do not place a stumbling block in front of the blind.” If one purchases movable items from him, it has the same law as one who buys from a thief, which was discussed in Siman 356.
Paragraph 2- One is prohibited from deriving benefit from a robbed item, even after the owner gave up hope. This assumes he knew with certainty that this item was the actual robbed item. How so? If he knew this animal was robbed, he is prohibited from riding on it or plowing with it. If the robber robbed a house or field, one is prohibited from passing through it or entering the property in the summer because of the sun or in the rainy season because of the rain. If he lives there he must pay rent to the owner if it was a property generally rented out. If the robber stole palm trees and made a bridge with them, one is prohibited from crossing the bridge. The same applies to anything similar. If the robber gave it to the public, however, one may derive benefit from it because there is a giving up hope along with a change in possession. If a king cut down trees of a homeowner and made a bridge, however, one is permitted to cross the bridge. Even if the king instructed his servants to cut a set amount from each person and they went and cut everything from one person, he is permitted to cross the bridge. Similarly, if the king destroyed houses and created a path or wall, one is permitted to derive benefit from it. The same applies to anything similar because the instruction of the kings is law, so long as his control spreads to those lands because the people of those lands have in effect agreed that he is their master and they are servants, because otherwise he would just be a strong robber.
Paragraph 3- One is prohibited from deriving benefit from a robber because there is a presumption that his money came via robbery. If a minority of his properties belonged to him, even though most of his money was a result of robbing, one may derive benefit from him unless he knows with certainty that this item in his possession was robbed.
Paragraph 4- One is prohibited from deriving benefit from people who are presumed robbers and all their money is presumed robbed money because their work is that of robbers, such as tax collectors and bandits, because the presumption of such work is robbery. We would not combine dinar from their box because everything is assumed to be robbed. With respect to the what they have in the house or market, but not in the tax-collector’s box, however, that may be combined. Even from his box, if he is required to pay ½ dinar and he only has one dinar, he may give it to him and take the ½ dinar from the collector-box because it is like he is rescuing from the collector’s possession.
Paragraph 5- If tax collectors took one’s garment and replaced it with another, he may keep it because it is like it was sold to him. There is a presumption the owner gave up hope and he doesn’t know with certainty that this was robbed. If he was careful and stringent on himself, he would return to the original owner. Where it was known that the owner did not give up hope, he would need to return it at no cost.
Paragraph 6- When is it true that a tax collector is like a bandit? Where the tax collector is a gentile, he created the tax on his own or the tax is from the king but has no set amount and he can take what he wants. If the tax was set by the king and was a set amount, however- even if the king instructed that the Jew give more than the gentile, it is still considered a set amount for each person- and the king appointed a Jewish collector to collect for him and this person is known as trustworthy and would not add anything to what the king instructed, he is not presumed to be a robber because the law of the government is the law. Moreover, one who evades the tax violates “do not steal” because he has stolen the king’s gift, whether the king was Jewish or a gentile. Similarly, if a Jew acquired the tax from the king, if one evades the tax he is robbing the Jew who acquired the rights to it. There are those who say that even where it is known that the Jew takes more than the set amount, one is still prohibited from evading the set amount, because it is like he is robbing a robber, which is prohibited. If a gentile acquired the tax, however, one is permitted to evade because it is like evading a loan which is permissible where there is no desecration of God’s name. There are those who say that even if the tax collector is Jewish, if he did not acquire for himself and just collects on behalf of the king, although one is prohibited from evading because of the government law, if a person were to evade the collector cannot force him to give because is like evading a loan, which is permissible. If there is any concern that he is afraid of the king, however, he is certainly able to force him to give.
Paragraph 7- Similarly, if a king placed a tax on the residents of a city or a set an annual tax on each individual or each field, or if he decreed that if anyone violates a certain matter then all his properties will be given to the king or that anyone discovered in a field during the threshing seasons must pay a tax, regardless of whether he owns the field or not, or anything similar, there is no issue of robbery and a Jew who collects such taxes for the king is not presumed to be a robber and is in good standing. This assumes he does not add, deviate or take anything for himself.
Paragraph 8- Similarly, if a king becomes angry with one of his servants or assistants from his jurisdiction and he took his field or courtyard, it is not robbery and one is permitted to derive benefit from him. If one purchases it from the king, it belongs to him and the owner cannot remove it from him. If the king took a field or courtyard from one of his citizens not in compliance with the laws he set up, he is a robber and if one purchases it from him, the owner may remove him from the property. The general rule is that any general law that the king sets up for everyone, and not just for one person, is not robbery, and if anyone takes property from one person not known to comply with the laws that are not know to all, then it is robbery. If the law was set for just one industry, such as were he made a law that a certain item can be loaned with interest, there are those who say we do not apply the principle of the law of the land is the law because it was not set for everyone. There are those who say we do not apply the principle of the law of the land is the law except with regards to taxes and property-taxes because the king decrees that people can only live on his lands in this fashion. With respect to other matters, however, we would not apply such a principle. There are those who disagree and hold we apply the principle that the law of the land is the law on all matters. Thus, if one lends on collateral, he may sell the collateral after a year because that is the law of the land. This is the primary view, as was discussed above in 356:7.
Paragraph 9- Thus, if the king’s collectors or officers sold fields because of the set tax on fields, the sale is valid. With respect to tax on the actual person, however, they may only collect from the person himself. If they sold a field for the individual tax, the sale is not valid unless that was the king’s law. See above Siman 68 regarding the law of the land, as well as more on this law in 104:2.
Paragraph 10- If a king had a law that anyone who does not pay the tax assessed to their field, then the field will go to whomever pays the tax, and the field-owner fled because of the tax, and another came and gave the required tax to the king and consumed its fruits, it would not be robbery. Rather, he may consume the fruits and pay the tax until the owner returns because the law of the king is the law, as we have said. Similarly, it is the king’s rule that whomever is discovered in the field must pay the tax for the entire valley and he will collect from the others or that he collect the annual tax from one person.
Paragraph 11- Similarly, if the king decreed that anyone who pays the affixed personal tax on behalf of another, then the person that paid has rights on the person he paid for, and one paid the tax for a poor Jew, the donor may work him more than is typical because the law of the king is the law, but he may not work him like a slave. If a Jew owed a gentile, and the gentile sold the document to a Jew, although he is prohibited from litigating with the other Jews in the presence of gentiles, and although he is coming via a gentile, the Jewish judges would still rule for this Jewish creditor that which the gentile would have profited from the gentile judges because this Jew is coming via the gentile judges, which is the government law. If one marries a woman in a place where they judge with secular law, and his wife dies, the wife’s father or other inheritors cannot say that anyone who gets married does so with the understanding that they will follow local custom and that any matter should be litigated in secular courts so that if she were to die her husband would not inherit her or something similar. The principle of government law does not apply here because we do not say the principle except for something where there is a benefit to the king or it is a regulation for the citizens, but not that they litigate in secular court, because if that were to happen all Jewish laws would become void. 

Siman 370



Siman 371



Siman 372



Siman 373



Siman 374



Siman 375



Siman 376



Siman 377



Siman 378



Siman 379



Siman 380

1. One who tells another "tear my garments, break my vessel, on the condition that you are exempt"- he is exempt (and there are those who say that even if he did not say "on condition that" explicitly, rather that he said words of similar meaning, for example if he said to him "break my vessel" and the damager said "on condition that I am exempt" and the one who suffered damage said "no" we can say that he said so sarcastically, and he is exempt).  And if he did not say to him "on condition that you are exempt" then he is liable, even though he gave him permission to destroy.  When is this true?  When the items first came into his hand to be guarded, in that they had been lent or given for safekeeping.  But if they did not come to be guarded, for example, if he said "take this vessel and break it, take this garment and tear it" and he did it, behold he is exempt, even though he did not say "on condition that you are exempt."

Siman 381



Siman 382



Siman 383



Siman 384



Siman 385



Siman 386

Distinction between causal damages and the law of direct causality, and the law of one who throws a vessel off a roof. There are 4 subsections within:   We rule like Rabi Meir that adjudicates on direct causality.  Gloss: However, only in regards to human caused damages.  Animal caused damages are exempt, in all opinions.  Therefore, if one pushed another's coin in a manner that it fell into the sea, although he didn't pick it up [prior, thus acquiring it], he is liable.  Similarly, one who minimizes [the weight] of another's coin and removed the image [on the face of the coin], is liable, even if he didn't diminish the value.  So too, one who sells a debt document and subsequently forgives the debt, the debt is forgiven and [the seller/lender] must pay the purchaser, as explained in ~ 66.
So too, one who burns another's loan document must pay the full debt that was in the document.  Even though the document itself isn't money, he caused the loss of money. However, the damager must admit the document was authenticated, and [admit to] the amount that was written therein.  Since it is burned the debt cannot be collected therewith.  If [the damager] doesn't believe [the lender], he doesn't need to pay other than the value of the paper.  Gloss: This [is true] is there are no witnesses that know how much was written therein, for if there are witnesses, they can rewrite the document, as explained in ~ 41.
So too, one who throws his own vessel off the roof and there were pillows and blankets beneath them, in a manner that if [the vessel] fell onto them they wouldn't break, and another person removed [the pillows] before [the vessels landed] and the vessels hit the ground and broke. The one who removed [the pillows] must pay [the damages].  So too for all similar cases. Gloss:  Some consider this causal damage and is exempt [in court but responsible by heaven].  Similarly, pushing the coin into the sea and minimizing the coin image are exempt, because they are causal damage. Therefore, even if one threw [another's] vessel from the roof while there were pillows beneath them and he himself removed the pillows, yet he is exempt [in court]. He is not liable for the throw because it wouldn't break through this action. The removal [of the pillows] is but a causal damage.  A scribe that wrote a document and wrote one hundred in place of two hundred, or if one damages another with [bad] advice, or an escrow that handed over a document [to one party] that he should not have handed over, all these are exempt [in court but responsible by heaven].  They are only causal damage.  However, [the damager] is excommunicated until he removes the damage, as in all cases of causal damage.  Some say that all common causal damage must be paid as a penalty.  Therefore, some say, if Reuven sells and item to an idolater, then Shimon says to the idolater that he overpaid [and the idolator keeps the item and the money (see Sha"ch), Shimon] must pay him.  Some say that is like a Moser (see ~ 388).          

Siman 387



Siman 388



Siman 389



Siman 390



Siman 391



Siman 392



Siman 393



Siman 394



Siman 395



Siman 396



Siman 397



Siman 398



Siman 399



Siman 400



Siman 401



Siman 402



Siman 403



Siman 404



Siman 405



Siman 406



Siman 407



Siman 408



Siman 409



Siman 410



Siman 411



Siman 412



Siman 413



Siman 414



Siman 415



Siman 416



Siman 417



Siman 418



Siman 419



Siman 420



Siman 421



Siman 422



Siman 423



Siman 424



Siman 425

<i><b>Rema</b>: Regarding those guilty of the death penalty in our days, we have no power to give them lashes, exile them, kill them, or beat them. Instead we censure them and distance them from the community (<b>Tur 68</b> from Natronai Gaon). Thus far regarding [strictly Torah] law. However, if the beit din sees a necessity for a preventative measure, it has the authority to institue whatever punishment they see fit (ibid., from the Responsa of the Natronai Gaon), as explained above in Siman 2. This regards those instances involving capital punishment which necessitates a beit din. Cases in which the death penalty can be implemented even without a beit din, are still judged in our days, as will be explained (ibid.).</i> One who pursuses his fellow in order to kill him, and was warned, and continued in his pursuit: Even if the pursuer was a minor, every Jew is commanded to save the pursed, even at the cost of one maiming one of the pursuer's limbs. If it is impossible to save the pursued without killing the pursuer outright, then the pursuer should indeed be killed, even though he has not yet performed the act. <i><b>Rema</b>: (<b>Tur 67</b>) One who "tunnels [into a house] in order steal" has this rule of pursuer applied to him, however if it is understood that his only intent is monetary gain, and that he would not kill the owner in a confrontation, then it is forbidden to kill him. See further in the Tur in this paragraph regarding one who endangers the public, such as a Jew who engages in forgery in a land where the authorities take a strict approach to such action, such a person constitutes a "pursuer" and it is permitted to turn him over to the authorities (<b>Nimukei Maharam MiRizburg</b>), as explained above in 388:12.</i>

Siman 426

The obligation for a man to save his friend in body, money, or the like.  One who saw his fellow drowning, or threatened by thieves or by a wild animal, and could have either saved him himself or hired others to save him – and he did not – or someone who heard that gentiles or informants are plotting against someone or preparing to ensnare him – and he did not reveal this to his friend and tell him – or someone who knew that a gentile or violent man was approaching his fellow, and he could have appeased him and changed his attitude towards his fellow – and he did not appease him – in all such situations, he has transgressed, “Do not stand idly by the blood of your neighbor.”

Siman 427

It is a positive commandment to make a fence on one's roof as it says "and you shall make a fence for your roof". This applies if it is a dwelling place, but a storage house or a cattle house and the like do not require one.
Any house that is not at least 4 cubits by 4 cubits is exempt from making a fence.
A house of two partners is obligated to have a fence around its roof, as it says “lest any one fall from it”.   This is applicable whenever someone is liable to fall.  If so, why does it say “your roof”?  To exclude synagogues and study halls, since they are not made for residence.  
If a public road is higher than the roof, a fence is not required. As it says: "lest the one who falls will fall <i>from it</i>".
The fence must not be shorter than ten handbreadths so that one will not fall from the roof, and the fence must be strong so that a man can lean on it and will not fall.
All that do not build a fence on their roof violates a positive commandment and a negative commandment. As it says, "do not place blood in your home".
Both a roof or anything dangerous where it's probable that someone will stumble upon and fall, for example if there was a well or a hole in his yard, whether there is water in it or not, one is obligated to make an embankment ten-handbreadths high, or to cover it, lest a person fall into it and die.
Likewise, one has a positive duty to remove and guard oneself of any life-threatening obstacle, as it is said "beware and guard your soul".  If one did not removed said obstacles, one has cancelled a positive commandment and transgressed "do not bring bloodguilt" (Deut. 22:8).
The sages prohibited many things because of danger to a person.  And some of them are explained in the Tur.  Additionally, there are other things and these are they: A person must never put his mouth to a pipe spouting water and drink; he must not drink from rivers or ponds at night, for fear that he might swallow a leech without seeing.  <i>Rama: I have already written these in Shulchan Arukh, Yoreh De'ah 116:5</i>