Niddah
נדה
merged
http://www.sefaria.org/Niddah
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Rabbi Dr. David Mevorach Seidenberg, from "Kabbalah and Ecology"
-http://www.amazon.com/Kabbalah-Ecology-Image-More-Than-Human-World/dp/1107081335 
-Sefaria Community Translation
-http://www.sefaria.org
-Rabbi Mike Feuer, Jerusalem Anthology
-http://www.sefaria.org
-Niddah 13a
-http://www.come-and-hear.com/niddah/niddah_13.html



Niddah

Daf 1a



Daf 1b



Daf 2a

Mishnah: Shammai says,
All women, their hour (i.e. the time at which they see menstrual blood) is [a] sufficient (starting point for determining whether the terumot and taharot they handled are ritually impure).
Hillel says,
From [a more recent] check (where she is found to be ritually impure) to [an earlier] check (where she is found to be ritually pure, all terumot and taharot handled will be retroactively declared impure), and even where there are many days [in between checks].
And the sages say,
The law is neither like this (Shammai, who is lenient) nor like this (Hillel, who is stringent). Rather a twenty four hour period can reduce (a longer than twenty four hour period) between two checks, and a period between two checks (that is less than twenty four hours) can reduce a twenty four hour period.
Any woman who has a regular time (i.e. menstrual cycle), her hour (i.e. the time at which she sees menstrual blood) is [a] sufficient (starting point for determining whether the terumot and taharot she handled are ritually impure).
And a woman who uses cloths [to perform a check (i.e. bedikah) at the time of intercourse], this counts as a [valid] check (i.e. bedikah) [for the purposes of determining which terumot and taharot are retroactively ritually impure], and [such a check] can reduce a twenty four hour period as well as period of time in between two checks (i.e. bedikot) [that is less than twenty four hours].
What is an example of, "her hour (i.e. the time at which they see menstrual blood) is [a] sufficient (starting point for determining whether the terumot and taharot they handled are ritually impure)"?
She was sitting on a bed, dealing with taharot (i.e. ritually pure items), and she separates [from the bed and the taharot] and [afterwards] sees [blood], she is ritually impure, and they (the bed and the taharot) are ritually pure.
Even though [the sages] said,
that she causes [terumah and taharot] to retroactively become ritually impure for [a maximum of] twenty four hours, she only [begins to] count [days of Niddah impurity] from the time she sees [blood].
Gemarah: What is the reasoning of Shammai?
[Shammai] reasons,
"Maintain the woman on her status, and the woman [in our Mishnah] has a status of ritual purity."
And Hillel [reasons], "When [we] say 'maintain something on its status', [that] is where it does not have an inherent disqualification. However, a woman

Daf 2b

since she sees [the blood] from her body, we do not say "uphold her (status of ritual purity) [based] on her establishment (of being ritually pure to begin with)."
And how is [the case of our Mishnah] different [from the case] of Mikvah?
As we learn in a Mishnah

Daf 3a



Daf 3b



Daf 4a



Daf 4b



Daf 5a



Daf 5b



Daf 6a



Daf 6b



Daf 7a



Daf 7b



Daf 8a



Daf 8b



Daf 9a



Daf 9b



Daf 10a



Daf 10b



Daf 11a



Daf 11b



Daf 12a



Daf 12b



Daf 13a

MISHNAH. EVERY HAND THAT MAKES FREQUENT EXAMINATION IS IN THE CASE OF WOMEN PRAISEWORTHY,  BUT IN THE CASE OF MEN IT OUGHT TO BE CUT OFF.
GEMARA. Wherein [in this respect] do women differ from men?  — Women [in this matter] are not sensitive, hence they are praiseworthy, but in the case of men who are highly sensitive [their hands] ought to be cut off. But, if so, what was the point in saying 'MAKES FREQUENT' [seeing that the same reason applies] also where [the examinations are] infrequent? — When 'MAKES FREQUENT' was mentioned it was intended to refer to women only.
One taught: This applies only to the emission of semen but as regards flux a man also is as praiseworthy as the women; and even in regard to the emission of semen, if he desires to make the examination with a splinter or with a potsherd he may do so. May he not, however, do it with a rag, seeing that it was taught: A man may examine himself with a rag or with any other thing he wishes? — As Abaye stated elsewhere: 'With a thick rag'. So also here it may be explained: With a thick rag. And in what connection was Abaye's statement made? In connection with the following: If a priest, while eating terumah, felt a shiver run through his body he takes hold of his membrum and swallows the terumah. 'Takes hold'! But has it not been taught: R. Eliezer said, 'Whoever holds his membrum when he makes water is as though he had brought a flood on the world'?  To this Abaye replied. 'With a thick rag'.  Raba replied: It may even be said to apply to a soft rag for once the semen has been detached the subsequent touch does no longer matter.  And Abaye?  — He made provision against the possibility of an additional discharge. And Raba? — He does not consider the possibility of any additional discharges. But does he not, seeing that it was taught, 'To what may this be compared? To the putting of a finger upon the eye where, as long as the finger remains on it, the eye continues to tear'? Now Raba? — It is quite uncommon for one to get heated twice in immediate succession.
[Reverting to] the main text: 'R. Eliezer said, Whoever holds his membrum when he makes water is as though he had brought a flood on the world'. But, they said to R. Eliezer, would not the spray bespatter his feet and he would appear to be maimed in his privy parts so that he would be the cause of casting upon his children the reflection of being illegitimate? — It is preferable, he answered them, that a man should be the cause of casting upon his children the reflection of being illegitimate than that he should make himself a wicked man, even for a while, before the Omnipresent. Another [Baraitha] taught: R. Eliezer replied to the Sages. It is possible for a man to stand on a raised spot and to make water or to make water in loose earth and thus to avoid making himself wicked, even for a while, before the Omnipresent. Which did he tell them first? If it be suggested that it was the first mentioned statement that he gave them first [is it likely, it may be objected], that after he spoke to them of a prohibition he would merely offer a remedy? — The fact is that it was the last mentioned statement that he gave them first, and when they asked him, 'What is he to do when he can find no raised spot or loose earth', he answered them, 'It is preferable that a man should be the cause of casting upon his children the reflection of being illegitimate than that he should make himself a wicked man, even for a while, before the Omnipresent'.
But why all these precautions? — Because otherwise one might emit semen in vain, and R. Johanan stated: Whosoever emits semen in vain deserves death, for it is said in Scripture. And the thing which he did was evil in the sight of the Lord, and He slew him also. R. Isaac and R. Ammi said. He is as though he shed blood, for it is said in Scripture. Ye that inflame yourselves among the terebinths, under every leafy tree, that slay the children in the valleys under the clefts of the rocks; read not 'that slay' but 'that press out'. R. Assi said: He is like one who worships idols; for here it is written, 'Under every leafy tree' and elsewhere it is written, upon the high mountains … and under every leafy tree.
Rab Judah and Samuel once stood upon the roof of the Synagogue of Shaf-weyathib in Nehardea. Said Rab Judah to Samuel 'I must make water'. 'Shinena', the other replied, 'take hold of your membrum and make the water outside [the roof]'. But how could he do so, seeing that it was taught: R. Eliezer said, Whoever holds his membrum when he makes water is as though he brought a flood on the world? — Abaye replied: He treated this case as that of a reconnoitering troop, concerning which we learnt, 'If a reconnoitering troop has entered a town in time of peace the open wine jars are forbidden and the closed ones are permitted, but in times of war the former as well as the latter are permitted because the troops have no time to offer libations'. Thus it clearly follows that owing to their being in a state of fear they do not think of offering libations, and so also in this case, since he was in a state of fear he would not think of lustful matters. But what fear could there be here? — If you wish I might reply: The fear of the night and of the roof. If you prefer I might reply: The fear of his Master. If you prefer I might say: The fear of the Shechinah. If you prefer I might say: The fear of the Lord that was upon him, for Samuel once remarked of him 'This man is no mortal being'. If you prefer I might say: He was a married man, and concerning such R. Nahman ruled, 'If a man was married, this is permitted'. If you prefer I might say: It was this that he taught him, vis., that which R. Abba the son of R. Benjamin b. Hiyya learnt: But he may support the testicles from below. And if you prefer I might say: It was this that he taught them, viz., that which R. Abbahu stated in the name of R. Johanan: It has a limit; from the corona downward [touch] is permitted.

Daf 13b



Daf 14a



Daf 14b



Daf 15a



Daf 15b



Daf 16a



Daf 16b

As to Reish Lakish, how does he expound Rabby Yohanan's text?  He requires it for the same exposition as that made Rabbi Hannina bar Pappa.  For Rabbi Hannina bar Pappa made the following exposition:  The name of the angel who is in charge of conception is "Night", and he takes up a drop and places it in the presence of the Holy One, Blessed is He, saying, "Sovreign of the Universe, what shall be the fate of this drop?  Shall it produce a strong man or a weak man, a wise man or a fool, a rich man or a poor man?"
Whereas 'wicked' or 'righteous' he does not mention, in agreement with the view of Rabbi Hannina.  For Rabbi Hannina stated:  Everything is in the hands of heaven, except the fear of God, as it says, "An now Israel, what does the Lord your God require of you, but to fear, etc." (Deuteronomy 10:12)

Daf 17a



Daf 17b



Daf 18a



Daf 18b



Daf 19a



Daf 19b



Daf 20a



Daf 20b



Daf 21a



Daf 21b



Daf 22a



Daf 22b



Daf 23a

































R’ Yan’ai ...
[fetuses shaped like certain animals still count as human births if] “their eyes go in front of them like those of a human”

Daf 23b



Daf 24a



Daf 24b



Daf 25a



Daf 25b



Daf 26a



Daf 26b



Daf 27a



Daf 27b



Daf 28a



Daf 28b



Daf 29a



Daf 29b



Daf 30a



Daf 30b

R. Simlai delivered the following discourse: What does an embryo resemble when it is in the
bowels of its mother? Folded writing tablets.57 Its hands rest on its two temples respectively, its two
elbows on its two legs and its two heels against its buttocks. Its head lies between its knees, its
mouth is closed and its navel is open, and it eats what its mother eats and drinks what its mother
drinks, but produces no excrements because otherwise it might kill its mother. As soon, however, as
it sees the light58 the closed organ59 opens and the open one60 closes, for if that had not happened the
embryo could not live even one single hour. A light burns above its head and it looks and sees from
one end of the world to the other, as it is said, then his lamp shined above my head, and by His light
I walked through darkness.

Daf 31a



























father seeds the white from which [comes] bones . . . 
his mother seeds redness from which [comes] skin and flesh . . . 
and the Holy One puts in him spirit and n’shamah . . . ”

Daf 31b



Daf 32a



Daf 32b



Daf 33a



Daf 33b



Daf 34a



Daf 34b



Daf 35a



Daf 35b



Daf 36a



Daf 36b



Daf 37a



Daf 37b



Daf 38a



Daf 38b



Daf 39a



Daf 39b



Daf 40a



Daf 40b



Daf 41a



Daf 41b



Daf 42a



Daf 42b



Daf 43a



Daf 43b



Daf 44a



Daf 44b



Daf 45a



Daf 45b



Daf 46a



Daf 46b



Daf 47a



Daf 47b



Daf 48a



Daf 48b



Daf 49a



Daf 49b



Daf 50a



Daf 50b



Daf 51a



Daf 51b



Daf 52a



Daf 52b



Daf 53a



Daf 53b



Daf 54a



Daf 54b



Daf 55a



Daf 55b



Daf 56a



Daf 56b



Daf 57a



Daf 57b



Daf 58a



Daf 58b



Daf 59a



Daf 59b



Daf 60a



Daf 60b



Daf 61a




















































These were the sons of the Galileans about whom a rumour spread that they killed a person. They came before R' Tarfon and said to him:
"The master should hide us[from the authorities]"
He said to them
"What should I do"?
If I don't hide you [the authorities] will see you [and execute you, on the other hand], should I hide you? The rabbis said: this is Lashon Hara, and although one should not accept it as truth, one should be mindful of it. You go hide yourselves.

Daf 61b



Daf 62a



Daf 62b



Daf 63a



Daf 63b



Daf 64a



Daf 64b



Daf 65a



Daf 65b



Daf 66a












































Rav Yosef said:
It such a thing one happened in Pumbedita and she was healed.
Rav Yosef said in the name of Rav Yehuda who said in the Name of Rav: Rebbi enacted this in in the fields:
If she saw one day, she waits six. Two, she waits six. Three, she waits seven clean days.
Rav Zeira said:
The daughters of Israel took it upon themselves that if they see even a drop of blood the size of a mustard seed, they wait seven clean days.

Daf 66b



Daf 67a



Daf 67b



Daf 68a



Daf 68b



Daf 69a



Daf 69b



Daf 70a



Daf 70b




Three words of aggadah: 
one verse says “For I do not desire the death of him who dies…” (Yechezkel 18:32) and another verse says “…for the Lord desired to kill them.” (Shmuel I 2:25)
One is when they repent and the other is when they do not repent. 
One verse says “…Who will show no favor, nor will He take a bribe,” (Devarim 10:17) and another verse says “May the Lord raise His countenance toward you…” (Bamidbar 6:26) 
One is before the judgment is sealed, the other is after. 
One verse says “For the Lord has chosen Zion…” (Tehillim 132:13) and another verse says “For this city has aroused My anger and My wrath since the day they built it until this day…” (Yirmiyahu 32:31) 
One is before Shlomo married the daughter of Pharaoh, the other is after Shlomo married the daughter of Pharaoh.