Niddah
נדה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Niddah



Daf 1a



Daf 1b



Daf 2a

Mishnah: Shammai says, All women, their hour (i.e. the time at which they see menstrual blood) is [a] sufficient (starting point for determining whether the terumot and taharot they handled are ritually impure). Hillel says, From [a more recent] check (where she is found to be ritually impure) to [an earlier] check (where she is found to be ritually pure, all terumot and taharot handled will be retroactively declared impure), and even where there are many days [in between checks].
And the sages say, The law is neither like this (Shammai, who is lenient) nor like this (Hillel, who is stringent). Rather a twenty four hour period can reduce (a longer than twenty four hour period) between two checks, and a period between two checks (that is less than twenty four hours) can reduce a twenty four hour period.
Any woman who has a regular time (i.e. menstrual cycle), her hour (i.e. the time at which she sees menstrual blood) is [a] sufficient (starting point for determining whether the terumot and taharot she handled are ritually impure). And a woman who uses cloths [to perform a check (i.e. bedikah) at the time of intercourse], this counts as a [valid] check (i.e. bedikah) [for the purposes of determining which terumot and taharot are retroactively ritually impure], and [such a check] can reduce a twenty four hour period as well as period of time in between two checks (i.e. bedikot) [that is less than twenty four hours].
What is an example of, "her hour (i.e. the time at which they see menstrual blood) is [a] sufficient (starting point for determining whether the terumot and taharot they handled are ritually impure)"? She was sitting on a bed, dealing with taharot (i.e. ritually pure items), and she separates [from the bed and the taharot] and [afterwards] sees [blood], she is ritually impure, and they (the bed and the taharot) are ritually pure.
Even though [the sages] said, that she causes [terumah and taharot] to retroactively become ritually impure for [a maximum of] twenty four hours, she only [begins to] count [days of Niddah impurity] from the time she sees [blood].
Gemarah: What is the reasoning of Shammai? [Shammai] reasons, "Maintain the woman on her status, and the woman [in our Mishnah] has a status of ritual purity." And Hillel [reasons], "When [we] say 'maintain something on its status', [that] is where it does not have an inherent disqualification. However, a woman

Daf 2b

since she sees [the blood] from her body, we do not say "uphold her (status of ritual purity) [based] on her establishment (of being ritually pure to begin with)."
And how is [the case of our Mishnah] different [from the case] of Mikvah? As we learn in a Mishnah

Daf 3a



Daf 3b



Daf 4a



Daf 4b



Daf 5a



Daf 5b



Daf 6a



Daf 6b



Daf 7a



Daf 7b



Daf 8a



Daf 8b



Daf 9a



Daf 9b



Daf 10a



Daf 10b



Daf 11a



Daf 11b



Daf 12a



Daf 12b



Daf 13a



Daf 13b



Daf 14a



Daf 14b



Daf 15a



Daf 15b



Daf 16a



Daf 16b

As to Reish Lakish, how does he expound Rabby Yohanan's text?  He requires it for the same exposition as that made Rabbi Hannina bar Pappa.  For Rabbi Hannina bar Pappa made the following exposition:  The name of the angel who is in charge of conception is "Night", and he takes up a drop and places it in the presence of the Holy One, Blessed is He, saying, "Sovreign of the Universe, what shall be the fate of this drop?  Shall it produce a strong man or a weak man, a wise man or a fool, a rich man or a poor man?" Whereas 'wicked' or 'righteous' he does not mention, in agreement with the view of Rabbi Hannina.  For Rabbi Hannina stated:  Everything is in the hands of heaven, except the fear of God, as it says, "An now Israel, what does the Lord your God require of you, but to fear, etc." (Deuteronomy 10:12)

Daf 17a



Daf 17b



Daf 18a



Daf 18b



Daf 19a



Daf 19b



Daf 20a



Daf 20b


   
  
 
  
        
     
   
  

Yalta presented blood before Rabbah bar bar Chana, and he declared it impure for her. She then brought it before Rav Yitzchak the son of Rav Yehudah, and he declared it pure for her. 

Daf 21a



Daf 21b



Daf 22a



Daf 22b



Daf 23a



Daf 23b



Daf 24a



Daf 24b

   
 
 
    
 
  
  
 
 
    
   
        
 
 
  
   
It was taught: Abba Shaul says:  "I was a burier of corpses and I would observe the corpses' bones: One who drank undiluted wine - its bones were burnt,one who drank mixed wine - its bones were dry,one who drank wine appropriately - its bones were oiled. And all whose drinking exceeded their eating - its bones were burnt, all whose eating exceeded their drinking - its bones were dry, all those whose eating and drinking were appropriate - its bones were oiled."

Daf 25a



Daf 25b



Daf 26a



Daf 26b



Daf 27a



Daf 27b



Daf 28a



Daf 28b



Daf 29a



Daf 29b



Daf 30a



Daf 30b




  
 
   
  

  
 
   
 

  
  
 
 
   
  
  
And it [the foetus] is taught the entire Torah, as it is said: (Proverbs 4:4) "He instructed me, and said to me, 'Let your mind hold onto my words; Keep my commandments and you wil live'", and it is also said (Job 29:4) "When the company (lit. "sod", secret) of God was on my tent"
Why do we need the second verse? You might say he was a prophet [...]
And when it [the foetus] comes to the light of the world, an angel comes and strikes it on the mouth and makes it forget the whole Torah, as it is said (Genesis 4:7) "Sin crouches at the door (lit., "petach", opening, i.e. of the mouth)
And the foetus isn't allowed out until it has been made to swear this oath, as it is said (Isaiah 45:23) "For to You every knee shall bend and every tongue shall swear [allegiance]". "For to You every knee shall bend", this is the day of death, as it is said (Psalms 22:30) "All those descending in the dust [i.e. at death's door] shall bow before Him". And "every tongue shall swear", this is the day of birth, as it is said... (Psalms 24:4) "[One who is] clean of hands and clear of heart, who has not taken a false oath by My life and has not sworn deceitfully". And what is this oath they made it (the foetus) swear? This: to be righteous and not to be wicked, and even if all the world says to them
"You are righteous", let it be in their eyes as though they are wicked. And you should know that the Holy Blessed One is pure and Their servants are pure and the soul (neshama) that They gave you is pure, and if you guard its purity, good! And if not, behold They will take it from you.
Taught by a "bei" of Rabbi Yishmael This is like a kohen who entrusted teruma to an am ha'aretz and said to him, "If you guard its purity, good! And if not, behold I will burn it before you."
Rabbi Elazar said...

Daf 31a

9 The first three months:  The fetus (ולד / valad) dwells in the lower compartment (of the womb).  The middle [three months]: the fetus dwells in the middle compartment.  The last [three months]: the fetus dwells in the upper compartment.  Once its time has come to leave, it turns around and leaves.  This is (this causes) the birth pangs of a woman.

Daf 31b

    
  
  
    
 
   
  
The students of Rabbi Shimon ben Yohi asked: Why does the Torah say a new mother should bring sacrifice?  He answered: When she is giving birth—lit. in the hour when she is kneeling in childbirth—she swears not to have intercourse with her husband  Therefore, the Torah prescribes she bring sacrifice.
Rabbi Yosef counters:

Daf 32a



Daf 32b



Daf 33a



Daf 33b



Daf 34a



Daf 34b



Daf 35a



Daf 35b



Daf 36a



Daf 36b



Daf 37a



Daf 37b



Daf 38a



Daf 38b



Daf 39a



Daf 39b



Daf 40a



Daf 40b



Daf 41a



Daf 41b



Daf 42a



Daf 42b



Daf 43a



Daf 43b



Daf 44a



Daf 44b



Daf 45a



Daf 45b



Daf 46a



Daf 46b



Daf 47a



Daf 47b



Daf 48a



Daf 48b



Daf 49a



Daf 49b



Daf 50a



Daf 50b



Daf 51a



Daf 51b



Daf 52a



Daf 52b



Daf 53a



Daf 53b



Daf 54a



Daf 54b



Daf 55a



Daf 55b



Daf 56a



Daf 56b



Daf 57a



Daf 57b



Daf 58a



Daf 58b



Daf 59a



Daf 59b



Daf 60a



Daf 60b



Daf 61a


  
   
 
   
 
  
 
 

    
      
      
  
  
 
These were the sons of the Galileans about whom a rumour spread that they killed a person. They came before R' Tarfon and said to him: "The master should hide us[from the authorities]" He said to them "What should I do"? If I don't hide you [the authorities] will see you [and execute you, on the other hand], should I hide you? The rabbis said: this is Lashon Hara, and although one should not accept it as truth, one should be mindful of it. You go hide yourselves.

Daf 61b


  
The Rabbis taught An article of clothing in which a thread of kilayim [prohibited combination of fabrics] had been sewn and lost cannot be sold to non-Jews or used to make a saddle for donkey However it can be used to make a burial shroud. Rav Yosef says: This means that mitzvot will be nullified in the coming days.
Abaye said to him, and some say it was Rav Dimi Rav Mani said in the name of Rav Yanai that this was not taught except regarding [the clothing the corpse is dressed in for] eulogies, but is forbidden with respect to [the clothing the corpse is dressed in when it is] buried. He said to him This was only said about the statement of rabbi Yochanan who said that even for burial [could a dead person could be buried in shatnez]
And rabbi Yochanan expounded, as rabbi Yochanan said: What does it mean "Freedom among the dead" (Psalms 88:6)? When a man dies, he is free from the commandments.

Daf 62a



Daf 62b



Daf 63a



Daf 63b



Daf 64a



Daf 64b



Daf 65a



Daf 65b



Daf 66a


 


 
  
  
  
   
  
    
    
  
      
Rav Yosef said: It such a thing one happened in Pumbedita and she was healed.
Rav Yosef said in the name of Rav Yehuda who said in the Name of Rav: Rebbi enacted this in in the fields: If she saw one day, she waits six. Two, she waits six. Three, she waits seven clean days.

Rav Zeira said: The daughters of Israel took it upon themselves that if they see even a drop of blood the size of a mustard seed, they wait seven clean days.