Shulchan Aruch HaRav
שולחן ערוך הרב
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.org



Shulchan Aruch HaRav

Book 1



Chapter 1

Yehudah son of Teimah says: " Be Bold as a leopard and and light as an eagle , swift as a deer and strong as a lion to carry out the will of your Father in heaven.'Bold as a leopard' means one should not to be humiliated by people who ridicule [him]. 'Strong as a lion' [refers to] moral strength which is primarily in the heart, [to act] like a lion and overpower ones evil urge and rise from ones sleep before the morning light, to serve one's Creator. So that he awake the morning, as it states, (Psalms, 57:9 )"I awake the morning", [Meaning] I awake the morning but the morning doesn't wake me. This is the intermediate level. 
But is the worthy for all those who fear heaven and for "soldiers" [strong ones] who G-d touches their hearts to arise at the half-point of the night to lament a little with the Psalm, "On the rivers of Babylon (Psalm 137)"  (as it is printed in the siddurim) on the destruction of the Temple and the lack of revelation of the divine presence as it is written, "Arise, cry out in the night (Lamentations 2:19)". Just like the Holy One, Blessed be He, lamented at that time and says, " Whoa is me that I destroyed my house". It is better to say less with intent that more without intent. Afterwords, one should toil in the Oral Torah until daylight.    
...And it is already known what is argued about this stringency in the book of the Zohar. Such is said in the Gemara that "midnight" is a time of will, as it is written, "And it was the half [way point] of [the] night and G-d struck the every first born..." (Shemot 12:29).   And they also said that one who occupies himself with Torah at night, the divine presence is in front of him as it says, "Arise, cry out in the night, at the beginning of the watches; pour out thy heart like water before the face of the Lord" (Lamentations 2:19). Meaning, the divine presence is found with you and " beginning of the watches" is at "midnight" (if he can not get up at half way through the night, he should get up at the beginning at the beginning of the third watch (the beginning of the last third of the night)). He that is involved with Torah at night, a string of kindness is pulled on him, as it says, "By day, may the Lord command His kindness, and at night, may His resting place be with me..." (Psalms 42:9). This is called a servant of G-d as it is written, " Behold, bless the Lord, all servants of the Lord who stand in the house of the Lord at night." (Psalms 134:1). It is proper to prepare a rooster to awake him from his slumber and "midnight", which was the doing of Rabbi Akiva. He pulled along with him a rooster, even when he would go on his travels so that it would awake him at "midnight". If the rooster did not awake him, he would pay someone to awaken him.
...And immedatley after he awakens, so that he van overcome his ("evil) inclinations  and to arise with haste, at midnight or before first light ,in character with an intermidiate state, he should think in his heart about before whom he is lying and that the king of kings is over him, as it says, "the whole land is filled with His glory". If he had been lying in the presence of a king of flesh and blood, he would be obligated with his life, all the more so with the kin of kings, the Holy One Blessed be He.