Kol Dodi Dofek
קול דודי דופק
Kol Dodi Dofek, Joseph B. Soloveitchik, translated by David Z. Gordon, 2006
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH990025047870205171/NLI

Kol Dodi Dofek

The Righteous Suffer

One of the deepest of mysteries, troubling Judaism from the dawn of its existence, is the ‎problem ‎of suffering. At a propitious moment of Divine compassion, Moses, the master of all ‎prophets, ‎pleaded before the Lord of All to be enlightened as to the workings of this ‎impenetrable ‎phenomenon.<sup>1</sup> I Moses knocked on the gates of heaven and cried out, “Show me ‎now Your ways, ‎that I shall comprehend You, so that I might find grace in Your eyes … instruct me ‎as to Your glory” ‎‎(Exodus 33:13, Exodus 33:18).‎
Why and wherefore are hardships visited on man? Why and wherefore do the righteous ‎suffer ‎and evildoers prosper? From that wondrous morning when Moses, the faithful ‎shepherd, ‎communed with the Creator of the Universe and pleaded for the comprehensive ‎solution to this ‎question of questions, throughout the generations, the prophets and sages of ‎Israel have grappled ‎with this conundrum. Habakkuk demanded satisfaction for this affront to ‎justice; Jeremiah, King ‎David in his Psalms, and Solomon in Ecclesiastes all pondered this problem. ‎The Book of Job is ‎totally dedicated to this ancient riddle that still hovers over our world and ‎demands its own ‎resolution: Why does the Holy One, blessed be He, permit evil to have dominion ‎over His ‎creations.‎
Judaism, in quest for a safe harbor in a world split and dismembered by existential suffering, and ‎in ‎its search for a solution to the mystery of the suffering that (to all outward appearances) ‎pervades ‎without limits, came to a new formulation and definition of this problem that has both ‎greater ‎breadth and greater depth. Posing the question of suffering, claims Judaism, is possible in ‎two ‎separate dimensions: the dimension of fate and the dimension of destiny. Judaism has ‎always ‎distinguished between an “Existence of Fate” and an “Existence of Destiny,” between the ‎‎“I” ‎which is the progeny of fate and the “I” which is the child of destiny. In this distinction lies ‎hidden ‎the Jewish doctrine of suffering.‎
What is an Existence of Fate? It is an existence of duress, in the nature of “against your will do ‎you ‎live” (M. Avot 4:22).<sup>2</sup> It is a factual existence, simply one line in a [long] chain of ‎mechanical ‎causality, devoid of significance, direction, and purpose, and subordinate to the forces ‎of the ‎environment into whose midst the individual is pushed, unconsulted by Providence. The “I” ‎of fate ‎emerges as an object. As an object, man appears as acted upon and not as actor. He is ‎acted upon ‎through his passive collision with the objective outside, as one object confronting ‎another. The “I” ‎of fate is hurled into a sealed dynamic that is always turned outward. Man’s ‎existence is hollow, ‎lacking inner content, substance, and independence. The “I” of fate denies ‎itself completely, ‎because the sense of selfhood and objectification cannot dwell in tandem.‎
It is against such a background that the experience of evil surfaces in all its terror. There are ‎two ‎stages in fate/existence. From the start, the man/object, imprisoned, against his will, [bound ‎up] in ‎the chains of existence, stands perplexed and confused in the face of the great mystery ‎called ‎suffering. Fate mocks him: his existence, crazed and torn, opposes itself and denies its worth ‎and ‎importance. The fear of extinction assails him and crushes his body and soul. The sufferer ‎wanders ‎lost in the vacuousness of the world, with God’s fear spread over him and his anger ‎tensed against ‎it; he is entirely shaken and agitated. His agonies are devoid of any clear meaning ‎and they appear ‎as satanic forces, as outgrowths of the primal chaos that pollutes the creation ‎whose destiny it was ‎to be a reflection of the Creator. At this stage of perplexity and ‎speechlessness, of numbness of ‎the heart and confusion of the mind, man does not ask at all ‎about the reason for evil and its ‎essence. He simply suffers in silence and is choked by his anguish, ‎which silences his complaint and ‎suppresses questioning and inquiry.‎
After the psychic quaking of the sufferer, which comes as a first reaction to suffering, comes ‎the ‎intellectual curiosity of the sufferer, which seeks to understand existence and to strengthen ‎the ‎sufferer’s safety and security. At this stage man begins to examine suffering and to ask ‎weighty ‎questions. He searches for the rational foundations of suffering and evil, and he ‎endeavors to find ‎the tranquility and harmony that lie between the positive and negative and thus ‎to remove the ‎edge from the tension between the thesis, “good,” and the antithesis, “evil,” of ‎existence. From ‎the question and the inquiry, the solution and the answer, he arrives at a ‎metaphysical formulation ‎of evil through which he comes to terms with evil and attempts to gloss it ‎over. The sufferer ‎employs the powers of rational abstraction (with which the Creator endowed ‎him) to the point of ‎selfdeception: denial of the existence of evil in the world.‎
Judaism, with its realistic approach to man and his status within existence, understood that ‎evil ‎does not lend itself to being obscured and glossed over, and that every attempt to diminish ‎the ‎import of the contrast and cleavage in existence will not bring man to inner peace or ‎to ‎comprehension of the existential secret. Evil is a fact that cannot be denied. There is evil in ‎the ‎world. There are suffering and agony, and death pangs. He who would deceive himself by ‎ignoring ‎the split in existence and by romanticizing life is but a fool and a fabricator of illusions. It ‎is ‎impossible to conquer monstrous evil with philosophical-speculative thought. Thus, ‎Judaism ‎determined that man, submerged in the depths of a frozen fate, will in vain seek the ‎solution to ‎the problem of evil in the context of speculative thought, for he will never find it. ‎Certainly, the ‎testimony of the Torah regarding creation — that “it is very good” (Genesis 1:12) — is ‎true. ‎However, this is only stated from the unbounded perspective of the Creator. In man’s ‎finite, ‎limited view, the absolute good in creation is not apparent. The contrast is striking and ‎undeniable. ‎There is evil that is not susceptible to explanation and comprehension. Only by ‎comprehending the ‎world in its totality can man gain insight into the essence of suffering. ‎However, as long as man’s ‎perception is limited and fragmented, so that he sees only isolated ‎portions of the cosmic drama ‎and the mighty saga of history, he cannot delve into the recesses of ‎evil and the mystery of ‎suffering. To what might this situation be compared? To a person who ‎views a beautiful tapestry, ‎the work of a fine artisan, which contains, woven into it on its front, a ‎representation dazzling to ‎the eye. To our great sorrow, we see this image [i.e., the world] from ‎the obverse side. Can such a ‎sight become a sublime esthetic experience? Thus, we are incapable ‎of comprehending the ‎panorama of reality without which one cannot uncover God’s master plan ‎‎— the essence of the ‎works of the Holy One.‎
In short, the “I” of fate asks a speculative/metaphysical question about evil, and this question ‎is ‎not given to solution and has no answer.‎
In the second dimension of man’s existence, destiny, the question of suffering takes on new ‎form. ‎What is an Existence of Destiny? It is an active existence, when man confronts the ‎environment ‎into which he has been cast with an understanding of his uniqueness and value, ‎freedom and ‎capacity; without compromising his integrity and independence in his struggle with ‎the outside ‎world. The slogan of the “I” of destiny is: “Against your will you are born, and against ‎your will you ‎die” (M. Avot 4:22), but by your free will do you live. Man is born as an object, dies as ‎an object, but ‎it is within his capability to live as a “subject” — as a creator and innovator who ‎impresses his ‎individual imprimatur on his life and breaks out of a life of instinctive, automatic ‎behavior into one ‎of creative activity. According to Judaism, man’s mission in this world is to turn ‎fate into destiny — ‎an existence that is passive and influenced into an existence that is active and ‎influential; an ‎existence of compulsion, perplexity, and speechlessness into an existence full of ‎will, vision, and ‎initiative. The blessing of the Holy One to his creation fully defines man’s role: “Be ‎fruitful and ‎multiply and replenish the earth and subdue it” (Genesis 1:28). Conquer the ‎environment and ‎subjugate it. If you do not rule over it, it will enslave you. Destiny bestows on ‎man a new status in ‎God’s world. It bestows upon man a royal crown, and thus he becomes God’s ‎partner in the work ‎of creation.‎
As stated above, in man’s “Existence of Destiny” arises a new relation to the problem of evil. ‎As ‎long as man vacillates in his fateful existence, his relationship to evil is expressed solely in ‎a ‎philosophical/speculative approach. As a passive creature, it was not within his power to ‎wrestle ‎with evil in order to contain or to exploit it for an exalted purpose. The child of fate is ‎devoid of the ‎ability to determine anything in the realm of his existence. He is nurtured from the ‎outside, and his ‎life bears its imprint. Therefore he relates to evil from an impractical perspective ‎and philosophizes ‎about it from a speculative point of view. He wishes to deny the reality of evil ‎and to create a ‎harmonistic outlook on life. The result of such an experience is bitter ‎disappointment. Evil mocks ‎the prisoner of fate and his fantasy of a reality that is all good and ‎pleasant‎.‎
‎However, in the realm of destiny man recognizes reality as it is, and does not desire to ‎use ‎harmonizing formulas in order to hide and disregard evil. The “Child of Destiny” is very realistic ‎and ‎does not flinch in anticipation of a face-to-face confrontation with evil. His approach is halakhic ‎and ‎moral, and thus devoid of any metaphysical/speculative nuance. When the “Child of ‎Destiny” ‎suffers, he says in his heart, “There is evil, I do not deny it, and I will not conceal it with ‎fruitless ‎casuistry. I am, however, interested in it from a halakhic point of view; and as a person ‎who wants ‎to know what action to take. I ask a single question: What should the sufferer do to live ‎with his ‎suffering?” In this dimension, the emphasis is removed <i>from</i> causal and ‎teleological ‎considerations (which differ only as to direction) and is directed <i>to</i> the realm of ‎action. The ‎problem is now formulated in the language of a simple halakhah and revolves around a ‎quotidian ‎‎(i.e. daily) task. The question of questions is: What does suffering obligate man to do? ‎This ‎problem was important to Judaism, which placed it at the center of its ‎‎<i>Weltanschauung</i>. ‎Halakhah is just as interested in this question, as in issues of <i>issur</i> ‎and <i>heter</i> and ‎‎<i>hiyyuv</i> and <i>p’tur.</i> We do not wonder about the ineffable ways ‎of the Holy One, but ‎instead ponder the paths man must take when evil leaps up at him. We ask ‎not about the reason ‎for evil and its purpose, but rather about its rectification and uplifting. How ‎should a man react in a ‎time of distress? What should a person do so as not to rot in his affliction?‎
The halakhic answer to this question is very simple. Suffering comes to elevate man, to purify ‎his ‎spirit and sanctify him, to cleanse his mind and purify it from the chaff of superficiality and ‎the ‎dross of crudeness; to sensitize his soul and expand his horizons. In general, the purpose ‎of ‎suffering is to repair the imperfection in man’s persona. The halakhah teaches us that an ‎afflicted ‎person commits a criminal act if he allows his pain to go for naught and to remain without ‎meaning ‎or purpose. Suffering appears in the world in order to contribute something to man, in ‎order to ‎atone for him, in order to redeem him from moral impurity, from crudeness and lowliness ‎of spirit. ‎The sufferer must arise there from, purified, refined, and cleansed. “An hour of distress it ‎is for ‎Jacob, and from it he should be saved” (Jeremiah 30:7). From the midst of suffering itself he ‎will ‎achieve lasting redemption and merit a self-actualization and exaltation that are unequaled in ‎a ‎world devoid of suffering. From negation sprouts affirmation; from antithesis, thesis emerges; ‎and ‎from a denial of existence, a new existence is revealed. The Torah gave witness to man’s ‎mighty ‎spiritual reaction to suffering inflicted upon him when it said, “In your distress when all ‎these ‎horrors shall come upon you …then you shall return to the Lord your God” (Deuteronomy ‎‎4:30). ‎Suffering requires man to repent and return to God.<sup>3</sup> Distress is designated to arouse us ‎to ‎repentance, and what is repentance if not the renewal and supreme redemption of ‎man?‎
How pitiful if man’s sufferings do not bring him to a spiritual crisis, and his soul remains frozen ‎and ‎bereft of forgiveness. How pitiful is the sufferer if his soul is not warmed by the flame of ‎suffering, ‎and if his wounds do not spark “the Candle of God” (Proverbs 20:27) within him. When ‎pain ‎wanders in the wide world as a blind force without purpose, a stinging indictment of the man ‎who ‎squanders his suffering issues forth.‎
Judaism made this notion more profound when it combined the idea of the repair ‎‎(<i>tikkun</i>) ‎of evil and its elevation with the perfection and elevation of goodness. Judaism ‎states that the ‎kindnesses of God are not given to man as an unconditional gift, without obligation; ‎they require ‎something in return; their very essence impose a moral, halakhic demand upon the ‎man who ‎enjoys them. Indeed, while loving-kindness emanates from the open, overflowing, ‎generous hand ‎of the Holy One, it is not an unlimited or unconditional gift. Such a gift is not ‎absolute. The ‎bestowing of good is always conditional and temporary. When God bestows wealth, ‎property, ‎influence, and honor, the recipient must know how to employ them; how to turn these ‎precious ‎gifts into fruitful, creative powers, how to include others in his happiness and greatness, ‎and how ‎to render loving-kindness with the divine kindnesses that emanate and issue forth to him ‎from a ‎never-ending font. If an abundance of good does not bring man to absolute subordination ‎to the ‎Holy One, then he is guilty of a fundamental sin resulting in the severe distress that in turn ‎reminds ‎him of his obligation to the Creator of the universe for the gift of His kindnesses. Our great ‎sages ‎have taught: “Man is obligated to give thanks for evil as he does for goodness” (M. Berakhot ‎‎9:5). ‎Just as good obliges man to perform deeds of a higher order and demands creative and ‎innovative ‎actions from the individual or the populace, so does suffering require the repair of the ‎soul and the ‎cleansing of life — if at the time of God’s favor and beneficence one was not aroused ‎to action. For ‎it happens that man is summoned to repair, through his afflictions, the damage he ‎caused in God’s ‎creation at the hour when the Holy One extended His bounty. The feeling of ‎subordination to the ‎Almighty and the understanding of one’s obligation to purify and sanctify ‎one’s self by dint of ‎one’s suffering must brighten man’s soul when he finds himself in distress and ‎perplexed by his ‎existence. He must overcome the obtuseness of his heart that caused him to sin ‎when he stood in ‎the presence of God’s bounty. In short, man must solve, not the question of the ‎causal or ‎teleological reason for suffering with all its speculative complexity, but rather the ‎question of its ‎curative role, in all its halakhic simplicity, by turning fate to destiny and elevating ‎himself from ‎object to subject, from thing to man.‎ 

Job

Indeed! This is the answer that was given by the Creator to Job. As long as Job, as a slave ‎of ‎fate, ‎philosophized about reasons, and motives, and demanded insight into the essence of ‎evil, ‎continually ‎asking and murmuring: “Why and wherefore does suffering come,” the Holy ‎One ‎answered him ‎sharply with the pointed question: “<i>Did you know?</i>”(Job 39:1).‎
<i>‎[Did you know] [w]ho it is who ‎darkens counsel by speaking words without knowledge? Gird ‎up ‎now your loins like a man, for I will ‎demand of you and you shall declare unto Me. Where were ‎you ‎when I laid the foundations of the ‎earth? Declare if you have such understanding. … ‎Do you ‎know ‎the time when the wild goats of the ‎rock will give birth; when the hinds will calve?</i> — Job ‎‎38:2-4, Job ‎‎39:1‎.
If you do not know the alphabet of creation, why be so impudent as to ask questions about the ‎workings of the world? But once Job realized how strange his question was and how great his ‎ignorance, and acknowledged it and was not ashamed to say: “[T]herefore I have uttered that ‎which I did not understand; things too wonderful for me which I know not" (Job 42:3), then God ‎was able to reveal to this man of destiny the true principles which are concealed in suffering, as ‎expressed by the halakhah. The Holy One said: Job! True, you will never understand the inner ‎essence of the why, the reason for suffering and its purpose, but there is one thing that you are ‎obligated to know: the basis for the repair of suffering. If by your suffering you are able to elevate ‎yourself to the spiritual level that you have not heretofore attained, you will then know that your ‎travail was intended as a device for your perfection in both spirit and soul. Job! When My ‎graciousness engulfed you in the manner expressed by the prophet, “Behold, I will extend ‎prosperity to [him] a like a river” (Isaiah 66:12) and you were well known and a man of influence ‎‎(“And this man was the greatest of all the children of the East” [Job 1:3]), you did not fulfill the role ‎that My grace placed upon you. You were a sound and just man, God-fearing and avoiding of evil. ‎You did not use your power and wealth for ill. You gave much charity (“Righteousness I wore, and it ‎robed me, my justice was a robe and turban” [Job 29:14]). You did not hesitate to offer assistance ‎and support to others, and you stood by them in their hour of peril and distress (“Did I not deliver ‎the poor that cried out and the orphaned that had none to help him?” [Job 29:12]). However, you ‎were still short of attaining that great trait of loving-kindness in two respects: (a) never did you ‎bear the communal yoke, nor did you participate in the trouble and grief of the community,<sup>A</sup> and (b) ‎you did not feel the pain of [i.e., empathize with] the individual sufferer. As a man blessed with a ‎good heart, you may have momentarily pitied the orphan. You had vast amounts of money and ‎you wanted for nothing, hence you gave a respectable amount of tzedakah [charity]. However, ‎loving-kindness encompasses more than fleeting sentiment and cheap sentimentality. Loving-‎kindness demands more than a momentary tear and a cold coin.<sup>B</sup> Loving-kindness means ‎empathizing with one’s fellow man, identifying with his hurt and feeling responsibility for his fate. ‎You did not possess this attribute of overflowing loving-kindness [in imitation of the Creator], ‎neither in your public nor in your personal relationships.‎
You ‎were a contemporary of Jacob,<sup>4</sup> who wrestled with Laban, Esau, and the angel at the stream ‎of ‎Yabok ‎‎(Genesis 32:23–32). Did you help Jacob with advice? Who was Jacob? A poor shepherd. ‎And ‎you? You ‎were rich and a man of influence. Had you related to Jacob with appropriate ‎sympathy ‎and with ‎steadfast loving kindness, he would not have had to pass through such a ‎multitude ‎of ‎tribulations.‎
You lived in the time of Moses, and you were numbered among the advisers of ‎Pharaoh. Did ‎you ‎lift a finger when Pharaoh issued his evil decree that “Every son that is born you shall ‎cast into ‎the ‎river” (Exodus 1:22), or when the oppressors enslaved your brethren with back-‎breaking ‎work? ‎You were silent then and did not protest, for you were afraid of identifying ‎yourself with ‎the ‎unfortunate slaves. To toss them a coin? Yes; but to publicly demonstrate for ‎them? No! You ‎were ‎afraid that you would be accused of dual-loyalty.‎
You were active in the generation of ‎‏ ‏Ezra and Nehemiah, the returnees to Zion. You, Job, ‎with ‎your wealth and influence, could have hastened the process of settling the Land of Israel ‎and ‎rebuilding the Temple. However, your ear was deafened and did not heed the historical cries ‎of ‎the nation.‎
You did not storm out in protest against the Sanballites, the Samaritans, and the rest of ‎Israel’s ‎enemies who wanted to destroy the Yishuv and extinguish the spark of the last hope of ‎God’s ‎people. What did you do in the hour when the returnees from the Diaspora cried out from ‎the ‎depths of suffering and despair: “The strength of the bearers of the burdens has faltered ‎and ‎there is much rubbish, so that we are not able to build the wall”(Nehemiah 4:4)? You sat ‎with ‎folded arms! You did not participate in the travail of those who fought for Judaism, for Israel, ‎and ‎the redemption. Never did you bring even one sacrifice on their behalf. All these years ‎you ‎worried only about your own welfare and only for your own benefit did you pray and ‎offer ‎sacrifices:‎
<i>And so it was when the days of their feasting were over, that Job sent word to his children ‎to ‎sanctify themselves and he [Job] rose up early in the morning, and offered burnt offerings for ‎each ‎of them all, for Job said: “It may be that my sons have sinned, and blasphemed God in ‎their ‎hearts.</i>” —Job 1:5.‎
Did you once, Job, participate in a stranger’s grief to the extent of making a plea on his behalf? ‎No, ‎you did not! Do you know, Job, that prayer is the province of the community, and that an ‎individual ‎does not come before the Lord to plead before Him and request the fulfillment of his ‎needs until ‎he redeems himself from isolation and self-containment and joins the community? Did ‎you forget ‎that Jewish prayer speaks in the plural (“One should Job always join together with the ‎community ‎in prayer” [TB Berakhot 3a]), and that Jewish prayer is the linking of one soul to ‎another and the ‎fusing of tempestuous hearts. You did not know how to use the formula for ‎prayer fixed by the ‎nation, which is to include yourself within the community and to help bear the ‎burden of one’s ‎fellow man. If your soul wants to comprehend the doctrine of the amelioration of ‎suffering, you ‎must grasp the secret of prayer that brings the “I” close to the other. The original ‎formula that joins ‎the individual with the experience of the community must become for you ‎second nature; and you ‎must understand the idea of loving kindness, which is realized by the one ‎who prays and who is ‎elevated from a personal self-concern to becoming one with the community. ‎You will not fulfill ‎your obligation by generously dispensing the miserable pennies with which you ‎were blessed. You ‎will only save through prayer resulting from the experience of communal travail. ‎You did not ‎understand the teaching of hesed, and you squandered My blessings. Try now to ‎comprehend the ‎lesson of suffering. Perhaps, out of pain and grief, you can undo the errors you ‎committed out of ‎illusory comfort and happiness.‎
The Holy One said to the friends of Job, “Now, therefore, take unto you seven bullocks and ‎seven ‎rams, and go to My servant Job and offer up for yourselves a burnt offering, and My servant ‎Job ‎shall pray for you” (Job 42:8). Behold, I will test Job yet another time. Let him be tested ‎publicly. ‎Does he now know how to pray for others and participate in their travail? Did he learn ‎anything in ‎the hour of retribution and divine anger? Did he adopt for himself a new style of ‎collective prayer ‎that encompasses the community? If he pleads for you, he will bring his salvation ‎and yours; “For ‎to him I will show favor” (Job 42:8). Then you shall know that Job was redeemed ‎from the narrow ‎straits of egotism and entered into the vistas of communal empathy; and that ‎social isolation has ‎ended and communal affiliation has appeared in its stead. A wonderful thing ‎happened. Job ‎suddenly understood the nature of Jewish prayer. He discovered in one moment ‎its plural voice ‎and the attribute of loving-kindness that sweeps man from the private to the public ‎domain. He ‎began to live a communal life, to feel the community’s hurts, to mourn its disasters and ‎rejoice in ‎its moments of celebration. Job’s sufferings found their true repair in his escape from the ‎prison in ‎which he had found himself, and God’s wrath was assuaged. As it is written: “And the ‎Lord ‎changed the fortunes of Job <i>when he prayed for his friends</i>” (Job 42:10).‎ 

Missing the Appointed Hour

We too are living in troubled times, in days of anger and distress. We have been afflicted ‎with ‎violent pogroms and have become accustomed to suffering. In the past fifteen years [1941–‎‎56] we ‎have undergone tortuous ordeals that are unparalleled in thousands of years of ‎diaspora, ‎degradation, and destruction. This chapter of suffering did not end with the ‎establishment of the ‎State of Israel. To this day the State is still in a condition of crisis and danger, ‎and we all fear for its ‎future. We are all eye - witnesses to the rising star of the iniquitous and to ‎the corruption of ‎international law by the Western nations out of indifference to the principles of ‎justice and ‎fairness. All try to curry favor with our enemies and bow and scrape before them with ‎false ‎humility and shameful hypocrisy. All are concerned with the welfare of our enemies, and ‎remain ‎indifferent to the suffering Jewish State (much like the rich man who stole the lamb of his ‎poor, ‎powerless, and uninfluential neighbor [II Samuel 12:1-6]).‎
The well-known metaphysical query surfaces and the sufferer asks: “Why do you show me ‎iniquity ‎and cause [us] to behold mischief  …  for the wicked man besets the righteous, so that ‎justice goes ‎out perverted?” (Habakkuk 1:3–4). Indeed, as we emphasized above, God does not ‎address this ‎question, and it is not answered. It remains hidden, beyond the realm of logic. For ‎‎“you cannot see ‎My face, for man may not see Me and live” (Exodus 33:20). When the desire for ‎rational inquiry ‎seizes man, he can do nothing but fortify his belief in the Creator, accept God’s ‎judgment, and ‎acknowledge the perfection of His action. “He is the Rock, His works are perfect: for ‎all His ways are ‎just” (Deuteronomy 32:4). If we want to ask a penetrating question at a time beset ‎by terrifying ‎nightmares, it is incumbent upon us to do so in a halakhic mode: What obligation ‎accrues to the ‎sufferer as a result of his suffering? What commanding heavenly voice breaks ‎through from the ‎midst of suffering? As we have said, this question has a solution which is ‎expressed in a simple ‎halakhah. There is no need for metaphysical speculation in order to clarify ‎the rules of rectifying ‎evil. “For it is not in Heaven” (Deuteronomy 30:12). If we succeed in ‎formulating this doctrine ‎without dealing with questions of cause and telos, we will earn a ‎complete salvation, and the ‎scriptural promise will be fulfilled for us, as it is written: “Take counsel ‎together, and it shall come to ‎naught; speak your harshnesses and they shall not come to fruition, ‎for God is with us” (Isaiah ‎‎8:10). Then and only then shall we emerge from the depths of the ‎Holocaust with enhanced ‎spiritual stature and augmented historical splendor, as it is written, “And ‎the Lord gave Job twice as ‎much as he had before” ( Job 42:10) — double in quantity and quality.‎
When the doctrine of the corrective effect of suffering is put into practice, it demands of ‎the ‎sufferer courage and spiritual discipline. He must gird himself with extraordinary strength, ‎make a ‎detached assessment of his world, examine his past and look to his future with complete ‎honesty. ‎The lesson of Job’s suffering did not come to him easily. And we, too, who are soft ‎hearted weak-‎willed, bound by fate, and devoid of spiritual strength, are now bidden by ‎Providence to adopt a ‎new attitude; to ascend and raise ourselves to a level where suffering ‎teaches us to demand from ‎ourselves redemption and deliverance. For this purpose we must look ‎at our reflection with ‎spiritual fortitude and pure objectivity. This reflection bursts through to us ‎from both the present ‎and the past.‎
If God’s grace, which is given to either an individual or a community, requires certain actions of ‎the ‎beneficiary, even if the gifts (such as wealth, honor, influence, power, etc., which are attained ‎by ‎exhausting effort) are granted to man by natural means, how much more so is it true that ‎Divine ‎gifts given supernaturally, in the form of miracles that transcend the framework of the ‎elementary ‎laws of historical causality, must subject the recipient of the miracles to God. ‎Miraculous grace ‎places upon man an absolute responsibility to fulfill the larger imperative that ‎calls out from the ‎miracle. A transcendental imperative always accompanies miraculous activity. ‎‎“Command the ‎Children of Israel” (e.g., Numbers 5:2, 28:1, 34:2, 35:2). Woe unto the beneficiary of ‎a miracle who ‎does not recognize it for what it is, and whose ear is deaf to the echo of the ‎imperative that arises ‎out of this metahistorical event. Pity the one who benefits from the miracles ‎of the Master of the ‎Universe but the spark of faith is not kindled in him, and his conscience is not ‎stirred by the sight of ‎this singular event.‎
When a miracle does not find its appropriate echo in actual deeds, a lofty vision dissipates and ‎is ‎squandered, whereupon Divine Justice indicts the ungrateful recipient of the miracle. “The ‎Holy ‎One sought to make Hezekiah the Messiah and Sennacherib, Gog of Armageddon. ‎However, ‎God’s Justice said to Him  …  ‘Hezekiah, for whom You wrought all these miracles, did not ‎sing in ‎praise before You. Shall You make him Messiah?”.<sup>5</sup> Then comes distress, the hour of ‎misery. ‎Suffering is the final warning given by Providence to the man, who is devoid of gratitude ‎for the ‎good God has done for him. To the final proclamation that issues forth from suffering, one ‎must ‎react quickly and answer the call of the Almighty, who cries out to him, “Where are you?” ‎‎(Genesis ‎‎3:9). Judaism has been very careful about not missing the appointed hour. It has a very ‎sensitive ‎time awareness; any delay is considered sinful. Man may sometimes lose his entire world ‎for but ‎one sin — that of tarrying. “But he lingered” (Genesis 19:16). What is the sin of leaving over ‎a ‎sacrifice, if not missing the appointed hour (Leviticus 19:5–8)? What is the desecration of ‎the ‎Sabbath, if not the performing of prohibited actions one second after the setting of the sun —‎‎ ‎work that just one second before was permitted? How does the loss of the ability to perform ‎a ‎‎<i>mitzvah</i> occur if not for the tarrying of a few moments, such as reciting the passages of ‎the ‎‎<i> Shema</i> after its appointed hour or the taking of the <i>Lulav</i> and <i>Etrog</i> ‎after ‎sunset, and the like? Two kings of Israel, both equally the anointed of the Lord and heroes of ‎the ‎nation, sinned, repented fully, and confessed. One God did not absolve; the other ‎was ‎immediately forgiven upon his confession. With regard to Saul, God acted in accordance with ‎the ‎demands of strict justice and tore the kingdom from him. With respect to David, He ‎tempered ‎justice with mercy and his dynasty was not wrested from his children. Why was the Holy ‎One so ‎strict with Saul and compassionate with David? The question does not require special ‎analysis. The ‎answer is quite simple. David did not miss the opportunity and immediately ‎confessed his sin; Saul ‎tarried a bit, and for this delay kingship was wrested from him. When ‎Nathan the prophet came to ‎David and uttered his cry, “You are the man!” (II Samuel 12:7), David, ‎in the blinking of an eye, ‎began his confession. “And David said to Nathan, I have sinned against ‎the Lord” (II Samuel ‎‎12:13). After he heard Samuel’s reprimand, Saul wasted one precious second, ‎a second “more ‎precious than gold and pearls” (Proverbs 20:15). “And why did you not listen to the ‎command of ‎God but instead went after the booty?” (I Samuel 15:19). Saul began to argue with ‎the prophet and ‎only later confessed: “And Saul [initially] said to Samuel: ‘Indeed I have done what ‎God has ‎commanded me to do, and I have gone along the path in which the Lord has sent me’" (I ‎Samuel ‎‎15:20). Indeed, in that confrontation, [after a moment’s reflection] he also confessed his ‎sins out ‎of a broken heart and a tempest-tossed spirit. “And Saul said  …  ‘I have sinned, for I ‎transgressed ‎God’s command and your instructions’" (I Samuel 15:24). But this confession was not ‎timely, and a ‎momentary lag such as this caused Saul to lose his kingdom. By the time Saul ‎confessed, the ‎decree was already sealed and the opportunity was lost. “The Lord has rent the ‎kingdom of Israel ‎from you” (I Samuel 15:28). If Saul had not missed the proper moment, and had ‎he not been ‎among the laggards, his dynasty would have continued.‎<sup>6</sup>
What is the essence of the story of the Song of Songs, if not the description of a paradoxical ‎and ‎tragic hesitation on the part of the love-intoxicated, anxiety stricken Lover, when the ‎opportunity, ‎couched in majestic awe, presented itself? What is it, if not the deferral of a great and ‎sublime ‎opportunity pregnant with a possibility of which she dreamed, for which she fought, which ‎she ‎sought, and for which she had searched with all the fervor of her soul? The delicate and ‎refined ‎Lover, passion-driven to her fair-eyed Beloved, who in days resplendent in brightness ‎wandered ‎the paths of the vineyards, the mountain ridges, through wheat fields and orchards, and ‎in ‎evenings bathed in the pale light of an enchanting moon or gloomy with darkness passed ‎between ‎the walls in search of her Lover — she returned one rain-stormy night to her tent, tired ‎and weary, ‎and fell asleep. The patter of quick-moving, light footsteps was heard in the stillness of ‎the tent. In ‎that mysterious and strange night, the Beloved for whom she had so hoped and kept ‎watch, ‎suddenly appeared out of the darkness and beckoned at the entrance of her tent. He ‎knocked and ‎pleaded that she open the door for Him. “Listen! My Beloved Is Knocking, saying, ‎‎‘Open to me, my ‎sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled: for my head is drenched with dew, and ‎my locks with the ‎damp of the night’” (Song of Songs 5:2). The great moment for which she had ‎been waiting with ‎such longing came at a time of inattentiveness. The elusive and secretive ‎Beloved, weary of ‎wandering and tribulations, appeared with His curly locks, black eyes, powerful ‎build, and shining ‎countenance. He stood in her doorway and thrust His hand through the hole in ‎the lock, seeking ‎shelter from the dampness of the night. He wanted to recount to her His mighty ‎love, His longing ‎and yearning for a life together filled with desire and joy, and of fulfillment of ‎expectations and ‎realization of dreams. A simple extension of the hand to turn the lock separated ‎the Lover and her ‎Beloved — the great dream from its complete fulfillment. With one leap the ‎Lover could have ‎attained all her life’s desires. “Draw me, we will run after you.  …  We will be glad ‎and rejoice in ‎you” (Song of Songs 1:4). Deceitful is the heart (Jeremiah 17:9), however, and who ‎can explain it? ‎That very night, sloth, the result of a strange inertia, took hold of the Lover. For one ‎small moment ‎the flame of yearning that burned within her was buried, the mighty desire ‎withered, and her ‎feelings and dreams were silenced. The Lover refused to leave her bed. She did ‎not open the door ‎of her tent to her handsome Beloved. A cruel confusion swept her into ‎forgetfulness and apathy. ‎The Lover became lazy and stubborn, she poured forth countless ‎excuses and pretexts to explain ‎her strange behavior. “I have removed my cloak, how shall I put it ‎on again? I have washed my ‎feet, how shall I soil them?” (Song of Songs 5:3). The Beloved ‎continued to beckon, and as His ‎beckoning became more persistent, so too did the insanity that ‎chilled and tainted the Lover.‎
So long as the whispering of the Beloved split the hush of the night, so did the heart of the ‎Lover ‎harden. Pleading and patient the Beloved continued to beckon while the minutes and hours ‎of the ‎clock were ticking away. The Lover did not respond to the voice of the Beloved. The door to ‎her ‎tent was locked shut. The opportunity was lost, and the vision of an exalted life died. True, ‎after a ‎brief delay the Lover awoke from her slumber and jumped in haste from her bed to greet ‎the ‎Beloved. “I rose up to open to my Beloved” (Song of Songs 5:5), but the leap came too late. ‎The ‎Beloved had stopped beckoning and had disappeared into the darkness of the night, “My ‎Beloved ‎had turned away, and was gone” (Song of Songs 5:6). The joy of her life was exiled. Her ‎existence ‎became a desert, a storehouse of emptiness. The episodes of feverish search returned. ‎She, the ‎Lover, still wanders through the dwellings of the shepherds seeking her Beloved.‎ 

Six Knocks

Eight years ago, in the midst of a night of the terrors of Majdanek, Treblinka, and Buchenwald; in ‎a ‎night of gas chambers and crematoria; in a night of total divine selfconcealment; in a night ruled ‎by ‎the devil of doubt and destruction who sought to sweep the Lover from her own tent into ‎the ‎Catholic Church; in a night of continuous searching for the Beloved — on that very night ‎the ‎Beloved appeared. The Almighty, who was hiding in His splendid sanctum, suddenly appeared ‎and ‎began to beckon at the tent of the Lover, who tossed and turned on her bed beset by ‎convulsions ‎and the agonies of hell. Because of the beating and knocking at the door of the ‎mournful Lover, ‎the State of Israel was born.‎
How many times did the Beloved knock on the door of the Lover? It appears to me that we ‎can ‎count at least six knocks.‎
First, the knock of the Beloved was heard in the political arena. From the point of view ‎of ‎international relations, no one will deny that the rebirth of the State of Israel, in a political ‎sense, ‎was an almost supernatural occurrence. Both Russia and the Western nations supported ‎the ‎establishment of the State of Israel. This was perhaps the one resolution on which East and ‎West ‎concurred [during the Cold War era]. I am inclined to believe that the United Nations was ‎especially ‎created for this end — for the sake of fulfilling the mission that Divine Providence had ‎placed upon ‎it. It appears to me that one cannot point to any other concrete accomplishment on ‎the part of the ‎United Nations. Our Rabbis of blessed memory already expressed this view: At ‎times rain falls on ‎account of one individual and for one blade of grass (Breishit Rabbah 66:2). I do ‎not know who the ‎representatives of the press, with their human eyes, saw to be the chairman in ‎that fateful session ‎of the General Assembly in which the creation of the State of Israel was ‎decided, but he who ‎looked carefully with his spiritual eye saw the true Chairman who conducted ‎the proceedings — ‎the Beloved. He knocked with his gavel on the lectern. Do we not interpret the ‎passage “On that ‎night the <i>king</i> could not sleep” (Esther 6:1) as meaning that the <i>King of ‎the ‎Universe</i> could not sleep? If Ahasuerus alone had been sleepless, the matter would not ‎have ‎been at all important and salvation would not have arisen on that night. If, however, the King, ‎the ‎Master of the Universe, could not sleep, as it were, redemption would be born. If just ‎anyone ‎were to have opened the session of the United Nations, the State of Israel would not have ‎been ‎born. But it was the Beloved who rapped on the Chairman’s lectern, and the miracle ‎materialized. ‎Listen! My Beloved Knocks!‎
Second, the knock of the Beloved was heard on the battlefield. The tiny defense forces of ‎‎[the ‎State of] Israel defeated the mighty Arab armies. The miracle of “the many delivered into ‎the ‎hands of the few” materialized before our eyes, and an even greater miracle happened! ‎God ‎hardened the heart of Ishmael and commanded him to go into battle against the State of ‎Israel. ‎Had the Arabs not declared war on Israel and instead supported the Partition Plan, the State ‎of ‎Israel would have remained without Jerusalem, without a major portion of the Galilee, ‎and ‎without some areas of the Negev. If thousands of years ago Pharaoh had allowed the children ‎of ‎Israel to leave immediately, as Moses had originally requested, Moses would have been bound ‎by ‎his word to return in three days. Pharaoh, however, hardened his heart and did not listen ‎to ‎Moses. “The Holy One then took Israel out with a mighty hand and by an outstretched ‎arm” ‎‎(Deuteronomy 4:34). Consequently, the force of the promise [that the children of Israel ‎would ‎return to Egypt] was vitiated. No contract that is based upon mutuality of promise binds one ‎side if ‎the other party refuses to fulfill its obligations. Listen! My Beloved Knocks!‎
Third, the Beloved also began to knock on the door of the tent of theology, and possibly this is ‎the ‎strongest beckoning. I have, on several occasions, emphasized in my remarks concerning the ‎Land ‎of Israel that the theological arguments of Christian theologians to the effect that the Holy ‎One has ‎taken away from the Community of Israel its rights to the Land of Israel, and that all of the ‎biblical ‎promises relating to Zion and Jerusalem now refer in an allegorical sense to Christianity and ‎the ‎Christian Church, were all publicly shown to be false, baseless contentions by the ‎establishment of ‎the State of Israel. One must have a broad familiarity with theological literature ‎from the time of ‎Justin Martyr down to the theologians of our own day to comprehend the full ‎extent of this marvel ‎by which the central axiom of Christian theology was shattered. We should ‎pay careful attention to ‎the learned explanation of our Secretary of State, Mr. Dulles (who served ‎as the deacon of an ‎Episcopalian Church), to a Committee of the United States Senate that the ‎Arabs hate the Jews ‎because they killed the founder of their religion. This “explanation” possesses ‎hidden and deep ‎symbolic significance. I am not a psychiatrist and surely not a psychoanalyst, but I ‎know how to ‎study Talmud, and I remember well what our Rabbis of blessed memory said about ‎Balaam: “from ‎his blessings  …  you may learn what was in his heart” (TB Sanhedrin 105b). ‎Sometimes, when a ‎person speaks too much, something of the truth slips out. When one of the ‎Senators asked the ‎Secretary of State, “Why do the Arabs hate the Jews?” he really wanted to ‎answer, “Personally, I ‎too, as a Christian, have no great love for them, because they killed our ‎messiah and consequently ‎forfeited their portion of Abraham’s heritage.” An angel sat in the ‎throat of the Secretary, or a ‎hook was put into it (as in the exegesis of the Rabbis of blessed ‎memory on the phrase “and God ‎put a word in Balaam’s mouth” [Numbers 23:5, TB Sotah 10a], ‎‎“[i.e.] he put a hook in his mouth”), ‎and instead of saying, “Our Lord” and “for myself,” he let other ‎words slip out, the “Arabs” and ‎‎“Mohammed.” In his subconscious he was terrified of the “awful” ‎fact that the Community of ‎Israel rules over Zion and Jerusalem. I find satisfaction in reading about ‎the State of Israel in the ‎Catholic and Protestant newspapers. Despite themselves they must ‎mention the name of Israel ‎when they report the news of Zion and Jerusalem, which we possess. I ‎always have a special sense ‎of satisfaction when I read in the paper that Israel’s reaction is not as ‎yet known because today is ‎Saturday and government offices are closed or when I read, on the ‎eve of Passover, an item from ‎the United Press that “Jews will sit down tonight to the seder table ‎in the hope that the miracles of ‎Egypt will return and recur today.” Listen! My Beloved Knocks!‎
Fourth, the Beloved knocks in the heart of the youth which is assimilated and perplexed. ‎The ‎period of <i> hester panim</i> in the 1940’s brought confusion among the Jewish masses ‎and ‎especially Jewish youth. Assimilation increased, and the urge to flee from Judaism and the ‎Jewish ‎people reached its apex. Fear, despair, and ignorance caused many to forsake the ‎Jewish ‎community and “climb aboard the ship,” to flee to Tarshish from the presence of the Lord ‎‎(Jonah ‎‎1:3), just as Jonah sought to flee God’s presence. A seemingly unstoppable tidal wave ‎stood over ‎us and threatened to destroy us. Suddenly, the Beloved began to beckon to the hearts ‎of the ‎perplexed, and His beckoning, the establishment of the State of Israel, at least slowed the ‎process ‎of flight. Many who were once alienated are now bound to the Jewish State with ties of ‎pride in its ‎mighty accomplishments. Many American Jews who were partially assimilated find ‎themselves ‎beset by hidden fear and concern for any crisis that the State of Israel is at the time ‎passing ‎through, and they pray for its well-being and welfare even though they are far from being ‎totally ‎committed to it. Even Jews who are hostile to the State of Israel must defend themselves ‎from the ‎strange charge of dual-loyalty and proclaim daily and declare that they have no stake in ‎the Holy ‎Land. It is good for a Jew when he cannot ignore his Jewishness and is obliged to ‎perpetually ‎answer the questions “Who are you?” and “What is your occupation?” (Jonah 1:8), ‎even when ‎extraordinary fear grips him and he does not have the strength or fortitude to answer ‎with true ‎pride, “I am a Jew, and I fear the Lord, the God of heaven” (Jonah 1:9). The unrelenting ‎question ‎of, “Who are you?” ties him to the Jewish people.‎
The very mention of the name Israel is a reminder to the fleeing Jew that he cannot escape ‎from ‎the community of Israel in whose midst he has been enmeshed from birth. Everywhere we ‎turn ‎we hear the name “Israel.” When we listen to a radio station, when we open a paper, when ‎we ‎participate in a debate on current events, we encounter the question of Israel; it is always a ‎topic ‎of public concern.‎
This phenomenon is extremely important for Jews who are afflicted with self-hatred and want ‎to ‎turn away from Judaism and run for their lives. They hide, like Jonah in his day, in the recesses ‎of ‎the ship (Jonah 1:5) and seek to “slumber” (Jonah 1:5). The Captain, however, does not ‎permit ‎them to ignore their fate. The shadow of Israel continuously chases after them. Random ‎thoughts ‎and paradoxical reflections arise from the subconscious of even the most confirmed ‎assimilationist. ‎And when a Jew begins to think, to reflect, when he is unable to sleep, it is ‎impossible to know ‎where his thoughts will take him and how his doubts will be expressed. Listen! ‎My Beloved ‎Knocks!‎
The fifth knock of the Beloved is perhaps the most important. For the first time in the annals of ‎our ‎exile, Divine Providence has amazed our enemies with the astounding discovery that Jewish ‎blood ‎is not cheap! If the antisemites describe this phenomenon as being “an eye for an eye,” we ‎will ‎agree with them. If we want to courageously defend our continued national and ‎historical ‎existence, we must, from time to time, interpret the verse of an “eye for an eye” literally. ‎So many ‎‎“eyes” were lost in the course of our bitter exile because we did <i>not</i> repay hurt for ‎hurt. The ‎time has come for us to fulfill the simple meaning of “an eye for an eye.” (Exodus 21:24) ‎Of course, I ‎am sure everyone recognizes that I am an adherent of the Oral Law, and from my ‎perspective ‎there is no doubt that the verse refers to monetary restitution, as defined by ‎halakhah. However, ‎with respect to the Mufti and Nasser I would demand that we interpret the ‎verse in accordance ‎with its literal meaning — the taking of an actual eye! Pay no attention to the ‎saccharine ‎suggestions of known assimilationists and of some Jewish socialists who stand pat in ‎their ‎rebelliousness and think they are still living in Bialystok, Brest-Litovsk, and Minsk of the year ‎‎1905, ‎and openly declare that revenge is forbidden to the Jewish people in any place, at any time, ‎and ‎under all circumstances. “Vanity of vanities!” (Ecclesiastes 1:2) Revenge is forbidden when it ‎is ‎pointless, but if one is aroused thereby to self-defense, it is the most elementary right of man ‎to ‎take his revenge.‎
The Torah has always taught that a man is permitted, indeed, has a sacred obligation, to ‎defend ‎himself. With the verse, “If a burglar is caught in the act of breaking in” (Exodus 22:1), the ‎Torah ‎establishes the halakhah that one may defend not only one’s life but his property as well.<sup>7</sup> If ‎the ‎thief who comes to take the property of the householder is capable of killing the ‎householder ‎‎(should the householder not comply with his demands), the householder may rise up ‎against the ‎criminal and kill him. For good reason the Torah relates that two of its great heroes, ‎Abraham and ‎Moses, took sword in hand to defend their brethren: “And when Abraham heard ‎that his kinsman ‎was taken captive, he led forth his retainers” (Genesis 14:14). “And when Moses ‎saw the Egyptian ‎smite a Jew  …  he struck down the Egyptian” (Exodus 2:11–12). This behavior ‎does not contradict ‎the principle of loving-kindness and compassion. On the contrary, a passive ‎position, without self-‎defense, may sometimes lead to the most awesome brutality. “And I will ‎gain honor from Pharaoh, ‎and all his hosts, his chariots, and his horsemen. And the Egyptians will ‎know that I am the Lord” ‎‎(Exodus 14:17–18). God did not seek honor and recognition. He wanted ‎Pharaoh, Moses’ ‎contemporary, to know that he must pay a high price for his edict that “Every ‎male child born shall ‎be cast into the river” (Exodus 1:22). His present desire is that the blood of ‎Jewish children who ‎were slain as they recited the eighteen benedictions of the daily [Amidah] ‎prayer shall also be ‎avenged. When God smote the Egyptians, He sought to demonstrate that ‎there will always be ‎accountability for the spilling of Jewish blood. At present, it is necessary not ‎only to convince the ‎dictator of Egypt [Nasser], but the self-righteous Nehru, the Foreign Office in ‎London, and the ‎sanctimonious members of the United Nations, that Jewish blood is not cheap. ‎Therefore, how ‎laughable it is when they try to persuade us to rely on the declaration of the three ‎Great Powers ‎guaranteeing the status quo. We all know from experience what value can be ‎attached to the ‎pronouncements of the British Foreign Office and the so-called friendship of ‎certain officials in our ‎State Department. In general, how absurd is the request that an entire ‎people be dependent on ‎the kindnesses of others and remain without the ability to defend itself. ‎Public and private honor is ‎dependent upon the possibility of defending one’s life and one’s honor. ‎A people that cannot ‎defend its freedom and tranquillity is neither free nor independent. The third ‎of the phrases of ‎Divine redemption is “And I shall redeem you with an outstretched hand and ‎with great ‎judgments” (Exodus 6:6).Thank God we have lived to see the day when, with the help ‎of God, ‎Jews have it within their power to defend themselves.‎
Let us not forget that the poison of Hitlerite anti-Semitism (which made Jews fair game to all) ‎still ‎permeates this generation, which looked with equanimity upon the horrible scene of ‎the ‎suffocation of millions in gas chambers as a normal event that need not be challenged. ‎The ‎antidote for this venom that poisoned minds and dulled hearts is the readiness of the State ‎of ‎Israel to defend the lives of its citizens. Listen! My Beloved Knocks!‎
The sixth beckoning, of which we should also not lose sight, was heard at the time of the ‎opening ‎of the gates of the Land of Israel. A Jew escaping from an enemy’s land now knows that ‎he can ‎find refuge in the land of his forefathers. This is a new phenomenon in the annals of our ‎history. ‎Up to now, when a Jewish population was uprooted, it wandered in the wilderness of the ‎nations ‎without finding shelter and habitation. The shutting of the gates in the face of the exiled ‎caused ‎total destruction for much of the Jewish people. Now the situation has changed. When any ‎nation ‎expels its Jewish minority, the exiled now direct their steps to Zion, and she, as a ‎compassionate ‎mother, absorbs them. We are all witnesses to the settlement of Oriental Jewry in ‎Israel over the ‎last several years. Who knows what would have been in store for these brothers of ‎ours in the ‎lands of their origin if not for the State of Israel, which brought them to her in planes ‎and ships? ‎Had Israel been born before the Hitlerian Holocaust, hundreds of thousands of Jews ‎could have ‎been saved from the gas chambers and the crematoria. The miracle of the State tarried ‎somewhat, ‎and in the wake of its delay, thousands and tens of thousands of Jews were taken to ‎the slaughter. ‎Now that the hour of <i>hester panim</i> has passed, however, the possibility ‎exists for Jews who ‎are pried from their homes to take root in the Holy Land. This should not be ‎taken lightly. Listen! ‎My Beloved Knocks!‎ 

The Obligation of Torah Judaism to the Land of Israel

What was our reaction to the beckoning of the voice of the Beloved, to the munificence of ‎His ‎loving-kindness and miracles? Did we get out of our beds and immediately open the door, or ‎did ‎we continue to rest like the Lover [in the story of the Song of Songs], and were we too lazy to ‎get ‎out of our beds? “I have washed my feet, how shall I soil them?” (Song of Songs 5:3).‎
All the trembling and fear for the geographical integrity of the State of Israel, all the suggestions ‎of ‎our enemies which are directed at territorial concessions by the State of Israel, and all of ‎the ‎brazen demands of the Arabs for boundary changes are based on only one fact: the Jews have ‎not ‎populated the Negev and established hundreds of settlements there. Had the Negev been ‎settled ‎with hundreds of thousands of Jews, even Nasser would never have dreamed of the ‎possibility of ‎rending it from the State of Israel. Wide and unpopulated expanses constantly and ‎perpetually ‎endanger the tranquility of the State. The Torah has already emphasized this notion ‎when it states, ‎‎“You shall not be allowed to quickly destroy them, so that the wild animals will not ‎over whelm ‎you” (Exodus 23:29). The fact that the Jews have conquered the Negev is not enough, ‎its ‎settlement is what is important. The great sage Maimonides ruled that the first sanctification of ‎the ‎Land of Israel was not a lasting one because it was the result of a military conquest, which ‎was ‎annulled by the violent attack of an enemy whose army was vast and armaments numerous, ‎who ‎conquered the Land and took it from us. The second sanctification of the land, which was ‎carried ‎out through occupation and settlement by Divine sanction, through toil and sweat, was ‎never ‎annulled.<sup>8</sup> The sanctity that is based on the settlement of the Land is, simply stated, for now ‎and for ‎all time! We are terribly guilty for this gross negligence. American Jewry could have ‎certainly ‎accelerated the process of colonization. Yet, why should we examine the faults of others ‎and place ‎the responsibility on the shoulders of nonobservant Jews? Let us admit our own faults ‎and confess ‎to our own derelictions. Among the Jews of America, Orthodox Jews bear the most ‎blame for the ‎slow pace of the conquest of the Land through settlement. It was for us, the loyalists ‎of Judaism, ‎to heed the call of the Beloved more acutely, and to respond to it immediately with ‎extraordinary ‎effort. In commenting on the verse “And I shall lay desolate the land” (Leviticus ‎‎26:32), Rashi states ‎in the name of <i>Midrash Torat Kohanim</i>: “This is a boon to Israel, that its ‎enemies will not ‎find tranquility in its land when it shall be bereft of its true inhabitants.” The Land ‎of Israel cannot ‎be built by any other nation or people. Only the Jewish people have it within their ‎power to settle ‎the Land and make its desolation blossom. The Creator’s promise was turned into a ‎wondrous ‎reality in different periods in the annals of the history of the Land of Israel. We cannot ‎forget even ‎for a moment, that the Land of Israel, like a magnet, attracted the nations of the world ‎‎— both ‎Christians and Muslims. The Crusades in the Middle Ages were undertaken with the ‎purpose of ‎conquering the Land of Israel and populating it with Christians. All the toil of the ‎Crusaders was for ‎naught. They did not strike roots in the Land. Even the indigenous Muslims did ‎not succeed in ‎properly settling the Land. It remained a barren desert, as is said, “And your land ‎shall become a ‎desolation” (Leviticus 26:33). Even in modern times, when European nations, in the ‎seventeenth ‎and eighteenth centuries, settled and populated entire continents, the Land of Israel ‎remained ‎desolate and in a more primitive state than its neighboring Arab lands: Egypt, Syria, and ‎the ‎Lebanon. Had the Land been settled by an industrious, successful, and cultured people, had ‎the ‎Land been properly populated and developed, our attachment to it would have been eroded ‎by ‎the course of events, and no Jewish foot would have trod upon it. Strangers would have eaten ‎its ‎bounty and its fruit, and our rights would have become null and void. However, the Land of ‎Israel ‎did not betray the Jewish people. It was loyal to them, awaiting redemption throughout ‎the ‎years. Logic dictates, then, that when the Jewish community was given the opportunity to ‎return ‎to its Land — which had withheld its treasures from foreigners and stored them for us — ‎Orthodox ‎Jews should have hastened to perform so great a mitzvah, to plunge with joy and ‎enthusiasm into ‎the very midst of this holy work: the building and settling of the Land. However, to ‎our regret, we ‎have not reacted that way. When the “desolate one,” which longingly waited for us ‎from era to ‎era, invited us to come and redeem her from her desolation, and when the Beloved ‎who watched ‎over the desolation for almost nineteen hundred years, and decreed that during this ‎time no tree ‎should grow, and no wells should fructify the Land, beckoned at the door of the ‎Lover, we the ‎Orthodox Jews — the Lover — did not bestir ourselves from our beds to open the ‎door for our ‎Beloved. If we had contiguous settlements throughout the Land from Eilat to Dan, our ‎situation ‎would be very different.‎
Let us publicly and frankly confess: we complain about certain Israeli leaders and their ‎attitude ‎toward the values of our tradition and religious practice. The complaints are justified. We ‎have ‎serious charges against the secular leadership of the Land of Israel. However, are only they to ‎be ‎blamed, and are we as faultless and pure as the heavenly angels? Such an assumption is ‎without ‎foundation. We could have extended our influence and done something to shape the ‎spiritual ‎character of the Land if we had but hurried to awaken from our slumber and open the ‎door for the ‎Beloved who is knocking. I fear that we Orthodox Jews are still enveloped in sweet ‎slumber. If we ‎were to establish more religious kibbutzim, if we were to build more housing for ‎religious ‎immigrants, if we were to establish an extensive system of schools, our situation would ‎be ‎completely different. Then there would be no need to come forward with complaints against ‎the ‎leaders of other movements. We Orthodox Jews suffer from a unique illness that is not found ‎in ‎nonreligious Jews (with some rare exceptions). We are all miserly. We do not excel when it ‎comes ‎to giving generously, in comparison with the rest of American Jewry. We are satisfied to ‎part with a ‎couple of pennies, and we demand, in recompense for our piddling donation, our ‎reward in this ‎world and a share in the first allocations. Thus, our dignity has reached its nadir, and ‎we do not ‎exercise appropriate influence on Jewish life here in America and on the course of ‎events in Israel. ‎Great and free America is a land of charity. The government itself, in the years ‎‎1945 to 1956, ‎disbursed $55 billion, $350 million in foreign aid projects (the numbers are truly ‎beyond our ‎comprehension), and philanthropists are truly respected in this land that knows how ‎to give and ‎help in such proportions. Accordingly, we Orthodox Jews are not entitled to the ‎greatness that ‎others possess. Lately, we have become experts at criticism and fault-finding. (“And ‎the priest shall ‎look on him, and pronounce him unclean” [Leviticus 13:3]). We know well how to ‎criticize, to look ‎for blemishes and to express opinions as self-styled experts. One thing, however, ‎escapes us, and ‎that is that the priest who pronounces defilement must leave the encampment to ‎be with the ‎afflicted sufferer so as to purify him. “And the priest shall leave the encampment  ...  ‎and the priest ‎shall command” (Leviticus 14:3–4). We must build not just a few small nooks, whose ‎impact is ‎unfelt, but central institutions throughout the length and breadth of America and the ‎Land of ‎Israel. We have an obligation to purify those who are “outside the encampment,” who are ‎situated ‎in the huge camp of ignorance. To this end, there is a need for vast sums; and we, the ‎Orthodox ‎Jews, are far from being generous and charitable. For this reason, our institutions here ‎and in Israel ‎suffer from want. The Religious Zionist movement especially has to content itself with ‎paltry sums. ‎Due to lack of funds, the movement cannot function appropriately. Indeed, the loyal ‎Lover is quite ‎splendid, her eyes are like twin doves and her face radiates a beautiful charm (Song ‎of Songs 1:15, ‎‎4:1). She is much fairer than the nonreligious lover. However, beauty is vain and ‎grace is deceptive‎‎ (Proverbs 31:30) if this Lover is stingy and very lazy. “I have removed my cloak, ‎how shall I put it on ‎again?” (Song of Songs 5:3). When one calls a rich Jew and asks him to give to a ‎just cause, he ‎answers, “I am going to Florida, and this year I have decided to stay in a luxury hotel, ‎and I don’t ‎have the wherewithal to give you what you requested.” What did the scholar tell the ‎King of the ‎Khazars? “You have embarrassed me, King of Khazars! …  And our saying ‘worship at His ‎holy hill’ ‎‎[Psalms 99:9] is but the chirping of a starling” (<i>HaKuzari</i> 2:24). Do we not hear in ‎our ‎trembling over the safety and tranquility of the Land of Israel in our day, the beckoning of ‎the ‎Beloved who begs the Lover to let Him in? He has already been beckoning for eight years, and ‎still ‎He has not been properly responded to. Nonetheless, He continues to beckon. To our ‎good ‎fortune, our inherited Land has become more beautiful. The Beloved has not shown the ‎Lover any ‎favoritism, but He has compassion for her. The Beloved beckoned for only a short ‎moment that ‎night and disappeared, yet with us He has exhibited extraordinary patience. It is ‎eight years that ‎He has continued to beckon. Hopefully, we will not miss the opportunity!!‎

The Covenants of Sinai and Egypt

When we delve into our historical existence we come to an important realization regarding our ‎‎<i>‎Weltanschauung</i>. The Torah relates that the Holy One concluded two Covenants with ‎Israel. ‎One Covenant was made in Egypt. “And I shall take you unto Me for a people, and I will be ‎to you a ‎God” (Exodus 6:7). The second Covenant was at Mount Sinai. “And he [Moses] took the ‎book of ‎the covenant  …  and he said: ‘Behold the blood of the covenant which the Lord made with ‎you in ‎agreement with all these words’” (Exodus 24:7-8). (The third Covenant, in the Book ‎of ‎Deuteronomy (28:69), is identical in content and purpose to the Covenant of Sinai.)<sup>9</sup> What is ‎the ‎essence of these two Covenants? It appears to me that this question was already answered at ‎the ‎beginning of our essay. Just as Judaism distinguished fate from destiny in the realm of ‎personal ‎individuality, so it also differentiated between these two concepts in the sphere of our ‎national-‎historical existence. The individual is tethered to his nation with bonds of fate and chains ‎of ‎destiny. In accordance with this postulate, one can say that the Covenant of Egypt was a ‎Covenant ‎of Fate, and the Covenant of Sinai was one of destiny.‎
What is the Covenant of Fate? Fate signifies in the life of the nation, as it does in the life of ‎the ‎individual, an existence of compulsion. A strange force merges all individuals into one unit. ‎The ‎individual is subject and subjugated against his will to the national fate/existence, and it ‎is ‎impossible for him to avoid it and be absorbed into a different reality. The environment expels ‎the ‎Jew who flees from the presence of God, so that he is awakened from his slumber, like Jonah ‎the ‎prophet, who awoke to the voice of the ship’s captain demanding to know his personal ‎national- ‎religious identity.‎
The historical loneliness of the Jew percolates from a feeling of compulsive fate. He is as alone ‎in ‎his life on earth as in his death. The concept of <i>kever yisrael</i> emphasizes the Jew’s ‎strange ‎detachment from the world. Sociologists and psychologists may say what they wish about ‎the ‎inexplicable isolation of the Jew. Their explanations are nothing more than barren ‎speculation, ‎incapable of rationally describing the phenomenon. Jewish separateness belongs to ‎the ‎framework of the Covenant of Fate that was concluded in Egypt. In truth, Judaism and ‎withdrawal ‎from the world are synonymous. Even before the exile in Egypt, separateness ‎descended upon ‎our world with the appearance of the first Jew, our father Abraham. Abraham ‎the Hebrew ‎‎(<i>ivri</i>) lived apart. “The whole world was on one side (<i>ever</i>), and he on ‎the other ‎side” (Bereshit Rabbah 42:8). Balaam, when he gazed upon the Israelite camp, ‎understood the ‎wonder of the experience of Jewish separateness and proclaimed with ‎amazement: “They are a ‎nation dwelling alone and shall not be reckoned among the nations” ‎‎(Numbers 23:9). Even if a Jew ‎reaches the pinnacle of social and political accomplishment, he will ‎not be able to free himself from ‎the chains of isolation. Paradoxical fate watches over the isolation ‎and uniqueness of the Jew, ‎despite his apparent integration into his non-Jewish environment. ‎Even people of power and ‎authority, such as Joseph, the regent of Egypt, was separated from ‎Egyptian society and remained ‎alone in his tent. “And they served him [Joseph] by himself  …  and ‎for the Egyptians  …  by ‎themselves.” (Genesis 43:32). (Egyptians could not eat with the Hebrews, ‎because it was a taboo ‎for them). Before his death Joseph pleaded with his brothers, “When God ‎will surely remember ‎you and bring you out of this land, you shall carry up my bones from here” ‎‎(Genesis 50:25). For ‎despite my greatness and glory I am tied to you and your existence both in life ‎and in death. This ‎singular, inexplicable phenomenon of the individual clinging to the community ‎and feeling ‎alienated from the outside world was forged and formed in Egypt. There Israel was ‎elevated to the ‎status of a nation in the sense of a unity<sup>10</sup> from which arises uniqueness as well .The ‎awareness of ‎the Fate Covenant in all of its manifestations is an integral part of our historical-‎metaphysical ‎essence.‎
When the exclusive fate-driven individual stands face to face with God, he encounters the God ‎of ‎the Jews, who is revealed to man by the experience of loneliness and from the inexorability ‎of ‎existence — from the fate awareness that overcomes and subjugates man. He is the Almighty ‎who ‎does not wait for the supplications of man and his voluntary summons. He imposes His ‎sovereignty ‎upon him against his will. A Jew cannot banish the God of the Jews from his world. ‎Even if he ‎desecrates his Shabbat, defiles his table and his bed, and tries to deny his identity, he ‎will not ‎escape the dominion of the God of the Jews, which follows him like a shadow. So long as ‎a ‎person’s physiognomy testifies to his birth, so long as Jewish blood flows in his veins, and so ‎long ‎as his flesh is Jewish, he is compelled to serve the God of the Hebrews. There is no counsel ‎or ‎tactic that can oppose Him. Even if the Jew who spurns his people should soar to the ‎farthest ‎heavens, from there the hand of the God of the Hebrews shall reach him. Where shall the ‎Jew go ‎to flee the God of the Hebrews and where can he escape from His presence?‎
<i>And they said: The God of the Hebrews has revealed Himself to us. Please allow us to take a ‎three ‎days’ journey into the desert, and we shall deliver sacrifices unto God lest he smite us ‎with ‎pestilence or sword.</i> —Exodus 5:3‎.‎
Failure to cleave to the commands of the God of the Hebrews results in punishment and ‎the ‎destruction of existence.‎
The Covenant of Fate is also expressed in positive categories that stem from the awareness ‎of ‎shared fate. There are four facets to this rare state of mind.‎
First, the awareness of shared fate appears as that of shared experience. We are all in the realm ‎of ‎a shared fate that binds together the different <i> strata</i> of the nation and does ‎not ‎discriminate between classes and individuals. Fate does not distinguish between nobility ‎and ‎commonfolk, between rich and poor, between a prince dressed in royal purple velvet and a ‎poor ‎man who goes begging from door to door, between a pious Jew and an assimilationist. ‎Even ‎though we may speak a mix of different languages, even if we are citizens of different lands, ‎even ‎if we look different (one being short and black, the other tall and blond), even if we live ‎in ‎different economic systems and under different living conditions (the one living in a royal ‎palace, ‎the other in a humble cave), we have but one fate. When the Jew in the cave is attacked, ‎the ‎security of the Jew standing in the courtyard of the king is jeopardized. “Do not think in your ‎soul ‎that you, from all the Jews [will escape and], shall flee to the palace of the king” ‎‎(Esther ‎‎4:13). Queen Esther robed in majesty and Mordechai wearing sackcloth were situated in ‎the same ‎historical nexus. “All Israel are bound together (<i>haverim</i>)” (TB Sotah 37a). We are ‎all ‎persecuted, or we are all saved together.‎ 
Second, the awareness of shared historical experience leads to the experience of shared suffering. ‎A feeling of empathy is a basic fact in the consciousness of shared Jewish fate. The suffering of one ‎segment of the nation is the lot of the entire community. The scattered and separated people ‎mourns and is consoled together. Prayer, the cry, and the consolation were formulated, as I ‎emphasized above, in the plural. Supplications that emerge from the depths of travail are not ‎confined to the suffering and affliction of the groaning individual. They encompass the needs of ‎the entire community. When there is a sick person in one’s house, one prays not only for that ‎person but for all the sick of Israel. When one enters the house of a mourner to comfort him and ‎to wipe the tear from the bereaved’s sad face, he directs his words of condolence to “all the ‎mourners of Zion and Jerusalem.”<sup>B</sup> The slightest disturbance in the state of an individual or a sector ‎of the people should trouble all segments of the nation throughout their dispersion. It is forbidden ‎and it is impossible for the individual to isolate himself from his fellow and not participate in his ‎suffering. If the assumption of shared historical experience is accurate, then shared suffering is its ‎direct corollary.‎
One of the great preachers of the last generation put it well when he likened the people of Israel ‎to the two-headed son about whom it was asked in the Talmud whether he would, as a dual-‎personality, take two shares of his familial inheritance or only one portion.<sup>11</sup> So too one may ask: ‎Has the dispersal of the nation in the Diaspora, and its taking root in different surroundings, caused ‎its spiritual disintegration, or has the unity of the people not been lost despite the fact it has grown ‎many heads and speaks many languages, with different customs and diverse ways of life? In a ‎word, is the Jewish Diaspora one or not? The answer, continued the preacher, to the question of ‎the unity of the people is identical with the decision rendered in the <i>beth midrash</i><sup>c</sup> to the ‎litigant who asked about the status of the two-headed heir. Let them pour boiling water on the ‎head of the one, said the Rabbi, and let us see the other’s reaction. If the other screams in pain, ‎then the two comprise one personality, and they shall receive one share of the inheritance. ‎However, if the second does not feel the suffering of the first, then they are two individuals ‎enfolded in one body, and they shall receive two shares of the estate.‎
With respect to the unity of the nation as well, one must firmly establish that so long as there is ‎shared suffering, in the sense of “I am with him in his distress” (Psalms 91:15), there is unity. If the ‎Jew, on whom Providence has shined Its countenance, and who believes that with respect to ‎himself the sharpness of hatred has been removed, and estrangement from his surroundings has ‎passed, nevertheless still feels the distress of the nation and the burden of its fate/existence, then ‎his bond to the nation has not been severed. If boiling water is poured on the head of a Moroccan ‎Jew, the prim and proper Jew in Paris or London must scream, and by feeling the pain, shows ‎himself loyal to the nation. The breakup of the people and the constriction of its self-image are the ‎result of a lack of empathy.‎
Third, shared suffering is expressed in a feeling of shared obligation and responsibility. When the ‎children of Israel left Egypt, Moses and Aaron fell on their faces, pleaded before God, and said: ‎‎“Lord, God of Hosts of all flesh, shall one man sin and You direct divine wrath at the entire ‎congregation?” (Numbers 16:22).This prayer accomplished that which the “shepherds of Israel” ‎‎(Ezekiel 34:2) sought. The Holy One agreed with their action and only punished Korah and his ‎cohorts. However, God only demonstrated this loving-kindness momentarily. Forever after, the “I” ‎is ensnared in the sin of his fellow, if he had it within his power to reprimand, admonish, and bring ‎his neighbor to repentance. The people of Israel have a collective responsibility, both halakhic and ‎moral, for one another. The discrete units coalesce into a single halakhic-moral unity, with one all-‎encompassing and normative conscience and consciousness. The halakhah has already decreed ‎that “all Jews are sureties for one another” (TB Shavu’ot 39a), such that one who has already ‎fulfilled his personal mitzvah is not considered fully absolved thereby and may therefore fulfill the ‎obligation on behalf of others who have not as yet done so. The “I” is not exempt from its ‎obligation so long as his neighbor has not fulfilled that which is incumbent upon him. There is a ‎special covenant of mutual responsibility among the children of Israel. This covenant is expressed ‎in the blessings and imprecations pronounced on Mounts Gerizim and Ebal (Deuteronomy 11:29). ‎It is based upon the notion of peoplehood revealed to Moses in Egypt. Out of this concept grew ‎the covenant of mutual obligation. Moses, the dean of all prophets, in relating this covenant of ‎mutual obligation, emphasized: “For that He may establish you today unto Him as a people, and He ‎shall be unto you as a God” (Deuteronomy 29:12). He thus returned to the formulation of the ‎Covenant of Egypt. “And I will take you to Me as a people, and I will be your God” (Exodus 6:7). ‎Here the notion of shared fate was elevated from the plane of communal-political suffering to that ‎of halakhic and moral responsibility. We are all sureties for one another, as it is said: “And the ‎revelations belong to us and to our children forever” (Deuteronomy 29:28).‎<sup>12</sup>
Sharing of responsibility is not simply a halakhic-speculative notion, but a central fact in the history ‎of Israel’s relations with other nations. Our neighbors perpetually blame us for the transgressions ‎of our co-religionists, and they turn the Talmud’s rhetorical question of, “[If] Tobias sins; should ‎Zigud be whipped?” (TB Pesahim 113b), into an everyday reality that no one questions. The ‎identification of the activities of the individual with the deeds of the nation is a fundamental truth ‎of the history of our people. Our enemies do not allow the individual Jew to remain alone in his ‎own confines. They take him out of his own four cubits into the public domain and there harshly ‎criticize the [entire] community because of him. This “standard” is only employed in relation to ‎Israel and not with respect to other nations. No one has yet accused a Russian or a Chinese ‎individual of being an agent of international communism and then held him liable, by virtue of his ‎national origin, for the nations that lead the communist regime and aspire to subjugate the world ‎under this cruel order. In contrast to this logical and humane approach to the members of other ‎nations, the Jewish people as a whole is slandered, because of a handful of Jewish apostates, [with ‎the allegation] that it is sympathetic to communism. We have yet to be absolved from this libel. ‎Once again, the explanations of the experts for this phenomenon are not satisfactory. It makes no ‎difference whether the causes are found in the realm of psychopathology or in the sphere of social ‎history. Scientific classification is beside the point; the phenomenon remains obscure and ‎inaccessible. We Orthodox Jews have one solution to this riddle: the hand of the Covenant of Fate, ‎which was concluded in Egypt on the basis of the absolute uniqueness of the nation, is revealed ‎amidst such an unintelligible reality.‎
The commandment to sanctify God’s Name and the prohibition against desecrating it<sup>13</sup> are clear in ‎light of the principle of shared responsibility and obligation. The activity of the individual is debited ‎to the account of the many. Every wrong committed by an individual stains the name of Israel ‎throughout the world. The individual is responsible not only for his own conscience but also for the ‎collective conscience of the nation. If he conducts himself properly, he has sanctified the name of ‎the nation and the name of the God of Israel; if he has sinned, he causes shame to befall the ‎nation and desecrates its God.‎ 
Fourth, shared experience is expressed by cooperation. The obligation to perform acts of charity ‎‎(<i>tzedakah</i>) and loving-kindness (<i>hesed</i>) is derived from the experience of unity that ‎is so all-pervading and encompassing. When the Torah deals with these precepts it uses the term ‎‎“brother” rather than “friend.”‎
"And if your brother shall become impoverished … you shall support him … and he shall live among ‎you". <br> —Leviticus 25:35 (emphasis added).‎
"Do not harden your heart, and do not shut your hand against your needy <i>brother</i> ‎…‎ open ‎your hand to your poor and destitute <i>brother</i> in your land." <br> —Deuteronomy 15:7, 11 ‎‎(emphasis added)‎
Confrontation with the fateful reality of the nation in all of its strangeness instills the Jew with his ‎common awareness in the realm of social activism. The shared situation of all Jews, whether in the ‎objective realm, as an event, or in the subjective realm, as suffering, taps the sources in the ‎individual’s soul for loving-kindness and pity for his brethren, who are in trouble and that in a ‎roundabout way touches him as well. Maimonides formulated this idea in his laconic but content-‎filled manner.‎
All Jews and those attached to them are like brothers, as it is said, “You are sons to the Lord your ‎God” (Deut. 14:1), and if a brother will not show mercy to his brother, then who will have mercy on ‎him? And to whom can the poor of Israel look for help — to those other nations who hate and ‎persecute? They can look for help only to their brethren.‎<sup>14, D</sup>
From [both] the midst of a heritage which is compulsive and fateful and a terrible aloneness which ‎are the source of the unity of the nation, issues forth the attribute of loving-kindness which ‎summons and drives the fateful collective to imbue their unity with positive content by means of ‎the constant participation in events, suffering, consciousness and acts of mutual assistance. The ‎isolated Jew finds his solace in his active adhesion to the whole and by tearing down barriers of ‎egotistical-separatist existence, and by joining his neighbors. The oppressive experience of fate ‎finds its connection in the coalescing of individual personal experiences into the new entity called a ‎nation. The obligation of love for another person emanates from the self-awareness of the people ‎of fate, which is alone and perplexed by its uniqueness. For this was the Covenant of Egypt ‎concluded.‎ 

The Covenant of Destiny

What is the Covenant of Destiny? In the life of a people (as in the life of an individual), ‎destiny ‎signifies an existence that it has chosen of its own free will and in which it finds the full ‎realization ‎of its historical existence. Instead of a passive, inexorable existence into which a nation ‎is thrust, an ‎Existence of Destiny manifests itself as an active experience full of purposeful, ‎movement, ‎ascension, aspirations, and fulfillment. The nation is enmeshed in its destiny because ‎of its longing ‎for an enhanced state of being, an existence replete with substance and direction. ‎Destiny is the ‎font out of which flow the unique self-elevation of the nation and the unending ‎stream of Divine ‎inspiration that will not run dry so long as the path of the People is demarcated by ‎the laws of God. ‎The life of destiny is a directed life, the result of conscious direction and free will.‎
While the Covenant of Egypt was concluded without the consent of the people of Israel (the ‎Holy ‎One took them unto Him before He consulted with them: “And I will take you unto Me as ‎a ‎people” (Exodus 6:7), the Covenant of Sinai was offered to them before it was promulgated. ‎The ‎Holy One sent Moses to tell them His message, and Moses returned to the Holy One with ‎the ‎people’s answer. The halakhah perceives the Covenant of Sinai as a contract which is valid ‎if ‎written with the consent of the obligated party, in this case, the community of Israel. ‎The ‎proclamation that “We shall do and we shall hear” (Exodus 24:7) is the foundation of the Torah.‎<sup>15</sup>
What is the content of the Covenant of Sinai? It is a special way of life that directs the individual ‎to ‎the fulfilment of an end beyond the reach of the man of fate — the striving of man to resemble ‎his ‎Creator via selftranscendence. The creative activity that fulfills the Covenant of Destiny flows ‎from ‎a totally different source, from man’s rebellion against an “as is,” factual existence, and from ‎the ‎longing that impels him to more enhanced and sublime forms of existence. Acts of ‎lovingkindness ‎and fraternity, which are integrated into the framework of the Covenant of Sinai, ‎are motivated ‎not by the strange sense of loneliness of the Jew, but by the sense of unity ‎experienced by a ‎nation forever betrothed to the one God. The absolute oneness of God is ‎mirrored in the unity of ‎the nation that is eternally bound to Him. “You are One, and Your name is ‎One, and who is like Your ‎people Israel, One nation”. The essence of Jewish fellowship on this level ‎is a byproduct of the ‎father-son relationship between the members of the nation and God. ‎‎(Maimonides already ‎emphasized this motif in the passage we quoted above.) At Sinai, God ‎elevated the Covenant of ‎Fate, which He had concluded with a collective that was forced to be ‎alone and that practiced ‎loving-kindness to others as a result of its requisite isolation, to a ‎Covenant of Destiny with a ‎collective of people of free will and volition that directs and sanctifies ‎itself to confront the ‎Almighty. He transformed the “people”— an amalgam bereft of direction and ‎purpose — to a ‎‎“nation,” a term that signifies a distinct communal profile, a national physiognomy,<sup>16</sup> ‎as it were. The ‎people of loving-kindness was elevated into a holy nation.<sup>17</sup> The basis of shared ‎destiny is the ‎sanctity that is formed from a distinctive existence.‎<sup>18</sup>
When the man of destiny stands before the Almighty, he envisions the God of Israel who ‎reveals ‎Himself only with man’s approval and invitation. The God of Israel is united with the finite ‎creature ‎only after man has sanctified and cleansed himself from all pollution, and longingly and ‎agitatedly ‎awaits this wondrous encounter. The revelation of the God of Israel does not come, in ‎any event, ‎in all conditions and circumstances. It demands a special state of spirit and soul, in the ‎manner of ‎‎“Be ready for the third day” (Exodus 19:11). Without the readiness of man, the God of ‎Israel will ‎not reveal Himself. He does not surprise His creatures. He responds to man’s urgent ‎petition. ‎However, when man does not actively long for God with spiritual intensity, then the God ‎of Israel ‎shows no interest in him. When the God of the Hebrews chases after man against his will, ‎He does ‎not ask him for his opinion or desires. The God of Israel, however, consults with a person ‎before an ‎encounter. Already in Egypt the Holy One revealed Himself to Moses not only as the ‎God of the ‎Hebrews but also as the God of Israel who waits for man and invites him to His service ‎to do His ‎work. “So said the Lord, the God of Israel: Let my people go, that they shall make a feast ‎unto Me ‎in the wilderness” (Exodus 5:1).‎ 

Encampment and Congregation

In order to explain the difference between a People of Fate and a Nation of Destiny it ‎is ‎appropriate to deal with a different contrast — that between an Encampment and a ‎Congregation. ‎The Torah used both of these concepts with respect to Israel. “Make for yourself ‎two silver ‎trumpets of hammered work; and they shall be to summon the <i>congregation</i> and ‎for ‎causing the <i>encampments</i> to set forth” (Numbers 10:2, emphasis added).‎
Encampment and Congregation constitute two different sociological experiences, two ‎separate ‎groups that have nothing in common and do not support one another. An Encampment is ‎created ‎out of a desire for self-defense and thrives on fear. Congregation is fashioned out of ‎longing for ‎the realization of an exalted moral idea and thrives on love. In the Encampment, fate’s ‎rule is ‎unlimited, whereas destiny rules the Congregation. The Encampment represents a phase in ‎the ‎development of the nation’s history. The continued survival of a people is identified with ‎the ‎existence of the Congregation.‎
An Encampment, in its essence, is not a uniquely human phenomenon; one finds its traces in ‎the ‎animal kingdom as well. There, too, the encampment serves as a shield against outside ‎danger. ‎When fear of attack grips herds of cattle and sheep, they tumble down in a crazed frenzy ‎from ‎every green mountain and grassy place and run toward each other, lock horns, and butt ‎their ‎heads. Fear finds its instinctive expression in a common quest for protection through ‎gathering ‎together. The secret of individuals uniting into one camp in the face of peril is well known ‎to the ‎animal instinct.‎
In man’s world too, an Encampment is created solely from fear. When fateful, choiceless ‎existence ‎terrifies man, the individual grasps the inadequacy of his strength and aligns himself with ‎others for ‎purposes of selfdefense, in order to prevail over a common enemy. The establishment ‎of an ‎Encampment is a stratagem of warfare. Learn what the Torah has taught: “When you shall go ‎out ‎as an <i>encampment</i> against your enemy” (Deuteronomy 23:10, emphasis ‎added). An ‎Encampment is born out of the terror of destruction and loss, from the fear that fate ‎is ‎overwhelming. From the midst of the Encampment, the People arises. In the beginning, the ‎Jews ‎in Egypt were an Encampment. When they were freed by the Holy One, they rose to the ‎level of a ‎nation‎.‎
Indeed, the Congregation has a special place in the kingdom of man and in his mighty spirit. ‎The ‎Congregation is man’s characteristic creation, and his glorious <i>glorious</i> hovers over it. ‎The ‎Congregation is not created as a result of negative causes or out of fear of the fate that ‎pursues ‎man, who senses his own misery and feebleness, but rather as a result of positive ‎impulses. Destiny is the foundation of the Congregation. A Congregation is a collection of ‎individuals with a single ‎past, a common future, shared aspirations, identical yearnings for a world ‎that is totally good and ‎pleasant, and a singular and harmonious destiny. The beginnings of the ‎Congregation are ‎embedded in the tradition of the people’s ancestors at the dawn of its existence. ‎Its end is rooted ‎in a common vision of the end of days. The people of the Congregation are ‎‎<i>witnesses</i><sup>19</sup> to the ‎events that have passed and to the miraculous future that has not yet ‎arrived. A The Congregation ‎encompasses not only those who are alive today but everyone who ‎has lived and who will live ‎from the dawn of humanity until the end of days. The dead who have ‎passed on are still alive ‎within the confines of the Congregation, and those destined to be born are ‎already alive within its ‎jurisdiction. A Congregation is a holy nation that does not fear fate and does ‎not live against its will. ‎It believes in its destiny and of its free will sanctifies itself for its realization. ‎The Covenant of Egypt ‎was made with a people that was born in the Encampment, the Covenant ‎of Sinai was concluded ‎with a holy people.‎ 

Conversion by Circumcision and Immersion

The integration into the fate and into the destiny of the chosen nation/people cannot ‎be ‎separated from the experience of belonging to <i>knesset yisrael</i> as an integrated ‎whole ‎whose historical existence embodies the dual ideas of loving-kindness and holiness. The ‎Covenant ‎of Sinai completed the Covenant of Egypt. Destiny joined fate; together they became a ‎distinct ‎covenantal unit. It is impossible to separate these constituent parts and formulate an ‎outlook that ‎opposes the unity of a nation of loving-kindness to that of a sanctified people. A Jew ‎who ‎participates in the suffering of his nation and its fate, but does not join in its destiny, which ‎is ‎expressed in a life of Torah and mitzvot, destroys the essence of Judaism and injures his ‎own ‎uniqueness. By the same token, a Jew who is observant but does not feel the hurt of the ‎nation, ‎and who attempts to distance himself from Jewish fate, desecrates his Jewishness.‎<sup>20</sup>
A gentile who wishes to join the nation must take upon himself both covenants. He places ‎himself ‎in the ambit of Jewish fate and sanctifies himself for the acceptance of the Jewish destiny. ‎The act ‎of conversion involves associating oneself as a member of the people of the Covenants of ‎Egypt ‎and of Sinai. Keep this important principle in mind: there is no such thing as partial ‎conversion. One ‎cannot omit one <i>iota</i> of either of these two Covenants. Total devotion to ‎the Jewish people ‎‎— as a nation that God took to Himself in Egypt, with all its tribulations, ‎suffering, responsibilities, ‎and actions; and as a holy people that is itself consecrated, heart and ‎soul, to the God of Israel and ‎His halakhic and moral demands — is the absolute foundation of ‎Judaism and hence is also the ‎basis of conversion.‎
For this reason, halakhah dictates that a convert who has been circumcised but has not ‎yet ‎immersed himself in a <i>mikveh</i>, or who has immersed himself and has not yet ‎been ‎circumcised, is not fully converted until he does both. Circumcision, which was given to ‎Abraham ‎the Hebrew, the father of Jewish fate, and which was fulfilled in Egypt prior to the ‎offering of the ‎Paschal sacrifice — the symbol of the redemption from Egypt — signifies the fateful ‎otherness of ‎the nation, its necessary isolation and uniqueness. Circumcision is a sign sculpted into ‎the very ‎physical being of the Jew. It is a constant, indelible sign between the God of the Jews and ‎His ‎people, one that cannot be erased. If the Covenant of Fate is not sealed in the flesh, then ‎the ‎singularity of peoplehood is absent and the gentile remains outside the bounds of the ‎Covenant of ‎Egypt.‎
Immersion in a mikveh, in contrast to circumcision, represents the integration of man into his ‎great ‎destiny and his entry into the Covenant of Sinai. The Jews were commanded to ‎immerse ‎themselves prior to the giving of the Torah at Sinai.<sup>21</sup> Immersion purifies and elevates from ‎the ‎profane to the holy, from life as it is to a life filled with a sublime vision. When the convert ‎emerges ‎from the waters of the mikveh, a new spiritual reality replete with destiny fills him, and ‎he is ‎endowed with the sanctity of the Jew (<i>kedushat yisrael</i>). It is not coincidental that the ‎act ‎of accepting the yoke of the commandments is tied to immersion.<sup>22</sup> The entire essence ‎of ‎immersion is the re-creation of the experience of the acceptance of the Torah and the elevation ‎of ‎the people to the status of a holy nation through its freely given commitment to obey God’s ‎word. ‎If the convert is circumcised and does not immerse himself, then the association of man to ‎destiny ‎is missing, and the gentile is fenced off from the Covenant of Sinai and from a ‎halakhic ‎identification with a holy nation.‎
The formula for conversion in the Book of Ruth contains these ‎two aspects, and their essence lies ‎in the four final words of Ruth to Naomi: “Your people shall be ‎my <i>people</i>, and your God my ‎God” (Ruth 1:16, emphasis added).‎ 

Mournful Thoughts of Confession

Let us pose a simple question: Did we not sin with respect to the first covenant, the Covenant ‎of ‎Shared Fate (as in the Covenant of Encampment-Nation), with regard to our obligation ‎to ‎participate in the pain of the nation and to see and feel its suffering: as it is said, “And ‎He ‎witnessed their burdens” (Exodus 2:11)? Let us be honest. During the terrible Holocaust, ‎when ‎European Jewry was systematically destroyed in gas chambers and crematoria, the ‎American ‎Jewish community did not rise to the occasion, and did not acquit itself as a community ‎with the ‎collective consciousness of shared fate, shared suffering and shared action with which it ‎should ‎have been expected to act. We did not properly sense the suffering of the nation, and we ‎did ‎precious little to save our unfortunate brethren. It is hard to know what we could ‎have ‎accomplished had we been more active. I personally think we could have saved many. No ‎doubt, ‎however, if we had properly felt the pain of our brothers; had we raised our voices and ‎shaken ‎worlds, that Roosevelt issue a sharp warning of protest accompanied by action, we would ‎have ‎been able to significantly slow the process of mass destruction. We witnessed the most ‎horrible ‎tragedy in our history, and we were silent. I shall not now dwell on the particulars. It is ‎an ‎extremely painful chapter. We all sinned by our silence in the face of the murder of millions. Do ‎we ‎not all stand before God’s seat of judgment charged with the grievous sin of “You shall not ‎stand ‎idly by the blood of your neighbor” (Leviticus 19:16), especially when the sin applies not only ‎to one ‎individual but to millions? When I say “we” I mean all of us: including myself, the members ‎of ‎rabbinic and lay organizations both Orthodox and secular, and Jewish political organizations of ‎all ‎persuasions. “Your leaders, tribal heads, elders, and policemen, every person in Israel … from ‎the ‎hewers of your wood to the drawers of your water” (Deuteronomy 29:9–10). Do you know ‎why ‎we were so indifferent? I think it is because our sense of nationhood was damaged. We did ‎not ‎grasp the notion of the experience of Shared Fate and the essence of peoplehood. We ‎were ‎missing the attribute of loving-kindness that Job, at first, also lacked. Job, who suffered, ‎was ‎devoid of a sense of shared experience and therefore did not know how to pray for his ‎brothers. ‎His concern was only for his own and his family’s wellbeing. We were also devoid of the ‎sense of ‎‎[the Covenant of] Encampment-Nation and therefore did not offer heart-felt prayers, nor ‎did we ‎take any bold measures to save our brothers.‎
In the crisis that the Land of Israel is [at present] passing through, Providence is again testing us. ‎It ‎is fitting that we openly state that this matter does not just involve Israel’s political future. The ‎evil ‎intentions of the Arabs are not only directed against our national independence but against ‎the ‎continued existence of the Jewish presence in Israel. They aspire to exterminate (God forbid) ‎the ‎‎<i>Yishuv</i> — men, women, children, infants, sheep, and cattle (cf: I Samuel 15:3). At a ‎meeting ‎of Mizrachi (the Religious Zionists of America), I repeated, in the name of my father (of ‎blessed ‎memory), that the notion of “the Lord will have war against Amalek from generation ‎to ‎generation” (Exodus 17:16) is not confined to a certain race, but includes a necessary attack ‎against ‎any nation or group infused with mad hatred that directs its enmity against the community ‎of ‎Israel. When a nation emblazons on its standard, “Come, let us cut them off from being a nation ‎so ‎that the name of Israel shall no longer be remembered” (Psalms 83:5), it becomes Amalek.<sup>23</sup> In ‎the ‎‎1930’s and 1940’s the Nazis, with Hitler at their helm, filled this role. In this most recent period ‎they ‎were the Amalekites, the representatives of insane hate. Today, the throngs of Nasser and ‎the ‎Mufti have taken their place. If we are again silent, I do not know how we will be judged ‎before ‎God. Do not rely on the justice of the “liberal world.” Those pious liberals were alive fifteen ‎years ‎ago and witnessed the destruction of millions of people with equanimity and did not lift a ‎finger. ‎They are liable to observe, God forbid, the repetition of the bloodbath and not lose a ‎night’s ‎sleep.‎
Come, let us pray “for our friends” (Job 42:10). Let us feel for the suffering of the Yishuv. We ‎must ‎understand that the fate of the Jews in the Land of Israel is our fate too. The Arabs have ‎declared ‎war not only on the State of Israel, but on the entire Jewish people. They are now the ‎leaders and ‎financial supporters of international antisemitism. Let us overcome the foolish fears of ‎dual-loyalty ‎that our enemies have instilled in us. To begin with, it is always impossible to satisfy ‎antisemites, ‎and they will find fault in whatever we do. Second, the matter relates not only to the ‎continued ‎existence of a state, but to the physical salvation of masses of Jews. Is it not our sacred ‎obligation ‎to come to their aid? Is it forbidden for us to seek the security of the <i>Yishuv</i>? We ‎are being ‎put to the test of Job. We have been given the opportunity to pray, by virtue of deeds ‎and self-‎sacrifice, for “our friends” (Job 42:10) — and our friend is the Jewish community in the ‎Land of ‎Israel. We must do but one thing: open the door to the beckoning Beloved, and ‎immediately all ‎dangers will disappear.‎ 

The Vision of the Religious Zionist Movement; Loneliness and Separateness

What should be the relationship of religious Zionism to its secular counterpart? It seems to me that ‎political, secular Zionism has failed by virtue of one basic error. It is based on a false assumption ‎that was introduced into the Covenant of Egypt, the Covenant of Fate. Secular Zionism asserts that ‎with the founding of the State of Israel, we became a people like all other peoples, and that the ‎force of, “It is a people that shall dwell alone” (Numbers 23:9), was diminished. The extremists in ‎this movement want to eradicate the idea of the shared fate (community and nation) of the Jews ‎of the Diaspora with the Jews of the Land of Israel. This train of thought is not only philosophically ‎and historically erroneous, it is mistaken practically. In [adhering to] the notion of equality with all ‎peoples and unity with all, the representatives of the State of Israel have on many occasions ‎showed themselves to be extremely naive. They have failed to properly evaluate specific ‎circumstances and conditions and have not correctly understood the hidden motives of certain ‎persons. Out of a childlike naiveté, they put stock in people who later betrayed us, and have been ‎inordinately moved by smooth talk and flattery. To my mind, in several instances Israel’s foreign ‎policy has lacked a sense of self-respect, national pride, prudence, and the strength to stand by its ‎principles.‎
These mistakes are outgrowths of the primary error made by secular Zionism when it wished to ‎erase both the feeling of isolation and also the phenomenon of shared suffering from our history ‎books. The beckoning of the Beloved must open the eyes of all of us, even the most confirmed ‎secularists. The State of Israel was not and will not be able to abrogate the covenant of, “And I will ‎take you unto Me as a people”(Exodus 6:7) and put an end to shared fate, the source of Jewish ‎aloneness. The State of Israel is as isolated today as the community of Israel has been during the ‎thousands of years of its existence. And perhaps the isolation of the State is more pronounced ‎than in the past because it is so clearly revealed in the international arena.‎
<i>They crafty plot against Your people, And take counsel against Your treasured ones. They have ‎said: “Come, and let us cut them off from being a nation; that the name of Israel may be no more ‎in remembrance. For they have consulted together with one consent; against You do they make an ‎alliance; the clans of Edom and the Ishmaelites; Moab, and the Hagrites; Gebal, Ammon, and ‎Amalek: Philistia with the inhabitants of Tyre; Assyria too joins forces with them; they give support ‎to the Children of Lot. Selah.</i> —Psalms 83:4-9‎
Communist Russia together with the Vatican, Nehru, the student of Gandhi, together with the ‎devoutly Catholic Franco, the British Foreign Office with Chiang Kaishek, have all joined in the ‎attempt to isolate Israel and are being assisted by [Israel’s other] enemies in other lands. This ‎conspiracy began specifically after the establishment of the State, at a time when many of Israel’s ‎leaders thought that the Jewish problem had been solved, that Jewish isolation had been ‎eradicated and normality had been introduced into our ex i s t e n c e .The assumption that the ‎State of Israel has weakened antisemitism is erroneous. On the contrary, antisemitism has grown ‎stronger and employs false charges against the State [of Israel] in the war against us all. Who can ‎foresee the end of this anti-Semitic hatred? The Covenant of Egypt cannot be abrogated by human ‎hands. We remain a scattered people, nonetheless attached one to another. Our fate is the fate of ‎the <i>Yishuv</i>, and conversely the fate of the <i>Yishuv</i> is our fate. No segment of the ‎Jewish Nation will delude itself by “fleeing to the palace of the king more than all the Jews” (Esther ‎‎4:13). Everyone must “pray for his friends” (Job 42:10). An American Jew must not be silent and ‎rest until the danger in which the State of Israel finds itself is removed and passes. The inhabitants ‎of the Holy Land should not babble about the “New Jew” that has been fashioned there, one who ‎has no connection with Diaspora Jewry. We are all obligated to listen to the “Clarion Call of the ‎Beckoning Beloved” (Song of Songs 5:1).
Still, the error of the secular Zionists is graver than just not understanding the true meaning of the ‎Covenant of Egypt, the Covenant of a Nation-Camp realized through shared fate and forced ‎isolation. They also sin against the Covenant of Sinai, the covenant of a sacred community and ‎people that finds expression in the shared destiny of a sanctified life. Only religious Zionism with its ‎traditional and authentic perception has the power to “repair the perverted” (Ecclesiastes 1:15).If ‎you were to ask me how the role of the State of Israel can best be described, I would answer that ‎its mission is not to nullify the special loneliness of the community of Israel or to destroy the unity ‎of its fate — in this it will not succeed — but to raise the people of the encampment to the level of ‎a sacred community nation and to turn Shared <i>Fate</i> into Shared <i>Destiny</i>. We must ‎remember, as we have already emphasized, that <i>fate </i> is expressed, in essence, in the ‎experience of life under duress — in an inability to run away from Judaism, in being forced to ‎suffer as a Jew. This, though, is not the ideal of the Torah or of our <i>Weltanschauung</i>. Our ‎solidarity with the community of Israel, according to an authentic Jewish outlook, must not come ‎from the conclusion of the Covenant of Fate—that of the Encampment-Nation possessed of a ‎compelled existence to which we are subjugated by outside forces — but by the conclusion of a ‎Covenant with a sacred community-nation of <i>Shared Destiny</i>. Man does not find the ‎experience of fate satisfying. On the contrary, it causes him pain. The feeling of isolation is very ‎destructive. It has the power to crush man’s body and spirit, silence his spiritual powers, and stop ‎up the wellsprings of his inner creativity. The feeling of isolation, in particular, troubles man ‎because it is devoid of reason and direction. The isolated person wonders, for whom and for what? ‎Isolation, which cleaves to man like a shadow, shakes his awareness and ability. An existence of ‎destiny, which is based on the Covenant of Sinai, is different. This concept turns the notion of ‎‎“nation” (a concept that denotes an ordained existential necessity, participation in blind pain, and a ‎feeling of isolation devoid of meaning) into a “sacred people” and to the elevated station of a ‎moral, religious community. Man draws from it strength and sustenance, creative power and a ‎renewed joy in an existence that is free and rejuvenated.‎
Let us return to what we said above. How does destiny differ from fate? In two respects: fate ‎means a compelled existence; destiny is existence by volition. Destiny is created by man himself, ‎who chooses and makes his own way in life. Fate is expressed in a teleological sense, in a denuded ‎existence, whereas destiny embodies purpose and objectives. Shared Fate means an inability to ‎rebel against fate. It is, as with the tragedy of Jonah the prophet, about the lack of alternatives to ‎escape the God of the Jews; “And God hurled a great wind into the sea, and there was a mighty ‎tempest in the sea, so that the ship was about to break apart” (Jonah 1:4). Shared Destiny means ‎having free will to strive for a goal (a decision freely willed to be sanctified to an ideal) and a ‎yearning and longing for the Master of the Universe. Instead of the blind fate that pursued him, ‎Jonah in the end chose the exalted destiny of the God of Israel. “I am a Jew, and I fear the Lord, ‎the God of the heaven” (Jonah 1:9)‎
Albeit, even in the experience of Shared Destiny there is an element of separateness, but the ‎apartness of destiny is totally different both in character and experience. It is not the negative ‎sentiment that Balaam foresaw in his prophecy of “they are people which dwells alone” (Numbers ‎‎23:9), but rather the special awareness that Moses promised Israel in the last few hours before his ‎death: “And Israel shall dwell in safety [separate and secure] by the fountain of ‎Jacob”(Deuteronomy 33:28). In truth, this self-isolation is nothing but the aloneness of a glorious, ‎strong, holy, and sacred existence. It is the isolation expressed in the singularity of a people, in its ‎holy self-image and unique existential experience. It is loneliness that creates an individual spiritual ‎personality. It is loneliness that demonstrates man’s honor and his aloofness. It is the solitude of ‎Moses, whose exalted spirit and sublime vision the people did not comprehend. It is the solitude ‎of Elijah and the other prophets. It is the solitude of which Abraham spoke to his attendants when ‎he said, “You sit here with the donkey, and the lad and I will go to <i>that</i> place, and we shall ‎worship” (Genesis 22:5, emphasis added). While man’s isolation is a destructive feeling of ‎inferiority that expresses self-negation, the solitude of man testifies to his greatness and sanctity ‎‎— the greatness contained within himself and the sanctity that hovers in the recesses of his ‎unique awareness. Isolation robs man of his inner peace; loneliness bestows upon man security, ‎self-esteem, significance and confidence — “separate and secure” (Deuteronomy 33:28).‎
Judaism has always believed, as we said at the outset, that man has it within his power to take fate ‎into his own hands and shape it into the destiny of a free life, a life full of meaning and saturated ‎with the joy of living, turning isolation into aloneness and disparagement into significance. For this ‎reason Judaism places so great an emphasis on the principle of free will. [And] for this reason ‎‎[Judaism] so appreciates the human intellect, which has it within its power to free man from his ‎enslavement to nature and allow him to rule over his environment and its blind circumstances and ‎subjugate it to his will. The Community of Israel is obligated to use this free will in all facets of life, ‎and especially for the good of the State of Israel. If secular Zionism, in the end, comes to ‎understand that the establishment of the State of Israel has not weakened the paradoxical fate of ‎Jewish aloneness, but, on the contrary, that the incomprehensible state of, “I shall take you unto ‎Me as a people” (Exodus 6:7) has become even more pronounced in the international arena, it ‎must ask itself the age-old question: “What is your occupation; from where do you derive . . . and ‎from what people do you come?”(Jonah 1:8).The question is asked in any event; if not by the Jew, ‎then by the gentile. We must answer with pride that, “We fear the Lord, the God of the heavens” ‎‎(Jonah 1:9). Our historic obligation today is to raise ourselves from a people to a holy nation, from ‎the Covenant of Egypt to the Covenant of Sinai; from a compelled existence to an original way of ‎life, permeated with morality and religious principles, that transcends history. We must go from ‎being an Encampment to being a Nation. The task of religious Zionism is to fuse the two covenants, ‎the Covenant of Egypt and the Covenant of Sinai; the covenants of fate and destiny, of isolation ‎and loneliness. This task entails self-perfection by suffering; the out-pouring of lovingkindness ‎brought about by combining all the elements of the nation and uniting them in one community, “A ‎nation unique in the land”(II Samuel 7:23),and the readiness to pray for one’s friend and to feel his ‎joy and his grief. The goal of this self-repair is the purposeful consecration of self and ascent to the ‎‎“Mountain of God” (Psalms 15:1).One great goal unites us all. A single exalted vision captures our ‎hearts. One Torah (Written and Oral) directs us all to a unified end — the fulfillment of the vision of ‎aloneness and the vision of the sanctity of an Encampment/People that ascends to the level of a ‎Community/Nation and ties its lot to the destiny that was proclaimed to the world in the words of ‎our ancient father Abraham: “And I and the lad shall go unto that place and shall worship God and ‎return to you” (Genesis 22:5).‎‎

The Author's Notes

‎1. See TB Berakhot 7a. R.Meir was of the opinion that Moses’ request to understand suffering ‎‎(why ‎the good suffer and evildoers prosper) went unanswered. R. Johanan, in the name of R. ‎Jose, ‎disagrees with R. Meir. Maimonides, in the <i>Guide for the Perplexed</i>, follows the view ‎that ‎the Holy One enlightened Moses as to the workings of all existence. See <i>Guide for ‎the ‎Perplexed</i> 1:54: “This dictum — ‘All My goodness’ — alludes to the display to [Moses] of ‎all ‎existing things  …  that is, he has grasped the existence of all My world with a true and ‎firmly ‎established understanding.” <i>Guide for the Perplexed</i>, trans. S. Pines (Chicago: ‎University of ‎Chicago Press, 1963), p.124.‎
‎2. The <i>Rishonim</i> dealt with the removal of choice from man as a result of his being ‎deeply ‎enmeshed in sin. See Maimonides, <i>Hilkhot T’shuvah</i> 6:3, and Ramban <i>ad</i> ‎Exodus 7:3, ‎‎9:12.‎
3. The connection between adversity and repentance was expressed in the mitzvah of ‎sounding a ‎warning with trumpets when adversity is about to befall the community. Maimonides ‎‎(<i>Hilkhot ‎Ta’anit</i> 1:1-4), states: “A positive Scriptural commandment prescribes prayer and ‎the sounding ‎of an alarm with trumpets whenever trouble befalls the community. For when ‎Scripture says, ‎‎‘Against the adversity that oppresses you, then you shall sound the alarm with ‎trumpets’ ‎‎(Numbers 10:9), the meaning is: Cry out in prayer and sound an alarm against ‎whatsoever is ‎oppressing you, be it famine, pestilence, locusts or the like. [And the Scribes teach ‎us that we must ‎fast until we are pitied from heaven on every misfortune that shall befall us.]” ‎Translation from I. ‎Twersky, <i>A. Maimonides Reader</i> (New York: Behrman House, 1972), pp. ‎‎113–114.<br>There are two unique mitzvot: (a) A positive mitzvah of confession and repentance ‎for every sin ‎that man commits. This mitzvah is explained in the biblical portion of Naso. “When a ‎man or a ‎woman shall [commit any sin that men commit], they shall confess the sins that they have ‎done” ‎‎(Numbers 5:6). Maimonides, in the <i> Sefer HaMaddah</i>, dedicated ten chapters to ‎this ‎mitzvah, entitled Laws of Repentance. (b) There is a specific mitzvah of repentance in an hour ‎of ‎misfortune, as recorded in the above-noted passage concerning the trumpets: “And when you ‎go ‎to war [in your land against the adversary that oppresses you, then you shall sound the alarm] ‎‎ ...  ‎and you shall be saved from your enemies” (Numbers 10:9). In practice, the biblical obligation to ‎be ‎aroused to repentance is accomplished by the sounding of the trumpets, to which the ‎Rabbis ‎added the vehicle of fasting.‎<br>Essentially, the obligation to repent is tied to the suffering of the ‎community, as noted by the ‎Mishnah: [that repentance is called for] “For every misfortune that ‎shall befall the community” (TB ‎Ta’anit 19a and Maimonides, loc. cit.). Indeed, the obligation of the ‎individual who finds himself in ‎extremis to return to God is also derived from this Torah portion. ‎The fact that the halakhah ‎recognized the individual’s fast as valuable, proves that the individual is ‎obligated to repent in a ‎time of trouble. According to Maimonides, there can be no fast devoid of ‎repentance. In ‎‎[<i>Hilkhot T’shuva</i> 1:9], Maimonides writes that “Just as the community fasts ‎on the occasion ‎of its adversity, so does the individual fast on the occurrence of his misfortune.” ‎Similarly, the ‎‎<i>baraita</i> cited in TB Ta’anit 22b states: “The Rabbis taught: In the case of a city ‎that was ‎surrounded by hostile gentiles, or by an overflowing river, or a ship being tossed by a ‎stormy sea, ‎or an individual pursued by non-Jews or by thieves or by a hurricane, etc. [in all these ‎instances ‎one may sound a voice alarm on Shabbat].” Maimonides ruled accordingly in <i> Mishneh ‎Torah, ‎Hilkhot Ta’anit</i> 1:6 (it being understood that there is no sounding of the trumpet on a ‎weekday ‎for an individual who is being pursued). The trumpets are sounded only for communal ‎adversity ‎and not for individual misfortune. There are specific halakhot in tractate Ta’anit and in ‎Maimonides’ ‎‎<i>Hilkhot Ta’anit</i>, chap.5, that delineate the character of communal adversity. ‎The ‎‎<i>baraita</i> only sought to teach that an individual who finds himself in <i>extremism</i> may ‎cry ‎out (according to Maimonides even on the Shabbat). It is therefore established that the ‎obligation ‎of crying out is equally applicable to the individual and the community, and of what ‎benefit is ‎crying, if it does not issue forth from a soul that regrets its sins?‎<br>The difference ‎between the general mitzvah of repentance and the obligation to repent in a time ‎of adversity ‎may be distilled in one detail: Repentance for sin is tied to the knowledge that one has ‎sinned. So ‎long as a man is not aware of his sin he has no obligation [to repent]. One cannot be ‎obligated to ‎obtain forgiveness without knowledge of the sin for which he repents. As the verse ‎states, “If his ‎sin, wherein he has sinned, be known to him [he shall bring for his offering a goat, a ‎male without ‎blemish] (Leviticus 4:23, emphasis added). Knowledge of a sin obligates the bringing ‎of a sin-‎offering. Similarly, with regard to repentance, man is not required to repent for those ‎‎[misdeeds] ‎that are hidden, but only those that are revealed to him. However, in a time of ‎adversity, the ‎sufferer must examine his deeds and inquire after his sins in order to repent for ‎them. The ‎essence of suffering confirms the existence of sin and commands man: find your sin and ‎return to ‎your Creator. Examining one’s deeds is characteristic of the obligation of repentance ‎which is tied ‎to suffering.‎<br>We know that on fast-days courts would sit and examine the deeds of the ‎inhabitants of the city. ‎The Talmud (TB Megillah 30b) states: “From the morning a group  …  ‎examines the deeds of ‎individuals.” Maimonides ([<i>Hilkhot Ta’anit</i>] 1:17) firmly establishes ‎the halakhah: “On each ‎fast day undertaken by a community beset by troubles, the court and the ‎elders should remain in ‎session at the synagogue from the end of the morning service until ‎midday, to examine into the ‎conduct of the citizens and to remove obstacles to righteous living ‎provided by transgressions. ‎They should carefully search and inquire after those guilty of extortion ‎and similar crimes.” ‎‎(Translation from I. Twersky, <i>Maimonides Reader</i>, p.114). 114). [Cf.TB ‎Eruvin 13b, “And now ‎that [man] is created let him examine his deeds, and we said he shall take ‎hold of his sins.”] The ‎obligation to examine one’s deeds relates to a time of misfortune. It appears ‎that the special ‎obligation to repent on Yom Kippur (as explained in Maimonides, <i>Hilkhot ‎T’shuvah</i> 7:7 and ‎in the <i>Sha’arei T’shuvah</i> of Rabbenu Yonah Gerondi) was established ‎as a special obligation ‎of repentance for undisclosed deeds and a requirement to examine one’s ‎deeds in order to reveal ‎the dishonorable aspects of a man’s life. In this regard the obligation of ‎repentance on Yom Kippur ‎coincides with the obligation of repentance in a time of suffering. ‎Concerning these opportunities, ‎the verse states: “Let us search and examine our ways and return ‎to the Lord” (Lamentations 3:40).‎<br>Established as a special obligation of repentance for ‎undisclosed deeds and a requirement to ‎examine one’s deeds in order to reveal the dishonorable ‎aspects of a man’s life. In this regard the ‎obligation of repentance on Yom Kippur coincides with ‎the obligation of repentance in a time of ‎suffering. Concerning these opportunities, the verse ‎states: “Let us search and examine our ways ‎and return to the Lord” (Lamentations 3:40).‎
4. These statements and what follows are based on the passage in TB Bava Batra [15a–b] that cites diverse views as to the generation and time in which Job lived.
‎5. TB ‎Sanhedrin 94a.‎
‎6. Cf. Maimonides, <i>Hilkhot Melakhim</i> 1:9 and the gloss of Rabad ‎thereon. However, ‎Maimonides’ approach is directed to the period after the kingship was given to ‎David [after having ‎been taken from Saul] and not to King [Saul] who preceded him. Cf. I Samuel ‎‎13:13–14. The ‎rending of the kingdom of Judah [for generations] thus began with Saul. He too ‎could have made ‎amends for his sin by repentance.‎
‎ 7. This notion is expressed by Rava, TB ‎Sanhedrin 72a,“<i>Amar Rava mai ta’ama de-mahteret</i>, ‎‎[etc.]”‎
8. Maimonides (<i>Hilkhot ‎Bet HaBehirah</i> 6:16) states almost explicitly that the fact that the ‎second sanctification has ‎endured till today and will last forever is based on the same rationale that ‎he used in relation to the ‎question of the sanctity of the Temple that cannot be nullified. Physical ‎destruction cannot exile ‎God’s Presence from among the ruins.‎
‎9. See <i>Yalkut Shimoni, Nitzavim</i>, s.v. <i>shalosh ‎beritot</i>; TB Berakhot 48b and Rashi ad ‎loc.‎
‎10. See the <i>Sefer HaShorashim</i> [“Book of ‎Hebrew Roots”] of R. David Kimhi, <i>shoresh</i> ‎‎“<i>im</i>” [lit. “with”]: “The import of this ‎word is joining and cleaving  …  and the word <i>am</i> ‎derives from it  …  since a collection of ‎people and their joining together is called an <i>am</i>.” ‎‎[The two Hebrew words are spelled with ‎the same consonants and differ only in the vowels ‎appearing below the consonants.] Cf. ‎‎<i>Gesenius, Hebrew and Chaldean Lexicon</i>, s. v. am.‎
‎11. Cf. Tosafot, TB Menahot 37a, ‎s.v. <i>‘o.</i> See also <i>Shittah Mekubbetzet</i> ad loc., par. ‎‎18.‎
‎12. TB Sotah 37b, ‎TB Sanhedrin 43b, Rashi ad Deuteronomy 29:28.‎
‎13. See Maimonides, <i>Hilkhot Yesodai ‎HaTorah</i> 5:11.‎
‎14. Maimonides, <i>Hilkhot Matnot Aniyyim</i> 10:2.‎
‎15. The Talmud ‎states (TB Shabbat 88a): “One learns from this that the Holy One held the Mountain ‎‎[i.e., Sinai] over ‎their heads like an inverted cask.” This expresses the notion that God proposed to ‎the Jewish ‎people that they accept the Torah and deliver themselves to Him out of their free will in ‎order to ‎live the life of a holy people, instead of a compelled existence of destiny, which is likened ‎to being ‎perpetually threatened by a mountain hanging over one’s head like an overturned cask” ‎Cf. ‎Tosafot ad loc. s. v. <i>kafah</i> and <i>moda’ah</i>.‎
‎16. See R. Yonah Ibn Janah, <i>Sefer ‎HaShorashim</i> (ed. A. Bacher), s.v. goy. See also R. David ‎Kimhi, <i>Sefer HaShorashim</i>, “R. ‎Jonah [Ibn Janah] said that the term <i>goy</i> [nation] is ‎appropriate for [even] one person, as it ‎says, ‘Shall you slay even a righteous <i>goy</i>?’ (Genesis ‎‎20:4).” See also (a) S.Mandelkern, ‎‎<i>Concordance</i>. s.v. goy, where he states, “It refers to a ‎group of people who belong to one ‎nation that have formed a body [politic] (emphasis added),” ‎and (b) Gesenius, <i>Hebrew ‎Lexicon</i>, s.v. goy.‎<br>However, occasionally we encounter the term goy in relation to a group ‎of animals, as in “For a goy ‎‎[of locusts] has come up to my land” (Joel 1:6). It is understood that with ‎regard to animals this ‎term appears metaphorically. See (a) Radak and Rashi ad loc., and (b) R. Elijah ‎of Vilna, ‎‎<i>Commentary on the Bible</i>, <i>ad</i> Isaiah 1:4, “Ah, sinful nation, a people laden ‎with ‎iniquity,” wherein he states:‎<br> ‎“Now  …  the term am will be used with respect to the ‎collective of a large number of persons, even ‎a multitude,  …  but [the term] <i>goy</i> is used ‎only for those who are law-abiding  …  as our Rabbis ‎have said, ‘“There he became a <i>goy</i>” ‎‎(Deuterotomy 26:5). This teaches that the Israelites ‎were distinctive there’ [Passover Haggadah] ‎‎[i.e., by their observance of traditional norms of ‎behavior].”‎
‎17. The phrase am kadosh [holy ‎nation] connotes a collective that has been elevated in holiness. It ‎is essentially equal in essence to ‎the term goy kadosh [holy people].‎
‎18. The uniqueness of the Jew began to be forged in the ‎crucible of the affliction in Egypt. The ‎historical suffering in Egypt fashioned the image of the nation ‎as a people, possessing a special ‎physiognomy and an individual nature that readied it for the ‎sublime moment of the concluding of ‎the Covenant of Destiny at Sinai. Scripture attests to the ‎birth of the Jewish collective in Egypt. “An ‎Aramean attempted to destroy my father [Jacob], then ‎‎[Jacob] descended to Egypt  …  and there ‎he became a nation” (Deuteronomy 26:5). How ‎beautifully our Rabbis expounded this verse: “This ‎teaches that the Israelites were distinctive ‎there” [ibid.]. Nationhood and being “distinguished as a ‎special collective” mean the same thing. ‎Truthfully, the forging of a Nation-People was the purpose ‎of the enslavement of our forefathers ‎in Egypt. They descended as the sons of Jacob, and they left ‎as a nation tied to God and a people ‎destined to the revelation of Providence and the conclusion of ‎the Covenant of Destiny at Sinai.‎ ‎[As the Zohar says: “Similarly with [Jacob’s descendants] whom ‎God desired to make a unique and ‎perfect people and to bring near to Himself: if they had not first ‎gone down to Egypt and been ‎tested there, they would not have been God’s chosen people  …  ” ‎‎[Zohar, Lekh Lekha 83a (New ‎York: Soncino Press, 1933, vol. 1, p. 276–277]. However, until they ‎went out from Egypt they were ‎not yet a nation and did not appear in a fitting light. As it is written: ‎‎“As a rose among thorns so is ‎my love among the daughters” (Song of Songs 2:2). The Holy One ‎desired to shape Israel on the ‎celestial pattern, so that there would be one rose on earth, [similar ‎to the] rose in heaven. Now ‎the rose, which gives out a sweet aroma and is conspicuous among all ‎other roses, is the one that ‎grows among thorns” [Ibid., <i>Ki Tissa</i> 189b, vol. 4,p. 138].‎
‎19. A congregation can also signify devotion to a negative ideology by people who sow evil. ‎‎“And ‎he shall not be as Korah and his congregation” (Numbers 17:5) [and] “All this evil ‎congregation” ‎‎(Numbers 14:35).‎
‎20. See Maimonides, <i>Hilkhot T’shuvah</i> 3:11, “One who secedes from the ‎commonweal, ‎even though he commits no transgressions other than separating himself from the ‎congregation of ‎Israel, and does not perform mitzvot in its midst and does not share in its suffering ‎and does not ‎fast on its fast-days, but goes his own way like a gentile who is not part of the ‎congregation, has no ‎portion in the world-to-come.”‎
21. [I.] Maimonides [<i>Hilkhot Issurei Bi’ah</i> 13:1-3, based upon TB Keritot 9a] states explicitly ‎that ‎in Egypt there was no immersion required [for conversion], which took effect solely by means ‎of ‎circumcision. It was at Mount Sinai that the children of Israel were commanded to ‎immerse ‎themselves as part of the conversion process. As Maimonides says: conversion process. ‎As Maimonides says: “With three [rituals] did the people of Israel enter the ‎covenant: circumcision, ‎immersion, and the offering of a sacrifice. Circumcision took place in Egypt, ‎as it is written, ‘But no ‎uncircumcised person shall [eat of the Paschal offering]’ (Exodus 12:48); ‎‎[thus] Moses circumcised ‎them. ‘Immersion was in the desert before the giving of the Torah, as it ‎is written, ‘And sanctify ‎them today and tomorrow, and let them wash their garments’ (Exodus ‎‎19:10). “Maimonides ‎interprets the talmudic statement (Yebamot 71a) that one may not convert ‎through circumcision ‎alone as referring solely to posterity, but not to the first Passover, where all ‎agree that circumcision ‎was sufficient to effect conversion. Similarly, Maimonides would explain ‎the position of R. Joshua ‎that immersion was required as part of the conversion of our forefathers ‎as dating from the ‎revelation at Sinai, in accordance with the plain import of the verses cited the‎re (see Yebamot ‎‎46b, s. v. R. <i>Joshua</i>). However, Maimonides would concede that with ‎respect to the ‎women in Egypt immersion was required. As the Talmud states explicitly in that ‎portion: “For it is ‎impossible to defer the immersion of the women from the time of the liberation ‎from Egypt to the ‎revelation at Sinai.” This is because of a powerful question that arose in the ‎Talmud and was noted ‎by Rashi (ad loc., s.v. <i>b’imahot</i>): “[This refers to] their wives who ‎immersed themselves, as ‎is explained below. For if they had not immersed themselves, by what ‎act would they have ‎entered under the wings of the Shekhinah?” In other words, they required ‎some formal rite of ‎conversion. Similarly, the Tosefta (TB Pesahim 8:18) asserts that the ‎requirement that non-Jewish ‎maid-servants immerse themselves prevented [their masters from] ‎bringing the Paschal offering ‎according both to the view stated in the Mishnah and that of R. Eliezer ‎b. Ya’akov. Cf. Rabad, ‎‎<i>Hilkhot Korban Pesah</i> 5:5.‎<br>In truth, we could maintain that immersion for males was also practiced in Egypt, and that at ‎Mount ‎Sinai the males were commanded to immerse themselves again because the giving of the ‎Torah ‎would endow them with an extra level of sanctity. Every act of convers ion requires ‎immersion, ‎and the conversion in Egypt conformed to this general rule.‎<br>‎[Translator’s note: A non-Jew who is acquired as a slave by a Jew must undergo immersion ‎and ‎circumcision. He thus acquires the status of a quasi-Jew and is obligated to perform some of ‎the ‎mitzvot. When the slave is freed and becomes a full-fledged Jew he requires a second ‎immersion]. ‎This view is supported by the position of many Rishonim, among them Maimonides, ‎that the ‎second immersion of a non-Jewish slave [as part of his manumission] is a biblical ‎requirement. This ‎results from the slave’s being endowed thereby with an added dimension of ‎obligation to perform ‎mitzvot, through his elevation, as a free man, to the status of a full-fledged ‎Jew. It is thus ‎understandable, that at Sinai, when the Jews embraced Torah and mitzvot, they ‎were required to ‎undergo an additional immersion, aside from the one undergone in Egypt. Even ‎according to the ‎view of Nimmukei Yosef, who holds that the immersion of a manumitted slave is ‎only rabbinically ‎ordained, the Jews at Sinai were nevertheless required to undergo a second ‎immersion. The case ‎of a slave, who was already [partially] converted through circumcision and ‎immersion and had ‎there by already entered the Covenant, is different from that of the children of ‎Israel at Sinai, who ‎needed to be endowed with an added dimension of sanctity which served as ‎the basis of the ‎Second Covenant. Regarding the slave, in the opinion of Nimmukei Yosef, there is ‎no need [i.e., ‎biblically] for an added act of immersion, because we are dealing with the presence ‎of an obstacle ‎‎[to full Jewish status, i.e., servitude]. Once the servitude is cancelled through ‎manumission, ‎removing the obstacle that precluded the slave from an obligation to timebound ‎mitzvot as well as ‎from marriage to a Jewish woman, he lacks nothing [i.e., he needs no further ‎formal act of ‎conversion]. At Sinai, however, the Jews were imbued with a new form of sanctity ‎that had been ‎unknown before and thus were enjoined to perform a second act of conversion. ‎Therefore, they ‎required a second immersion.‎<br>‎[II.] One could ask why the children of Israel were not required to undergo a second symbolic ‎act ‎of circumcision [<i>hatafat damberit</i>; lit. “the letting of blood from the place of ‎circumcision”] ‎at Sinai. To this one could reply that circumcision (of a convert), which normally ‎precedes ‎immersion and (as noted above) does not generate a new dimension of sanctity, need ‎not occur a ‎second time on the occasion of an individual’s acquiring added sanctity. We require ‎simply that a ‎proper act of circumcision be performed for a conversion to proceed. Thus, if the ‎circumcision had ‎already been performed, when the convert had entered into a lower degree of ‎sanctity, we need ‎not [symbolically] circumcise him again when he enters into a state of higher ‎sanctity. So, too, the ‎slave, when he is emancipated, he need not be circumcised even though he ‎becomes obliged to ‎perform new mitzvot and is raised up to a higher level of sanctity. This is ‎because his first ‎circumcision, undertaken for quasi-conversion [lit. “slavery conversion”] was ‎properly performed. ‎However, the immersion, which completes the conversion, and from which ‎full Jewish status ‎‎[<i>kedushat yisrael</i>, lit. “the sanctity of Israel”] issues, must be repeated ‎when the convert ‎ascends from a lower level of sanctity to one that is higher.‎<br>However, upon broader examination (of the Rishonim), how shall we account for the opinion ‎of ‎Nahmanides, who maintains (<i>novellae ad</i> Yebamot 47b, s. v. <i>nitrape</i>) that a ‎convert ‎who immerses himself, and only subsequently is circumcised, has undergone a perfectly ‎valid ‎conversion? In line with this opinion we would periodically encounter situations in ‎which ‎circumcision comes (after immersion) and thus at the end of the conversion process. If so, ‎the ‎elevating factor would be reversed, and we would be required to perform <i>hattafat ‎dam ‎berit</i> after the immersion since this would bring him to a higher degree of holiness and ‎not the ‎immersion.‎<br>However, note that Ramban [loc. cit.] asserts that even the members of the tribe of Levi, who ‎had ‎been circumcised prior to the Exodus from Egypt in fulfilment of the mitzvah [i.e., the one ‎given to ‎Abraham] and not for purposes of conversion, did not require <i>hattafat dam berit</i>, ‎as he ‎wrote:‎ “And if so, how did the tribe of Levi enter the covenant? They went through the ‎process of ‎‎<i>hattafat dam berit</i>. Yet it appears to me that as regards the requirement for ‎circumcision, ‎they did not require <i>hattafat dam berith</i> because they were already ‎circumcised for the ‎sake of the mitzvah of circumcision; unlike the circumcision of an Arab or a ‎Gibeonite, who were ‎not given the mitzvah of circumcision, and therefore are [legally] considered ‎uncircumcised.” It is ‎apparent from Nahmanides’ statement that circumcision is not as integral an ‎act as immersion in ‎the process of conversion. The object of circumcision is to remove the convert ‎from the category ‎of the uncircumcised. If he was not circumcised, he cannot become infused with ‎‎<i>kedushat ‎yisrael</i>, because an uncircumcised person may not enter the covenant. ‎Accordingly, if the ‎convert is circumcised, he need only immerse himself in order to convert. An ‎Arab who was ‎circumcised but not for the purpose of conversion is legally uncircumcised and must ‎undergo ‎‎<i>hattafat dam berit</i>. (See TB Nedarin 31b,Yebamot 71a, Abodah Zarah 27a.) ‎However, the ‎sons of Levi, who were descended from Abraham and were circumcised according to ‎the ‎command of the Holy One,were not enjoined to undergo <i>hattafat dam berit</i>‎<br>In light of this suggestion [and employing the above supposition] we [are able to] resolve ‎our ‎question as to why recircumcision [<i>hattafat dam berit</i>] is not required when going to ‎a ‎higher state of sanctification according to the view of Nahmanides, who holds that at ‎times ‎conversion is completed with circumcision.‎<br>We have seen [as delineated above] that circumcision is not at all part of conversion. ‎All ‎circumcision does is remove the convert from the category of the uncircumcised. Therefore, ‎one ‎who is already circumcised [according to the halacha] does not require <i>hattafat dam ‎berit</i> ‎when he ascends from one level of sanctity to another level. Immersion is different ‎because it ‎instills <i>Kedushat Yisrael</i> and is thus an integral part of the conversion process. ‎Therefore, ‎when additional sanctity is to be added we require immersion but not <i>hattafat dam ‎berit</i>. ‎Nahmanides, however, is of the view that immersion can take place before circumcision, ‎even ‎though one does not become a full-fledged Jew immediately thereafter. It is, however, ‎effective ‎for the future. When the convert is circumcised [and the obstacle removed], his ‎conversion and ‎Jewishness take hold as a result of the prior immersion.‎<br>‎[III.] The basic question of whether circumcision is a part of the conversion process or ‎merely ‎removes the convert from the status of being uncircumcised is dependent upon a dispute ‎among ‎the Rishonim as to whether a <i>bet din</i> need be present at the time of the ‎circumcision. From ‎the manner in which Maimonides formulates his opinion, we can deduce that ‎the presence of a ‎‎<i>bet din</i> (religious court) is required only for the immersion. In line with ‎this, one could argue ‎that circumcision achieves nothing more than the removal of a legal bar to the ‎conversion [See ‎Hilkhot Issurei Bi’ah 13:6 and 14:5-6].‎<br>‎<i>Tur</i> and <i>Shulhan Arukh</i> note the necessity of the [formal] process of bet din ‎for ‎circumcision as well, and so it is explicitly stated in the <i>novella</i> of Ramban (TB Yebamot ‎‎45b). ‎If this is the case, our suggestion that Nahmanides views circumcision as simply the removal ‎of the ‎status of being uncircumcised is incorrect. The very fact that Nahmanides requires the ‎presence of ‎a <i>bet din</i> at the time of circumcision testifies that the act of circumcision is an ‎integral act of ‎conversion and therefore susceptible to the requirement for the presence of a ‎‎<i>bet din</i>. The ‎question thus rearises: Why did the tribe of Levi at Mount Sinai not undergo ‎‎<i>hattafat dam ‎berit</i>, since their original circumcision was not for the purpose of ‎conversion?‎<br>‎(Nahmanides’ view is actually similar to that of Tosafot [Yebamot 41b, s. v. <i>mi ‎lo</i>], that ‎immersion and circumcision are sufficient to fulfill the mitzvah of circumcision [and do ‎not need to ‎be done explicitly for the sake of conversion]. Nahmanides relied on the statement of ‎the ‎Jerusalem Talmud that he cited. This, however, will not provide a solution to our ‎quandary. ‎Circumcision and immersion for the sole purposes of fulfilling these mitzvot are ‎acceptable for ‎conversion only once the Torah was given and the halakhah of conversion was ‎established ‎requiring that conversion is accomplished through circumcision and immersion. In this ‎framework, ‎circumcision and immersion are effective even if performed solely in fulfillment of ‎a ‎commandment and not explicitly for purposes of conversion. However, the tribe of Levi, ‎which ‎was circumcised in Egypt before the people of Israel were given the mitzvah of circumcision ‎for ‎purposes of conversion, concluded an act of conversion through circumcision. This [pre-Sinaitic] ‎act ‎of circumcision cannot effectuate the conversion which the Jews were later commanded ‎to ‎undergo at Sinai.)‎<br>It would appear that Nahmanides was of the opinion that circumcision constitutes an act ‎of ‎conversion only so long as it (is an halachally mandated circumcision) has not yet been fulfilled, ‎but ‎not after such a [legally binding act] has been performed. Circumcision as an act of conversion ‎finds ‎its expression only when the subject lacks a legally valid circumcision. Therefore, a ‎circumcised ‎Arab who converts requires <i>hattafat dam berit</i> because his previous ‎circumcision is of no ‎legal value. Through <i>hattafat dam berit</i> he will fulfill the commandment ‎to enter the ‎covenant of our Father Abraham, which is an integral part of the mitzvah of ‎circumcision. However, ‎the Levites who had fulfilled the mitzvah of circumcision in all of its detail ‎‎[which they were ‎mandated to perform] as descendants of Abraham and flawlessly fulfilled their ‎obligation, did not ‎require <i>hattafat dam berit</i>, for what more would they achieve thereby?‎<br>It appears that Nahmanides was of the opinion that circumcision constitutes an act of ‎conversion ‎so long as the conversion process remains unfulfilled in its entirety. Circumcision is only ‎a ‎‎“converting action” when the convert still lacks the full effectuation of his conversion. For ‎this ‎reason, a circumcised Arab requires a ritual letting of blood because his original circumcision is ‎of no ‎‎[legal] value, and with a ritual letting of blood the convert will achieve his entry into the ‎covenant ‎of our Father Abraham, which is an integral part of the mitzvah of circumcision. However, ‎the ‎Levites, who fulfilled the mitzvah of circumcision <i>qua</i> descendants of Abraham, in all of ‎its ‎details, and flawlessly fulfilled thereby their obligation, did not require a ritual letting of blood, ‎for ‎what more was to be achieved thereby? Therefore, their conversion was, willy-nilly, limited ‎solely ‎to immersion, as in the case of women and castrati. (Compare the manner in which ‎Nahmanides ‎concludes his comment [loc cit.]: “Therefore, the children of Levi were judged to be in ‎the same ‎category as women, such that they were allowed to convert through immersion ‎alone.”) ‎Therefore, when a [gentile slave belonging to a Jew] converts [and thereby is elevated] ‎from a ‎lesser to a greater level of sanctity, he does not require a <i>hattafat dam berit</i>, for was ‎not ‎the commandment of circumcision already fulfilled in its entirety. In contrast to circumcision, ‎the ‎role of immersion in the conversion process is not due to any commandment or requirement ‎that ‎needs to be satisfied. It has no legal significance aside from its role as effecting ‎conversion. ‎Immersion, as a means of imbuing <i>kedushat yisrael</i>, can take place any number ‎of times, ‎and wherever there is an increase in sanctity, one undergoes immersion.‎
22. The fact that the acceptance of the [obligation to perform] mitzvot (lit. <i>Kabbalat Ol ‎Mitzvot</i>) ‎is tied to the immersion which is an integral part of the conversion [process] is almost ‎axiomatic, as ‎is explained in Yebamot 47a-b and in Maimonides, <i>Hilkhot Issurei Bi’ah</i> 13:12 ‎and 14: 6– 7. ‎Rashi expresses this point explicitly. “For now, by the act of immersion, he effectively ‎converts; ‎hence at the time of the immersion he must accept the commitment to observe mitzvot” ‎‎(lit. yoke ‎of the commandments). However, Tosafot (Yebamot 45b, s. v. <i>me lo taula</i>) states ‎that ‎‎<i>kabbalat ol mitzvoth</i> can occur before immersion.‎<br>Maimonides (<i>Hilkhot Issurei Bi’ah</i> 13:17) states: “A convert who was not questioned [as ‎to ‎whether he would be faithful to the performance of the mitzvot] or who was not informed of ‎the ‎mitzvot and the punishments for transgressions, but who was circumcised before a lower court ‎of ‎three is a convert.” I once heard from my father ([R. Moses Soloveitchik] of blessed memory) ‎that ‎Maimonides did not intend to say that a convert who converted with the intention of not ‎fulfilling ‎the mitzvot is considered a true convert. Such a notion would uproot the entire concepts ‎of ‎conversion and <i>kedushat yisrael</i>, which [derive] from our obligation to observe the ‎mitzvot ‎of God. Maimonides’ opinion is that the acceptance of mitzvot is not a distinct act in the ‎conversion ‎process that requires the oversight of a <i>bet din</i> as does immersion, but is rather ‎an ‎overriding characteristic theme in the conversion process that is predicated upon acceptance ‎of ‎the responsibility for observing mitzvot. Therefore, if we know that a convert by his immersion ‎is ‎willing to accept the “Yoke of the Torah” and mitzvot, even though there was no formal ‎notification ‎of the mitzvot and formal acceptance by the convert, the immersion will be legally ‎sufficient ‎because the convert intends to live the sacred life of a committed Jew. [In contrast,] the ‎Tosafot ‎that we cited before seems to maintain that the acceptance of the “Yoke of Mitzvot” is a ‎discrete ‎act in the conversion process, and that the requirement for the bet din’s involvement ‎was ‎restricted thereto. Immersion (according to this view) does not require the presence of a ‎‎<i>bet ‎din</i>; only <i>kabbalat ol mitzvoth</i> must occur in its presence.<br>Nahmanides ‎‎(Hiddushei ‎HaRamban, Yebamot 45b) states: “Even a male convert who accepted the mitzvoth ‎prior to ‎circumcision must do so again at the time of immersion.” Ostensibly, it appears that in his ‎opinion ‎‎<i>kabbalat ol mitzvoth</i> occurs at the time of [a prior] circumcision as well. However, ‎one could ‎interpret Nahmanides as not intending to refer to the acceptance of mitzvot as a ‎discrete act, but ‎as a general characterization of the act of circumcision. Circumcision must be ‎fulfilled out of a ‎commitment to mitzvot, as I noted above with respect to Maimonides’ view. ‎Maimonides, ‎however, is of the opinion that the formal act of <i>kabbalat ol mitzvoth</i> is not at ‎all ‎determinative. Maimonides agrees with the view of the Tosafists that there is a distinct act ‎‎[of ‎‎<i>kabbalat ol mitzvoth</i>] and it requires the presence of a <i>bet din</i>. Aside from ‎the ‎special acceptance of mitzvot, the circumcision and the immersion must also be done out of ‎a ‎commitment to mitzvot, which is identical to conversion.‎
23. With respect to the seven nations of Canaan Maimonides wrote in <i>Hilkhot Melakhim</i> ‎‎5:4:‎ ‎“It ‎is a positive mitzvah to destroy the seven nations [of Canaan], as it is said:‘You shall utterly ‎destroy ‎them’ (Deuteronomy 7:2), and anyone who encounters one of them and does not kill him ‎has ‎violated an injunction, as it is said, ‘Do not keep alive a soul’(Deuteronomy 20:16), and [in ‎fact] ‎their memory has already been erased. “Radbaz [R. David Ibn Abi Zimra, sixteenth century] ‎located ‎the source of the last line, “and their memory has already been erased,” in the words of R. ‎Joshua ‎‎(M. Yada’im 4:4), “Sennacherib, king of Assyria, has already arisen and intermingled all of ‎the ‎nations” [i.e. so that none retained their distinct identity].‎<br>But note something strange : in relation to the destruction of Amalek, Maimonides does not ‎add ‎the words “and their memory has already been erased.” In <i>Hilkhot ‎Melakhim</i> ‎‎5:5, Maimonides writes: “And similarly it is a positive mitzvah to erase the memory of ‎Amalek, ‎as it said: ‘Erase the memory of Amalek’ (Deuteronomy 25:19), and it is a positive mitzvah ‎to ‎forever remember his evil deeds and his laying ambush (against you), in order to arose ‎anger ‎against him. As it is said, ‘Remember what Amalek did to you.’ Tradition teaches: Remember ‎‎— ‎with your mouth; do not forget in your heart, for it is prohibited to forget his enmity ‎and ‎hatred.”‎‎<br>From Maimonides’ words it appears that Amalek still exists in the world, whereas the ‎seven ‎nations of Canaan have descended to the depths of oblivion.‎ One wonders why ‎Maimonides did not employ the rule of R. Joshua that “Sennacherib came and ‎intermingled all the ‎nations” with relation to Amalek. The answer to this question is very simple. ‎The Bible testifies that ‎Amalek still exists in this world. Go and see what the Torah says: “The Lord ‎will have war with ‎Amalek from generation to generation” (Exodus 17:16). Accordingly, it is ‎impossible for Amalek to ‎be blotted out of the world until the coming of the Messiah. So said our ‎Sages: “God’s name and ‎throne will not be complete until the children of Amalek are blotted out” ‎‎(Rashi to Exodus 17:16). ‎But where is Amalek? I heard the answer from my father of blessed ‎memory. Every nation that ‎conspires to destroy the Jewish people is considered by the halakhah ‎to be Amalek. My father ‎added that as concerns Amalek itself we were commanded to perform ‎two mitzvot: (a) [for the ‎individual] to blot out the memory of Amalek, which is incumbent on ‎everyone [to slay] any ‎individual member of Amalek [that he encounters], as expounded in the ‎Torah portion of Ki ‎Tetzeh, “You shall blot out the memory of Amalek” (Deuteronomy 25:19), and ‎‎(b) [for the ‎community] to engage in communal military preparedness for war against Amalek, as it ‎is ‎explained in the Torah portion of B’shalach, “The Lord will wage war with Amalek from ‎generation ‎to generation” (Exodus 17:16). With relation to any other nation that stands ready to ‎destroy us, ‎we are [now after the time of Sennacherib] commanded to wage war against it [even] ‎while it ‎prepares for war against us,and our war against it is a “War of Mitzvah”, in accordance with ‎the ‎command of the Torah that “The Lord will wage war with Amalek from generation to ‎generation.” ‎However, the destruction of individuals, which is derived from the Torah portion of Ki ‎Tetzeh, ‎refers only to the biological descendants of Amalek. The words of Maimonides include ‎the ‎obligation to wipe out individuals, which does not apply to any other nation that plots ‎destruction ‎against the People of Israel. However, since the obligation of warring Amalek pertains ‎to such a ‎nation (as well), he did not employ the phrase “And its memory has already been lost.” ‎The status ‎of Amalek exists even now after the nations were intermingled [by Sennacherib]. And ‎perhaps this ‎is the basis for Maimonides’ view (<i>Hilkhot Melakhim</i> 5:1) that a defensive war ‎by Jews ‎against an enemy who comes to wage war against it is a “War of Mitzvah”. For this kind of ‎war is ‎subsumed by the notion “The Lord will have war against Amalek from generation to ‎generation.” ‎To be sure, Maimonides especially singled out the war with Amalek [in that regard]; ‎nevertheless, ‎one may say that saving Jews from an enemy that has arisen to destroy them is ‎encompassed to ‎this Torah portion [i.e., the destruction of Amalek]. Cf., Sotah 44b, s. v. <i>amar R. ‎Jochanan</i>.‎ 