Tosefta Bikkurim (Lieberman)
תוספתא ביכורים (ליברמן)
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Tosefta Bikkurim (Lieberman)



Chapter 1

First fruits are not presented before the Pentecost festival, as detailed in Mishna Bikkurim 1:3 and other references. However, if these fruits were presented before Pentecost, the individual is required to wait until Pentecost to recite the confession in the presence of a priest, as indicated in Deut. 26:1.
Buying a single tree growing in another person's field exempts the buyer from reciting the confession while presenting the first fruits, according to R. Meir. Sages, however, argue that the individual neither brings the first fruits nor recites the confession. R. Judah insists that all proselytes must present their first fruits but are not obliged to recite the confession. He also refers to Moses' father-in-law and his clan, the Kenites, who are obligated to both bring first fruits and recite the confession, as commanded in Num. 10:32. Disagreeing with R. Meir, R. Yosé argues that priests should present first fruits but should not recite the confession because they did not inherit a portion of the land. He also contends that priests received their portion from the Levites, similar to how Levites received their portion from the Israelites, as detailed in Num. 35:2.
An individual who presents his first fruits then sells his field must again bring the first fruits, but he is not obliged to recite the confession. The buyer's obligations towards bringing first fruits are not straightforward; they cannot bring first fruits of the same type, but they may bring other types of first fruits and recite the confession. Disagreeing with this, R. Judah insists that even the same type of first fruits should be presented along with the recital of the confession.
In the event that an individual separately presents his first fruits, then purchases another field and first fruits ripen within it, he must bring all seven types of first fruits together without the recital of confession, because a man cannot recite twice in one year.
According to R. Judah, the individual is responsible for replacing inaccessible or unfit first fruits until he reaches the Well of the Exile. Beyond this point, the individual bears no responsibility. R. Simeon, quoting R. Simeon b. Judah, asserts that replacement fruits ignore the law of the added fifth. Rabban Simeon b. Gamaliel also cautions that first fruits should only be brought from dates grown in Jericho, and the kotebet, a type of date, is the only type for which the recital of confession is authorized. R. Eliezer equally considers pomegranates from the valley as worthy first fruits.
There are stringencies associated with the separation and disposition of the heave-offering that don't apply to the second tithe or first fruits. On the other hand, the second tithe and first fruits have their own specific stringencies that don't apply to the heave-offering. A heave-offering is only removed from the produce that's in the same location as the produce that's intended for the heave-offering. It can only be removed from completely processed produce, and it's not removed from clean produce for unclean produce. It imposes the status of heave-offering upon other produce it's mixed with, and it's subject to the law of the added fifth. The requirement to separate a heave-offering is applicable to every kind of produce, unlike first fruits, which are separated only from the seven species. Additionally, the requirement to separate a heave-offering is applicable in the third and sixth years of the sabbatical cycle, which is not the case with the second tithe. Furthermore, there are specific stringencies applicable to the second tithe, which don't apply to the heave-offering. Money used for the second tithe sanctifies the vessel in which one purchases the produce. It also forbids the use of coins that are used for its redemption, any mixture it's part of or suspected of being part of, regardless of the proportions of consecrated and unconsecrated produce in the mixture. It's prohibited to mourners as food and requires an additional fifth of its value to be set aside for its redemption. The second tithe also requires the recitation of a confession and cannot be consumed unless it's been redeemed. It also cannot be used to kindle a lamp unlike heave-offering.
The requirement to separate heave-offering and second tithe applies in Ammon and Moab, unlike with first fruits. The second tithe and first fruits also come with their own stringencies that do not apply to heave-offering. Both second tithe and first fruits must be brought to the Place, require the recitation of a confession, and their consumption is prohibited to mourners. According to R. Simeon, however, mourners are permitted to eat first fruits. They are also subject to the law of removal, though R. Simeon argues that first fruits are exempt from this law. When R. Yosé points out that just as second tithe requires removal so should first fruits, R. Simeon counters that the coins used to redeem second tithes require removal while the redemption-value of first fruits do not. Furthermore, R. Simeon points out that what grows from first fruits when used as seed is not prohibited and doesn't have to be eaten in Jerusalem. According to R. Simeon b. Judah, quoting R. Simeon, farmers aren't obligated to separate first fruits until the produce has been harvested. 

Chapter 2

The comparison between a koy and a wild animal lies in its blood, which must be covered up like that of a wild animal. Rabbi Eliezer posits that those who consume its fat are liable to bring a conditional guilt-offering. 
How is a koy akin to both a wild and a domesticated animal? If one flays it, its hide is deemed a connective to the carcass, capable of contracting and transmitting carrion uncleanness, akin to that of a wild or a domesticated animal. It is similarly restricted by the prohibition to eat the sinew of the hip. If one vows to become a Nazirite if the koy is either a wild or a domesticated animal, they indeed become a Nazirite; yet Rabbi Yosé b. R. Judah declares that a koy is a unique species, and the sages couldn't determine whether it is wild or domesticated.
The distinct nature of the androgyne resembles men in some aspects, women in others, both men and women in some, and neither men nor women in certain aspects. 
The ways it mirrors men include: it is rendered unclean by a white-colored discharge, it contracts marriage but is not wedded, it cannot remain alone with women it isn't married to, it doesn't inherit with the daughters, it doesn't dress or cut its hair in a feminine fashion, it remains pure for the dead (if a priest), it mustn't contravene the prohibitions regarding hair and beard styling, and it is required to follow all the commandments proclaimed in the Torah. 
As for women, the androgyne parallels them in the following: it is denounced as unclean by a red-colored secretion, it can't be alone with men it isn't married to, it doesn't contract a levirate marriage, it doesn't inherit with the sons, it can't partake of the Most Holy Things (if a priest's offspring), it is disqualified from bearing witness, and if it has had any kind of forbidden intercourse, it is disqualified from priesthood benefits.
The androgyne is similar to both men and women in a few ways. Firstly, regardless of the androgyne being male or female, others are liable for any damages it suffers. If someone intentionally kills an androgyne, they are sentenced to death, while an unintentional killing results in banishment to the cities of refuge. Furthermore, an androgyne's birth triggers the mother's observance of blood purification periods for both male and female offspring. The androgyne can also inherit the entire estate if they are the sole heir, similar to both men and women. Also, an androgyne who is a priest's offspring can partake of Holy Things that are consumed outside Jerusalem, just like both men and women. If someone vows to be a Nazirite only if an individual is identified as both a man and a woman, he indeed becomes a Nazirite. 
There are also aspects in which an androgyne is unlike either men or women. For instance, others are not held accountable for an androgyne's sin or impurity. An androgyne's valuation cannot be vowed, unlike the process for men and women. It also cannot be sold as a Hebrew slave, in contrast to men and women who can be. If someone vows to be a Nazirite if an individual is identified as neither man nor woman, he becomes a Nazirite. Taking a different view, Rabbi Yosé classifies an androgyne as a distinct entity, and the sages cannot conclusively determine whether it is a man or a woman. However, he does not apply the same rule to individuals with underdeveloped genitals who could be potentially categorised as either an ambiguous male or female.
In the process of separating the first fruits from the rest of the produce, a man visits his field and witnesses a ripening fig, grape, or pomegranate. He ties it up with a cord and acknowledges them as the first fruits. Rabbi Simeon criticises this practice, asserting that first fruits must be distinguished post-harvest. It's commendable to keep these fruits in seven separate containers, however a single container is also acceptable. If the Israelite brings all seven kinds in one container, they would arrange them by first adding barley at the bottom of the basket, followed by wheat, olives, dates, pomegranates, and finally figs, each layer marked off with something else. The fruits are then surrounded with grape clusters which hang on the outside. A collective approach to the pilgrimage to Jerusalem is preferred, with the officers of the synagogue joining them. They sleep outside in the open area of the town, without entering the houses in town due to potential corpse-uncleanness through overshadowing. They are required to bring a burnt-offering and a peace-offering. Upon their return, the inhabitants of Jerusalem don't treat them the same way as when they were on their way to Jerusalem.
The defined time for bringing the wood-offering from the priests and the people falls on the ninth of Ab. Those who bring the wood-offering are mandated to spend the night in Jerusalem. They are treated differently from those who brought the first fruits by the inhabitants of the city.
The Israelite is allowed to hand over the basket of first fruits to a slave or a relative while they are on the route to Jerusalem, until they reach the Temple Mount. There, everyone, including Agrippa the king, must bear the basket of first fruits on their shoulders and enter the Temple Court. Upon reaching the Temple Court, the Levites chant, "I will extol thee, O Lord, for thou hast drawn me up, and hast not let my foes rejoice over me".
The pigeons placed atop the baskets are to be offered as burnt-offerings, while the ones held in their hands are given as gifts to the priests.
The supplement of first fruits must contain the same types of produce as the actual first fruits. On the other hand, the ornaments that adorn the first fruits should comprise different kinds of produce.
The supplement of the first fruits, which consist of the same kind of produce as first fruits themselves, must be eaten in a state of purity. These additional offerings are exempt from the practice of tithing if the produce is certainly untithed. This exemption extends and is even more applicable for produce which falls under the category of dema’i, the nature of which is of uncertain tithing status.
The decorations that adorn the first fruits are assessed by a different set of criteria. If they are made of the same kind of produce as the first fruits but are sourced from items not typically subject to the first fruits offering, they are still liable to tithing when in the status of either certainly untithed produce, or more so, when in the status of dema’i-produce. But, if the decorations are made from different kinds of produce that are not liable to the first fruits offering, or from produce sourced from Ammon or Moab, even if typically subject to the first fruits offering, the priests do not accept these offerings.
Selling a Torah scroll is considered unfavorable as the seller will never witness a sign of blessing. This principle also extends to scribes who replicate Torah scrolls, tefillin, and mezuzah, their dealers, and even the dealers' dealers, all of who will not be blessed if they trade these sacred objects for profit. Yet, those who engage with these sacred objects with noble intentions shall indeed be blessed.
Merchants who sell their goods at public auctions, breeders of small cattle, and lumberjacks disrupting fruitful trees will not benefit from a blessing.