Tosefta Orlah (Lieberman)
תוספתא ערלה (ליברמן)
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Tosefta Orlah (Lieberman)



Chapter 1

If someone plants a fruit tree for purposes other than fruit production, such as to form a fence, for lumber, or for firewood, it's exempt from the laws of 'orlah. This rule dates back to the initial three years of a tree's growth when its fruit can't be consumed or used. R. Simeon b. Gamaliel clarifies that this exemption applies when the tree planted is suitable for fencing, lumber, or firewood. However, if the tree isn't suitable for these specific uses and is planted for firewood, then it falls under the laws of 'orlah. If intentions change and a tree initially planted for firewood is later intended for food purposes, it becomes liable under these laws. This rule holds ground based on a verse from Lev. 19:23, which mentions planting 'every kind of fruit tree'. But when should one start counting the three years of ‘orlah? The clock starts from the time of the tree's planting.
Whoever plants a fruit tree for public use is held accountable under the laws of 'orlah. according to R. Judah, such a person is exempt from these laws. There is a saying in R. Judah's name by R. Simeon b. Eleazar that reads, "He who plants a fruit tree for public use is liable to the laws of 'orlah. A fruit tree which grows by itself is never beholden to such laws."
This advice is applicable to those who plant a fruit tree in unconventional places such as a boat, a pot, or a rooftop. These trees are also liable to the laws of 'orlah. If someone plants a tree in an unperforated pot and it breaks, and it is then planted in a perforated pot, the tree, if it can survive on its own, is liable. If not, the tree is exempt. But how do you determine a tree's ability to survive on its own? By digging a hole in the ground and setting it in it. From this, you can assess if it can live; if it can, it is liable, otherwise, it's exempt.
Trees that grow from either the trunk or the roots of a tree that has been chopped down are liable to these laws. It is believed by R. Judah that a tree growing from the trunk is liable, but one growing from the roots is exempt. When a tree is consecrated and planted, it is exempt. But if a person plants a tree and consecrates it afterward, and even redeems it, it is liable. Starting from where should we count the three years of 'orlah for it? From when it was planted.
If a gentile grafts a fruit tree onto a barren tree, an Israelite, who is forbidden to make such a graft, counts the years of 'orlah from the time of planting. According to R. Yosé, they can plant a slip of an 'orlah tree, but not a walnut of an 'orlah tree as it is considered fruit. Early date-berries from an 'orlah tree should not be used for grafting. Furthermore, R. Simeon b. Eleazar says that 'orlah fruit used in dyeing is neutralized when mixed with other ingredients in a ratio of 200 to one.
In the teachings of R. Simeon b. Eleazar, meat and milk are allowed for use. Nonetheless, any hair from an unslaughtered blemished firstling is strictly prohibited. R. Yosé suggests inspecting the blemished firstling.
An oven fired with shells of 'orlah fruit must be broken if it is new, and cooled if it is old. However, baking and cooking on the burnt coals of 'orlah fruit shells are permissible. Ashes are allowed except for ashes from pagan grove (’asherah) wood. Ashes from plague-diseased garments or rubble from plague-hit dwellings are not to be used.
If there is doubt regarding the status of 'orlah fruit, the rules differ based on geographical location. In the Land of Israel, the fruit is forbidden. However, in Syria and outside the Land of Israel, it is permitted. If a field or a vineyard planted with vegetables outside which similar vegetables are being sold, the doubtful produce is forbidden in the Land of Israel. In Syria and outside the Land of Israel, it is allowed. According to R. Judah, even this doubtful produce is forbidden in Syria. A vineyard that is planted with vegetables next to a field of vegetables and outside of which vegetables are sold, the doubtful produce is forbidden in the Land of Israel. But in Syria and outside the Land of Israel, it is permitted. If there is a young sapling in one's field and its age is uncertain, the sapling is forbidden in the Land of Israel. In Syria and outside the Land of Israel, it is permitted. As quoted by R. Eleazar b. R. Yosé, R. Yosé the Galilean once said in the name of R. Yoḥanan b. Nuri who said in the name of R. Eliezer the Great, "The laws of 'orlah do not apply outside of the Land of Israel."