Narboni on Guide for the Perplexed
נרבוני על מורה נבוכים
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Narboni_on_Guide_for_the_Perplexed
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Narboni on Guide for the Perplexed

Introduction

Publisher's Introduction



Author's Introduction



Part 1



Part 2 Introduction



Part 2



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6

And it wants to apply this idea to all mankind. They said, 'For the Lord is your God'—that the designation is not referring to Israel alone, that God consults the world of the intellects and influences from it existence. It seems that through the intermediacy of the angels and His influence on them. He (God) influences existence from them. And this is the intention in their saying that the Holy One, Blessed be He, does not do anything until He consults the celestial court . And the Rabbi, of blessed memory, was astonished at their saying 'consults (mistachel)' and what he omitted, and I was puzzled by is the court (familia) above. For he said it is an encampment in the Greek language which is intended as the world of the intellects. And after we see the statements agree on the matter and there appears a Greek word there we can know from whom the statement originally came. And they said, and in its place they said it absolutely it means in the absolute, without the words 'it is possible' which implies connection and doubt in knowledge or a partnership in a thing. And this is the idea of all the faculties (powers). For you do not see and hear through sight, and you do not see through sight and hearing, they say their song—their own songs and it is it's unique action. And the truth of the song is its truth regarding the one who acts (the doer) at the time when a person sleeps, why the person sleeps because the soul is one in a subject (body) that has many powers the perceptions oppress one another and at the time of awakening, the external perceptions oppress the internal ones and at the time of sleep, the natural forces return to their origin and the soul can complete its work and then the perceptive faculties will subdue one another in the forms they received during wakefulness and the soul is a hint toward the shared energy.  And this is a great secret of prophecy. They challenged this from what the Rabbi, of blessed memory, left in chapter 46 (s/b 45) of this section, the speech of the angel in a dream or seeing him and his speech in a vision is greater than the speech of a man. And I saw in a dream.. And on this he said it is a great secret of prophecy, that one whose faculty was good, it appeared to him like the form of men and one whose faculty was bad, it appeared to him like the form of angels. And I respond to this for indeed he spoke regarding the matter of the faculties. And therefore, one who is not impressed by their attainment and imagines them in the form of men his faculty is better than one who is impressed and imagines them in the form of frightening angels like the appearance of an exceedingly awesome angel of God. And there he will speak with us about the truth of prophecy and its levels and the influence flows from the active intellect onto the soul of the prophet. Indeed, one who imagines the active intellect as being an angel that appears to him or speaks with him is at a higher level than one who imagines a man speaking with him or appearing and speaking with him.

Part 3 Introduction



Part 3

