Ralbag on I Samuel
רלב"ג על שמואל א
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Ralbag_on_I_Samuel
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Ralbag on I Samuel



Chapter 1



Verse 1



Verse 2

And it further narrates that Elkanah had two wives. One was named Channah, and the second was named Peninah. And Channah did not merit having children.

Verse 3

On a set basis. The intention is either yearly or each festival as the Torah commands. The more correct interpretation is that every year he would ascend there with his wives and children. And this is the intention when it says "This man would ascend from his city on a set basis". That once every year he would ascend from his city, in a way that there remained no one in his house. Even women and children.

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Verse 1



Verse 2



Verse 3



Verse 4



Verse 5



Verse 6

--- To explain to them that it was from the many kindnesses of God, may He be blessed, that He sometimes saved Israel from their enemies through those not very refined, even though they were not so fit for this on their own, like the matter with Yerubaal and Jephthah - for Yerubaal was an idolater when God called to him to save Israel; and we also did not see that Jephthah had a great virtue beside his power - and sometimes He saved them with with the very refined, like the matter with Bedan and Samuel. And that is because we find that Bedan - who was Samson - was of the refined. For God, may He be blessed, had already performed a wonder through him. And when he called to God, He answered him. And this indicates his refinement and his  being, in some respect, on the level of the prophets. For God, may He be blessed, does not perform wonders except through those fitting - as we have explained in the sixth Chapter of the Wars of God. And indeed the refinement of Samuel is very, very clear. And this was from great Divine Providence over Israel. For when it was possible that there was a refined man among them through which He could do a miracle, He would raise him over them as a Judge and save them through him. But when there was no man with this description among them, He would also save them - [but] through one not refined, even though he is not fitting for this - on account of His providence over Israel. And it is as if He said this to teach them that they would not need a king to fight their wars, but rather the Lord, God of Israel, is their king; and He will save them when they return to Him - as He did in the days of the Judges, for He sent them Judges to save them [then]. But if they go away from the ways of the Torah, a king will not help them. Rather the hand of the Lord will be against them, as it was with their forefathers who did not have a king.