Malbim on Leviticus
מלבי"ם על ויקרא
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Malbim_on_Leviticus
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Malbim on Leviticus

Vayikra



Tzav



Shmini



Tazria



Metzora



Achrei Mot



Kedoshim



Siman 1



Siman 2



Siman 3



Siman 4



Siman 5



Siman 6



Siman 7



Siman 8



Siman 9



Siman 10



Siman 11



Siman 12



Siman 13



Siman 14



Siman 15



Siman 16



Siman 17



Siman 18



Siman 19



Siman 20



Siman 21



Siman 22



Siman 23



Siman 24



Siman 25



Siman 26



Siman 27



Siman 28



Siman 29



Siman 30



Siman 31



Siman 32



Siman 33



Siman 34



Siman 35



Siman 36



Siman 37



Siman 38



Siman 39



Siman 40



Siman 41



Siman 42



Siman 43



Siman 44



Siman 45

<b>And you shall love your neighbor as yourself:</b>... And the philosophers have already explained that the primary axiom which is the root of moral philosophy is that one should will that everything that he does be a universal axiom (<i>chok kollel</i>). This means that that if he should want that evil occur to his fellow so that he will benefit, he must evaluate it to see if he would want it to be a universal axiom, such that this axiom would be that everyone may cause damage to their fellows when it brings benefit to themselves. And this will certainly not be acceptable to him, that damage should be caused to him in order that benefit come to his fellows. And through this, he too will desist from doing it to his fellow. And likewise if he is able to benefit his fellow and he desists from it, he must evaluate it to see if he would want this to be a universal axiom, such that all people would desist from benefitting him. And this is [the meaning of] that which Rabbi Akiva said, that it is the great principle (<i>klal gadol</i>) of the Torah. However the critical philosophers questioned this maxim, since this axiom is still not universal. For according to this, everyone would act on the basis of the benefit to themselves, whereas it is fitting that all of their actions be on account of axioms of sublime universal reason without any admixture of personal benefit. And for this reason, Ben Azzai elevated the axiom to a more sublime matter when he based [it] on "This is the book of the generations of man." For all men are bound together like one body. All of them were created in the image of God to complete the highest image and form which contains the souls of all mankind. All of them are like one single person, and like one body which is composed of different members... According to this theory, the words of Rabbi Akiva follow his own understanding (<i>leshitato</i>), since he expounds (Sifra Behar 5:43, Bava Metzia 62a), "Your life comes before that of your fellow." 

Emor



Behar



Bechukotai



Siman 1



Siman 2



Siman 3



Siman 4



Siman 5



Siman 6



Siman 7



Siman 8



Siman 9



Siman 10



Siman 11



Siman 12



Siman 13



Siman 14



Siman 15

And I will walk among you, and I will be your God - there are two levels here. (1) Holiness will be inside you, really, in your divine soul, and through holiness the divine soul will again be the master in [your] reality. This is similar to the righteous being described as tenants who are partners to a king in the orchard: even though the garden is not their possession, they are partners with him in their work, by fixing and fencing and trimming the grapevines, so too the righteous are tenants with God, that keep the great garden which is the world, maintaining the world that was created through Ten Sayings through Torah and mitzvot. They stroll with the king through the work, they are partners with the Holy One of Blessing in the works of creation by keeping the great garden with Torah and mitzvot. I [God] say to them - behold I am like you [Sifra, above in this source sheet] because they with their actions sake the lines of judgment and through their decisions they make the world go through lovingkindness and punishment, as the sages say in various places "who rules over Me? The righteous. And  from a second perspective (2) "I will be your God" from the side that God behaves with the righteous according to God's will, for good, and God's reverence will be with them in their recognizing of God's greatness and majesty. And regarding those two aspects it is said "I will place My Sanctuary among them forever.  My Presence shall rest over them; I will be their God and they shall be My people." (Ezekiel 37:26-27). And those are two levels, the tabernacle among them and the Presence in them and above them. And there (Ezekiel 37:28) "And when My Sanctuary abides among them forever, the nations shall know that I, Ad-nai, do sanctify Israel" since once the Presence is in them, and they control all their actions, it is made known to idolaters that Israel is holy and beyond nature.
