Nishmat Chayyim
נשמת חיים
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Nishmat Chayyim

Introduction

In the name of our God we will fight,
In the eyes of my people.
On my bed at night my thoughts removed and sharpened my sleep from my eyes and the thought did not let me sleep.  When I put on my heart what is human because God and man will remember us because they will command us.  Isn't that the king of the land?  Otherwise they will answer with the prayers, We will make man in our image, after our likeness.  What advantage does the possessor of the tongue have over all the beasts of the earth and immortal animals, if in the composition of his body and the perfection of his creation.  They are the means of movement and the man has his weapon of war in his hand.  There he gave him a law and the law of nature gave him from the heights the horns to the bull, the thorns to the hedgehog.  The jaws for the pig.  The shield to the hummet.  And the hornbills to the tiger and Larry.  And every A and A turns the weapons of war and condescends to say I will reign.  After all, their dress did not wear out the vessels of their lives.  Because the material will make them clothing and control covers, even in my days I have not seen a summer deer sufferer and a geeky fox, because they are not as easy as the racing deer.  And not for heroes like the war lion.  And not for the wise as a bread fox and vineyards.  And they make a living not with sorrow and the bread of heaven will satisfy them.  And man treasures every tool of greed, every tool he creates will not succeed.  And in his house there is no bread and there is no dress.  And if according to his understanding a man praises because he gave man wisdom and knowledge.  Don't they also have a heart like him and each and every one with tricks make war on them and easily ask for food for him.  And they only have the monarchy in the Medes.  We learned modesty from a cat, robbery from an ant.  And Arias Miona.  And from the beasts of the earth and from the flight of the heavens, they will make us wise as a saying, and what more is a level man and a man a worm if under parties the sorrow of a man is turned and he is like the beasts of the field and the beast of the forest:
And I sat down and saw that man is permitted from the beast as the advantage of light from darkness.  For I said in my heart that this man was like one of the army of the high on high, and under his feet sheep and thousands all.  And also the beasts of the heavenly horn and the fish of the sea spend days.  He who humiliates should not be disobedient to his discipline, is he not the one who rides the sky with his intelligence and pride.  He ascended heaven and descended and many hidden things from the beginning are under his glory.  He who said to the earth, 'Thou shalt open, commanded the sun, and it will stand still, who gathered wind in his hands, and who collected water in his garment, this is none other than a man of God:
Zemuti and Saifi cut off my heart all night long.  I did not give sleep to my eyes and slumber to my eyelids, because I said how I would ask for rest and eternal answers to show all nations the precious glory of man's greatness because of his soul, because this means weep and this means weep and what does a writer consider?  I'm tired of wandering.  And it came to pass in the guard of the morning, when the stars came from above the earth, that I slept, then I would rest.  And I lifted up my eyes and saw, and behold, an angel touched me and said to me, "I demand in the plural in audible words, and a quick scribe's pen, get up, for you must finish the work and it is time to do it."  Didn't you know if you hadn't heard the false faith and the leprosy flourishing among the crooked people and the workers of the power that God has created and what beasts they have.  They were a burden to the children of Israel above God and His holy Torah.  Things that are not like that, the rabbis answer and say that there is no evidence in the Torah of Moses for the soul remaining.  Because her world will be seen in her life and there is no other inscription besides it, and others who set up this corner for them said it was for her because her commandments are incomplete and the main thing is missing, therefore understand the things that I am speaking to you and stand your ground because it is time for mercy because the time has come to prepare her and for her feast under the throne of God  from which it was carved.  And when he spoke to me in these words, I said, Oh my lord, how can this servant of my lord speak of the things that are lofty and sublime in the eyes of all the wise, for I am a man of men, and I have no understanding of a man.  And he said to me, do not be afraid of anyone. Peace be with you, strong and strong, because from the first day that you gave your heart to understand and instruct, I have been with you, not since your four writings. Books written by the finger of God on all the verses look like this. They deny your new hearings, even from the time you wrote thirty about your resurrection.  The dead and all that is written for life, your help gave you a name like the name of the great ones in the land.  I gave you the light of Gentiles in your book which you wrote about the enrichment of tribes to plant wastelands to say to the forbidden come out and confirm in the darkness of the open.  I will also support you with my right hand in the five books of the laws which you have written for your people to instruct them in the way they should walk and the deed they should do.  I was also with you in the book that you wrote about man's tendency to sin and God's help, the grandmother of his salvation. Also in your book, in which from the first material you began the existence until the 8th century, without which you ascended.  You have well seen in your answer that you were elevated to a minister and a great man in the nations of the world to the question he asked all the sages of his generation if man's days are limited to which one may not add and from which one may not subtract or not, and now here I am out to teach you how to do and succeed because with you I will not let you down and I will not leave you.  And I gave you treasures of light and hidden treasures'.  And when I heard these words I said, Lord, I will run through your commandments, for you will enlarge my heart.  And I was strengthened and stood on my feet and I held the writer's box and did not rest and did not rest until given in the light of his judgment:
And now here is a wise and wise man, please help me, O God, and I have written to benefit all my generation. This glorious book includes four articles and how wise they are, in which you will find peace for your soul, because in them all the eyes of wisdom are included, no problem read and no problem he pondered and here in the first article I brought from the beginning all the fruit of the Holy Torah and the places  The ones that necessarily require that there is no contradiction and stuttering since the pure soul is a part of man from God, spiritual and eternal as the angels of the highest standing and standing: The second article includes all the questions and investigations required about the matter of the soul from the day of its birth to the day of its death, so the body with all the things in which after the mind created the Father qualifies:
The third article includes all the proofs that through the sense we can bring proof of the soul being indestructible, and in all of them it will talk about the spirits and demons and because of their reality through the Kabbalah, the sense and the miracle:
The fourth article includes the view that is on the way of the mind from the imperatives of this retention.  And he will talk about the reincarnation of souls with all the questions and investigations that fall into this requirement:
And now a friend calls, know that the foundation of the foundations and the root of the barren is this belief from the remains of the soul.  And this is because the believer that there is some spiritual thing in man, even if it has disappeared from sight.  He will necessarily believe in the reality of the first conversion because we will not see the man alive.  And so the wise man said know your souls and your God and the poet how the secret of the foundation of everything is the eye of an idea of power and not the daughter of your foundation and it is the first foundation also the second foundation will believe from its unity that if the soul is one in alternating actions even from the simple one in the purpose of the raids there will be many and separate actions.  And from this the third element that cancels out incarnations, that if the soul, from its nobility, is spiritual, especially since from this level there will be no lack of a creator, and also it will be believed that the Lord is the ancestor of everything that is created, that if the soul is from the level of the angels after the absolute absence, it received its reality from a whole that is alone God of the past, who is the foundation  The fourth. Therefore, he alone deserves to be praised and exalted for all the praises which is the fifth element, and from this the sixth element of the prophecy is proved, and that if man was like one of the animals and beasts of the earth without having any spiritual thing in him, who would make him a worthy and suitable subject for the Shekinah to rest upon?  And how will God speak to man if not because of the virtue of his soul, if in the examination of the body he is likened to a dead animal, and if his grace prevails over him, he is like the degree of victory and the minority of seasons, and all A and A will eat the fruit of his deeds.  All human beings, as it was said, and the man Moses answered very much of all the people on the face of the earth, and he is the seventh element, even if the suspension is divine and spiritual, the eighth element will be drawn from the Torah from heaven, that if the absolute good for animals is at the end of my words, he opens his hands, and all those who lack them must raise their seed.  and to revive their souls, especially since a man who is ruthni because of his soul is political by nature and has a choice and will, it was necessary to give him divine teachings and laws to lead himself from destruction to evil and from evil to good.  And if we saw ministers and all the judges of the land establish religions for them and a king in his judgments would set up the land, who would live and not see that the kingdom of God is like a heavenly kingdom and that it was appropriate and necessary for his goodness and grace to instruct and teach the people who sit on it his will and how to serve his honor to achieve his perfection, and he answered that every action is tested for the sake of the worker and we know that he is"  He gave his Torah to the people he chose, we judged that if the worker is blessed, he is complete in the purpose of perfection, also his Torah is innocent from the return of a soul, which therefore will not be formulated and will not change for ever and ever, which is the ninth element, after all, from this corner the remaining four elements continue, and they are those that God knows  All the actions of man, who gives a good reward to the keepers of his commandments and punishment to the transgressors, for whom the Messiah will come, and who will raise the dead.  And this is that if man by reason of his soul transcends all animals, all of them, that the Lord from the transparent heavens sees all men and the eye of God does not fear him in his private providence. And in the form of all his ways, judgment, we knew that a man will be rewarded for kindness according to his deeds, he will give evil to the wicked according to his wickedness, and as we have seen in this the world is righteous and evil to him.  Wicked and good to him who judged that in the days of the Messiah and the resurrected world the judgments of the true God will be justified together and there eye to eye they will see what is between the righteous and the wicked and between the servant of God and the one who did not serve him.
And let it not be bad in your eyes, I brought some of our words as testimony of scribes who are not of our people. The answer from the good people is to receive the truth from those who said it, and from the wise to eat the inside and throw away the shell, and you will see in all this group that wherever I mention their names and their language, I intend to instruct how they received most of their wisdom in the words of God.  From our forefathers, the late, he turned away from him a peg or to bring evidence from them, messiahs according to their tommy, to call those who are needed, and I praise God I did not make from the external wisdom established and all my words with the Kabbalists, which every precious one saw their eyes.  You bring up so many different laws and a dozen of them sit before me and sing to my discipline.  And with that I'll put Kenzi to Mellin.  And I will arrange for you the chapters included in this book:

First Treatise



Second Treatise



Third Treatise



Fourth Treatise

