Amos
עמוס
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Amos



Chapter 1

Words of Amos. A farmer from Takoa. 2 years before the earthquake.
Hashed calls out from Zion. Everything will dry up.
3 sins of Damascus. 4th is over the line. Plowed up Gilead.
I (Hashem) will send a fire to the palaces
I will break the strength of Aram and send them into exile
4th sin of Gaza was that they did not let the Jews escape from Edom. Hashem does not forgive them.
I (Hashem) will send a fire to Gaza
I will eradicate the Philistines 
4th sin of Tyre was not letting the Jews escape Edom. They remember the pact of the brothers.
Fire will devour the palaces
4th sin of Edom. The never-ending hatred of the Jews.
Some pyro-stuff
4th sin of Ammon destroyed the child of Gilead
Fire, Wind
King will go into exile


Chapter 2

4th sin of Moab. They burned the king of Edom's bones.
Hashem will burn their places
All their leaders will die
Judah is over the line. They're disgusted with the Torah. Falsehood led them astray.
Pyro trick: Hashem says he'll burn everyone
Israel is over the line. They sell righteous people for money and poor people for shoes.
Desire, dust of earth, heads of poor people, man and dad sleep with same women ewww….
They have stolen clothing near their alter
I (Hashem) destroyed the Emorites before you and they were really tough
I took you out of Egypt and took care of you in the desert for 40 years
I made your kids into prophets and Nazarites
You gave the Nazarites win and told the prophets "We don't want to hear it"
I will make you suffer like a wagon stuffers under its load
Fast people: no escape. Strong people: won't save themselves.
Weapons and chariots won't help
Mighty people will run naked

Chapter 3

Here's a message for the Jewish people on how I took them out of Egypt
You're My people so I expect standards
Do 2 people get together without arranging beforehand?
Does a lion call out without catching prey?
Does a trap go up without catching something?
Does a Shofar blow without people being scared? Do bad things happen without ה׳ doing it?
If Hashem does something He tells the prophets first
If a lion roars who is not afraid? Hashem speaks how can you not prophesies?



When a shepherd find what's left of his sheep, ear feet, etc. That'll be you!

Chapter 4



Chapter 5


















You all say that you want the day of Hashem? You can't handle the day of Hashem
Its like running from a lion and bumping into a bear then leaning on the wall and being bitten by a snake
It's so dark, no light at all 
I (Hashem) hate your holidays (because they're fake)
Bring your offerings – I don't care!
Keep your music
I want justice everywhere
Did you bring me offerings in the desert?
You can take your idols
And go to exile to Demascus

Chapter 6



Chapter 7

Amos sees a vision: Locust eat the crops
Amos: Forgive the Jews, they're small
Hashem says, "Fine"
A ball of fire comes down and consumes everything
Amos intercedes
Hashem lets it go
Vision number 3: Hashem has a plumb line
Hashem: I'm putting down a line for the Jews
Destroy houses of idolatry. Go after Jeroboam's house with a sword...
Amaziah the priest: Send a message to Jeroboam saying "Amos is rebelling against you"
Amos is saying that you'll die by the sword and Jews will be exiled
Amaziah says to Amos: Go back to Judah, eat bread and give prophesies
We don't want you here in the Kingdom of Israel! Go away!
Amos says, "I'm not a prophet, not the son of a prophet, I'm a hick with straw in my teeth"
Hashem took me from the sheep and told me to be a Prophet
You told me not be a Prophet
Your wife will cheat on you, your children will die and you'll die in exile

Chapter 8

He sees a basket of figs
The end has come (play on words of קץ?)
Singing will be replaced with wailing, when they bury the corpses they'll be quiet
All you try to do is be mean to poor people
When will people enter my shop so I can rip them off
"Buy" poor people for shoes...
Hashem "You think I forgot? BIG MISTAKE!
Water should rise up and sweep you away
I will darken the day of light
I'll turn your holidays into mournings
I (Hashem) will bring a famine not for food or water but for the word of Hashem
People will search everywhere and not find the word of Hashem
Young people will keel over
All of you who swear falsely will fall and never get up

Chapter 9

Amos sees Hashem on the Alter. Everything shakes. People die by the sword.
If you go down to the grave then I will take you from there. If you go to heaven I'll bring you down.
If you go into the depths I'll have a snake bite you
My eye is on you all for bad 
I'll rise like a tidal wave
Hashem who is mighty in heaven and His creations are on Earth