Commentary on Sefer Hamitzvot of Rasag
ביאור על ספר המצוות לרס"ג
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Commentary on Sefer Hamitzvot of Rasag

Title Page



Foreword



Introduction

Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7

Introduction



Shorashim



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Positive Commandments



Negative Commandments



Laws of the Courts

Introduction







Mitzvah 1



Mitzvah 2



Mitzvah 3



Mitzvah 4



Mitzvah 5



Mitzvah 6



Mitzvah 7



Mitzvah 8



Mitzvah 9



Mitzvah 10



Mitzvah 11





And regardless, the words of Tosafot there certainly require much investigation. And this is the essence of their words (s.v. veken mashuach) that they wrote — and these are their words: They were not able to make other anointing oil to anoint from, as it is written: <i>This shall be an anointing oil sacred to Me throughout the ages</i> (Exodus 30:31) — "this," and none else. And it is like it is found in the first chapter of Keritot (5b:1), "And was it merely one miracle with the anointing oil? But were there not many miracles that were done with the anointing oil? For it was initially only twelve <i>log</i>, yet from it the Tabernacle was anointed, etc. and all of it remains in existence for the future, as it is stated: <i>This shall be an anointing oil sacred to Me throughout the ages</i>." And that which it said there (Keritot 5a:19), "One who blends the oil to learn from it or to transfer it to the community is exempt [from punishment]," behold that which we learned to transfer it to the community to teach them that they should know how to make it, etc., it is not that they should anoint from it, etc. To here are their [words]; see there. And it is clear that it was obvious to them that it is learned out from the verse of <i>This shall be an anointing oil sacred to Me throughout the ages</i>, that it is not fit to anoint with any anointing oil besides specifically this one that Moses made in the desert; and any other oil besides it is disqualified, even though it was made according to all of its laws and statutes. In my humble opinion, this is very strange to me, and I do not know where they [got] this from. As certainly, nothing is proven from that which they brought from Keritot. For the only thing that is learned from that verse is that Scripture promises that this oil will last for the ages. But to disqualify another oil besides it cannot be inferred from this verse, and it is not speaking about this there at all. And from that which Rabbi Yosei bar Rabbi Ḥanina says there (Keritot 16a:17), "It is sacred, it shall be sacred to you (see Exodus 30:36), all of its actions should be performed only in the sacred area [of the Temple]," the opposite is made clear, according to that which I wrote above: That since that verse is written about the anointing oil; hence the essence of that law was only written about the anointing oil. However, since [laws about the incense and the anointing oil are learned from one another, we also learn [this law] about the matter of the incense. And, if so, it is necessary from this that other oil besides the one that was made by Moses is fit, so long as it is made according to its law. For if it were not like this, what law is the verse teaching us, that we need all of its actions only to be with the sacred? Behold, even if it was made with sanctity and from the sacred, and according to all of its laws and its statutes — and more than this, even if it were made by our teacher Moses himself, peace be upon him — it would still be unfit, according to the opinion of Tosafot, since it is written, <i>this</i>, and none else. Rather, it is certain that even though Scripture promised that this oil of Moses would exist for all the ages and that they would not need to mix another oil, nevertheless, if another were made according to its law, it would be fit to anoint with it. So the verse is not disqualifying it at all. And [about] that which they did not make anointing oil after Josiah hid away the anointing oil that Moses had made, the matter is clear that this is not difficult at all. For there is in this hiding away a rectification, that they should not use the anointing oil at all from then on. For, if not, what benefit would there be with this hiding away? Would the prophets and the sages, may their memory be blessed, who were in his days and after him not have been able to mix another oil according to its law instead of the one he hid away? Moreover, with the ark, there was no exclusion [in the way the word, "this," may have excluded other oils] to disqualify another ark. So why did they not make another one? Rather, it is certainly as I have written. It was because King Josiah saw fit to make a fence for the needs of the time, that it was not appropriate that there be an ark in the Temple or that they should anoint with the anointing oil. [So] he acted and hid them away. And no permission was granted to make others in their stead, even though others would legally also have been fit.

Communal Laws

Introduction







Mitzvah 1



Mitzvah 2



Mitzvah 3



Mitzvah 4



Mitzvah 5



Mitzvah 6



Mitzvah 7



Mitzvah 8



Mitzvah 9



Mitzvah 10



Mitzvah 11



Mitzvah 12



Mitzvah 13



Mitzvah 14



Mitzvah 15



Mitzvah 16



Mitzvah 17



Mitzvah 18



Mitzvah 19



Mitzvah 20



Mitzvah 21



Mitzvah 22



Mitzvah 23



Mitzvah 24



Mitzvah 25



Mitzvah 26



Mitzvah 27



Mitzvah 28



Mitzvah 29



Mitzvah 30



Mitzvah 31



Mitzvah 32



Mitzvah 33



Mitzvah 34



Mitzvah 35



Mitzvah 36



Mitzvah 37



Mitzvah 38



Mitzvah 39



Mitzvah 40



Mitzvah 41



Mitzvah 42



Mitzvah 43



Mitzvah 44



Mitzvah 45



Mitzvah 46



Mitzvah 47



Mitzvah 48



Mitzvah 49









Nevertheless, it is certainly not likely to say that the inauguration (<i>miluim</i>) of Aharon and his sons is a commandment that is practiced for all the generations, any more than the sacrifices of the dedication of the altar. So at first glance, the words of our rabbi, the Gaon, may his memory be blessed, are very surprising! However after some analysis, this does not appear to be the path to the intent of our rabbi, the Gaon, may his memory be blessed. Rather he has a different approach regarding this matter. As certainly the essence of the section of the inauguration – whether those [sacrifices] which they were commanded to sacrifice for the priests, those which they were commanded to sacrifice to prepare the altar or the sacrifices that the chieftains sacrificed for the dedication of the altar – were all, according to his opinion, a temporary instruction, and not [to be] practiced for all the generations, as is explained in sever places. And the Rashbatz, may his memory be blessed, cited many of them (in Zohar HaRikiyah there). Rather that which our rabbi, the Gaon, may his memory be blessed, counted the inauguration of Aharon and his sons here [among the commandments] is a completely different matter. And it is based upon that which we learned (in a mishnah) in the chapter [entitled] HaTodah (Menachot 78a), “The inauguration [offerings] would come like the matzah in the thanksgiving offering: Loaves, wafers, and poached.” And we said about it [in the Gemara], “From where are these matters derived? […] It is as Rav Nachman bar Rav Chisda expounded in the name of Rabbi Tavla, ‘This is the offering of Aharon and of his sons, which they shall bring to the Lord on the day when he is anointed’ (Leviticus 6:13). And what have we learned with regard to his sons from the day that he was anointed? Rather, it compares [their] dedication with his anointment. Just as when he is anointed it is poached, so too during [their] dedication it is poached.” See there. And Rashi explained, and these are his words: And what have we learned with regard to his sons from the day that he was anointed – are his sons obligated anything on account of their father’s anointment? Rather it compares a common priest’s dedication to [Aharon’s] anointment,<b> so his dedication is his inauguration. Hence in an inauguration, it is poached.</b> As a common priest brings <i>chavitin</i> – meaning poached – on the day of his dedication, and a high priest brings it every day. So too were the oil bread loaves (Leviticus 8:26) that were in the inauguration also poached. To here are his words. See there. It is understood from his words that that which the common priest is commanded to bring a dedication offering on the day that he first draws near to the service of the Temple – as we say there later close to this – is from the laws of inauguration. For his dedication is his inauguration. And that is why we learn from this comparison, in which his dedication is compared to [Aharon’s] appointment, such that his anointment is his anointment for the high priesthood. As from then on, he has obligated himself to bring the <i>chavitin</i> offering every day, which are poached. So too with the dedication of the common priest, when he is first dedicated for [the Temple] service, his tenth of flour is poached. And so we also hear from this that the oil bread loaves that are written about in the section about the inauguration were also poached. That is because the dedication of a common priest for all the generations is also only from the laws of inauguration. And just like his tenth of flour that he is commanded to bring as his dedication offering for all the generations is poached – as we understand from this comparison – so too can we say about the oil bread loaves of the inauguration of the tabernacle, that they were poached. And even though the law of the inauguration for all the generations – meaning the dedication – was different in several things from the laws of the dedication of the tabernacle; nevertheless, we equate them in what it is possible to equate them, given that they are both inaugurations. And also the Rambam, may his memory be blessed, explains this teaching exactly like the explanation of Rashi, may his memory be blessed (see Commentary to the Mishnah, Mishnah 7:2). And see what is written in the Mishneh LeMelekh (at the end of the Laws of the Vessels of the Temple, Chapter 5), see there in particular. And in the commentary of Rabbenu Gershom, the light of the exile, may his memory be blessed, he explains even more than this there: That even anointment [of any high priest] is only from the laws of the inauguration. For the high priest is also obligated to bring a tenth of flour on the day of his anointment to the high priesthood for his dedication, as we say there later. And that is from the laws of the inauguration. And the dedication of a common priest is compared to the dedication of the high priest, concerning it being poached. And again we learn from it, that just like for all the generations – that is the dedication of the high priest and the common priest – was poached; so too was the inauguration of the tabernacle, about which it is written, “oil bread loaves,” poached. See his words there. It is true that the Shita Mekubetzet challenges the explanation of Rashi from a baraita in Torat Kohanim – as it is explained there that the dedication offering is not poached – such that he stretches to explain [the Gemara] here not like the explanation of Rashi, may his memory be blessed. Yet the Rambam, may his memory be blessed, had already anticipated his challenge; and that is why he rejected that baraita in the Torat Kohanim from being the law, on account of its contradicting our Talmud. And this is as the Mishneh LeMelekh wrote there. In any event, we see that both Rabbenu Gershom, light of the exile, and the Rambam, may his memory be blessed also explained the discussion [in the Gemara] like the explanation of Rashi, may his memory be blessed. 

Appendix

Introduction





