Yismach Moshe
ישמח משה
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Yismach_Moshe
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Yismach Moshe

Introduction



Bereshit



Noach



Lech Lecha



Vayera



Chayei Sara



Toldot



Vayetzei



Vayishlach



Vayeshev



Miketz



Vayigash



Vayechi



Shemot



Vaera



Bo



Beshalach



Yitro



Mishpatim



Terumah



Tetzaveh



Ki Tisa



Vayakhel



Pekudei



Vayikra



Tzav



Shmini



Tazria



Metzora



Achrei Mot



Kedoshim



Emor



Behar



Bechukotai



Bamidbar



Nasso



Beha'alotcha



Sh'lach



Korach



Chukat



Balak



Pinchas



Comment 1



Comment 2



Comment 3



Comment 4



Comment 5



Comment 6



Comment 7

The Hanochites (Numbers 26:5). And see Rashi (first word: family of) that explains this through David (Psalms 122:4) the tribes of Yah are a testimony to Israel etc. see there. And we have to understand what is hinted at by this testimony being given by the name Yah, precisely. And we can explain through what the Alsheich explained in the verse (Isaiah 51:1) "Look at the Rock from which you were hewn" - because Israel's root is from Avraham and Sarah, and both had no strength to conceive, so the father who gave birth to Israel is the letter Hey of the name of the Holy One of Blessing that was added to Avraham, as to say 'Avram does not give birth, but Avraham does' (Bereshit Rabbah 44:10), and the mother giving birth is also through hey, that changed from Sarai to Sarah (Genesis 17:15). And look, it was explained in the books that the Yud of Sarai was separated into two Heys, and pay attention to this to understand. And it is known that the quarry is called Tzur, and the stones quarried from it are called by the names Sela and Even. And according to this, the essence of the quarry of giving birth s the Yud, and the strength to give birth is the Hey, and the fact that they are double each other should not come to mind, just the separating of the letters: we find [that there is] the essence of conception of Israel, and the strength to give birth to them are both Yud and Hey, Y"ah. And this is the tribes of Yah, just as the branches separated out of the body of the tree, so too they separate out from, and seize, the name Yah; and so the name Yah is written in their families to explicit that they are children of Yah, and from Yah they come out, and not from a different people. And this is the explanation for the verse "And Yah chose for Him Yaakov" [can also be read "And Yaakov chose for him Yah"] and understandm because this is true, with the help of Heaven.

Matot



Masei



Devarim



Vaetchanan



Eikev



Re'eh



Shoftim



Ki Teitzei



Ki Tavo



Nitzavim



Vayeilech



Ha'Azinu



V'Zot HaBerachah

