Shulchan Arukh HaRav
שולחן ערוך הרב
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Shulchan Arukh HaRav

Introduction by the Author's Sons



Orach Chayim

Second Edition



Siman 1

Yehudah son of Teimah says: " Be Bold as a leopard and and light as an eagle , swift as a deer and strong as a lion to carry out the will of your Father in heaven.'Bold as a leopard' means one should not to be humiliated by people who ridicule [him]. 'Strong as a lion' [refers to] moral strength which is primarily in the heart, [to act] like a lion and overpower ones evil urge and rise from ones sleep before the morning light, to serve one's Creator. So that he awake the morning, as it states, (Psalms, 57:9 )"I awake the morning", [Meaning] I awake the morning but the morning doesn't wake me. This is the intermediate level. 
But is the worthy for all those who fear heaven and for "soldiers" [strong ones] who G-d touches their hearts to arise at the half-point of the night to lament a little with the Psalm, "On the rivers of Babylon (Psalm 137)"  (as it is printed in the siddurim) on the destruction of the Temple and the lack of revelation of the divine presence as it is written, "Arise, cry out in the night (Lamentations 2:19)". Just like the Holy One, Blessed be He, lamented at that time and says, " Whoa is me that I destroyed my house". It is better to say less with intent that more without intent. Afterwords, one should toil in the Oral Torah until daylight.    
And it is already known what is argued about this stringency in the book of the Zohar. Such is said in the Gemara that "midnight" is a time of will, as it is written, "And it was the half [way point] of [the] night and G-d struck the every first born..." (Shemot 12:29).   And they also said that one who occupies himself with Torah at night, the divine presence is in front of him as it says, "Arise, cry out in the night, at the beginning of the watches; pour out thy heart like water before the face of the Lord" (Lamentations 2:19). Meaning, the divine presence is found with you and " beginning of the watches" is at "midnight" (if he can not get up at half way through the night, he should get up at the beginning at the beginning of the third watch (the beginning of the last third of the night)). He that is involved with Torah at night, a string of kindness is pulled on him, as it says, "By day, may the Lord command His kindness, and at night, may His resting place be with me..." (Psalms 42:9). This is called a servant of G-d as it is written, " Behold, bless the Lord, all servants of the Lord who stand in the house of the Lord at night." (Psalms 134:1). It is proper to prepare a rooster to awake him from his slumber and "midnight", which was the doing of Rabbi Akiva. He pulled along with him a rooster, even when he would go on his travels so that it would awake him at "midnight". If the rooster did not awake him, he would pay someone to awaken him.
And immediately after he awakens, so that he van overcome his ("evil) inclinations  and to arise with haste, at midnight or before first light ,in character with an intermediate state, he should think in his heart about before whom he is lying and that the king of kings is over him, as it says, "the whole land is filled with His glory". If he had been lying in the presence of a king of flesh and blood, he would be obligated with his life, all the more so with the king of kings, the Holy One Blessed be He.
And this is a great principle in the greatness of the righteous who walk before G-d like it’s written, “I always place G-d before me,” because the things a person does are not similar by himself and in front of a great king, similarly speaking with his family and by the king, how much more so when a person realizes that the King of All Kings stands in front of him and sees his actions, like it’s written, “‘If a person is hiding, will I not see him?’ says G-d. “Don’t I fill the heavens and the earth?!” Immediately a feeling of fear and humility should reach him due to his fear and embarrassment in front of G-d constantly. If these feelings do not reach him immediately; then he should delve deeply in this concept until it reaches him. Additionally, he should completely return to G-d on account of all of his sins which hold him back from the fear reaching him, like it’s written, “Your sins were separating…




Análisis de la Traducción por חיים יואל  בן  אברהם 
Este pasaje discute la importancia de recitar ciertos pasajes de la Torá diariamente y su conexión con la práctica religiosa judía.

Siman 2







Y especialmente en estos países, donde los no judíos están acostumbrados a descubrir sus cabezas, y los santos israelitas son cuidadosos con esto debido al pudor, si uno camina o incluso se sienta con la cabeza descubierta como un no judío, está transgrediendo el mandamiento negativo: "No andarás en sus estatutos".
Sin embargo, si uno coloca su mano sobre su cabeza como para cubrirla, eso es suficiente. Uno debe evitar mencionar el nombre del Cielo, como se explicará en el capítulo 91."*

Siman 3












Y hay quienes dicen que en el caso de los líquidos no hay transgresión de 'no contaminen', sino que está prohibido por peligro y para evitar que se vuelva estéril.
Y cualquiera que pueda aguantar hasta una distancia de una parasang (medida de distancia), no hay transgresión de 'no contaminen' ni de peligro, ni para líquidos ni para sólidos, según todos. Y hay quienes dicen que incluso si no puede aguantar mucho menos de una parasang, no hay transgresión de 'no contaminen', siempre y cuando no lo necesite y lo desee mucho (en el caso de que si no se esforzara y aumentara la fuerza que retiene, la fuerza que expulsa naturalmente superaría a la fuerza que retiene, y haría sus necesidades sin ningún esfuerzo de empujar, incluso mínimamente. Pero si la fuerza que expulsa no superara tanto a la fuerza que retiene sin un esfuerzo de empujar un poco, entonces, al esforzarse y evitar empujar, no se le considera que retiene sus excrementos, ya que simplemente está 'sentado y no haciendo nada', y no hay transgresión de 'no contaminen').

Siman 4



Pero para el toque de los no judíos, no hay que preocuparse, porque este espíritu de impureza no desea posarse sino en un recipiente de santidad, en un lugar de santidad que se ha ido, que son los cuerpos de los israelitas, cuando están durmiendo y su alma santa se separa de su cuerpo, y entonces el espíritu de impureza se posa sobre su cuerpo, y cuando el alma regresa al cuerpo, el espíritu de impureza se retira de todo el cuerpo y permanece solo en las manos. Y por esta razón, se acostumbra a ser más indulgente con el toque de los niños pequeños que no han alcanzado la edad de la educación, ya que la finalización y el núcleo de la entrada del alma santa en el hombre es a los trece años y un día para el varón y a los doce para la mujer, por lo que entonces están obligados a los mandamientos de la Torá y se vuelven responsables. Y el comienzo de la entrada de esta alma santa es con la educación en la Torá y los mandamientos, que los sabios obligaron a enseñar (incluso en el mandamiento de la circuncisión). Por lo tanto, el que se cuida de tocar a un niño desde el día de la circuncisión en adelante, ¡que se le llame santo!





Siman 1



Siman 2










Traducción de חיים יואל בן אברהם 


Siman 3



Siman 4



Siman 5



Siman 6

Although based on the law in the Talmud, the only time one must recite the blessing of “Asher Yatzar” is after he relieved himself, nevertheless, it is customary to recite it every morning, right after the blessing upon washing hands, being that a person becomes a renewed creation every day, it is therefore appropriate to recite every day: “[Blessed are you], who formed man with wisdom”. However,  one who wishes to remove himself from doubt, should be careful to relieve himself right after waiting washing hands in the morning, and upon exiting the restroom he should wash his hands again, and then recite “Asher Yatzar”, and he would then still fulfill his obligation [of reciting “Asher Yatzar” every morning] with this blessing, even if reciting “Asher Yatzar” every morning (upon becoming a new creation) would be a full-fledged obligation, nevertheless, reciting the blessing once can be counted for both purposes (i.e. A. relieving oneself, and B. becoming a new creation). Also it is better not to recite the blessing upon washing hands until after the second washing, which is done upon exiting the restroom, and this (not reciting the blessing until after the second time) applies especially when one needs the restroom [when washing hands the first time], which it would then be forbidden to recite any blessing.
There are those who have the custom, that upon waking up in the morning, and wanting to go to the synagogue right away in order to pray, they postpone reciting the blessing upon washing hands until they  arrive at the synagogue, and they then recite the blessing upon washing hands together with the rest of the morning blessings, and the reason for doing so is because the main purpose of washing hands in the morning is in order to become sanctified, and to purify our hands before worship, thus resembling the priest, who would sanctify his hands before performing his sacred duty - therefore, being that the prime aspect in worship is to praise G-d and to pray before him, it is therefore appropriate to recite the blessing upon washing hands before prayer, because if not for the existence of prayer, there would be no need for one to wash his hands.

Siman 7



Siman 8



Siman 9



Siman 10



Siman 11



Siman 12



Siman 13



Siman 14



Siman 15



Siman 16



Siman 17



Siman 18



Siman 19



Siman 20



Siman 21



Siman 22



Siman 23



Siman 24



Siman 25



Siman 26



Siman 27



Siman 28



Siman 29



Siman 30



Siman 31



Siman 32



Siman 33



Siman 34



Siman 35



Siman 36



Siman 37



Siman 38



Siman 39



Siman 40



Siman 41



Siman 42



Siman 43



Siman 44



Siman 45



Siman 46



Siman 47



Siman 48



Siman 49



Siman 50



Siman 51



Siman 52



Siman 53



Siman 54



Siman 55



Siman 56



Siman 57



Siman 58



Siman 59



Siman 60



Siman 61



Siman 62



Siman 63



Siman 64



Siman 65



Siman 66



Siman 67



Siman 68



Siman 69



Siman 70



Siman 71



Siman 72



Siman 73



Siman 74



Siman 75



Siman 76



Siman 77



Siman 78



Siman 79



Siman 80



Siman 81



Siman 82



Siman 83



Siman 84



Siman 85



Siman 86



Siman 87



Siman 88



Siman 89



Siman 90



Siman 91



Siman 92



Siman 93



Siman 94



Siman 95



Siman 96



Siman 97



Siman 98



Siman 99



Siman 100



Siman 101



Siman 102



Siman 103



Siman 104



Siman 105



Siman 106



Siman 107



Siman 108



Siman 109



Siman 110



Siman 111



Siman 112



Siman 113



Siman 114



Siman 115



Siman 116



Siman 117



Siman 118



Siman 119



Siman 120



Siman 121



Siman 122



Siman 123



Siman 124



Siman 125



Siman 126



Siman 127



Siman 128




































At the time that the priests bless the people, they should not look at the people and not get themselves distracted. Rather their eyes should be down, like one standing in focused prayer. For behold they are praying that the Holy One, blessed be He, should bless all of the Jewish people. And the people receiving the blessing should also concentrate on the blessing, so their faces should be towards the priests, because of the reason that will be explained below. And they should not gaze at them so as not to get themselves distracted and, all the more so, should they not gaze at another place.<br>Hence it is the custom in many places to roll down the prayer shawl [<i>tallit</i>] over their faces and their hands so that they cannot gaze at the people, nor the people at them – not at their faces and not at their hands.<br>And in these provinces, they have followed the practice of rolling down the prayer shawl only over the faces so that they are unable to gaze, but their hands are outside of the prayer shawl so that they themselves are unable to gaze at their hands and not get themselves distracted. And the people also roll down the prayer shawl over their faces so that they be unable to gaze at the hands of the priests.  And this is the more correct practice, since the raising of the priests’ palms is revealed, and their prayer shawls do not separate between their palms and the people. For this is the meaning of the verse: <i> And Aaron lifted his hands toward the people, and he blessed them</i> (Leviticus 9:22) – that there not be anything separating between him and the people. And they did not say, “Even an iron partition does not intervene between the Jewish people and their Father in Heaven (Sotah 38b:20) – as will be explained – except when there is [already] a congregation being blessed by the priests inside the synagogue. [Only] then is someone who is standing outside of the synagogue also blessed with them. However, ex post facto, this is not an impediment. As behold [in] a city that is all priests, all of them go up on the platform [to recite the blessing, even though they are not facing anyone], as will be explained. (However, the prayer shawl on the face of the people is subordinated to their body, like their other clothes, and does not separate.<br>And they only forbade gazing; but just looking is permissible. However, we follow the practice of being careful [not to do so].

Last Edition



Yoreh Deah





Laws of Interest and Iska



Choshen Mishpat

Laws of Loans



Laws of Testimony and Contracts



Laws of Sales, Gifts and Agency



Laws of Ona'ah



Laws of Dimensions, Measures and Pricing



Laws of Lost Property and Deposit



Laws of Loading and Unloading



Laws of Ownerless Property



Laws of Theft and Robbery



Laws of Monetary Damages



Laws of Tort



Laws of Personal Injury



Laws of Hiring and Skilled Labor

