Shaarei Orah
שערי אורה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Shaarei Orah

Introduction

You asked me, brother, dear friend, to clarify in front of you a path about the names of the Holy One, Blessed be He, the Exalted and Almighty, to produce with them according your will and to reach through them the object of your desire. And by seeing that your intention is honest, and better than (simply fulfilling) your request, I must let you know which way will spread light (be spiritually profitable); namely, what is the way that HaShem Almighty desires or does not desire. And when you get to know this, then call HaShem and He will respond. And you will be closest to him. And love Him with all your soul, and rejoice on HaShem. And He will grant you the requests of your heart.
Do you not know? Have you not heard? Hashem is the L-rd of the Universe, before Him tremble all of the upper worlds and lower worlds, from the fear of Him the earth trembles and before His wrath who can stand? (Nahum 1:6) Who shall endure before His anger? He places no trust even in His holy ones, and the heavens hold no merit in his eyes. How much less man who is vile and corrupt and who drinks wickedness like water. (Job 15: 15-16). How may a mortal use the His holy names and make from them an axe to chop with? Who is he who conspired to do so? To snatch the kingly crown for his own personal use? Behold, our sages have said: anyone who utters the name of Hashem according to the way it is written has no share in the world to come. The holy Rabbi Chanina ben Tradion did not utter Hashem's name in a profane manner or for his own use, rather in a manner of respect in order to learn and understand the ways of Hashem blessed be He and he was still punished, we who are (spiritually) impoverished and  lacking, how much more so!?

First Gate, Tenth Sefirah



Second Gate, Ninth Sefirah



Third and Fourth Gates, Seventh and Eight Sefirah



Fifth Gate, Sixth Sefirah



Sixth Gate, Fifth Sefirah



Seventh Gate, Fourth Sefirah



Eight Gate, Third Sefirah



Ninth Gate, Second Sefirah



Tenth Gate, First Sefirah

