Kuzari
הכוזרי
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Kuzari



Essay 1

I was asked about the arguments and answers I have for the arguments of those who disagree with our religion, whether they are attracted to philosophy, believe in other religions, or are heretical Jews. I had remembered what I have heard before, the arguments that the chaver argued four hundred years ago before the king of Kuzar. Arguments that led the king of Kuzar to convert to Judaism, as is well known and written in the chronicles. The king had repeatedly dreamed that an angel was talking to him, saying: "your intention is acceptable to the God, but your actions are not". The king was very careful to keep the rules of the Kuzar religion, he himself worshiped in their temple and offered sacrifices with a full heart. But even though he was pious and scrupulous, he saw the angel every night saying: "Your intention is good, but your actions are not". This caused the king of Kuzar to research the beliefs and opinions and finally he converted to Judaism along with many of his people. Many of the arguments of the chaver agree with my opinion, and I decided it would be proper to write them as they came to me. When the king of Kuzar saw in the dream that the God accepts his intention but not his actions, he was commanded in the same dream to look for the actions that would be accepted by the God. First he called a philosopher and asked about his belief.
The philosopher told him: "The God does not desire or detest anything. He is above all desire, because to desire means that the person feeling that desire is lacking something, and won't be complete until it is fulfilled. Also, we philosophers believe that the God is above knowing individuals. Individuals change all the time, but the knowledge of the God cannot change. Therefore, the God does not know you, let alone your intentions and actions, let alone listen to your prayers. When the philosophers say that the God made you they mean it in the sense the God is the prime cause, the first cause of everything that was created. But the God did not mean to create things, and did not create man. The world has always existed, and every person from earlier people, inheriting characteristics from his father and mother and the rest of his relatives, and from the climate and the land of his birth, foods, water, astrological signs, etc.   &lt;need to="" continue="" the="" page=""&gt;

Essay 2



Essay 3



Essay 4



Essay 5






















22. The Rabbi was then concerned to leave the land of the Khazari and take himself to Jerusalem. The king was loth to let him go, and spoke to him in this sense as follows: What can be sought in Jerusalem and Israel nowadays, since the divine reflex is absent from it, whilst, with a pure mind and desire, one can approach God in any place. Why wilt thou run into danger. on land and water and among various peoples?