Bartenura on Mishnah Zavim
ברטנורא על משנה זבים
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Bartenura_on_Mishnah_Zavim
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Bartenura on Mishnah, trans. by Rabbi Robert Alpert, 2020
-sefaria.org

Bartenura on Mishnah Zavim



Chapter 1



Mishnah 1

הרואה ראיה אחת של זוב – flux that comes from the flesh of a corpse and it is similar to the white of a rotten/smashed egg. But effusion of semen comes from flesh that has not died, and is joined like the white of an egg that is not rotten/smashed.
בית שמאי אומרים כשומרת יום [כנגד יום] (like a woman who observes a day for a day) – for even though she is not a complete woman who experiences a flow of menstrual-type blood on three consecutive days during a time of the month when she is not due to experience menstrual bleeding until three sightings, nevertheless, with one sighting, she makes a surface designated for lying and sitting ritually impure, just like a person with gonorrhea, even though he does not become a complete person with gonorrhea/flux until three sightings, nevertheless, with one sighting he makes surfaces designated for lying and sitting ritually impure.
ובית הלל אומר כבעל קרי (like a person who experienced a seminal emission) -and he does not make surfaces designated for lying and sitting ritually impure, and a sighting does not defile through carrying, but only through contact/touching.
ראה אחת ובשני הפסיק ובשלישי ראה שתים – for if he saw two sightings on one day or on two consecutive days, he must count seven clean [days], and he is exempt from the sacrifice. But if he saw three sightings on one day or on three consecutive days, he must count seven clean [days] and he is liable for a sacrifice, as it teaches in a Baraita: Scripture counted two [days] and called him ritually impure, as it is written (Leviticus 15:2): “When any man has a discharge issuing from his member, he is impure”/"זב מבשרו זובו טמא הוא"; three [sightings] and he is called impure, (Leviticus 15:3): “The impurity from his discharge shall mean the following – whether his member runs with the discharge or is stopped up so that there is no discharge, his impurity means this:”/ואתה תהיה טומאתו בזובו רר בשרו את-זובו או-החתים בשרו מזובו טמאתו היא.", how so? Two [sightings] for ritual impurity and three [sightings] for [an obligatory] sacrifice. But a woman who experiences a flow of menstrual-type blood on three consecutive days during a time of the month when she is not due to experience menstrual bleeding/זבה if she saw many sightings on one day or on two days not during the time of her menstrual bleeding, observes one day in cleanliness and she is ritually pure in the evening. But if she saw three sightings [of non-menstrual bleeding] on three consecutive days, she needs to count seven clean days and she is liable for a sacrifice. For concerning a זבה/a woman who experiences a flow of menstrual -type blood on three consecutive days during a time of the month when she is not due to experience menstrual bleeding, it is written (Leviticus 15:25): "ואשה כי-תזוב [יזוב] דמה ימים רבים בלא עת-נדתה"/When a woman has had a discharge of blood for many days, not at the time of her menstrual impurity” (The text of Bartenura “misquotes” the Biblical verse -what is in brackets is what is found in the text of the Torah); [The word] "ימים"/days- are two; [the word] "רבים" /many – are “three.” Scripture suspends/hangs the man who has gonorrhea through sightings, and the woman who has discharges of blood outside the time of her menstrual impurity through days, and now it states, that if the man who has a flux has three sightings, but that he stopped for one day between the first sighting and the latter two sightings.
בית שמאין אומרים זב גמור [he is a complete man with flux/gonorrhea] and he is liable for a sacrifice like a person with three sightings.
ובית הלל אומרים – the pure day [in-between] nullified the first sighting, and there isn’t here other than the two latter sightings [of flux], and he is exempt from the sacrifice.
מודים בית שמאי בזה שאינו זב גמור – for the pure day that interrupted nullified the first sighting, as we have stated.
על מה נחלקו על הרואה שתים וכו', בית שמאי אומרים זב גמור – for since it was joined to the counting of seven [days] when he saw two [sightings] at the outset, the sighting nullified the pure day (i.e., without sightings), and he has in his hands three sightings.

Mishnah 2

ביום השלישי לספירת זובו – as for example, a personw ho two sightings who needs to count seven clean [days], and he counted the first and the second, and on the third saw an emission, it invalidates the two days that preceded it, and he returns and counts seven [days] like at the outset.
לא סתר אלא יומו – and he counts five [days] to complete the seven, for the first two did not count for him.
הרואה בשני – that he counted one [clean day], and on the second saw an emission, he invalidated that which was before it, even according to the School of Hillel, but Rabbi Akiba holds that in this also they disagree. But the Halakah is not according to Rabbi Yishmael.
ומודים – The School of Shammai. ברואה קרי ברביעי שלא סתר אלא יומו – that those that were before it counted for him. For specifically when the fluxes were not interrupted with three clean days, according to the number of days that makes a person a complete זב, it is this case where the School of Shammai states that the effusion of semen invalidates it, but after three pure days have passed, the School of Shammai agrees that an emission does not invalidate anything other than that day, and in this that one calls that a person with gonorrhea invalidates, one derives from Scripture, as it is written (Leviticus 15:32): “This is the ritual concerning him who has a discharge: concerning him who has an emission of semen and becomes impure thereby.” Just as flux invalidates, even effusion of semen invalidates. If just as a flux invalidates everything, so the effusion of semen invalidates everything, the inference teaches us (Leviticus 15:32): "לטמאה בה"/”and become pure thereby,” she only has one day. But if he saw a flux, even on the seventh day, it invalidates what is before it, as it is written (Leviticus 15:13): “[he shall count off] seven days for his purification,” until all seven days would be pure from the discharges.

Mishnah 3

הרי זה זב גמור – and he is liable for a sacrifice, for the All-Merciful suspended it/hung it upon appearances, as it is written (Leviticus 15:3): “the impurity from his discharge”/"טומאתו בזובו", and the impurity is dependent upon his discharge, but it is not dependent upon the days. However, when there is an interruption in-between as the School of Hillel states above (in Tractate Zavim, Chapter 1, Mishnah 2), he is not a complete Zav, and the appearances do not combine, there is no difference regarding the matter of impurity as for example, that he saw two appearances alone with the interruption of the day in-between and there is no difference regarding the matter of a sacrifice, as for example that he saw three appearances [of emissions].

Mishnah 4

כדי טבילה וסיפוג (long enough to immerse/bathe and dry one’s self) – in order that he can ritually immerse and wipe himself off after the ritual immersion, but less than this measurement is not an interruption, and it is not considered other than one appearance.
או אחת מרובה כשתים – that he had between the beginning of the first appearance and the end of the appearance in order that he could perform a ritual immersion and wipe himself off, and he would continually see [the emission] without interruption.

Mishnah 5

כמין גד יון לשילוח – a place in Jerusalem that the Canaanite kings preserved idolatrous worship, and that same place was distant from the Shiloah as a measure [of time] of twice bathing and getting dry. Like from Gad Yon. It is the language of (Isaiah 65:11): “Who set a table for Luck” (a name of heathen deity). Shiloah is the name of the river, as it is written (Isaiah 8:6): “Because that people has spurned the gently flowing waters of Siloam” (the conduit – and later the tunnel – of Siloam conveyed into Jerusalem the waters of Gihon, which symbolize “The LORD of Hosts who dwells on Mount Zion – see verse 18).
מטמא משכב ומושב – that we consider it as two sightings.
אלא אם ען יש בה כדי שלש (unless it sufficed to make up three [emissions]) – as for exzmple like from Gad Yon to Shiloah, for then it is considered like a complete Zav, even with regard to the sacrifice. But with one profuse as two, they do not divide it, and it is considered like one sighting. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 6

אם ידוע שמקצת הראיה מהיום וקצתה למחר – that he saw part of the appearance [of the flux] at the end of today and part of it at the beginning of the night of the morrow, even though there weren’t between them [sufficient time] in order to perform [both] the ritual immersion and the drying off, they are considered as two appearances [of flux], because the days divide them.
ודאי לקרבן ולטומאה – that there are three appearances [of flux] here. And that of at twilight is divided into two [appearances], since there is in it from two [different and consecutive] days.
ואם ספק – that perhaps all of it is from today or all of it is from the night.
ודאי לטומאה – for at any event, there are two [appearances].
וספק לקרבן – for we are in doubt that perhaps there are two [appearances], perhaps three [appearances of flux]. For if all of it is from the day or all of it is from the night, there are two [appearances of flux]. But if it is from part of the day and part of the night, there are three {appearances of flux].
שני ימים בין השמשות – as for example, that the first [appearance] is at the beginning at the first twilight, and the second is at the end of the second twilight, as for example, that the first [appearance] is on Friday/the Eve of the Sabbath at the beginning of twilight and one is on Saturday night at the conclusion of twilight. For if the beginning of twilight is day and the end of twilight is night, we don’t have two appearances [of flux] on two consecutive days, for Shabbat interrupts and there isn’t the defilement of gonorrhea (but rather, like a person with an emission). But if the entire twilight from the day or all of it is from the night, there are two appearances here on two consecutive days, and which require counting seven clean [days] and one is exempt from the sacrifice. But if the beginning of twilight or at its end, half of it is from the day and half of it is from the light, the appearance [of flux] was divided into two and one is required to bring a sacrifice. But because there are all of these doubts, it is taught [in the Mishnah]: "ספק לטומאה ולקרבן"/”he is in doubt as to its imparting uncleanness and in doubt as to bring a sacrifice, lest there isn’t uncleanness here, and lest there is uncleanness here but not a sacrifice, or lest thee is [both] uncleanness here and a sacrifice. Therefore, he brings a sacrifice, but it is not consumed.

Chapter 2



Mishnah 1

הכל מטמאין בזיבה (all are susceptible to uncleanness through flux) – everyone, including a baby who is one day old who becomes defiled through flux/gonorrhea.
אף הגרים – as it is written in the portion of the person with a flux (Leviticus 15:2 - which Bartenura reproduces only in the singular): "דברו אל בני ישראל"/”Speak to the Israelite people.” I don’t have other than the “children of Israel” (i.e., born Jews), from where [do I learn] to include converts and slaves? The inference teaches us (Leviticus 15:2 – the Bartenura writes the verse with the fuller spelling): "ואמרתם אליהם איש"/”And say to them: When a man,” to include the converts and the slaves. From where do I learn to include the minors? The inference teaches (Leviticus 15:2): "איש איש"/”When any man.”
ומיטמאין בדם כאשה – that a woman does not defile with the white matter but rather with the red matter/substance, for blood is written for her, which is red [in color] (as opposed to white gonorrhea substance for a man).
ובלובן כאיש – for it is written (Leviticus 15:2): "זובו טמא הוא")/”discharge issuing from his member, he is impure.”) "זובו"/his discharge”, regarding a man. And it is like the dough of barley.
וטומאתן בספק – if they saw white matter, lest they are of a woman, and the white matter is pure in her. But if they saw red matter,, perhaps it is of a man and the red matter is pure regarding him. But if he saw red matter and white matter together, their uncleanness is certain whichever side you take, and they burn the heave-offering over them. But do not require of them coming to the Sanctuary, for concerning sending forth they are unclean; it is written (Numbers 5:3): “Remove male and female alike; [put them outside the camp so that they do not defile the camp of those in whose midst I dwell],” a definite male and a definite female, but not someone whose sexual organs are concealed and a hermaphrodite.

Mishnah 2

בשבעה דרכים בודקין את הזב – because he (i.e., the man with flux/gonorrhea) does not defile because of unavoidable interference/accident, as it is written (Leviticus 15:2): “[when any man] has a discharge from his member, but not because of unavoidable accident/interference.
עד שלא נזקק לטומאה (before he is confirmed as to flux) – that is when he sees a second sighting [of flux] that through it he becomes a Zav (i.e., a person afflicted with flux/gonorrhea) to defile through lying and sitting and to require him to count seven clean [days]. But a first sighting/appearance defiles through unavoidable accident ritual impurity until nightfall, like the law of the person with a seminal emission (see Deuteronomy 23:11-12), but it combines with the second [sighting] and even it was an unavoidable accident.
במאכל – if he consume a large meal or at things that bring him to gonorrhea, and even a little bit, as for example, fatty meat, milk and cheese, eggs, and aged wine, and pounded beans and a kind of kress or pepperwort.
ובמשתה – increase/excess of drinking.
במשא – a heavy thing that he carried.
במראה – he saw a woman, even without meditation [on her].
ובהרהור – even though he did not see [her]. It one of these seven things happened to him before he saw the second sighting/appearance, he is not become a Zav because of that sighting, but the drop does not defile in carrying like the rest of the drops of his flux.
אין אחריות זבין עליכם (the responsibility for Zavim is not yours) – and if there won’t ever be any Zavim, what are you concerned/worried about? Have you not accepted responsibility of the Zavim upon yourselves? But the Halakha is not according to either Rabbi Yehuda or Rabbi Akiba.
משנזקק – for ritual defilement, after he saw a second sighting that was not an unavoidable accident. For from here onwards he makes [defilement] through sitting and lying.
אין בודקין אותו – even though he saw a third appearance/sighting [of flux] by unavoidable accident, he became a Zav for a sacrifice. And similarly, if he saw a sighting of effusion during the seven clean days that he is counting, it made void everything , and even it that sighting was by unavoidable accident.
ספיקו ושכבת זרעו טמאין – his doubt is because of his effusion of semen. As for example, if he saw effusion of semen initially, and a drop of a flux that comes afterwards does not defile, for the person who sees an emission does not defile with gonorrhea during the time of twenty-four astronomical hours. But before he is confirmed for defilement, the emission purifies the gonorrhea, because it was an unavoidable accident. But after he was confirmed for defilement, the emission does not purify the gonorrhea, and we don’t suspend/leave it in doubt that because of the emission the gonorrhea comes.
שרגלים לדבר – that this sighting is not because of an unavoidable accident, for he has already become a Zav.
ראה ראיה ראשונה בודקין אותו – that is specifically for [the requirement to being] a sacrifice. For if it was because of an unavoidable accident that he saw it, it does not combine with the third [sighting] for a [requirement to bring a] sacrifice, but it combines with the second [sighting] for defilement. For if the second sighting was not by unavoidable accident, even though the first [sighting] was by unavoidable accident, it makes sitting and lying [something that defiles] and requires seven clean [days] and going into living waters, as just as it is written (Leviticus 15:2]: “[a discharge issuing] from his member” and not because of his unavoidable accident, with the second [sighting] it is written, but the first [sighting] is compared by close analogy to effusion of semen, as it is written (Leviticus 15:32): “Such is the ritual concerning him who has a discharge: concerning him who has an emission of semen/שכבת זרע [and becomes impure thereby], just as the effusion/emission of semen defines through unavoidable accident, so does the first sighting of flux/gonorrhea defiles through unavoidable accident.

בשלישי אין בודקין אותו – neither for ritual defilement nor for a sacrifice.
רבי אליעזר אומר כו' – But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer (see Tractate Niddah 35a for the rationale of the dispute).

Mishnah 3

אינו מטמא בזיבה מעת לעת – for these emissions of semen/gonorrhea are because of weakness that they called, and we are speaking about the second sighting, for the first [sighting] defiles through unavoidable accident . And just as we suspend/leave it in doubt for an emission over an astronomical period of twenty-four hours, so also for the sighting [of a woman] and for a fantasy, we suspend/leave it doubt for a period of twenty-four hours. But for eating and drinking and carrying and jumping, we suspend/leave it doubt for him all the time that he is in pain, and we say that because of the pain, he had a flux/emissions but not from his member/flesh.
רבי יוסי אומר יומו – we do not suspend/leave in doubt other than for that day that he saw the emission alone, but not for an astronomical period of twenty-four hours. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.
מיד מיטמא בזיבה – that a proselyte who converted [to Judaism] is like a small child who was born. And even though he saw gonorrhea/emissions while he was a heathen, he becomes defiled through the gonorrhea in this second sighting that he sees within the astronomical period of twenty-four hours of emission, for the sighting of a flux of a heathen is like something that doesn’t exist, for heathens do not defile through emissions/gonorrhea.
הרואה דם – defiles all the pure things she was engaged with retroactively for an astronomical period of twenty-four houses, as we explained at the beginning of [Tractate Niddah] (Chapter 1, Mishnah 1), and since we are dealing with/speaking about an astronomical period of twenty-four hours, we consider all of these that their measurements are over an astronomical period of twenty-four hours.
וכן המקשה בימי זיבה – for we have stated (Leviticus 15:25): “[When a woman] has had a discharge of blood [for many days, not at the time of her menstrual impurity,]” because of herself, but not because of offspring. But if she let blood flow from the spices over an astronomical period of twenty-four hours and she gave birth, we don’t suspend the protracted travailing with the blood of giving birth.
המכה את עבדו- it is stated in the Torah (Exodus 21:20): “When a man strikes his slave male or female, with a rod, [and he dies there and then, he must be avenged.] But if he survives a day or two, [he is not to be avenged, since he is the other’s property],” and we expound that “day”/"יום" is like two days, and this is the astronomical period of twenty-four hours.
כלב שאכל בשר המת – for we hold that it isn’t consumed in its bowels/intestines until after three days from one astronomical period of twenty-four hours, and such it is taught in Tractate Ahilot in Chapter 11 (Mishnah 7), “And how much must it remain in his intestines? Three whole days of astronomical periods of twenty-four hours.
והוא שיהא כברייתו (and it continues in its natural state) – that it doesn’t change. And furthermore, there is more that their measure is an astronomical period of twenty-four hours but it is not considered, for he taught and omitted (i.e., the Mishnah taught certain cases and omitted other cases – the list is incomplete).

Mishnah 4

מטמא את המשכב – and the same law applies to sitting.
עומד יושב שוכב – as it is written (Leviticus 15:4): “Any bedding on which he one with the discharge lies shall be impure,” and it is written (Leviticus 15:23): “Be it the object on which she has sat, [on touching it he shall be impure until evening],” I do not have other than at the time that he lied on the bed or sat on the chair. Lying on the seat and sitting on the bed, standing, suspended or leaning, from where do we derive it? The inference teaches, (Leviticus 15:4): “He shall be impure”, “on which he lies shall be impure” (Leviticus 15:23), and all of them are called מדרס/[impurity through] treading.
והמשכב מטמא את האדם וכו' עומד יושב שוכב נתלה – that the pure object is on the balancing scale [on one side] and the impure lying on the second scale, and the impure lying outweighed , and suspended the pure object. And that which is suspended in the first clause, as for example the person with gonorrhea on the [first] balance and those sitting on the second balance, and they outweighed them, they are impure, for how, the person with gonorrhea is suspended/hanging and it is as if he is sitting upon them.
לטמא בגדים – and this is the same law for all vessels that come in contact with them that have not been explained, except for a man and an earthenware vessel.
כמגע ובמשא – if it came in touched with something impure that was lying or that he carried it.

Chapter 3



Mishnah 1

הזב והטהור. או באסדא – large pieces of wood tied together and they place them on the sea or on the river and place upon them a banner/flag and leads/carries them by wind to the harbor of their desire. And in the language of Scripture, they are called דוברות: (I Kings 5:23 – the text citation in Bartenura is incorrect): “and at the sea I will make them into floats”/"ואני אשימם דברות בים". And they are also called רפסודות/floats: (II Chronicles 2:15): “and deliver them to you as rafts by sea to Jaffa; [you will transport them to Jerusalem].”/"ומביאם לך רפסדות על-ים יפו [ותה תעלה אתם ירושלם]" (see also Tractate Berakhot, Chapter 4, Mishnah where the term אסדא /raft is also used).
או שרכבו על גבי בהמה – an undefined bent animal underneath the rider, therefore, it doesn’t matter whether it cannot endure pressure nor if it can endure pressure. The ritually pure person and his clothing are defiled. But that which the animal is shaking with its foot, is not shook on account of the rider, unless it cannot endure pressure, as is brought in the last (i.e., 18th) chapter of [Tractate] Ahilot [Mishnah 6].
אע"פ שאין בגדיהן נוגעים – the clothing of the ritually clean person does not touch the clothing of the person with gonorrhea, nevertheless, they are ritually impure imparted through treading, that the small ship is similar to a raft and they sink, for sometimes, that the person with gonorrhea outweighs the clean person and his clothing and they are defiled through movement/shaking (without actually coming in contact with it, like by means of a lever). And we derive the defilement of movement/shaking from what is written (Leviticus 15:11): “If one with a discharge [without having rinsed his hands in water], touches another person,”/"וכל אשר יגע-בו הזב" and it is written (Leviticus 6:21): “An earthen vessel in which it was boiled shall be broken; [if I was boiled in a copper vessel – the vessel – shall be scoured and rinsed with water].”/ "וכלי-חרש אשר תבשל-בו ישבר [ואם-בכלי נחשת בשלה ומרק ושטף במים]." Just what is stated further on from the hollow/airspace of the vessel, even here [also] in the hollow/airspace of the vessel, for an earthenware vessel is not defiled through the contact of a person with gonorrhea unless he came in contact in it from its hollow/airspace, but if he came in contact with it from behind it he did not defile it, and since after we learned that he (i.e., the person with gonorrhea) does not defile it other than from its airspace/hollow, what does the inference teach us [from the Biblical text]:"אבל נגע בו" /”that it touches another person” (Leviticus 15:11), contact with it is like all of it, this is shaking/movement of it. For we have learned that that a person with gonorrhea defiles through movement/shaking. But if it was ritually pure on one end of the board and the person with gonorrhea shook/moved the board on the second edge until it shakes/moves the pure person that is on the first edge, the pure person has already been defiled through shaing/movement, and his clothing has been ritually defiled through treading if they are clothing appropriate for lying and sitting.
הגשיש של מטה (the frame on which the couch is spread) – they are like long pieces of wood that they place on the bed of sections, and through them the parts of the bed strike against each other and is connected to the, and therefore, these pieces of wood are called frames/גשישין. Another explanation: pieces of wood that they place under the legs of the bed so that they are not lost due to the moistness of the ground.
שהן מחגירין – like a lame person who is not able to move his two feet at the same time. Such are those when people sit upon them, they tilt this way and that way, and through this, it is found that the person with gonorrhea leans upon the pure person and the pure person upon the person with gonorrhea.
באילן שכוחו רע (on a shaky tree) – and in what case is a tree shaky? All that its root is not wide and thick in order to make hollow a quarter of a Kab.
או שוכה- that is, the bough of a tree.
שכוחה רע – and in what case is a bough shaky? All that is hidden in its being held, that a person who grabs hold of it hides it in the palm of his hand.
על אילן יפה – even the bough stands on a firm tree. And all these that are bent underneath them and the weight of the upper part is upon the bottom part and leans upon it. And whether the person with gonorrhea is the one that leans upon the pure person, or whether the pure person is the one that leans on the person with gonorrhea, he is impure.
שאינו קבוע במסמר – and because of this, it is bent.
על הכבש – on the bridge.
שאינו עשוין בטיט טמאין – because they are bent.
ור' יהודה מטהר – but the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 2

מגיפין – they (i.e., the ritually pure person and the person with gonorrhea/the Zav) close the door.
או פותחין – [open] the door together – the person with gonorrhea/the Zav and the ritually pure person.
עד שיהא זה מגיף – after all there is no defilement here, until there would be this one pull to open [the door] and that one pull to close it, that we don’t allow them each to do it to the other [for it would cause defilement through movement/shaking].
עד שיהא הטהור מעלה את הטמא – for then the clothes of the ritually pure person would be impure through treading, for the weight of the impure person would be greater than that of the pure ofperson and he would be leaning upon him. And the clothing of the pure person would be impure through treading. But if the impure person raises the pure person [from the pit], the impure person does not lean upon the ritually pure person, and the clothing of the pure person is not impure through treading. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.
מפשלין בחבלין (twisting ropes) – the person with gonorrhea/the Zav and the ritually pure person together are plaiting/twisting a rope. And even if both of them are doing it from one side.
זה מושך הילך וזה מושך הילך – this one stands to the east and pulls towards him and the other stands to the west and pulls towards him.
בין עומדין – there are things that are woven while standing and there are those [that are woven] while sitting, and the ritually impure person and the ritually pure person weave together, or grind [wheat].
ר' שמעון מטהר בכולן – but the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.
בזמן שמשאן כבד טמאים – for perhaps through the heaviness of the load, the person with gonorrhea leans upon the ritually pure person and it is found that the pure person shakes/moves him or the pure person is moved by him (i.e., the person with gonorrhea).
וכולן – even if their load is heavy.
טהורים לבני הכנסת – that is to say, to those who eat their non-holy produce in a state of ritual purity, for this is not a complete shaking, and all the more so, that there is a doubt [of shaking].
וטמאים לתרומה – from according to the Rabbis, and even with doubt.

Mishnah 3

כל שאינו יכולה להמיט באדם (a ship which has no staggering effect on man) – it is large enough that when a person ascends on it, a person is not shaking/sinking.
הטהור מכה את הטמא – the person with gonorrhea/a Zav.
הרי הטמא נופל – for it is the manner of one who hits/strikes his fellow, if his fell was stretched, the person who struck/hit [his fellow] falls. And therefore, the person who strikes/hit [his fellow] (i.e., the person with gonorrhea is the one striking) is considered as one who is leaning on the ritually pure person in. And specifically, we are speaking of the matter of ritual impurity imparted through treading, for the ritually pure person who strikes/hits the impure person is pure from ritual impurity imparted through treading. But he is impure, for he is leaning on the person with gonorrhea/the Zav. And a ritually impure person who strikes the ritually pure person, his clothes are impure through treaiding, for it is as if the person with gonorrhea/the Zav is leaning upon him.

Chapter 4



Mishnah 1

ר' יהושע אומר. כפיה שבראשה – it was taken for something remarkable, for even a veil that is on the head of a ritually pure woman is considered as if the menstruating woman sat upon it, even though she doesn’t sit upon it. And he (i.e., Rabbi Yehoshua) disputes with the anonymous Mishnah in the chapter above (Chapter 3, Mishnah 1; see also Chapter 2, Mishnah 7) which does not defile other than their clothing but not the cap that is on the women’s heads.
כלים שבראש הנס – this is also taken for something remarkable, for even though they are at the height of the top of the mast/flag that is not at the place of treading, nevertheless, they are impure through treading. But we are speaking about a small boat and a vacillating bed, when it is expounding upon the chapter that is above (Chapter 3, Mishnah 1), but rather that which is taught above does not defile vessels that are at the top of the mast. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehoshua.
בזמן שמשאן כבד טמאין מדרס – and even though they do not come in contact with the clothing, for it is considered as if it is leading on the clothing.
כסוסטרא -it is like a גזוזטרא/balcony, enclosure, like the planed board that protrudes outwards from the upper wall.
ונפל ככר של תרומה – [the loaf of priest’s due] that is upon the balcony/enclosure.
טהור – the loaf [is ritually pure] that fell on account of the knocking against of the person with gonorrhea is not considered to him as shaking/movement, because the strength of the balcony endures.

Mishnah 2

מריש – a large beam that they build in the group of buildings forming one residence and the tops of the beams of the roof all of which are dependent upon it, and it is placed on top of the pillars (see also the Bartenura commentary of Tractate Gittin, Chapter 5, Mishnah 5 that defines מריש as a beam and בירה as a large house).
מלבן (frame) – like a kind of square of beams affixed in the ground.
צנור – water pipe/spout, duct
אע"פ שהוא עשוי בחבלים – which is not affixed in the ground, but tied with ropes, but it is not so strong.
ועל הים (flour mill’s container) – a circumference/surface of wood that the flour is gathered in it at the time of grinding.
אצטרובל (lower millstone – which is immovable – included in the sale of a home) – a round mold of wood that they place the millstone upon it. And both are fixed.
חמור של רחים של יד (jack of a hand mill) – a wood building that the hand millstone is affixed in them.
וסאה של ריחים (an olive grinder’s Seah measure) – a large measure and it is affixed in the ground.
וקורות הבלנין (beams whereon the bathing masters are stationed) – a beam that the master of the bathhouse sits upon. And all of these, if the person with gonorrhea/the Zav knocked against and the loaf of priest’s due/Terumah fell in from the strength/power of the knocking, it is ritually pure, for they are very strong and it is not considered shaking/moving. But regarding the beams whereon the bathing masters are stationed, they disagreed. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 3

הנגר (door-bolt) – a peg that is wedged in behind the door in the incision that is in the lintel/lower door-sill.
מנעול – that they close the door with it (i.e., a lock).
משוט (oar) – that they direct/steer the ship. And it is a Scriptural language (Ezekiel 27:29): “all the pilots of the sea [shall come down from their ships and stand on the ground].”
קלת (the framework under the millstone to receive the flour-dust) – a wooden round mould that surrounds the lower millstone to receive the flour that is ground that it should not fall to the ground, and it is movable.
ועל סוכה שכוחה רע – and it stands in a tree which is very strong.
טמאין – for all of these are not very strong, and the power/strength of the knocking of the person with gonorrhea/the Zav is considered shaking/movement.
מטהרין באלו – it is referring to the chest, ark and turret. For this reason, the first Tanna/teaches teaches them separately. But the Halakha is not according to either Rabbi Nehemiah or Rabbi Shimon.

Mishnah 4

פונדיות (money-bags)- like long pouches/bags, receptacles.
לארכן – that he lies on the length of the benches or the pouches/bags.
טמאים – for on each one, the person with gonorrhea/the Zav leans upon them, sometimes on this one and sometimes on that one.
לרחבן – that he lies his length on their width.
טהורים – because the majority of his [body] does not lean upon one of them. And there is no lying or sitting ever until he leans most of his [body] upon it, as it is written (Leviticus 15:23): “Be it the bedding [or be it the object on which she has sat, on touching it he shall be unclean until evening], until his majority will be carried upon it.
ישן – widthwise, and there is doubt if he turned himself around/rolled over to lengthwise, they are ritually impure.
כסיות – the plural language for “chair.”
שתחת הגוף – because the majority [of his body] is carried/borne upon him. But the others are ritually impure by contact of the person with gonorrhea. But they don’t have the law of lying and sitting to become a primary source of ritual impurity to defile people and vessels.
אם רחוקים זה מזה טהורים – because the majority [of his body] is not carried/borne either on this one or on that one. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.

Mishnah 5

עשר טליתות – it the plural usage of טלית/a cloak. But not specifically then, for even one-thousand cloaks and a large stone on top of them, and the person with gonorrhea/the Zav sat upon the stone, all of the cloaks that are underneath it are defiled through sitting, for lying and sitting become defiled underneath a stone used for closing a pit.
כרע הזב טהורים – from the law concerning lying, but they are impure through the burden of the person with gonorrhea.
ביחידי – one bed [used for lying].
טמא – for the majority of the person with gonorrhea/the Zav is carried/borne upon it.
ובמרובים – many beds on the scale opposite the person with gonorrhea.
שאין אחד מהם נושא את רובו – for since they (i.e., the beds) went down, the majority of the person with gonorrhea is not borne/carried on even one of them, but rather, each one of the beds bore/carried a majority of the Zav.

Mishnah 6

טמאין – whether the person with gonorrhea/the Zav went down/bowed or whether the foods and drinks went down, they were defiled through movement/shaking.
ובמת הכל טהור – whether sitting or lying, whether foods or liquids, whether the corpse went down [on the balancing scale] whether they (i.e., foods, liquids, sitting, lying) went down. For all of the defilements of movement are pure, except for the movement of a person with gonorrhea/a Zav (with a flux). But if they went down [on the balancing scale], they are also ritually pure, for all that the corpse is lifted up over him, as for example, on the balancing scale other than a tent, it is ritually pure (see also Tractate Zavim, Chapter 5, Mishnah 3)ssb, except for a human, for at the time that it outweighs the corpse, it is impure because it moved/shook it, as we state in the last chapter of [Tractate] Niddah (folio 69b) do you think that a corpse does not defile through carrying?
מדף (indirect contact by shaking – the uncleanness of an object arising from an unclean person’s indirect contact) – it the language of minor uncleanness, as it is written (Leviticus 26:36): “The sound of a driven leaf [shall put them to flight].” But Maimonides explained that [the word] "מדף" is from the language of "ריחו נודף"/so that its fragrance spreads (see Tractate Menahot, Chapter 8, Mishnah 7), that the fragrances of the defilement of a Zav/person with gonorrhea/flux goes from afar to defile all the vessels that upon it even though it did not come in contact with them. But not like the defilement of the vessels that are underneath it, for the vessels that are on top of the person with gonorrhea/flux even though they are things that interpose between them and the person with gonorrhea/flux, all of them are unclean with a minor defilement to defile foods and drink, but not to defile humans and vessels, whereas vessels that are underneath him, even if they are one hundred one on top of the other, the lowest of all of them have a greater defilement to defile humans and to defile clothing like the upper one.
מה שאין המת מטמא – hat what is below it (i.e., the corpse), even if it will be Levitical impurity/defilement breaking through the ground and descending, nevertheless, nothing lying and sitting that is underneath it defiles humans and to defile clothing.
ועל גביו מדף – assuming that the corpse defiles vessels that are on top of it the uncleanness of a minor degree to defile foods and drinks, that defilement breaks through the ground and rises, nevertheless if [the corpse was on an upper floor and the uncleanness caused by unclean persons lying on an object and sitting on an object in the house until the top of the beam, and the planed board that is bent from the weight of the corpse and which make heavy those lying down, or] the corpse is in the house near/adjacent to the top of the beam, and those that are lying are in the upper story, and the planed boards are bent from the weight of those lying and weigh down upon the corpse, in that manner with an impure person with a flux/gonorrhea (i.e., a Zav) below to defile humans [and] to defile clothing, and above it to defile foods and drinks, but with the corpse, whether above it or whether below it, is pure.

Mishnah 7

שאינה יכולה (it – i.e., the bed – is not able to stand – on three legs) – and since this one (i.e., leg) is not able [to stand] and that one (i.e., leg) is not able [to stand] each one of all of them has performed an act and there most of the person with gonorrhea/flux (i.e., the Zav) is lifted upon it (i.e., the leg).
רבי שמעון מטהר – that requires the measurement of gonorrhea for this one (i.e., the leg) and the measurement of gonorrhea for that one (i.e., the leg), meaning to say, the majority of this [Zav] weighs down on each of them. And he follows after his reasoning that he stated above in our chapter (Tractate Zavim, Chapter 4, Mishnah 5) regarding an individual [place to lie down or sit], but if there were many [places to lie down or sit] they are clean, for no single place can carry the majority. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.
היה רכוב על גבי בהמה – we are dealing with something standing, for if it is walking, all the while that the one [leg] is uprooted but it is standing on three [legs], and what is underneath them is impure, for it is unable to stand on two [legs].
שיכולה לעמוד על שלש – therefore each one is like a fourth leg, and it is not other than a support [for the other legs], and support has no substance to it (see Tractate Shabbat 93a). But one cloak underneath two legs, is impure, for it (i.e., the animal) is not able to stand on [the other] two legs.
ר' יוסי אומר - he is referring to four cloaks under the four feet of an animal.
הסוס מטמא ברגליו – if a person with gonorrhea/flux (i.e., a Zav) rides upon it (i.e., a horse) and there is a cloak underneath one of the feet of a horse, it is ritually impure. But underneath its hands, it is ritually pure, for it doesn’t lean on its forelegs. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.
כלים שבעקל טמאים (utensils that are in the roller are unclean) – that the crutch of the beam is on the roller, and the roller is a basket that gathers/detains in it the olives (i.e., a bale of loose texture containing the olive pulp to be pressed) and it is made like a kind of basket of network, and after they gather/detain in it the olives and there remains the peat which is the refuse of olives (i.e., the peals), and they bring it into the bale of loose texture containing the olive pulp to be pressed, and place upon the bale of loose texture a beam to weigh it down.
המכבש של כובס (the washer’s clothes press) – after they launder the clothing, they fold them underneath the clothes press to press them and to preserve their folding.
כלים שתחתיו טהורים – for a person who sits on one end of the clothes press does not weigh down the utensils.
ור' נחמיה מטמא – he holds that it is impossible that he sits on one end of the clothes press without weighing down on the utensils. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Nehemiah.

Chapter 5



Mishnah 1

הנוגע בזב. וכלי שטף במגע (he who touches a Zav/person with a flux. And a vessel that requires only rinsing to be restored to Levitical cleanness) – for just as a person who touches a Zav/person with a flux defiles clothing at the time of his contact/touching, so he defiles all vessels that touch them at the time of his [physical] contact with a Zav, except for humans and earthenware vessels. As it is taught in the [Halakhic Midrash] of the Torah of the Priests (i.e., Sifra), from where do we make the rest of vessels like clothing? The inference teaches us (Leviticus 15:5): “and remains impure/וטמא [until the evening].” I might think that it makes a person and earthenware vessels [impure], the inference teaches us "בגד"/”All cloth [or leather on which semen falls shall be washed in water and remain impure until evening]” (Leviticus 15:17); it defiles clothing, but it does not defile human beings and earthenware vessels. And especially at the time of contact with the Zav/person with a flux, but if he separates [from the things that make him unclean], it does not, as it is written (Leviticus 15:5): “Anyone who touches his bedding shall wash his clothes, bathe in water and remain impure [until evening];” at the time of his contact he defiles his clothing, [but if] he separates, he does not defile clothing.
אבל לא במשא (but not what he carries) – if at the time of his contact with a Zav/person with a flux he carried clothing but did not touch them, they are ritually pure.
כל המטמא בגדים בשעת מגעו – as for example, a person who touches a man with a flux/gonorrhea, or a woman with a flux, or a woman who has just given birth and with their discharges, with what they lie upon (i.e., bedding) and with what they sit upon.
מטמא אוכלים להיות תחלה – because he is considered like a primary source of ritual defilement at the time of his contact, since the Torah stated that he defiles clothing.
ואת הידים להיות שניות – but the body of a person, he (i.e., the Zav) does not defile, as it is taught in the concluding clause that he does not defile a person and an earthenware vessel.
ולאחר פרישתו ממטמאיו מטמא את המשקין להיות תחלה – and even though he is not aught but first degree of ritual impurity, he makes the liquids first remove, for even second degree of ritual impurity defiles liquids to be first remove. But they are likely/liable to catch uncleanness and don’t require fitness to become unclean (which arises from contact with certain liquids) like foods, they (i.e., the Rabbis) decreed concerning them that they are always of first remove, as a decree because of liquids that come on account of [contact with] a reptile which are first remove from the Torah.
והאוכלים והידים להיות שניות – since he separated from the things which make him unclean, it is not other than a mere first [degree of ritual defilement].

Mishnah 2

כל הנישא על גבי הזב – the uppermost part of the person with a flux/gonorrhea and even if the person with a flux/gonorrhea did not touch him and even if there are many things that interpose between him and between the person with a flux/gonorrhea, everything is ritually impure, as it is written (Leviticus 15:10): “Whoever touches anything that was under him [shall be impure until evening].” What is underneath him? If you were to say, underneath the person with flux/gonorrhea, that is his lying, but rather with anything that the Zav/person with flux will be underneath him, that is, the uppermost part of the Zav. And this applies to all things, even with something that is not normally upon him, and not with that is similar to what is below him, for it is not practiced other than something that appears to him.
חוץ מהן הראוי למשכב ולמושב – and the same law applies for what he is riding upon, but that which is not appropriate is pure, as for example, if he inverted a Seah which is not made for sitting and he sat upon it, it is possible that it would be impure for sitting, as the inference teaches us (Leviticus 15:6): “Whoever sits on an object on which the one with the discharge has sat,” that which is special fro sitting, excluding this that we say to him: “stand and perform our work.”
נדבך (a frame carried to the building ground with the tools and vessels above and under it) – a row of the building of the wall, like (Ezra 6:4): “With a course of unused timber [for each three courses of hewn stone].”
הטהור מלמעלה – on the frame/course of stones and weighing down upon the finger of the person with flux/gonorrhea (i.e., the Zav), for now it is carried above the Zav and is considered a primary source of ritual defilement.
מטמא שנים ופוסל אחד – it defiles first degree [of ritual impurity] and second degree [of ritual impurity], and renders heave-offering/priest’s due] impure with one further remove.
פירש – the pure person came down from the course of stones/frame, or that the person with flux/gonorrhea (i.e., the Zav) removed his finger from underneath the course of stones/frame. It defiles the pure with one remove and invalidates one remove, because the pure thing is not other first degree of ritual impurity for since it separates, it further does not defile clothing and makes heave offering/priest’s due second and third remove.
הטמא מלמעלה – on the course of stones/frame, and the finger of the pure person is underneath the course of stones/frame and the impure person weighs down upon him, for the Zav/the person with a flux/gonorrhea is carried upon it, therefore it defiles two removes and renders unfit one further remove.
והמדף – all the vessels that are not lying or sitting are called מדף/indirect contact for conferring ritual impurity.
מלמעלה – [above] the course of stones/frame, but the finger of the Zav/person with flux/gonorrhea is from below, they are not other than first degree of ritual impurity, 
and they defile one remove and renders unfit [still] one [further] remove, but after they have separated, also this is the law.
פירשו מטמאין שנים ופוסלין אחד – the person who lies and who sits is always a primary source of ritual defilement, even though they (i.e., the defiling agents) have separated themselves.
טהורים – as we have stated that all that the Zav/person with flux/gonorrhea is carried upon is pure, except for from lying and sitting and the human being.

Mishnah 3

מפני שאמרו – that is to say, because what they said – that foods and drinks and the indirect contact for conferring ritual impurity from below underneath the lying person [on a bed] with flux/gonorrhea (i.e., the Zav) are ritually pure because of that which they said that whatever carries and is carried [on top of a bed is pure.
כל הנושא – as for example, foods and drinks and indirect contact for conferring ritual impurity which are below from the lying person [on a bed] with flux/gonorrhea (i.e., the Zav) and they carry him, but they don’t touch him for there are things that interpose between them.
נישא על גבי המשכב – for these are above (i.e., foods and drinks, etc.) and the unclean person lying (i.e., the Zav – the person with flux/gonorrhea) on a bed below, and it is carried upon him, but they (i.e., the objects) do not touch him, they are ritually pure.
חוץ מן האדם – that a person who carries the unclean person (i.e., the Zav – the person with flux/gonorrhea) on a bed is defiled even though he did not touch him and did not shake/move him, because the Zav who is lying on a bed defiles through carrying, and similarly, if they placed an immovable stone used for closing a pit above from where the Zav is lying and a ritually pure person sat upon the stone, he is defiled, because he was carried on top of the bed [of a lying Zav/person with flux/gonorrhea]. In the same way as that if the Zav sat on the stone, the bed that is below from the stone is ritually defiled, so when the pure person that sat on the stone is defiled, and he is carried from the defiling bed [of the Zav] that is lying underneath it.
כל הנושא על גבי נבילה – it is speaking/dealing with a human being, meaning to say, that any human being who carries or is placed on top of a carrion.
טהור חוץ מן המסיט – that carries the carrion and does not move it from its place, also did not move it from its place but rather that placed it on top of him, as for example, that his friend came and placed it upon him, he is ritually pure, until he shakes/moves it.
רבי אליעזר אומר אף הנושא – in the Gemara (Tractate Hullin, folio 124b) it explains that this is what he (Rabbi Eliezer) said: “and he that carries”, meaning to say, the person who shakes/moves the carrion is not ritually impure other than when he carries it, that the carrion is above and he (i.e., the person who carries it) is below, but if the carrion is below and he is above, even though he shakes/moves it, he is ritually pure, all the while that he did not touch it. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer.
חוץ מן המאהיל – that it is possible to be carrying [a corpse] or being carried by [a corpse] but not overshadowing it [with a tent] , as for example, an upper chamber/story forms a partition, that if the corpse is on the upper chamber/story, and foods and drinks and vessels in the house reach until the ceiling, and the planed boards are bent from the weight of the corpse and weigh down upon vessels, or the corpse is in the house adjacent to the ceiling, and the vessels in the upper chamber/story and the planed boards that are in the upper are story/chamber are bent from the weight of the vessels and weigh down upon the corpse, for in this manner, one carries and is carried by on top of the corpse but does not overshadow, and is pure.
ואדם בזמן שהוא מסיא – whether he carries the corpse or whether he is carried on top of the corpse, he is ritually pure, even though it (i.e., the corpse) did not touch him, but if the corpse does not move from its place as there is no shaking/movement here, he is ritually pure.

Mishnah 4

מקצה טמא על הטהור – even the finger of a Zav/person with flux/gonorrhea is on top of the pure person, or the finer of a pure person is on top of the Zav, or a connection, it is impure, as for example, his hair and his fingernail or his teeth, all these are called חיבורי/a connection, junction, even though there isn’t other than a minority of the impure on top of the pure person or a minority of the pure on top of the impure thing, the pure thing is defiled, for we don’t require that he carries the majority of a person with a flux/gonorrhea (i.e., the Zav) other than upon the lying but not upon a person.
ומקצת טהור על הטמא טהור – for we require that he carries its majority. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.

Mishnah 5

הטמא על מקצת המשכב – the majority of a impure person on a minority of the lying bed [of a Zav], the lying bed is defiled. And similarly, the greater part of a ritually pure person on the lesser part of a defiled bed, the ritually pure person is defiled. But we are not concerned of the lesser part of bed defiled, since the majority of it is ritually pure and the majority that the impure sits upon it, for with the lesser part of the thing that the defilement enters, and with its lesser part it departs, as is taught in the concluding clause [in this segment of the Mishnah]: "נמצאת טומאה נכנסת לו ויוצאת ממנו בטומאתו"/”it turns out that uncleanness enters it and leaves it through its lesser part.”
מקצת הטמא על המשכב – since that it is the lesser part of the impure person, even though that he leans on all of the bed, the bed is pure, until the greater part of the person with flux/gonorrhea (i.e., the Zav) is carried upon it.
ומקצת טהור על המשכב – that is to say or the lesser part of the pure person even on the entire bed.
טהור – until the greater of the part of the ritual pure person leans upon it.
וכן ככר של תרומה – it is referring to the Mishnah above (see Tractate Zavim, Chapter 5, Mishnah 3) as it teaches in the Mishnah: "כל הנושא ונישא על גבי המשכב טהור חוץ מן האדם"/”Whatever carries and is carried on top of a bed is clean.” And even food of priest’s due/heave-offering, if it was carried on top of the bed and there is between them something that interposes, even if it is the most thin like [a piece of] paper and similar to it, they are not susceptible to receive ritual defilement from the bed, for it doesn’t defile others and is not susceptible to receive defilement through shaking/moving other than something that has the breath of life (i.e., a human).
ור' שמעון מטמא בזו – since its place is impure, it defiles through shaking/moving, even something that does not have the breath of life. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.

Mishnah 6

הנוגע בזב ובזבה וכו' – each of these are equivalent regarding their contact/touching to their carrying in that they defile a person to defile clothing, therefore, they are considered a primary source of ritual defilement all the while that they didn’t separate from them, for after [being in contact] it defiles clothing, and therefore, a person who touches it makes himself first remove (i.e., first-degree of ritual impurity) and second remove and invalidates/makes unfit heave-offering/priest’s due through third remove.
פירש – [he separates] from what defiles him, he is none other than a mere first-degree of ritual impurity and defiles something to make it second-degree of ritual impurity, and makes heave-offering/priest’s due unfit in the third remove.
ואחד המסיט, ואחד הנושא – and even though they do not touch, the man with a flux/gonorrhea and a woman with a flux and a menstruant woman are explicitly written, as it is written (Leviticus 15:31-32): “Such is the ritual concerning him who has a discharge, [concerning him who has an emission of semen and becomes impure thereby], and concerning her who is in menstrual infirmity, [and concerning anyone, male or female, who has a discharge, and concerning a man who lies with an impure woman],” but the leper and the woman who has given birth we derive from (Leviticus 15:32): "לזכר ולנקבה"/”and concerning anyone, male or female, who has a discharge,” [the word] "לזכר"/for the man – to include the leper and [the word] "לנקבה"/or female to include the woman who has given birth to a child.

Mishnah 7

ואחד המסיט – who moves/shakes her from her place even though he doesn’t touch or carry [her].
רבי אליעזר אומר אף הנושא – and it speaks of one who carries, meaning to say, that the person who moves/shakes is not ritually impure unless he carries it, that they are above and the person doing the moving/shaking is below. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer.

Mishnah 8

הנושא את המרכב (he who carries the saddle/riding seat) – in carrying the riding seat, it is written (Leviticus 15:9-10): “[Any means for riding that one with a discharge has mounted shall be impure; whoever touches anything that was under him shall be impure until evening;] and whoever carries such things shall wash his clothes, [bathe in water and remain impure until evening],” but not touching/coming into contact with it. But the person who touches it is not other than a mere first degree of ritual impurity.
הנושא את הנבילה – that is he moves/shakes it, for carrying without shaking/moving, that person is ritually pure, as we have explained above (see Tractate Zavim, Chapter 5, Mishnah 3:"כל הנושא ונישא על הנבילה – טהור חוץ מן מסיט"/”Whatever carries or is carried on top of a carrion is clean, except for him who shifts/shakes it.” And one who also touches a carrion even though it is ritually impure, since it does not defile clothing, it does not defile two removes (i.e., makes things first degree of ritual impurity and makes non-holy produce second degree of ritual impurity) nor invalidate/make unfit one (i.e., priest’s due/heave offering becomes unfit as it is made third-degree of ritual impurity), it is not other than merely first degree of ritual impurity and it defiles one (i.e., making non-holy produce second-degree of ritual impurity) and invalidates one (i..e, making priest’s due/heave-offering third degree of ritual impurity).
מי חטאת שיש בהן כדי הזייה – they defile clothing through carrying but not through touching/contact.

Mishnah 9

והוא בבית הבליעה (and it is in the esophagus/gullet) – all the time that it (i.e., the food) is in the esophagus it defiles clothing, and since it defiles clothing, it defiles two things (i.e., it’s law is like that of a primary source of ritual defilement – that it makes something first degree of ritual impurity and a first makes non-holy produce second-degree of ritual impurity) and invalidates/makes unfit one (i.e., something second degree of ritual impurity makes priest’s due/heave offering unfit).
הכניס ראשו באויר התנור – even though the carrion of the bird exists with the esophagus/gullet of the person who eats it, everything is in the airspace of the over, nevertheless, it (i.e., the oven) is ritually pure. For the oven is not defiled on account of the person, for everything that defiles clothing does not defile humans and earthenware vessels. But because of the carrion of a clean bird it does not become defiled, for it lacks defilement other than the person in his esophagus/gullet.
הקיאה או שבלעה (he vomited it out or swallowed it) – that is he separated from it. That from when it (i.e., the food particles of the carrion of the clean bird) descended to the stomach, it has no defilement, and when it is in his mouth, it has no defilement, for it is written (Leviticus 17:15): “[Any person, whether citizen or stranger,] who eats what has died/"[וכל נפש] אשר תאכל [נבלה]" for it is written, “who has not eaten” – food in the esophagus/gullet.

Mishnah 10

ובנבילה ובמרכב – all of these are through carrying alone that they defile clothing, but not through touching/coming into contact. Therefore, a person who touches them even though he did not separate is not other than first-degree of Levitical impurity, and he defiles one (making non-holy produce second-degree of ritual impurity) and invalidates/makes unfit one (i.e., heave offering becomes unfit as it becomes third-degree of ritual impurity).
כל הנוגע- as for example food and vessels, for even with those that a person touches defiles two and invalidates/makes unfit one vessels that touch them defile one and invalidate one, and even at the time of their contact/touching.
חוץ מן האדם – that there is from them that if he touched them or carried, that he (as he is first-degree of ritual defilement) defiles two (making non-holy produce second-degree of ritual defilement) and invalidates one (making priest’s due/heave offering third degree of ritual impurity), like those that we stated above.
פירש – even a person, in all of them he defiles one (as he is first-degree of ritual impurity, making non-holy produce second degree of ritual impurity) and invalidates one (priest’s due/heave offering becoming unfit for use), for since he separated from it, he is not other than first-degree of ritual impurity.

Mishnah 11

בעל קרי כמגע שרץ – just as a person who touches a creeping insect/reptile is first degree of ritual impurity, so also the person with an nocturnal emission/pollution is a first degree of ritual impurity, and his defilement is comparable to the defilement of someone who touches effusion of semen.
ובועל נדה כטמא מת – which is one of the primary sources/causes of Levitical uncleanness and is ritually impure for a period of seven days.
שהוא מטמא משכב ומושב – and a corpse itself and all the more so someone with ritual impurity imparted by a corpse does not defile by sitting or lying, neither a minor defilement nor a stringent defilement, as it is written (Leviticus 15:3): “and every object on which he sits [shall be impure],” but not someone defiled by a contact with a corpse (see also, Tractate Kelim, Chapter 1, Mishnah 3).

Mishnah 12

אלו פוסלים את התרומה – from/according to the Rabbis. And all of it is from the eight things that they decreed בו ביום/on that selfsame day (that Rabban Gamaliel was deposed as the head of the Sanhedrin -see Talmud Berakhot 28a [see the Bartenura commentary to Tractate Shabbat, Chapter 1, Mishnah 4, also Tractate Shabbat 13b – our Mishnah lists nine of the fourteen of them], except for [the law regarding] the טבול יום/the one who immersed himself that day which is from the Torah.
האוכל אוכל (he who eats food) – that is first degree of ritual defilement or second degree of ritual defilement, they decreed that his body is second degree of ritual defilement, and it invalidates the heave-offering/priest’s due with his contact, touching, for second degree of ritual defilement makes priest’s due/heave-offering unfit.
והשותה משקים טמאים – it becomes also second degree of ritual impurity, and makes the priest’s due/heave-offering unfit/invalid, and the reason that the Rabbis decreed on these, is that sometimes, when a person eats unclean foods and pours liquid of heave-offering in his mouth while the foods are impure in his mouth, and invalidates them. And also, sometimes that he drinks impure liquids and pours foods of heave-offering/priest’s due in his mouth while they are still in his mouth, invalidating them.
והבא ראשו ורובו – after he immersed [in a Mikveh[ on that same day.
במים שאובין – because they would immerse in the badly smelling/decaying waters of caves and they would put upon them afterwards drawn waters to remove to bad-smelling/decaying waters, they began and made a fixed rule to state that the waters of caves do not purify but rather [only] drawn waters purify; they (i.e., the Rabbis) stood and decreed defilement upon them [who used those waters], for perhapsthey would come to annul the law of Mikveh and immerse in drawn waters, and in order to fulfill this decree to establish it, they added to it and decreed on a person completely pure who had three LOG of drawn waters that fell upon him, that he would invalidate the heave-offering/priest’s due until he immersed [in a ritual bath].
והספר – all Holy Writings/Scrolls defile the priest’s due/heave offering through contact. Because at the outset, they would hide food of priest’s due/heave offering next to a Torah Scroll saying “this is Holy and that is Holy,” since they saw that Scrolls would come to loss, that the mice that are found near the food would ruin/cause loss to the Scrolls, they decreed on the Torah, Prophets and Writings (i.e., the three portions of Scripture) would defile the priest’s due/heave-offering through their contact.
וטבול יום – invalidates the priest’s due/heave-offering from the Torah until his sunset arrives. But this is not from the eighteen decrees that they (i.e., the Rabbis) decreed on that day (see the Bartenura commentary to Tractate Shabbat, Chapter 1, Mishnah 4).
והאוכלים – that were defiled by liquids. The Sages decreed on the liquids that were defiled by second degree of ritual impurity, to become first-degree, and that they would defile the foods. It is a decree because liquids that come on account of a defiling reptile/insect which are first-degree according to the Torah. But why did not decree on foods also to become first-degree? It is a decree because of foods that come on account of an insect/defiling reptile, because the foods require fitness to become unclean (which arises from contact with certain liquids), but they are not susceptible to receive defilement other than through coming in water, but the liquids are liable/likely to be susceptible to receive defilement and do not require fitness to become unclean nor repair, and their defilement is found more.
וכלים שנטמאו במשקין – that according to the Torah, even if the liquids were defiled by a reptile/insect (i.e., creeping animal), they do not defile vessels, for humans and vessels are not susceptible to receive ritual defilement other than from a primary source of ritual impurity, but the Rabbis decreed that even on liquids that were defiled on account of hands which are second-degree of ritual impurity, that they would defile vessels, as a decree because of the liquid of a person with gonorrhea/זב or a woman with a flux/זבה, as for example, their spittle and their urine, which are a primary source of ritual impurity and defile vessels according to the Torah.