Mishneh Torah, The Chosen Temple
משנה תורה, הלכות בית הבחירה
Maimonides' Mishneh Torah, edited by Philip Birnbaum, New York, 1967
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH002108864

Mishneh Torah, The Chosen Temple



Chapter 1


As soon as the Israelites entered Eretz Yisrael, they set up the portable sanctuary (<i>Mishkan</i>) in Gilgal for the fourteen years during which they occupied and divided the land. From there they came to Shiloh and built a sanctuary of stones, over which they spread the curtains of the <i>Mishkan</i>, since it had no ceiling. The sanctuary of Shiloh lasted three hundred and sixty-nine years. It was destroyed when Eli died, so they came to Nov and built a sanctuary there. It was destroyed when Samuel died, so they came to Gibeon and built a sanctuary there. From Gibeon they came to Jerusalem to build the permanent sanctuary. Nov and Gibeon lasted fifty-seven years.
As soon as the Temple was built in Jerusalem, it was prohibited to build a sanctuary for the Lord or to offer a sacrifice in any other place. Only the Temple in Jerusalem, on Mount Moriah, was intended for all generations.— —

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4

There was a stone at the western side of the Holy of Holies, on which the Ark was placed, and in front of it there was the jar of manna as well as the staff of Aaron. When Solomon built the Temple, knowing that it would at the end be destroyed, he constructed underneath a place where to hide the Ark in deep and winding secret tunnels. At the command of King Josiah, it was concealed in the place which Solomon had built.— — Along with it were concealed the staff of Aaron, the jar of manna, and the anointing oil. None of these reappeared in the Second Temple. Even the <i>Urim</i> and <i>Tummim</i>, which were available in the Second Temple, no longer responded prophetically, nor were they consulted.— —

Chapter 5

The Temple Mount, which is Mount Moriah, was five hundred cubits long and five hundred cubits wide, and was surrounded by a wall.— — It was all roofed over, a colonnade within a colonnade.
It had five gates: one on the west, one on the east, one on the north, and two on the south. Each gate was ten cubits wide and twenty cubits high; each had doors.
Within, there was a latticed railing ten handbreadths high, encircling all around. Inside the latticed railing was the defensive rampart, ten cubits high. — —

Chapter 6

The entire Temple was not on level ground, but on the slope of the mountain. When a person entered from the east gate of the Temple Mount, he would walk on level ground till the end of the rampart. From the rampart he would ascend twelve steps to the Women's Court, the height of each step being half a cubit and its tread half a cubit.
He would then walk the entire length of the Women's Court on level ground. From there he would ascend fifteen steps to the Israelite Court, which was the beginning of the Temple Court. The height of each step was half a cubit and its tread half a cubit.

Chapter 7



Chapter 8

It is a biblical positive command to guard the sanctuary, even in the absence of fear of enemies or marauders, since by guarding the sanctuary honor is accorded to it. A palace that is attended by guards is quite unlike a palace that is not attended by guards.
The duty of guarding the sanctuary is applicable all through the night, with the priests and the Levites serving as the guards.— —

The duty of guarding it is fulfilled by the priests guarding from within and the Levites from without [the Temple Court]. Twenty-four groups would guard the sanctuary every night continuously at twenty-four posts; the priests at three posts, and the Levites at twenty-one posts.





One officer was placed in charge of all the guards, and he was called Officer of the Temple Mount. He used to go round to every watch all night, with lighted torches in front of him. If any guard did not stand up and say to him: "Officer of the Temple Mount, peace be with you," it was evident that he slept, so he would beat him with his cane. He had the right to burn his clothing. They used to say in Jerusalem: "What is the noise in the Temple Court? It is the noise of some Levite being beaten and having his clothing burned because he slept during his watch."
In the morning, before daybreak, but close to it, the Temple officer would come and knock on the door of the priests who were at the chamber of the hearth, and they would open the door for him. He took the key and opened the small gate between the chamber of the hearth and the Temple Court. He entered the Temple Court from the chamber of the hearth, and the priests followed him with two lighted torches in their hands. They separated into two groups, the one going eastward and the other going westward. They kept searching the entire Court.— — When they all arrived, they said: "Peace, all is well!" — —
They followed this procedure each night, except Sabbath nights, when they had no lighted torches in their hands but searched by means of the lamps which were lit in the Court since Sabbath eve.