Sefer Etz Chaim
עץ חיים
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Sefer_Etz_Chaim
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Sefer Etz Chaim



Gate 1



Chapter 1

First palace of seven palaces and which is the hall of Adam Kadmon, and in this palace are seven gates:
The first gate:
Explanation of the round [lights] and direct [lights] including five branches
Regarding the ultimate goal of the creation of the worlds which will now be clarified in two inquiries which the Kabbalists dealt with. The first inquiry is that which the first- and the last ones inquired to know the reason of the creation of the worlds. This reason has been counted, finished and developed. It is said that this reason of the matter is that the Blessed One "needs" to be complete in all His actions and abilities and in all His Names of greatness and loftiness and honor. 

Chapter 2

Regarding Ein Sof, B"H. What was the beginning of refining of the worlds that are loftier than us? And also a great inquiry and arguments separated all the Mekubalim. For there are those that wrote that the Ten Sefirot are according to ten levels one after the other and one lower than another. And there are those who write that their order is straight up with a border or division between right and left and middle: 3 Sefirot one next to the other on the right side - Chochmah, Chesed, Netzach; 3 Sefirot one next to the other on the left side - Binah, Gevurah, Hod; and 4 Sefirot one next to the other in the middle - Keter, Tiferet, Yesod, Malchut. Many learned and said that they are in the shape/form of wheels, circling around one under the other, and one surrounding another. Behold, one who looks at the words of Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai in the Zohar and the Tikkunim, and also in the Sefer HaBahir {the Book of Splendor} (written by Rabbi Nechunia ben Hakanah) will find in their words many different lessons which are inclined to here or there. The later Mekubalim {Kabbalists} (who were perplexed by this) greatly tired of investigating this and were not able to do so. Because a great and strong problem/difficulty came upon them like a storm, as was said before, that the Ein Sof differed according to each opinion; and a complete comparison could not be justified either up or down, facing or backwards. All of these established  teachers had boundaries and borders and areas of measuring the Light of the Heavenly Ein Sof, G-d forbid. And it was known that the Light of Ein Sof is fundamental and was embedded within the thickness of each and every Sefirah, and is measured in each and every Sefirah...as is remembered in the Zohar Parshat Behar, and Parshat Pinchas and in the introductions to the Tikkunim... 

Gate 2



Gate 3



Gate 4



Gate 5



Gate 6



Gate 7



Gate 8



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Gate 9



Gate 10



Gate 11



Gate 12



Gate 13



Gate 14



Gate 15



Gate 16



Gate 17



Gate 18



Gate 19



Gate 20



Gate 21



Gate 22



Gate 23



Gate 24



Gate 25



Gate 26



Gate 27



Gate 28



Gate 29



Gate 30



Gate 31



Gate 32



Gate 33



Gate 34



Gate 35



Gate 36



Gate 37



Gate 38



Gate 39



Gate 40



Gate 41



Gate 42



Gate 43



Gate 44



Gate 45



Gate 46



Gate 47



Gate 48



Gate 49



Gate 50



Chapter 1

Gate fifty, gate ABY"A [Atzilut, Brieya, Yetzira, Asieya] containing ten chapters: