Mekhilta DeRabbi Yishmael
מכילתא דרבי ישמעאל
Rabbi Mike Feuer, Jerusalem Anthology
https://www.sefaria.org

Mekhilta DeRabbi Yishmael

Tractate Pischa



Tractate Vayehi Beshalach



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4

(Exodus 14:15) "And the Lord said to Moses: Why do you cry out to Me?" R' Yehoshua says: The Holy One said to Moshe: Moshe, all that Israel has to do is to go forward. 
R' Eliezer says: The Holy One said to Moshe: Moshe, My children are in trouble. The sea is raging and the foe is pursuing and you stand and prolong your prayers? For R' Eliezer was accustomed to say: There is a time to prolong (prayer) and a time to shorten. (Numbers 12:13) "God, I pray You, hear her" — to shorten. (Devarim 9:18) "And I fell down before the Lord (in prayer) as at first, forty days and forty nights" — to prolong. 
R' Meir says: If for Adam, who was alone, I made dry land, for this assembly of holy ones shall I not make dry land? 
R' Yishmael says: In the merit of Jerusalem I will split the sea for them, as it is written (Isaiah 52:1) "Awake, awake, clothe yourself in splendor, O Zion. Don your robes of glory, O Jerusalem, holy city. For there will not again enter you the uncircumcised and the unclean", and (Ibid. 51:9-10) "Awake, awake, clothe yourself in splendor, O arm of the Lord. Awake as in days of old, as in generations of yore … Is it not You that dried up the sea, the waters of the great deep, a road for the redeemed to cross?" 
Another explanation. Because of My promise to their father Avraham I will split the sea for them, "And your seed shall be as the dust of the earth, and they shall break forth west and east...(ufaratzta yamah vakedma)" (Genesis 28:14), "ufaratzta yamah" implies the splitting of the sea. 
R' Yehudah ben Beteirah says: The Holy One said to him: I have already fulfilled My promise to your father Avraham, "...and He made the sea into the dry land." (Exodus 14:21)  ... “Why do you cry out to Me? Speak to the children of Israel and let them travel.” (Exodus 14:15) 
R’ Yishmael says: ‘Why do you cry out to Me?’ In the merit of Jerusalem I will split the sea for them, as it says “Awaken, awaken, put on your strength, O Zion; put on the garments of your beauty, Jerusalem the Holy City, for no longer shall the uncircumcised or the unclean continue to enter you.” (Isaiah 52:1) and it says “Awaken, awaken, dress yourself with strength, O arm of the Lord, awaken, awaken like days of old, generations of yore; are you not the one that hewed Rahab and slew the sea monster? Are you not the one who dried up the sea, the waters of the great deep? Who made the depths of the sea a road for the redeemed ones to pass?” (Isaiah 51:9-10)


















R’ Yosi haGalili said ‘when Israel entered the Red Sea, mount Moriah was already uprooted from its place with Yitchak's altar built upon it and its woodpile in place. It was as if Yitzchak was tied and placed on the altar and Avraham was stretching out his hand to take the knife in order to slaughter his son, as it says “And Abraham stretched forth his hand and took the knife, to slaughter his son.” (Bereshit 22:10)…

Tractate Shirah



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3











“… and I will make Him a habitation (v’anvehu)” (Exodus 15:2) R’ Yishmael says: is it possible for one of flesh and blood to beautify (l’hanvot) his Creator? Rather I will beautify Him with the commandments. I will make before Him a beautiful lulav, a beautiful sukkah, beautiful tzitzit, beautiful tefillin. Abba Shaul says: I will be like Him. Just as He is merciful and gracious, so too you should be merciful and gracious. 
R’ Yosi HaGalili says: proclaim the glories and praises of the Holy One before the nations of the world. R’ Yosi ben Dormaskit says: I will make before Him a beautiful Temple. ‘Dwelling (naveh)’ always refers to the Holy Temple as it says “…and made his dwelling desolate.” (Psalms 79:7) And it says “See Zion, the city of our gathering; your eyes shall see Jerusalem, a tranquil dwelling…” (Isaiah 33:20)

Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9











“You led [them] with Your might to Your holy dwelling place.” (Exodus 15:13) In the merit of the Holy Temple which they would build in the future. Dwelling always refers to the Temple, as it says “…and have wasted his dwelling.” (Jeremiah 10:25) And it says "See Zion, the city of our gathering; your eyes shall see Jerusalem, a tranquil dwelling, a tent that shall not fall, whose pegs shall never be moved, and all of whose ropes shall not be torn. (Isaiah 33:20)

Chapter 10





Four are called an inheritance (nachalah). The Holy Temple is called an inheritance, as it says “…on the mount of Your heritage…” (Shemot 15:17) The land of Israel is called an inheritance, as it says “…in the land which the Lord, your God, gives to you as an inheritance…” (Devarim 25:19) So too the Torah is called an inheritance, as it says “From the gift, to the streams (nachliel)…” (Bamidbar 21:19) And Israel is called an inheritance, as it says “…My people and My heritage, Israel…” (Yoel 4:2) The Holy One said: let Israel, who are called inheritance, come to the land of Israel, which is called inheritance, and build the holy Temple, which is called in heritance, in the merit of the Torah, which is called inheritance. That is why it says ‘on the mount of your heritage.’ “Directed toward Your habitation…” (Shemot 15:17) this is one of the indications that the throne below is aligned with the throne above. So too it says “The Lord is in His Holy Temple. The Lord-His throne is in Heaven…” (Tehillim 11:4) And it says “I have surely built You a house to dwell in (bet zevul); a settled place for You to dwell in forever.” (Melachim I 8:13)

Tractate Vayassa



Tractate Amalek



Tractate Bachodesh



Tractate Nezikin



Tractate Kaspa



Tractate Shabbata

