Mekhilta DeRabbi Yishmael
מכילתא דרבי ישמעאל
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Mekhilta DeRabbi Yishmael

Tractate Pischa



Chapter 1







As it is said: (Numbers 14:6) "And Joshua son of Nun and Caleb son of Jephunneh, of those who had scouted the land, rent their clothes". I may hear, the first in the account is the first in importance; but it is also said (Numbers 32:12) "none except Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite and Joshua son of Nun", from this we learn that they are both equal.

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18
























[24] It turns out that [the Torah] has four sons: one wise, one stupid, one wicked, and one who does not know how to ask. The wise son, what does he say? “What are the testimonies, statutes that the Lord our God has commanded us?” (Deut 6:20) So you should open for him the laws of Pesah. Say to him: “[After eating] the Paschal lamb, one does not follow up with the afikomen.” The stupid son, “saying ‘What is this?’ And you should say to him: ‘With a strong hand God took us out of Egypt’” (Exod 13:14).  The wicked son says: “What is this service to you?” Since he excluded himself from the whole you should exclude him from the whole. Say to him, “‘because of what God did for me’ (Exod 13:8)—me and not you, if you had been there, you would not have been redeemed.” And the one who doesn’t know to ask: you open with him, as it says, “And you shall tell your child on that day, ‘Because of this the LORD acted for me when I came out of Egypt.’” (Exod 13:8).

Tractate Vayehi Beshalach



Tractate Shirah



Tractate Vayassa



Tractate Amalek



Chapter 1

All men are hereby apprised of proper deportment. Moses did not say to Joshua "Choose for me men," but "Choose for us men with the properties of the divine." 

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



































"Moshe explained to his father-in-law" - to connect to him to bring him near to the Torah. "Everything that Hashem did" - in giving the Torah to the Jewish people. "all the ordeal" - in Egypt. "That they experienced" - at the sea. "On the way" - this is the war against Amalek. "Hashem saved them" - the Omnipresent saved them from everything.

Tractate Bachodesh



Tractate Nezikin



Tractate Kaspa



Tractate Shabbata

