Redeeming Relevance
פדיון הרלוונטיות
Redeeming Relevance
http://www.sefaria.org

Redeeming Relevance



Approbation of Rabbi Dr. Aharon Lichtenstein<b>Letter from Rabbi Dr. Aharon Lichtenstein</b>
The resurgence of the study of Tanakh in Israel - in dati-leumi Torah circles, in particular - has been justly welcomed as a most positive development. Constituting both an expansion of the horizons of <i>talmud Torah</i> and an expression of bonding with the cradle of most of Tanakh within the context of <i>shivat Zion</i>, this renascence has unquestionably enriched and enhanced the spiritual life of a revitalized community.
Unfortunately, however, this enterprise has, at times, been accompanied by negative elements, as well. Perhaps most regrettable has been the tendency on the part of some scholars, students, or observers to constrict the content, scope and significance of much of Tanakh. Familiarity with the text, in one sense, has, in some circles, bred familiarity with the Scriptural narrative and the events and their protagonists presented therein, in another. The sense of reverential awe and the awareness of heroic stature may become jaded and replaced by what is cried up as "eye-level Tanakh study." To be sure, in one respect, the eye-level approach is to be welcomed, insofar as it serves as a healthy antidote to the radical and sweeping idealization and etherealization - and, hence, dehumanization - which characterized some latter-day <i>parshanut</i>. Surely, recognition of the human and emotional dimension of even our greatest - so amply, vigorously, and imaginatively portrayed by <i>midrashim</i> - is critical for a proper understanding of their lives and their meaning. But when this reactive response to previous excesses goes overboard; when eye-level confrontation is taken to entail not only acknowledgment of overarching humanity but envisions the meeting, shorn of majesty, grandeur, and elan, at the plane of my own very mundane existence; and when, as sometimes occurs, this approach is accompanied  by  the  benign  neglect  of  much  of  the  treasures  of traditional <i>parshanut</i> and the <i>midrashim</i>, to boot - the spiritual loss can be enormous.
Within this context, Rabbi Francis Nataf 's <i>Redeeming Relevance in the Book of Genesis: Explorations in Text and Meaning</i> constitutes a welcome and worthwhile contribution to the corpus of yeshiva-oriented elucidation of Tanakh. The volume is comprised of a series of independent and yet related essays, each dealing with a significant episode or personage, drawn from <i>Sefer Bereshit</i>. Above all, however, in the tradition of the Ramban and the Netziv, Rabbi Nataf fuses reverence for our greatest with awareness of their humanity; moreover, he recognizes that the human element does not compromise the greatness but, rather, ennobles it. I presume that some of his specific interpretations and judgments will draw criticism from the left or from the right; and the overall balance he has struck may likewise invite some variegated challenge. However, the serious and sensitive initiative to cope with the substantive issues as well as with their educational ramifications deserves the respect of a broad range of readers. Rabbi Nataf's fresh voice is one the Torah world will find well worth hearing.
בברכת התורה והמצוה, 
<i>Aharon Lichtenstein</i>



Genesis Chapter 1<b>Redeeming Our Souls: Avraham's Ninth Test</b><br><br> <b>Biblical Heroes</b><br><br> We are not always sure what to think of our Biblical ancestors. Sometimes their feats appear superhuman, and at other times their mistakes are too painfully clear. For the inexperienced student, this creates a certain cognitive dissonance, which may lead to hasty and forced interpretations aimed at creating more homogeneous characters. As a student becomes more experienced and sophisticated, he will likely become more comfortable with this lack of uniformity, realizing that rather than a weakness, the Torah's nuanced portrayal of our ancestors is quite true to real life. Thus, if the Torah is trying to teach us about the lives of real people, we should not expect to read about artificially one- dimensional characters, as this is not the nature of actual men and women. While appropriately sophisticated, this realistic complexity still creates some confusion as we attempt to find a proper perspective on the Torah's great figures.
Indeed, maintaining an appropriate perspective of our Biblical heroes is one of the most serious issues that a Jewish Educator must face. Making them too great or not great enough is as pernicious as it is common. The cost of misunderstanding our heroes' actions and thinking of them as "just like everyone else" is clear to most religious Jews. Without the needed reverence and awe for them, they lose their power as the effective role models that they have been from time immemorial. Consequently, most traditional commentators carefully examine actions that seem incongruent with a certain character's standing, seeking to find more subtle explanations than what would appear from a superficial reading.
What many teachers and students do not realize, however, is that the other side of this equation is equally problematic. When we make our heroes into angels who operate without the difficulties inherent in natural human existence, we also prevent them from being true role models. This is because we can only hold ourselves accountable to that which has been accomplished by real people who faced the same sort of challenges as we do. This too was understood by the vast majority of traditional commentators, who start with the premise that our heroes are fallible and therefore not beyond criticism - even as that criticism must be very sober and respectful.
It is within this context of natural human existence that we need to study the various tests encountered by Avraham in the Torah. In our attempt to grasp the relevance of his tests for us, we must remember that Avraham was a spiritual giant. Yet it is critical that we also note that he was not born that way. In other words, Avraham was not a static individual. He is not the exact same person when he is first told to move to Eretz Yisrael as he is much later, when God asks him to kill his son Yitzchak. He has developed in a way that is natural and, therefore, instructive. Indeed, from the point of view of natural human development, the well-known rabbinic tradition that Avraham encountered ten different trials (Pirkei Avot 5:3) takes on a significance that may otherwise be overlooked. Rather than seeing these tests as independent of one another, as would be the case with ten distinct missions given to ten different people, we can understand the ten trials as one singular path outlining Avraham's moral and spiritual development.
We must now carefully look at the text itself to see how the Torah helps us understand Avraham's pattern of growth. Comparing the tradition of Avraham's many tests to the Biblical text leads us to a question: If, as the rabbis claim, the ten different challenges faced by Avraham are all to be viewed as trials, why then does the text explicitly describe only his last ordeal, when he is called to sacrifice Yitzchak, as a trial? Should not the Torah have described all ten incidents as trials?
The more one studies the binding of Yitzchak, however, the more one appreciates the Torah's creating a special category for this one particular test. In fact, it is so unique that it is the only place in the entire Torah where the word <i>nisa</i> (tested) appears with reference to an individual. While it is almost self-evident that every major decision in Avraham's life had ramifications for his descendants, more than anything else it is his final test that truly established Avraham's legacy. The rabbis (Sanhedrin 89b) make this point in explaining that had Avraham failed the last test, it would have put all of his other accomplishments into question. Of course, once we recognize the critical weight of the last test, we come to ask the opposite question: what was the need for all the other trials; if everything depends on the final test, why bother with the other ones at all?
 <b>Sacrificing Yishmael, Sacrificing Yitzchak</b><br><br> Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian, whom she bore to Avraham, laughing. She said to Avraham, "Expel this maidservant and her son, because the son of this maidservant will not inherit with my son, with Yitzchak." This [matter] was very evil in the eyes of Avraham, on account of his son. God said to Avraham, "Don't let it be evil in your eyes concerning the boy and concerning your maidservant - everything that Sarah tells you, listen to her voice.. And also the son of the maidservant I will make into a nation since he is your seed." Avraham got up early in the morning... and he sent her away. (Bereshit 21:9-14)
God tested Avraham, and He said to him, "Avraham." [Avraham] said, "Here I am." He said, "Please take your son, your only one, whom you love, Yitzchak, and go to the land of foriah and bring him up as a sacrifice on one of the mountains that I will tell you." Avraham got up early in the morning and he saddled his donkey and he took... Yitzchak his son. (Bereshit 22:1-3)
In order to understand the need for Avraham's first nine tests, it is worthwhile to focus our attention on what may be the most revealing of these earlier tests - the expulsion of Avraham's first son, Yishmael. Rambam on Avot 5:3 enumerates this as the penultimate test. This test almost immediately precedes and somehow sets the stage for Avraham's final ordeal with his other son, Yitzchak.
Even without its role as a trial for Avraham, the expulsion of Yishmael is among the most difficult stories in the Torah to understand. The Torah does not explicitly tell us how Yishmael's behavior prompted Sarah to ask Avraham for his expulsion. Since her demand follows her observation of Yishmael laughing (or playing), we can surmise that there was something negative about this behavior. Still, it is difficult to read into Yishmael's laughter something that could have warranted her extreme reaction.
The severity of Yishmael's expulsion is underscored by the harsh manner in which he is sent out and by the fact that he almost dies along the journey. Short of resorting to midrashic explanations that are most likely allegorical, it is hard to justify Sarah's response to Yishmael's behavior. Indeed, Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai objected to such explanations in this context, pointing out the extreme unlikelihood of serious misbehavior by someone under the direct influence of Avraham, who is notably one of the most charismatic individuals presented in the Torah (Tosefta Sotah 6:3). R. Avraham ibn Ezra goes even further by telling us that Yishmael actually did nothing at all to deserve being sent away (Ibn Ezra on Genesis 21:9). Rather, ibn Ezra posits, he was just acting his age - which reminded Sarah that this son of Hagar was older than her own son Yitzchak and therefore a threat to his inheritance. Yet even without such a suggestion, it is easy to understand Avraham's strong disagreement with Sarah's request to expel Yishmael. foreover, it would follow that Avraham had every reason to believe that God would back him up in his disagreement. What is much harder to understand, then, is the fact that God sides with Sarah, telling Avraham to listen to her.
The solution to our problem may actually lie in abandoning the search for a justification for Yishmael's expulsion. This becomes possible when we look at the story within the context of the larger picture of Avraham's trials and specifically in comparison with Avraham's final trial. Without such a perspective, we may miss the remarkable parallels between these two stories. In fact, once we shift our attention, we notice that the core narratives of both stories are almost identical: God asks Avraham to do away with his son, knowing the personal anguish this will cause him and yet still expecting Avraham to put his own beliefs and preferences aside - which Avraham faithfully does in carrying out his mission.
Indeed, if we see Yishmael's expulsion as a test of faith for Avraham, certain things become much clearer: Our search for justification is tempered with the realization that God purposefully hid His reasons for this demand. Indeed, had God explained His reasoning to Avraham, the whole test would have been moot. In other words, even though God may have foreseen that Yishmael's expulsion was ultimately in everyone's interest, He wanted Avraham to accept it completely on faith.
This was a perfect way to prepare Avraham for his final test with Yitzchak: Just as in the later test, here too God tells Avraham to act against what he thought to be Divine justice and love. As with the binding of Yitzchak, Avraham is tested where he was most vulnerable - the same man who passionately pleaded for strangers in Sodom is told to ignore his powerful trait of loving-kindness when it comes to his own son. In heroic fashion, however, Avraham shows his willingness to completely subordinate himself to the will of God. When he hears the directive concerning Yishmael - as when he hears the decree about Yitzchak - Avraham is essentially asked to sacrifice everything. More than divesting himself of his sons, he is really being asked to divest himself of everything he has become. Avraham built his life around bringing ethical monotheism to the world. Both the content and the future of his efforts would have been undermined by the acts he was now expected to perform. Thus, in these tests, Avraham must place his intellect, his emotions and his entire being on the altar.
If the above parallels are not clear enough, Avraham's response in both cases is expressed with the same exact phrase of <i>Vayashkem Avraham baboker</i> ("Avraham got up early in the morning"), a phrase which according to Rashi indicates a person's eagerness to do something (Rashi on Genesis 22:3). In other words, in both cases Avraham responds to the chilling test with almost superhuman eagerness to do God's bidding.
<b>The Need for Process</b><br><br> Now that we have shown the similarity between Avraham's two final tests, we should inquire about the point of this dress rehearsal with Yishmael. Isn't it enough that God tested Avraham with one son? The answer may be that God knew that without the dress rehearsal with Yishmael, Avraham would not have been able to pass his all-important final test with Yitzchak.
Thus, Avraham's trial with Yishmael is intentionally easier than his ultimate test in a number of ways. fost obvious is that he was not asked to kill Yishmael, only to send him away (even though Yishmael almost dies as a result, were it not for Divine intervention). Secondly, it is clear throughout the text that Yitzchak was more precious to Avraham than was Yishmael. Thirdly, as the demand originally came from Sarah, Avraham was able to formulate an independent position before he had to accede to the Divine endorsement of Sarah's request. Finally and perhaps most significantly, God responds to Avraham's feelings for Yishmael and consoles him, telling him that Yishmael will flourish even after his expulsion.
In this way, the Biblical narratives show us a close-up of how one specific religious and emotional challenge prepares Avraham for the next. The main issues that Avraham has to deal with in these two tests are basically the same - namely, the need to put his faith in God even when it requires obedience to a seemingly irrational and unethical demand with devastating personal consequences. However, as opposed to the total surrender required with the sacrifice of Yitzchak, the demand to sacrifice Yishmael comes in a softer, more compromising fashion. On some level, the first test almost suggests the possibility of the other - if God can ask Avraham to put aside his intellect as well as his emotions to get rid of his first son, it is not such a long stretch to think that he could do the same, albeit in much harsher fashion, with the second. One wonders if Avraham had maybe even anticipated the final test, as a result of God's command to expel Yishmael. He might have said to himself, "There could be only one thing harder than what God is asking of me now...."
Our analysis of Avraham's two final tests can also give us insight into the need for the other eight tests. If God felt it necessary for Avraham to go through a dress rehearsal with Yishmael before he could pass his epic final test, the only natural way for him to pass even this penultimate test would be for God to prepare him with graduated tests, each of which would prepare Avraham for the next. In order for a man to master his challenges, he needs suitable preparation. When someone prepares for a great physical feat such as running a marathon, he must build up his physical stamina one step at a time, running progressively longer distances at each stage. The same is true in the spiritual arena: Emotional stamina will only be built by progressively more difficult spiritual challenges.
Although some of the tests are not clearly elucidated, starting with what appears to be the first test - when God tells Avraham to leave his homeland - each test gets progressively more difficult. For example, the first test is coupled with Divine promises assuring Avraham that he has nothing to worry about and that he will only benefit from complying with God's wishes (Genesis 12:1-3). Such assurances are given to Avraham even though this is a relatively easy request, especially compared to the final two. Still, God's first explicit command needed to be one that Avraham could obey with minimum discomfort, thereby building his confidence for the tests that would follow.
Among some of Avraham's major subsequent tests in order of their appearance are his journey to Egypt to escape famine (Genesis 12:10) and Sarah's abduction , first in Egypt (Ibid., verses 14-15) and then in Eretz Yisrael (Ibid., 20:2). The former is something that Avraham may well have accepted as an unavoidable challenge due to the fluctuating weather patterns of the arid Middle East. Moreover, he had recently completed his earlier move from Charan, so emigration was not totally new to him. This was a greater trial than leaving Charan because this time he received no Divine guidance. In fact, God's promise regarding his possession of Eretz Yisrael made it more difficult for Avraham to know how to react to a famine that seemed to compromise his hold on the land.
The next test, the abduction of Sarah, was certainly an  even greater test of Avraham's faith in the Divine promises granted him. Now, not only was he stripped of his land, he was also stripped of his wife, who was supposed to bear him the next link in the nascent Jewish people. For Avraham to be a stranger without a land was not completely new. At the same time, whether in Eretz Yisrael or in Egypt, his being a stranger only served to underscore the existential importance of his relationship with Sarah. As a result, the prospect of a life without Sarah was even more difficult for him than the prospect of a life in exile.
Thus, the rest of Avraham's trials follow the same pattern we have established between the ninth and tenth tests. Each one is there to prepare the ground for the next one. In this way, these tests are exactly what allowed Avraham to <i>become </i>Avraham.<br><br>*	*	* 
The above analysis is especially resonant in modern times, as there is a greater appreciation of human development. Still, even though we are more aware of the gradual way in which people develop, our fast-paced society all too frequently tempts us to take shortcuts in climbing the ladder of success, be it in our careers, our spiritual lives or any other realm. Rabbi J. B. Soloveitchik once pointed out that there can be no holiness without preparation. On a halachic level, this means that anyone who would want to enter the holy areas of the Temple fount would need to attend to various preparatory matters first. Of course, this notion is meant as more than a halachic insight - we are to understand that the requirement for preparation is part of holiness' intrinsic definition. Like any other accomplishment, holiness cannot come about just by willing it.
It is for this reason that many programs for <i>ba'alei teshuva</i> (returnees to traditional Judaism) advise their students to go slowly and to take on mitzvot gradually. It is somewhat of a paradox for Orthodox teachers to advise their students not to take on a fully observant lifestyle - they know that the law is the same for new initiates as for veterans. What such advisers have noticed, however, is that <i>ba'alei teshuva</i> are much more likely to stay with observance if they progress slowly. In view of our discussion of Avraham, this makes perfect sense. While in theory one should rigorously observe the mitzvot as soon as one is aware of them, in practice this is not really possible. Like Avraham, we all need to build our observance and cannot ignore the need for process.
Even for those born into religious families, observance is meant to be a process. We must not forget that children are not commanded in mitzvot until they reach the age of twelve or thirteen. The process of preparing the child for this level of observance is what <i>chinuch</i>, Jewish education, is all about. In turn, building on this basic level of observance is at the center of a serious Jewish life.
The Biblical narrative of Avraham's life helps us internalize that there can be no shortcuts. Greatness is achieved one step at a time. Great men and women are not born that way - they must successfully pass the small challenges that one by one allow them to reach higher and higher. Were they somehow to bypass all these graduated steps, considering them insignificant, they would never be able to confront the great challenges, which ultimately can be faced only by those with suitable preparation.
 We are now in a better position to appreciate the real-life description the Torah gives us of Avraham's life. As it does with other great figures, the Torah creates a model that we can realistically emulate. By showing us Avraham's spiritual development, we can pattern ourselves after him not only in view of his accomplishments, but also with the understanding of how he came to them.
As for the confusion created by normal life-like description of our Biblical heroes discussed at the beginning of this chapter, we need to realize that the Torah can only impart its crucial lessons through a heterogeneous portrayal of our Biblical heroes. The confusion thereby caused is the price we must be willing to pay for the beautiful and sustaining lessons offered to us by this Book of Life.



Exodus Chapter 3<b>Exile, Alienation and the Jewish Mission</b>
<i>When a man is in his place, everyone knows him, and respects him according to his worth and according to the rank of his forbears. He, too, is familiar with his surroundings, knowing what he should say and what he should not say, what he should do and what he should not do. Once uprooted from his landscape, a man is at a loss, bewildered and perplexed.	(Haim Sabato, Aleppo Tales)</i>
In the last chapter, we explored the unusual self-awareness that Moshe brought into his first set of interviews with God. Of course, this perspective did not appear in a vacuum – as with everyone, Moshe was shaped by his life experience. In this chapter we will look at part of this experience, which will both resemble and yet be at variance with many other Biblical Jewish leaders. Looking at Moshe’s early life, we find a fascinating paradox: The greatest  Jew to walk the face of the earth spent his childhood and youth in a completely non-Jewish culture. This forges the great irony that, as opposed to all the other Jews whom the Midrash praises for preserving their Jewish identities through keeping their Israelite names, language and dress, young Moshe’s name, language and certainly mode of dress were all Egyptian. Various commentators have noticed this and given explanations for the anomaly. Among them, the great nineteenth century commentator, Malbim, writes that the royal court of Egypt was the best place for Moshe to acquire the characteristics and abilities that he would need to become the political and military leader of the Jewish people. This approach implies that had there been a Jewish monarch and court from which to learn, it would have been preferable for Moshe to avoid the court of Pharaoh. In other words, Moshe’s apprenticeship in a foreign culture was due to the lack of a better option.
But there is another, more fundamental reason for Moshe’s bicultural upbringing, which sees Moshe’s youth in a foreign court as a necessary part of his formation as the prime Jewish leader and recipient of the Torah. In order to fully appreciate this position, we will first want to compare Moshe’s early life to the early life of one of his great predecessors.
<b>Moshe’s Exile and Ya’akov’s Exile</b>
There appear to be no two extended narratives in the entire Torah as similar as Ya’akov’s exile to Lavan’s house and Moshe’s exile to Yitro’s house. The following narrative could uncannily describe either story:
After growing up in a privileged and sheltered environment, the hero runs away from a more powerful member of his household, who has made clear his intention to kill him. The hero goes east and ends up by a well, where his future wife faces an obstacle in watering her sheep. He removes the obstacle and waters the sheep for her. Quickly the shepherdess’s father hears about this and takes in the hero, giving him his daughter as a wife and making him a shepherd over his flock. Eventually, after having children, he tells his father-in-law that he wants to return home. God speaks to the hero and he subsequently returns home to become leader of his clan. On the way back, he meets an otherworldly stranger who attacks him but ultimately relents. This is followed by a reunion with his older brother who markedly embraces him, in spite of the fact that the hero’s return spells a threat to the older brother’s position of leadership.
This astounding narrative analogy can be understood on two levels: (1) On the biographical level, we note the similarity between the <i>actual</i> events that transpired and (2) even more important, on the literary level, we note that the text <i>chooses to record</i> many of the parallel events, often in similar fashion. Since any biographical narrative will mention certain events and leave others out, when the Torah includes so many events that happen to both Ya’akov and Moshe, it is attempting to draw our attention to the similarities in the early lives of these two protagonists.
With parallel narratives, either one or both of them are highlighting the similarities in order to create a sort of internal commentary on the other (a literary technique referred to as intertextuality). This begs the question, “What are we supposed to gain by comparing the lives of Moshe and Ya’akov in their respective exiles?” Or to put it another way, why did Moshe’s life not run as closely parallel to the lives of the other patriarchs, Avraham and Yitzchak?
One answer might be that Ya’akov and Moshe serve as the “bookends” of the exile in Egypt. As such, their lives are bound up with the concept of exile in a way that the lives of Avraham and Yitzchak are not. There is certainly much to say about this notion, but it fails to provide a comprehensive explanation to such a pronounced narrative analogy.
A more fundamental approach to the question may lie in the fact that both Ya’akov and Moshe are highly central characters. More specifically, both of them play out their lives at formative stages of the Jewish people’s development. Consequently, it appears that the type of seminal experiences that were common to Moshe and Ya’akov are a type of prerequisite in the life of a formative leader of the Jews.
The outstanding feature of the narrative analogy between Moshe and Ya’akov is their intense personal exile. They are in foreign lands, marry into (ultimately) foreign families, work with property that doesn’t belong to them and live alongside unfamiliar cultural values.
It is true that exile is not unique to these two great figures in the Jewish tradition. Avraham’s very mission is born out of the command to go into exile. He is given the charge to move away from everything he knows in order to become a Jew. Not only that, even when he gets to the Promised Land, he soon feels impelled to move on to a new place of exile. It is also experienced – twice– by David. Yosef is sold into slavery and then taken into exile. Yehudah has his own version of exile when he temporarily leaves his family. The narrative of Yonah takes place almost exclusively in exile. In all of these cases, it is only when he is in exile that the Jewish hero comes into his own. This is hardly a coincidence. The central place of exile in what could be described as Jewish epic literature reveals it as a fundamental component in the heroic Jewish life.
Still, the intensity of exile experienced by Moshe and Ya’akov makes their lives the most intimately and meaningfully connected with this experience. Having identified the key variable in the life of a formative Jewish leader, we now need to analyze its significance.
<b>Exile and Alienation</b>
In the best of circumstances, exile automatically breeds some level of personal alienation. The man in exile initially experiences estrangement from the new host culture to which he is transplanted. The new nation does things in ways that appear strange and unnatural to him. Eventually, however, he begins to feel alienated from his own ancestral culture as well. The strangeness of the new culture starts to dissipate as he experiences their ways on a more regular basis. In fact, depending on the amount and proximity of exposure he or his children have to the new host culture, it is now the “old ways” of his ancestral culture which start to seem unnatural. If familiarity to the new culture facilitates its adoption, so do the benefits frequently bestowed by the host culture onto its new adherents. To give an example from American Jewish history, one of the main causes for Jewish immigrants’ estrangement from Judaism was the tangible rewards earned by those who adapted to American culture. If this was occasionally lost on the first generation of immigrants, it rarely escaped the attention of the second and third generations. As a result of this conditional advancement, many a Jew felt prompted to take a more critical view of the ancestral institutions of Shabbat, kashrut and the like – often impediments to upward mobility – allowing them to more easily justify abandoning these practices.
Even beyond assimilatory behavior, estrangement from a comfortable collective identity brings doubt about one’s very identity. If, for example, one is a Jewish-American, one automatically has a hyphenated identity. A question that such a person will have to face is, “Am I more Jewish or more American?” Moreover, if we are speaking about a person’s cultural identity, can he really be both Jewish <i>and</i> American? Or is culture not an exclusive affair, such that one who attempts to be bicultural ends up being neither really American nor really Jewish? Here too we can look at Jewish-American literature, with its characteristic angst. Through their protagonists, authors of this genre are often grappling with their own evolving bicultural identities and consequent alienation.
Although rare is the man who actually chooses exile, the resultant detachment from a clear and obvious path is not without its benefits. Exile prompts one to greater independence in value formation and, subsequently, in decision making. He has at least two options open to him – to act according to the values of his own ancestral culture or according to the values of his new host culture. Since most people do things because “it’s simply what’s done,” once a person is confronted with the fact that two different groups with which he identifies do things differently, he must make a thoughtful choice about which approach he will adopt. And once the automatic monopoly on what to do is broken, it suggests that other choices are out there as well. A person who needs to think about his course of action will often be led to consider other possibilities that he previously did not realize existed. Simply put, <i>once two choices are available,  nearly  all  choices  become  available.</i>
Indeed, in many respects, this is the situation of modern man. Though there are still many things that we do simply because “that’s what’s done,” there are many areas in which living in a culturally cosmopolitan world has made us aware of our choices (often to the point of paralysis!).
Hence it could be said that Ya’akov’s and Moshe’s exiles made them into proto-modern men. Moreover, if our modern personal state of autonomy is, indeed, largely a result of our lack of cultural roots, then the more uprooted a person, the more autonomous we can expect him to be. In that case, the extreme nature of Ya’akov’s and Moshe’s exiles likely led them to a heightened level of deliberation and thoughtfulness, such as would rarely be found in even the most modern of men.
Having briefly considered the effects of exile on a person, we are now in a better position to understand why Ya’akov and Moshe had to endure such an intense version of this experience. It appears that the Torah is interested in specifically <i>these</i> great leaders’ making their own decisions. For this to happen, the alienation of exile would first need to facilitate transcendence of the values which they might otherwise have automatically shared with their ancestral and/or host cultures.
 It is not that Ya’akov and Moshe would be free of human terms and concepts. One could not expect that from any person. Rather, they would be enriched by the multiplicity of human approaches to which they were exposed and would as a result become unusually thought<i>ful</i> leaders. And, as we will discuss later, it is this thoughtfulness that would bolster the Jewish tradition’s unusual cultural transcendence and accompanying universal appeal.
<b>Moshe the Outsider</b>
Having seen the centrality of exile and loneliness for the formative Jewish leader, we can still ask whether this solitude need be absolute or whether such a leader can still have some attachments nonetheless. The answer to that question may depend on a further distinction that will lead to different answers for Ya’akov and Moshe.
The characteristic existential loneliness that we described in the previous section is felt in the best of exiles. In the case of Ya’akov and Moshe, however, it is compounded by the additional hardship of having to go it alone. If someone has to undergo exile, he would almost always prefer to be accompanied by his family and, if possible, even by his community. Similarly, once in exile this man commonly marries within his own ancestral community so as to ease the effects of alienation, at least within the four walls of his own home. In contrast to this, Ya’akov and Moshe arrive all alone. Having no other realistic choice, they marry cross-culturally and father children who grow up in the culture of their wives. True, it is Ya’akov’s parents who tell him it is better that he marry specifically in exile. Still, this does not make his ordeal much easier. In both cases, it is likely that some of the difficulties that these two great men experience in their marriages stem from the increased complexity engendered when a man in exile enters a cross-cultural marriage.
Be that as it may, Moshe’s loneliness is not exactly the same as Ya’akov’s. Since Ya’akov had certain advantages in this regard, he is able to create bonds with his foreign wives that Moshe is not. One such advantage is that he is able to marry his cousins, even if he didn’t know them until he moved out of his home. Moreover, his exile was to a land that his grandfather Avraham could still refer to as “his land and his birthplace” (Genesis 24:4 and 7) Granted, it is neither Ya’akov’s land nor his birthplace, but neither was it completely foreign. In contrast, when Moshe goes to Midian, it is to an altogether foreign place and foreign family. Yet even after taking all these differences into account, Moshe’s highly unusual relationship with his wife and children needs further analysis.
<b>The Complete Alienation of Moshe</b>
Though there are, in fact, several major differences in the two narratives under discussion, when it comes to the issue of alienation, the interaction presented between Ya’akov and his wives on the one hand and Moshe and his wife, Tzipporah, on the other, takes on far more importance than anything else. Compared with the description of the marriages of Ya’akov and his wives, the story of Moshe and Tzipporah is highly truncated. In fact, Tzipporah’s name appears only three times in the entire Torah. What we do hear about the relationship between Moshe and his spouse leads us to conclude that it was emotionally distant. Even before their final separation alluded to in the book of Numbers 12:1-4, Moshe and Tzipporah had already known a protracted geographical separation (Exodus 18:2), something unknown to any other couple in the entire Torah. This early separation would not only impact on the frequency of their interaction, it would also set its tone.
Indeed, Tzipporah remains largely invisible. To begin with, she is almost entirely silent – we hear her voice only briefly, when she appears to give Moshe some sort of rebuke concerning the circumcision of their son (Exodus 4:26). Otherwise, we don’t hear from her at all.
Related to the paucity of interaction between Moshe and his wife is the parallel lack of connection between Moshe and his children, who at one point (Exodus 18:2 and 6) are appropriately referred to as “the children of Tzipporah.” The Torah tells us almost nothing about Moshe’s children – even less, in fact, than it tells us about Tzipporah. That being the case, we are almost surprised when the Torah uncharacteristically focuses even briefly on the significance of their names (Exodus 18:3-4). This is all in marked contrast to the detailed and colorful description of Ya’akov and his children.
Moreover, the anomaly here is not just terseness; the curious fragmentation also demands our attention. This is seen most clearly in the middle of the journey back to Egypt, when a second, unnamed child suddenly appears (Exodus 4:20). Neither introduced nor explained, his very name is revealed to us only later. In another place, the Torah (Ibid., 18:2) tells us that Tzipporah came back to see Moshe “after he had sent her away” – as if we already knew this. In fact, it comes totally out of the blue: Earlier, the text tells us only that Moshe’s family started on the road back to Egypt with him. From that point onward, his family is no longer mentioned, making us assume that they had been with him the entire time. After all, we don’t hear anything that would make us believe otherwise, and the default of Biblical couples is to stay together.
One could perhaps suggest that the difference between the Torah’s interest in Ya’akov’s family and its lack of interest in Moshe’s is due to a greater need for the mothers’ influence on the formative stages of the Jewish people. And because the children of Ya’akov <i>were</i> the Jewish people at that time, it makes sense that the Torah would focus on them. In contrast, by the time Moshe appeared on the scene, the Jewish people were a large nation, which made Moshe’s wife and two sons were much less central to the further development of Jewish history.
Along these lines, it is possible to argue that Moshe’s children didn’t <i>do</i> anything that would warrant their inclusion in the text. No doubt all of this is true. Still, the Torah’s terse and fragmented presentation of Tzipporah and her children seems too extreme to be completely accounted for by these explanations. Consequently, it would make much more sense to say that the main reason for this extraordinary presentation has more to do with Moshe himself than it has to do with any external factors.
To help us understand Moshe’s unique isolation, we should turn briefly to the relationship between Ya’akov and his wives. Though we see a similar alienation from his general surroundings, his relationship at least with Rachel can hardly be described as distant. Nor should the dichotomy between his isolation from others on the one hand and the emotional closeness with this wife on the other come as a surprise. It may well be the very intensity of his separation that pushes him closer to Rachel. The loneliest of men can find a welcome vestige of existential communion in the relationship with his wife. This allows a person to find the strength to endure isolation from others when such separation is necessary.
But Moshe was destined for a different fate. It appears that the one who would receive the Torah could not be entirely “human.” The demanded level of uninterrupted spirituality would require someone as removed from the human condition as possible. Close involvement with someone else, no matter how spiritually uplifting, would necessarily come at the expense of some of his direct involvement with God. The same would be true of Moshe’s role as a father. Being involved with his children would also have come at the cost of the intensity of his relationship with God.
Indeed, the angels’ objection to Moshe’s receiving the Torah is couched in the phrase that he was “born of a woman” (Shabbat 88b). Their complaint could be understood as pointing to Moshe’s intrinsic inability to escape his human bias. We can choose to have no intimate human bonds – except for the bond with the person who bore us. For the angels, that unavoidable human bond disqualified Moshe from being the bearer of the superhuman document called the Torah. This observation notwithstanding, Moshe does separate himself from others as much as is <i>humanly</i> possible.
This is not true of Ya’akov, who actually spends a great deal of energy on family matters. Inasmuch as Ya’akov represents the earlier stage of proto-nation building, his alienation need not be as complete as Moshe’s, as it is the latter who builds the true foundations of the Jewish people. In this sense, Ya’akov is in point of fact an earlier, yet necessarily incomplete, prototype of Moshe. He sets up the mode of behavior in order for it to be perfected by Moshe later on. When it was time for Moshe to take on his role, however, his alienation would need to be total. Even the last stronghold of human bonding and communion that we find in marriage would have been counterproductive for his particular mission. In this sense, Moshe can be described as the most, and maybe the only truly, lonely man of faith. But what type of faith is generated by this type of complete alienation from others?
<b>Moshe the Universal Leader</b>
We know that the human bonds to community and family are a great blessing. But as with anything else, it is a blessing that comes at a cost. On the one hand, family and community are just about essential to the creation of identity and, ultimately, of meaning. But these same bonds of loyalty that allow us to be more receptive and helpful to our own group are also what prevent us from being more understanding of those outside our circle. We all understand events from the perspective of a specific community; this is the way we make sense of our experiences. In turn, this prevents us from seeing events in the same way as they are seen by others. It is humanly impossible to give complete and total support to two competing narratives of the same story.
Moshe’s alienation from his wife, his family and his nation allowed him to transcend the normal boundaries that separate us from those outside these circles. He <i>could</i> not remain tied to his family. Otherwise, there would always be an in-group and a resultant out-group. This is what made Moshe into a universal leader – he could identify with other groups as easily as he could identify with his family; with non-Jews as easily as with Jews. As a result, when considering Moshe, other nations would not perceive an unfriendly bias that would disqualify him from their allegiance.
The rabbinic tradition that Moshe insisted on bringing the group of foreigners known as <i>eiruv rav</i> (the mixed multitude) out of Egypt along with the native-born Jews (Shemot Rabbah 42:6) serves to strengthen our contention. Moreover, it leads to the conclusion that Moshe’s experience with other cultures does not end when he comes back “home” to his own people. Moshe remains a leader of mankind even when he becomes the leader of the Jews.
Moshe’s stance may well be grounded in the nature of the Torah itself: While sometimes overlooked, the Jewish understanding of revelation is far from being an exclusively Jewish affair. The Torah describes the Jews as a nation of priests, meaning that they have a responsibility to spread the Torah’s moral and religious principles beyond the Jewish people. How they are to do that is beyond the scope of the current discussion, but it is clear that this is a major goal of the Jewish people. To put it differently, even as the Torah’s specific laws are meant for the Jews, its ethical and spiritual vision is intended for all of mankind. Thus, the Torah has an uncommon dual identity, addressing a specific national culture on the one hand yet implicitly speaking to all who are created in the image of God on the other.
As the central figure and communicator of this dual doctrine, Moshe needed a dual identity: to be a representative of the Jewish people and still also be a true citizen of the world. Only in this way would Moshe be able to receive the Torah in both of its dimensions. As such, the faith of Moshe is the faith of man as man as well as that of man as Jew.
<b>Moshe the Jew</b>
Moshe’s alienation did not only benefit the world at large, it also brought significant direct benefits for the Jewish people as well. Moshe was in charge of leading the Jews through the greatest revolution in history – a revolution that would require them to address their faults in as complete a fashion as possible. Such leadership could only come from someone who saw the Jews objectively – who could recognize their weaknesses unapologetically. As mentioned earlier, it is a natural tendency for a person to assume the values of his culture, even when these values are not ideal. From this point of view, there was a need for the Jews to be led by an “outsider.”
At the same time, being purely objective is not what was desired of Moshe either. Cold objectivity makes it more difficult to feel the nation’s suffering – and easier to say that <i>they</i> deserve these punishments. Although Moshe’s foreign objectivity benefited the Jewish people, he could not be their leader if he did not empathize with their affliction. So even though Moshe had to be raised by Egyptians, his earliest childhood had to be among Jews. He had to be emotionally connected from the crib. This early connection was needed to connect an ultimately universal Torah with the specific nation that was destined to fulfill it. Indeed, as a leader, Moshe needed to have both of these qualifications – objective universal intellect and subjective Jewish emotion.
<b>Exile and the Jews</b>
Returning to Moshe’s universal role, it is not only the Torah of Moshe that has a universal side to it, it appears that the Jewish people itself has a universal side as well. More than any other nation, the Jews are called upon to perform a transnational function.
Hence, it could well be that the cultural alienation experienced most powerfully by our formative leaders is something that the Jewish people would need to experience on a national level as well. As Moshe would have to be a universal man, the Jews too would have to be a universal nation. From this perspective, it should come as no surprise that the Jewish people has known more years of exile than of statehood.
The Jews’ relationship to exile is based not only on its being the more frequent situation in which they have found themselves. Exile is also a key element in the very foundation of the Jewish people. The Torah makes a point of telling us that Avraham was not born or raised in Israel (Genesis 11:26-31). Just as he was born outside his homeland, the Jewish nation too would have to be “born” outside their homeland (i.e., in Egypt). This means that the Jew’s relationship to his land is not the same as that of other nations. He belongs in it but he also belongs out of it.
And whether it was God’s original intention or not, the so-called “wandering Jew” is an almost ubiquitous feature of our world. The Jews are a nation that maintains its own identity in exile even as it assumes much of the cultural trappings of its hosts. Indeed, Jews don’t only resemble their gentile neighbors, they often take a leading role in their societies. A Jew is both a Jew and a universal man. This unique situation is perhaps the result of being the spokesperson for a document that is meant as much for universal consumption as it is for Jewish consumption.
Beyond Avraham’s foreshadowing our identity as strangers, we also see that this very first Jew created a tone of concern for others outside his immediate sphere. He did this by praying for wicked neighboring communities, taking care of wandering strangers and rebuking leaders who did not live up to their moral calling. By embedding these actions into its first stories, the Torah forever binds the Jew to all those with whom he comes into contact. From these beginnings, the Torah develops this theme more fully in the uniquely transcendent personality of Moshe.
◆	◆	◆<br><br> The Jew is called to emulate Moshe and somehow try to hear the national narratives of others – to be above his own culture while he lives within it. In the post-nationalist world of today, the Jewish take on nationalism is extremely useful. For in truth, contemporary post-nationalism is only one side of today’s equation. Although increasingly permeable national borders result in their taking on less importance, nationalism is still not entirely a thing of the past. Nor is it likely (or even desirable) that it will completely disappear in the foreseeable future. The problem raised by the vestiges of nationalism in an increasingly multicultural global community is how to simultaneously cling to the meaning given by one’s own particular identity and still be able to work with others who don’t share it. Hence, the unique Jewish model just explained could make a singular contribution. Properly understood, Jewish duality represents the notion of a people comfortable with its own tradition yet sufficiently alienated from it to listen to competing narratives. Such a paradigm allows for the grounding influence of one’s own culture while leaving room for other visions of the good.
<b>Alienation from Above</b>
If we have begun to understand the reasons for Moshe’s exile, we have certainly not exhausted the topic. It may prove useful to revisit the fact that Moshe (as well as Ya’akov) spent most of his days in exile as a shepherd. The motif of a young Jewish leader as a shepherd or shepherdess is actually found in several places. The leading of sheep is meant to prepare and foreshadow a future leader’s responsibility for his “flock,” the Jewish people (Abarvanel on Exodus 3:1). Nonetheless, when we look at Moshe and Ya’akov, here too we see that they deviate somewhat from the standard version of this motif.
In the standard shepherd scenario, the sheep are obviously analogous to the Jewish people. More subtle is the further analogy created by the fact that the shepherd-leader is usually tending his or her <i>father’s</i> flock. The father, of course, represents God. Thus, the full imagery is of the Jewish people as God’s flock, which He entrusts to faithful caretakers. If we look more carefully, an ordinary shepherd has two primary responsibilities – to protect his sheep from predators and to make sure that they find food to eat and water to drink. This is exactly the two main responsibilities of the Jewish leader: to protect them from their enemies and to provide them with sustenance, both physical and spiritual.
In the cases of Moshe and Ya’akov, the analogy is more nuanced. While the master still represents God and the sheep continue to represent the Jewish people, the relationship of shepherd to both flock and master is different from the classical case where the leader tends his father’s sheep. Ya’akov and Moshe were watching sheep that did not belong to them. They were essentially tending a <i>foreign flock</i> for a <i>foreign master</i>.
Hence, when Ya’akov and Moshe would become the shepherds of the Jewish people, they would not relate to the sheep as their own, and more important, they would not relate to the owner of the sheep as their Father. If we may at first doubt such a conclusion, when we look at the relationship of these two great men with the Jewish people and with God, we truly see that there is a greater degree of separation than we might expect.
For example, when Moshe sees the negative effect his mission is having on the Jewish people, he laments to God about the state of “this people” and “Your people,” but not “<i>my</i> people” (Exodus 5:22-23). Moreover, God’s possibly rhetorical suggestion to Moshe that He would destroy the Jewish people and create a new nation from Moshe only adds to the notion that Moshe represents a shepherd who is not completely identified with his flock. Moshe’s unique stance is further seen from his many arguments with both the Jewish people and with God, acting once on this side and once on the other, as we would expect from an independent third party.
Granted, this distinction of the shepherd as separate from God and from the Jewish people is less clear when it comes to Ya’akov. Though Ya’akov is not as passive as his father Yitzchak, neither does he appear to be as independent as his grandfather Avraham. However, his wrestling with what tradition describes as an angel (Bereishit Rabbah 77:3) is unprecedented and certainly bespeaks independence – far beyond the autonomy typified by the arguments that Avraham had with God. Since an angel is an agent of God, standing up against it is a type of insubordination, if apparently an acceptable one. From this incident alone it would seem that Ya’akov is not as pliant as we might otherwise think. A further indication of his independent attitude is his removal of the God-given birthright from Reuven. A careful reading of the Ya’akov narrative shows us a determined patriarch who, if not as dramatic as Moshe, is still capable of disagreeing with his Master as well as with his flock.
In short, the position of Ya’akov and Moshe toward their flock is that of a manager whose job it is to detachedly determine both the master’s and the sheep’s best interests, not necessarily his own. His interests and theirs are not always identical, as he is not self-employed or working for blood relatives. For those who are, financial security is completely tied to the outcome of their work, for it is their own property that they aim to preserve and increase.
The relationship of a manager to both the master and the flock is obviously more removed and less emotional than that of a shepherd toward his or his own father’s flock. In this regard, it is sometimes easier to manage someone else’s money than one’s own, since the emotional concerns that can lead to bad business decisions are avoided. A manager is typically less afraid to take a calculated risk since he doesn’t identify with the possible loss as intensely as if it were his own money.
Yet the detachment of Ya’akov and Moshe from the Master and His flock may well have importance beyond its contribution to their effectiveness. As mentioned, an employee formulates his interests separately from his employer. Even when the employer was God, the Torah wants us to note the autonomy of the managers. In this context, we should remember the highly symbolic wrestling of Ya’akov (Genesis 32:25-31) and note that a similarly symbolic scene is reenacted on some level when Moshe and his wife meet their otherworldly assailant on their way to Egypt (Exodus 34:28).
In thinking about a religious leader – and certainly a prophet – we would naturally assume that he needs to draw himself as close to God as possible. In this regard, it is surprising to see that Moshe assumes a certain distance from God. Exactly because it is surprising, it is also instructive.
It is axiomatic that God wants man to obey Him and to elect to do His will. But He also wants a genuine partnership. That is to say, He wants a man to be a free agent who comes to agree with God neither from meek submission nor from cultural tradition. Precisely because both Moshe and Ya’akov would become so close to God, He had to make sure that they would perceive God’s interests (as well as those of the Jewish people) separately from their own. This is especially true concerning Moshe: the man who would become God’s humble servant is most clearly in danger of losing his own independent perspective. Moshe’s separation from his wife and temporary abstinence from food and drink (Exodus 4:24-26) only underscore the danger of his losing his humanity – i.e., that which makes him a genuine partner of God.
In the case of Moshe, it was necessary for the man who would receive and first teach the Torah to lay the groundwork for the partnership between man and God that Jews would subsequently call <i>Talmud Torah</i>. This is maybe best summarized through the classic rabbinic dictum, <i>“lo beshamayim hee”</i> (the Torah is not in Heaven). Via this principle, the Jewish people has enshrined the idea that God wants man – within certain parameters – to decide for himself the best way to understand the Torah.
◆	◆	◆<br><br> In the final analysis, the Jewish tradition’s unusual involvement with exile and alienation is precisely that which makes it particularly Jewish. Ironically, those very elements that we identify as “Jewish” also give Judaism its relevance to mankind as a whole. Without putting the importance of nation completely aside, the Torah teaches all men to recognize the centrality of universal human values. Connectedly, the narratives we have studied also illustrate God’s insistence that man be human and not superhuman – to accept the legitimacy of his own emotions, needs and aspirations in order to formulate that which is incumbent upon him to request from his Almighty Partner.
Perhaps the following midrash (Shemot Rabbah 42:6) most succinctly illustrates how Moshe combined a universalist ethic with human autonomy:<br><br> [The mixed multitude is called Moshe’s] people. Moshe said, “Master of the world, what is the reason that they are my people?” God said to him, “They are your people because when they were still in Egypt . . . I told you not to mix them in with the [native-born] Jews and <i>since you were humble and righteous</i> you told me, One should always take penitents. And since I knew what they would do I said no, but <i>I [still] did as you wanted.</i>”
 After the mixed multitude is identified as the group who worshiped the golden calf, Moshe is castigated for his lack of proper judgment. Still, the midrash approves of Moshe’s motivation to the point that it tells us that God accepted his argument. In doing so, the midrash reiterates the monumental significance of his stance – a stance born of exile and alienation.
◆	◆	◆ <br><br> The return of Jewish statehood has brought many challenges with it. Even as the opportunities created are myriad, one of its greatest spiritual challenges is the resultant effacement of our sense of exile. As we see from our great formative leaders, this is part of our national legacy and thus its loss is not completely positive – at least, not unless we can continue to dip into the consciousness of our historical alienation and transculturalism and make it a cardinal feature of the still-new Jewish state.
In this context, it is interesting to speculate that the development of the State of Israel has roughly coincided with another phenomenon that could help to remedy the isolationist trends that come naturally with statehood. The so-called <i>ba’al teshuva</i> community (returnees to traditional Judaism), from which I draw my own roots and with which I still have much contact, is the segment of committed Jewry that grew up in the “Egyptian court.” This means that they have the ability to be more objective about the Jewish people and constructively point out its weaknesses. By and large, this is not what we see. Instead, the more objective viewpoint of the <i>ba’al teshuva</i> is often criticized as foreign, causing most returnees to question their own frequently legitimate perspective and to bow to the pressures of traditional society.
I remember discussing a certain series of children’s books with a kindergarten teacher working for me at an Israeli school a few years back. I told her that I did not feel the books were appropriate, as all the non-Jewish characters were caricatured as stupid and anti-semitic. She responded by saying that she did not understand what I meant and that I had a somewhat “goyish” view of things. My thought was that my point of view was in fact much more “Jewish” than hers – I wonder if Moshe’s leadership was also castigated for being “goyish”?
When I was criticized by my employee, I had two advantages that most <i>ba’alei teshuva</i> do not have. First, I was her supervisor and, “goyish” or not, I was the one who made the final decision. Secondly, I had pursued my Torah studies to the point where I could feel self-confident in my own understanding of Jewish tradition.
Be that as it may, all <i>ba’alei teshuva</i> need to realize that veteran religious Jews are not always correct in their opinions, and base much more than they might think on “this is simply how things are done.” Much of the <i>ba’al teshuva</i>’s initial dissatisfaction with his new world comes from a greater objectivity. And just as objectivity was needed in the time of Moshe to help the Jews improve themselves, so too is it needed today if the Jews are to truly improve themselves. Coming to this realization is not just good for the <i>ba’al teshuva</i>, it is, more important, good for the Jewish people as a whole.



Bamidbar Chapter 6<b>The Daughters of Tzelofchad and the Elders of Menashe –Identity, Interests, and Differentiation</b>
The first two chapters of <i>Redeeming Relevance in the Book of Genesis</i> discussed the Bible’s interest in teaching us about real-life trade-offs. We already know from our own lives that we truly cannot “have our cake and eat it too.” And because we would prefer to ignore this truth, the Torah makes a point of frequently repeating the notion that we must make choices about what is the most valuable – or alternatively, the least undesirable – course of action. This means that biblical characters rarely live “happily ever after.” They make difficult choices and have to live with the resultant consequences. Yet, had it been otherwise, the Bible would have been a book of fairy tales that would not have had the tremendous transformative and inspirational power that it has had for so much of human history.
In the book of <i>Bemidbar</i>, the theme of trade-offs is examined again with the petition of the five daughters of Tzelofchad from the tribe of Menashe and the subsequent counter-petition of that tribe’s elders. These fatherless, brotherless sisters come out of nowhere, questioning an assumed status quo that their late father’s portion in the Land of Israel will go to the male next of kin. They are successful in their petition, and God reveals that the assumption was actually faulty and that it is, truly, daughters who are next in line in such a situation. Several chapters later, the tribal leaders from Menashe challenge the new status quo with their own concern: that if these women marry men from another tribe, their birth tribe will end up losing part of its inheritance. They too are successful, and the women appear to be commanded to marry only within their tribe. But whether this is an actual commandment or not, the story goes on to tell us that the daughters of Tzelofchad do indeed follow God’s preference and marry within their own tribe.
Although it ends with everybody seemingly getting what he or she wanted, the narrative highlights the tension that is always created by conflicting needs, which are well nigh impossible to meet to everyone’s satisfaction. A man succeeded by daughters and no sons creates a situation wherein tribal interests are in conflict with familial and personal ones. In a make-believe world of perfection both interests would be completely satisfied, but in the real and finite world within which the Bible positions itself there is a bona fide conflict that will require compromise from at least one of the sides. For the daughters of Tzelofchad, their petition to keep their father’s territorial inheritance within his nuclear family results in their either having to limit their choice of mate to members of the tribe of Menashe, or for the tribe to lose part of its allotment to the tribes of the men they marry. (The third choice is for the sisters to keep the land in their own name and within their birth tribe. This, however, was neither practical nor even culturally conceivable, and hence is not treated as a live option.)
That the original decision regarding the sisters’ petition is challenged by the tribal elders makes the conflict even more obvious, as they would not have taken that step had they not felt the greater tribal interests threatened. Once their own petition is accepted and the sisters’ choice of spouse becomes limited, it is the sisters’ interests that have now been compromised. We will soon see that this tilt toward tribal interests is eventually reversed back in favor of the original petitioners, but our point right now is not who has the upper hand but the fact that there is no way for both groups to be completely happy here.
<b>A Split Decision</b>
Though the trade-off presented above is similar to many others in the Torah, the resolution of the conflict is not. Unlike almost all of the Torah’s decisions on conflicts of interest, which are meant to be lasting and permanent, here the Torah (at least according to its legal, rabbinic interpretation - Bava Batra 120a) surprises us by issuing a temporary decision: Whereas tribal interests needed to take precedence in the generation that entered the Land of Israel, and thus daughters from this generation would have to marry from within their own tribe, this law would be limited to that generation only. In other words, in the future, the personal interests of women inheriting their fathers’ land would trump the broader, tribal interests. As opposed to almost everywhere else in the Torah, here we have a split decision, favoring one group in one set of circumstances and the other in a differing set of circumstances.
Now that we have seen that tribal interests outweigh those of the daughters of Tzelofchad only temporarily, i.e., when the land is first divided, we must seek to understand why. To do this we will enlist the help of Ramban, who tells us, “More strictness was observed during the time of the division [of the Land of Israel] so that the tribes’ inheritances would not become mixed up, since afterward the inheritances were already known and there was no need to maintain them with such rigidity” (Ramban on Numbers 36:7). In other words, since the sisters’ desire to marry the men of their choice was a truly vital interest, it could be displaced only by tribal concerns of the first order such as those that existed in the first generation to enter the Land of Israel. That being said, further analysis is required to understand why the prohibition against transferring land out of a tribe in the first generation but not in subsequent ones constitutes such first-order interests.
The mixing up of tribal land should presumably still be an issue even after the first generation, if admittedly somewhat less so. But whether in the first generation or later, we are dealing with a marginal phenomenon that would always only slightly compromise tribal integrity. To take the case of Tzelofchad, were his five daughters all to marry men from the tribe of Binyamin, there would be a small bloc of Binyaminite territory in the middle of Menashe’s tribal land. Were two more nearby families to marry Binyaminites under similar circumstances, one would quickly have a sort of “Chinatown,” or better, Binyamintown, situation on Menashe’s tribal land. Again, this is not likely to destroy the tribe’s social fabric, nor is it generally a question of exposure to negative influences; rather we are dealing with a slight dilution of tribal character. Yet, to the extent that the transfer of tribal land is an issue, it should always be seen as an issue. But why is the dilution really an issue at all?
Although exposure to differing cultural influences can sometimes be positive, we have already seen the Torah’s strong interest in creating distinct tribal entities. Each tribe has its own unique contribution to make, and that contribution would be compromised by any weakening of tribal identity. Beyond the Torah’s interest in federalism, which would thrive only when there are strong distinctions between the tribes, the Torah also foresaw that only if each tribe is able to develop its own particular identity would the Jews reach their maximum potential. Thus, while other interests may sometimes take precedence, the Torah wanted the tribal entities to reinforce themselves robustly.
The Torah displays an interest in tribal differentiation throughout the five books, but there is a difference between foreign influences on an identity that is already formed and on one that is not yet formed. Only after tribal identity has gelled will it have the resilience to fend off outside influences. A strong argument can be made that the tribal identity the Torah pushes so strongly in the book of <i>Bemidbar</i>, meaning in the nearly forty years before the Jews entered the Land of Israel, would not become fully realized until each tribe created a distinct territorial enclave for itself. And in order for these territories and thus tribal integrity to be taken seriously, each identity-information required pristine territorial embodiment in the generation that settled the land. Once that transpired, a more solid base of identity formation had taken place. It is clear that processes such as these never really end and that identity is always evolving; what was set in motion in one generation would continue indefinitely. Nevertheless, it is critical to establish a cutoff point at which identity is strong enough to allow the interplay of other variables. Apparently, for the Torah this happens after the division of the land into its tribal components. Before we move on, we should note that the desert was a near-perfect laboratory setting for the rigid tribal symmetry that defined the Jewish camp and allowed for tribal identity to gel. Whatever happened in the desert, and especially in the book of <i>Bemidbar</i>, should be seen as an ideal staging ground for the type of nation-building that would need to reach a certain stability once the journey would be finished. Empty and almost featureless, the desert allows for a rarified division, whereas the highly diverse Land of Israel cannot. Indeed, any inhabitable land is not a parcel that can be divided in the same way that the desert camp formation was.
In view of the above, it becomes even clearer that the desert tribal model was suited to a limited period in Jewish history, and not for practical implementation once the Jews would settle the Promised Land. Hence, that model was used only until the end of the generation that entered the Land of Israel, when there would still be no room for the transfer of land from one tribe to another. By the next generation, a new mode of existence would come into play that would allow for more flexibility, which would include, among other things, such transfers of land.
◆	◆	◆<br><br> Now that we have a better understanding of the rationale for the Torah’s compromise between competing interests, we are in a better position to understand the broader implications of its split decision. Ultimately, it teaches us that the Torah sees both personal and group interests as valid and legitimate. Similarly – but perhaps even more important – we learn that there is no automatic prioritization of the group over the individual, or vice-versa. The Torah’s bottom line is that our identities are complex. Therefore, drawing the lines as to which part of our identities takes precedence in any given situation is a difficult and nuanced matter to which there is no universal answer. This desert truth will always be basic to the human condition.
<b>Text and Context</b>
The general contours of the stories of Tzelofchad’s daughters and their tribal elders follow a not uncommon pattern (other examples of which we will soon mention), wherein Moshe is asked to rule on an issue to which he doesn’t know the correct halacha, consequently seeking a Divine answer – which ends up being in agreement with the petitioners’ preference. Yet there are some interesting idiosyncrasies in the parallel narratives of the daughters of Tzelofchad and their tribal elders. The first is that the two stories are separated by several chapters, even though they are conceptually one unit and likely to have followed quickly one after the other. This creates a clear division between the two stories. Yet the other idiosyncrasy of note, the clearly parallel language of the two stories, has the opposite effect of reinforcing the thematic connection of the two stories.
Much of what drives our two narratives can be better understood if we take stock of the larger context, i.e., that they come as part of a series of challenges given to Moshe by other members of the camp. The first such story and the model for subsequent challenges of this type comes from an anonymous group of Jews who, like the daughters of Tzelofchad, are placed in a disadvantaged situation by laws; in this case, concerning coming into contact with the dead. Like the five sisters, these men challenge an assumed status quo they believed to be unjust. Since this group had taken care of burying the dead, they were disqualified from taking part in a central and fundamental Jewish observance, the eating of the Passover sacrifice. As a result, they question why they should be excluded from being “among the Jewish people” (Numbers 9:7), and imply that by not participating in this universal Jewish rite they would be effectively disenfranchised. Their argument could be buttressed by the fact that their impurity was not only not their fault, it was the result of performing a commandment as well as an act of kindness. The group thus challenges Moshe by asking a rhetorical question meant to make their point, after which he takes their question to God. The result is the creation of Pesach Sheini (second Passover), vindicating these men and allowing those unable to participate in the Passover sacrifice at its given time to do so a month later.
While the men connected with this narrative end up being right, and indeed praiseworthy for their desire to be included in the Jewish people and its Torah, it is important to note the unprecedented nature of their appeal. On the face of it, their challenge could appear downright rude: If God had wanted them to eat from the Passover offering, He certainly could have made provision for it, either by originally informing Moshe of the second chance they would ultimately be given via Pesach Sheini or in some other way. What gave these men the sense that the status quo was open to question?
Given the temerity required for such a challenge, it is likely that the petition wasn’t directed at God but rather at Moshe. What these men were challenging, then, wasn’t God’s justice but rather Moshe’s understanding of God’s Torah on this point. The logic was that since God’s law is perfect, the only problem could be in its transmission. Yet challenging Moshe was not a simple endeavor either. If Moshe wasn’t a reliable conduit of God’s will, who was?
Yet, even had the petitioners’ question been for God, their behavior would not have been unprecedented. We encounter a similar situation with Avraham when he argues in defense of Sodom (Genesis 18:23-33). Furthermore, the Jews had already seen Moshe defend them to God on more than one occasion. New here is that neither a leader nor a prophet but men of the people are presenting the challenge, and this makes all the difference in the world. It’s one thing for men of great stature to make such challenges, but another thing entirely for simple men to do so. Not everyone has the wisdom to know when it is in place to argue with the Master of the Universe.
What is true about challenging God is also true about challenging Moshe, but obviously on a lower level. It is not by coincidence that the Torah would later be called <i>Torat Moshe</i>, the Torah of Moshe. At the end of the day, no matter who was the target of their challenge, the men who buried the dead went out on a limb in a very big way. The fact that they went through with their claim shows that they must have been quite convinced of its legitimacy, in spite of their lowly position vis-à-vis their supreme leader. It must have been clear to them that if one stands to be hurt by a problematic status quo, there is room for sincerely questioning it. However, this might not be obvious to those who read the story. Thus, the Torah emphasizes this point by following it up with other successful challenges.
The related stories that follow this one are important links in this chain of connected narratives. This is because each of the stories would require further refinement. For example, although the men of Pesach Sheini charted important new territory, by doing so they also opened a Pandora’s Box. Their success would certainly invite imitation and would bring less valiant challenges in its wake. Two prominent cases are the rebellion of Korach and his group, and Reuven and Gad’s request. Hence, we see the need for other appropriate challenges that will serve to refine and refine again the initiative taken by the men who buried the dead. Taken as a whole, these episodes together create guidelines for the Torah’s view on appropriate and inappropriate petition of religious authority.
<b>The Pesach Sheini Paradigm</b>
The differences between the various challenges are reflected in the initial verbs used in each episode. In all three of the appropriate requests (the men who came into contact with human corpses - Numbers 9:6, the daughters of Tzelofchad - 27:1, and the elders of Menashe 36:1), we are told that they approached (<i>vayikrevu</i>) the authorities, whereas Korach’s group rose up (<i>vayakumu</i>) before them (Ibid., 16:2), and Gad and Reuven simply came (<i>vayavo’u</i>) before them (Ibid., 32:2).
Yet while the word “approached” is used in too many other contexts to come to any definitive understanding, the fact that it is <i>not</i> used in the two problematic stories of Korach’s rebellion and Reuven and Gad’s request is noteworthy. Even without this, we can plainly see that in the cases where petitioners <i>approach</i> Moshe they don’t display the same aggressiveness as those in other cases where other, stronger language is used. In the “approach” cases the petitioners make their claim and await an answer, presumably reconciled to whatever it may be. In contrast, Korach’s group is insistent from the get-go; the questioning of authority itself their primary goal, with any specific request being secondary. Though not as extreme, Reuven and Gad’s request also lacks the appropriate deference as they, apparently casually, <i>come</i> in front of the authorities. The problematic nature of their case is reinforced in both their loquaciousness and their inability to take no for an answer, which we will take up more fully in the next chapter.
Now that we have discussed these five petition narratives in the book of <i>Bemidbar</i>, we can see that their order is quite instructive. The Pesach Sheini story, along with that of Tzelofchad’s daughters and Menashe’s tribal leaders, sandwich the most objectionable counter-stories of the Korach rebellion and Gad and Reuven. The first narrative in this cycle is that of the men who buried the dead. This is followed by the story of Korach and his assembly. Like the sisters, the tribal elders and the men of Pesach Sheini, Korach and his followers challenge Moshe, basing their rhetorical question on what they perceive as injustice. Yet, unlike the other groups, theirs is not a request that Moshe should take their query to God as much as a request that Moshe relinquish authority altogether. In other words, they take the lesson of Pesach Sheini and corrupt it. Once they see that the rules are open to change in response to popular critique, they challenge the fundamentals of the system altogether.
The Korach narrative is then followed by the daughters of Tzelofchad, who once again remind us of the correct way of doing things. Their petition is somewhat more detailed than what we saw with the men who buried the dead, the latter of whose lack of detail causes Korach and his followers to get the wrong idea and thus distort it. The sisters’ narrative reminds us of the parameters of appropriate challenge and shows us that not everything is open to question. Without solid, systemic foundations, anarchy would ensue. And although this seems to be exactly what Korach is after, it can’t be seen as a realistic alternative to Mosaic Law for a people that clearly still needs guidance. Instead of a total challenge like Korach’s, the daughters of Tzelofchad present a limited and specific request. Similar to the men who buried the dead as well as the tribal elders, they are only seeking parity with their peers. They emphasize this by saying that the status quo will lead to their <i>giraon</i> (lessening). In contrast, Korach finally seeks either to bring down Moshe and/or the priests, or to elevate himself and his followers <i>above</i> the rest of the community. What the daughters of Tzelofchad add to the Pesach Sheini paradigm that had not been presented by the first petitioners is their explanation as to why their status should not be less than that of their peers, i.e., because their father was not part of Korach’s group. Additionally, Tzelofchad’s daughters were very clear about the reasons for their request, while Korach’s group was not. And as the latter’s narrative unfolds, it becomes clear that his stated goal is not in line with his unstated ambitions.
However, although the subsequent refinement of the paradigm by the daughters of Tzelofchad provides a return to this first petition story, it paradoxically also provides more opportunity for the petitioners to err. While the sisters present more background to their claim, they also present it (Numbers 27:4) as a demand (<i>“Tena lanu . . .”</i>); they were so certain of its veracity that they felt it to be their right. About this they were apparently correct, since God validates not only their claim but even their speech (Ibid., verse 7). Yet the sisters’ clarity of vision is not the lot of most people, and perhaps that is why others stumble shortly thereafter.
Based on what we have discussed up until now, had the Torah ended with the story of Tzelofchad’s daughters, we could be left with the wrong impression. Because their claim was only a partial model for appropriate challenge of authority, it takes the next story, that of Gad and Reuven, to determine what can and cannot be gleaned from the sisters’ narrative. Ultimately, like Korach’s, Gad and Reuven’s request represents a misunderstanding of the Pesach Sheini paradigm.
At this point, the principle of appropriate challenge has now been some-what obfuscated by the sisters’ detailed and novel explanation to back up their petition, as well as by their claim to land. Under the impression that one of the keys to getting what they want is to elaborate on their claim, the tribal leaders of Gad and Reuven speak a great deal. In this they were partially correct, but they substituted clarity of information, which was important, for long-windedness, which was not. They also learn from the sisters that Moshe will recognize a Jewish group’s right to territory if it feels entitled to it. After all, since Moshe acceded to the request of five women who felt a need for a portion of their tribal land, it stood to reason that the desire of two entire tribes for a specific piece of land would be even more legitimate.
Unfortunately, Gad and Reuven’s petition is fundamentally flawed, so much so that Moshe is shocked by it. As discussed in the previous chapter, the audacity of Gad and Reuven is not in confronting authority, it is in asking for something clearly against God’s will.
As a result, the Torah must present a last corrective in order to leave us with the authoritative model for how a challenge must take place. Accordingly, the last story, that of Menashe’s tribal elders, presents the final word on this topic. Unlike the petitioners in the first three narratives, but like Gad and Reuven, the elders of Menashe do not pose a rhetorical question. Gad and Reuven articulated their claim in a neutral way (length of speech and territorial claims) based on a positive source (the daughters of Tzelofchad); the elders of Menashe incorporated a positive form of speech (making their claim as a request and not a demand) from a negative source (Gad and Reuven). As in the Gad and Reuven narrative, they simply present the facts and allow Moshe to reach his own conclusion (Numbers 36:2-4). This goes one step further than the daughters of Tzelofchad, and shows greater respect for authority. As the rabbis prevent a child from directly challenging his parents due to the respect he owes them (Kiddushin 32a), so too respect for authority should preclude us from demanding what we think is our due. To do otherwise is to flaunt our belief that we have greater insight than those in the position of authority.
Via the elders of Menashe we learn that respectful speech is not enough. Although the men of Gad and Reuven also spoke respectfully to Moshe, his silence forced them into the situation where they had to either drop their claim or ask him directly for what they wanted. To present the facts as they did, namely that they had much livestock and that the lands east of the Jordan were good pastureland, and to think that Moshe didn’t understand the desire behind it, would be a great insult to the latter. Since the simplest reader is aware of what Gad and Reuven want, it isn’t likely that the two tribes believed Moshe didn’t understand. And since Moshe didn’t respond to their not-so- veiled request, it should have been equally clear to them that the answer was no. When they continue to ask for what Moshe has refused with his silence, they are ultimately challenging his authority. They already knew that if someone brought up a good idea, Moshe would accept it. We see this early on in his implementation of Yitro’s advice to appoint judges, as well as in the narratives of Pesach Sheini, the daughters of Tzelofchad, and, possibly later on, the elders of Menashe.
Gad and Reuven’s insubordination is made even clearer when Moshe answers their more explicit petition in the negative, and yet, they continue to negotiate an alternative (Numbers 32:16-19). Moshe’s ultimate agreement to their new proposal should not be read as a sign that their tenaciousness paid off. Rather, it should be seen in the same light as God’s ultimate agreement to Bil’am’s continuous petition that he be allowed to go to Moav (Ibid., 22:21); it is less a sign of capitulation than a decision to allow a person to bear the consequences of his inappropriate desires. Thus, what begins as a show of respect when Gad and Reuven avoid asking Moshe anything directly, ends up as great disrespect when they are not prepared to accept even an unequivocal response that they don’t like. In this, they are not so different from Korach’s group who, after the law of Pesach Sheini is enacted, no longer see Moshe as the unequivocal leader.
Beyond incorporating proper respect, the elders of Menashe also add the final ingredient to the paradigm: recognition of the nature of <i>Torat Moshe</i>. The manner in which they make their claim attests to their acknowledgment that “my master was commanded by God” (Numbers 36:2). Any subsequent petition within the Jewish people must display awareness of this important fact.
Now looking back at the five narratives we have discussed, we see a clear pattern which distills an important but dangerous idea about Jewish governance, namely that there is room – perhaps even a need – for the respectful airing of grievances. The order in which the book of <i>Bemidbar</i> puts the narratives is critical to establishing the parameters of what we have referred to as the Pesach Sheini paradigm. Hence, even if the story of Gad and Reuven took place chronologically after the story of Menashe’s elders, as some commentaries hold, it was important that the narratives were presented in the order that we find in the Torah. Moreover, this final narrative of the elders of Menashe dramatically establishes closure to the topic.
◆	◆	◆<br><br> Before continuing, we should briefly take stock of the important applications of the above discussion. We have seen that the Torah not only allows for but even encourages challenges to the status quo. At the same time, it makes clear that it is equally important that such challenges not be directed against authority itself. All concerned should be aware that there is room for positive change. Leaders as well as followers should never assume that the application of the law is right simply because it is in place. Furthermore, once a problem has been felt, it must be raised to those best suited to make decisions for the group as a whole and not simply answered or insisted upon by the petitioners.
It should be clear from the narratives explored in this chapter that there is no room for taking the law into one’s own hands. One may question certain norms, but he should not change actual practice without first getting requisite permission from the appropriate religious authorities. But this also means that authorities must truly listen to petitioners and realize that correct observations can come from anyone. Laymen and religious authorities alike must see themselves in partnership to establish that which is “good and straight.” About this there should be no conflict of interest.
<b>Why Menashe? A Postscript</b>
Above we noted that the two requests that came from the tribe of Menashe, one from the daughters of Tzelofchad and the other from its elders, appear to be artificially split within the book of <i>Bemidbar</i>. We concluded that this was due to the creation of the Pesach Sheini paradigm and its subsequent, step-by-step refinement starting with the first Menashe episode and ending with the second. But more than this, the non-contiguous placement of these two closely related narratives fits in well with other things that we know about this rather idiosyncratic tribe.
Even without the issue of the split narrative, we would be remiss if we did not ask ourselves why these “bookends” in <i>Bemidbar</i> feature specifically the tribe of Menashe. After all, given the size of the Israelite camp, it is highly likely that other women were in the same predicament and yet did not step forward. Presumably, they were prepared to accept the status quo which did not allow for daughters to inherit at all. And while the daughters of Tzelofchad may well stand out as individuals, the parallel language used in the narrative of the tribal elders (including full genealogies of both groups, tracing them back to Yosef) gives us at least one reason to believe that they acted in ways particularly suited to their tribe. Let us try to better understand the attributes of Menashe that led the sisters and the elders to behave in a similar manner.
We don’t know a great deal about the tribe of Menashe beyond the clues revealed in the narratives we are discussing. We do know that Menashe was Yosef’s firstborn, and that Ya’akov placed his brother, Ephraim, before him. We also know that this tribe later became one of the more important in Jewish history, although not always for positive reasons. Most striking, however, is Menashe’s unique geographical division, which the Torah mentions between their two petitions.
We have no real clue as to why Moshe appends half of the tribe to join Reuven and Gad on the other side of the Jordan. It goes without saying that the strategic placement of this detail between the two narratives can hardly be ignored. Menashe’s is a division in the midst of a divided story, which leads us to the conclusion that the notion of division is itself central to what the tribe is all about. Menashe’s intra-tribal division means that this tribe may have been more comfortable than others with sub-tribal identity. In other words, whether as a result of familial loyalty or loyalty to their villages or provinces, the members of Menashe would have been less tied to the greater, unified tribe than members of other tribes were to theirs.
 Thus, it makes sense that women from Menashe would petition Moshe for the right to hold on to their own land even when this brought the possibility of taking away land from their greater birth tribe. Even if the tribal elders had never warned of the ramifications of the sisters’ request, it is clear that the latter’s claim shows a great deal of autonomy (i.e., separation) from their tribe. As inheritors, they will take the place of their nonexistent brothers who would have been the land’s stewards for the tribe. That they suggest an arrangement which may lead to just the opposite, i.e., transfer of the inheritance to other tribes, shows that tribal affiliation was not their greatest concern.
But from where does Menashe get this resistance to tribal unity? The truth is that there were deep roots for it in his family tradition. Going back to Ya’akov, the progenitor, we notice that much of what transpired in his life was based on the principle of productive bifurcation. Thus, for example, he had two names, married two women, and fathered two leaders (Yehudah and Yosef), who would ultimately be the ancestors of two different states (Yehudah and Yisrael).
On more than one occasion, the rabbis find solid evidence to suggest that Yosef, Menashe’s father, carries a special likeness toward his own father, Ya’akov (Bereishit Rabbah 84:6). Consequently, it is quite likely that Yosef mirrors Ya’akov’s central characteristic of duality, which is most crucially embodied in their respective legacies to their children. Thus, alone among Ya’akov’s children, it is Yosef whose portion is divided into two, with both Menashe and Ephraim taking on the status of separate tribes. Likewise, the portion of Yosef ’s firstborn, Menashe, is also divided into two – if not by name, then by territory. It seems the legacy of continuous bifurcation must live on in this line.
Now that we have a better sense of Menashe’s character, we are in a better position to note that the autonomy displayed by the daughters of Tzelofchad is not a unilateral cause for admiration. It should be remembered that the story comes in the midst of tribal identity formation which we have seen to be so central to the Israelites’ desert experience. So while there were good reasons for the sisters to ask for and receive their inheritance, their ostensible lack of concern for the greater tribe during this key period was a problematic element in an otherwise correct request. That it was less than ideal is attested to by the fact that it would be fixed by the request of the elders at the very end of the book.
We might have failed to understand just how problematic the sisters’ claim really was had Moshe not sent part of the tribe to live over the Jordan. Like Gad and Reuven, Menashe was penalized for a destructive characteristic, albeit different and less dangerous than its co-Transjordanians. Measure for measure, Menashe’s problematic lack of tribal cohesion that the daughters of Tzelofchad embody means that the tribe needed to be divided in practice to match their approach in theory. Yet since Menashe’s deficiency was not on the scale of Gad’s and Reuven’s, their exile is far from total (especially since for them, division rather than exile is the main point). Thus, only part of the tribe was sent to live across the Jordan, while the majority was allowed to remain on the western side together with the other nine tribes.
As mentioned earlier, the consolidation of tribal identity would become less important as time went by, and thus with the march of history Menashe’s intra-tribal division would become more acceptable. Moreover, the bifurcation to which Menashe is heir is an example of a potentially healthy process of creating new sub-identities. Even as this trait was problematic when it was first exposed through the daughters of Tzelofchad, the Jewish nation would require it in the future, because if no new identities were ever created, the people would be ill-equipped to meet all of the challenges placed in their way. So whereas eleven tribes needed to generally preserve and develop their identities during the desert period, there was one tribe whose business it was to create constantly new identities. That tribe was Menashe. All the other tribes had certain attributes to offer the nation as a whole, and only by developing their own identities would they be able to contribute to the Jewish people most effectively. But in the case of Menashe a paradox exists, by which one of the central attributes it has to offer can be accomplished only by sacrificing the solidity of that very identity.
We have seen that the daughters of Tzelofchad are the true bearers of Menashe’s exceptionality, and perhaps this exceptionality more than anything else is Menashe’s legacy. While no two tribes are the same, Menashe’s identity is more different from any of the others. And it is this uniqueness that was to be reinforced by the tribe’s permanent territorial division on the two sides of the Jordan. Thus, even while this division was a punishment for not subduing their autonomous character at this critical time, it was also a badge of Menashe’s essential identity. Moreover, the tribe would be expected to bear it proudly and for the betterment of the nation as a whole.
Ultimately, the daughters of Tzelofchad carried with them the knowledge that even at times when unity and conformity are at a premium, there must be one part of the nation that stands to the side and takes a slightly different stance. Perhaps their timing was slightly off or perhaps it was their delivery that was slightly off, but theirs was still a trait that needed to be expressed. And more than their father’s land, their unique character was their true inheritance.