Sulam on Zohar
הסולם על ספר הזהר
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Sulam on Zohar

Introduction



Bereshit I



Bereshit II



Noach



Lech Lecha



Vayera



Chayei Sara



Toldot



Vayetzei



Vayishlach



Vayeshev



Miketz



Vayigash



Paragraph 1



Paragraph 2



Paragraph 3

The letter Tav entered and said before Him: "Is it Your will to create the world with me?" The Holy One, Blessed be He, replied: "No, because through you, many righteous people are destined to die." As it is written: "And I will put the mark of the letter Tav on the foreheads of the men" (Ezekiel 9:4). And we were taught that it is written "and from My sanctified ones, it will begin" (Isaiah 10:12), it is not read "from My sanctifiers", but rather "from My sanctified ones", who are the righteous (as stated in Tractate Shabbat, folio 55, etc.). And therefore, the world will not be created with you.

Paragraph 4

The three letters Shim, Kuf, and Reish entered, etc.: The three letters, Shim, Kuf, and Reish, came, each one on its own. The Holy One, Blessed be He, said to them: "Are you not worthy that the world be created with you?" Because you letters are called "falsehood", and falsehood is not fitting to stand before Me, and I have already explained it.

Paragraph 5

And the letters Pe, Alef, Tzadi, etc. ascended: And the letters Pe, Alef, Tzadi, and so on, came, until the letters reached the letter Kaf, because when the letter Kaf descended from the crown, the upper and lower worlds trembled, until everything was established in the letter Bet, which is the sign of blessing, and in it the world was perfected and created. And you will find the explanation of this matter earlier (in the introduction to the book Zohar, folio 25, lines 22 to 39, in HaSulam, etc.).

Paragraph 6

And if you would say that Aleph, etc.: And if you would say that the letter Alef is the head of all the letters, and that the world should have been created with it. And it is answered, so it is, but because it is called "cursed" with it, the world was not created with it. For this reason, despite the fact that the letter Aleph is a superior and secret letter, it was not given a place, that is, power and strength, to the other side, called "cursed". Therefore, the world was not created with it, and the world was perfected with the letter Bet, and with it was created.

Paragraph 7

"You are our father!", because this world, which is the Point of Zeir Anpin, called "you", was perfected and created in this level, namely, in the sign of blessing, as mentioned earlier that the world was created and perfected in the letter Beth, because it is the sign of blessing, and also man was created in it, in the level of the sign of blessing, and came out into the world. Therefore, the Point is considered from this aspect as the root of man, and we say to it: "You are our father!", that is, You are our root! And what is said that man was also created in the sign of blessing, will be explained later (on page 3, under the title "And with this").

Paragraph 8

For Abraham did not know us: because although the world is sustained through him, which is Chesed, as it is written, "The world is built with kindness", he did not strive for us as he strove for Ishmael, when he said: "May Ishmael live before you". And Israel did not recognize us: because all the blessings that he was supposed to give to his sons, he left for this level, which is the Nukva, to bless them all. That is, as it is written, "And this is the blessing that their father gave them", which means that the Nukva, called "this", spoke for them, that is, for their benefit, their father, to bless them. And so too in the blessing of Ephraim and Manasseh, he said: "The angel who redeems me from all evil", which is the Nukva, "bless the lads", etc.

Paragraph 9

You, HaShem, are our father: that is, the Point, as mentioned above, for you are always over us, to bless us and take care of us, like a father who takes care of his children in all that they need. You are our redeemer from the world, your name: for you, that is, the Point, are the redeemer, as he is called, the redeeming angel, and this is our redeemer from the world, your name. Your name is true, which is the Point, called YHVH. We learn that there is no interruption between redemption and prayer, that is, between the blessing "Redeemer of Israel" and the prayer of eighteen blessings, just as there is no interruption between the blessing of the prayer of the hand and the blessing of the prayer of the head. And I have already explained this.And it is found that for this reason, Abraham did not know us.
Explanation of the article: Because it was objected to in the scripture, “And Judah came near to him,” which is apparently unnecessary, since it would have been sufficient to say, “And Judah said to him: My lord!” And Rabbi Elazar began to explain this with the scripture, “For you are our father,” etc. And he first proves that man and the Point of Zeir Anpin are on the same level, meaning on the level of the mercies that are revealed in the illumination of wisdom, since man was created with the name “Arech Apim,” meaning he is patient and does not get angry, so that man can receive the three radical letters of the illumination of wisdom. And so also the world, which is the Point of Zeir Anpin, was created with the letter Bet, meaning a point in its palace, which is the sign of blessing, meaning the beginning of the revelation of the intelligences of the three radical letters of the illumination of wisdom. As mentioned above (Genesis 1, folio 129, line 139 and 140), the Aleph letter of Mercy is "Chayot Temirin," meaning mercies covered with wisdom, and the Bet letter of Mercy is "Chayot Deitgaliin," meaning mercies that are revealed in the illumination of wisdom.
And with this, the verse explains that Israel said to the Point of Zeir Anpin, which is called "you," because you are our father, since you, that is, the Point, are the source of our life and our sustenance in everything we need. You are our redeemer from the world, your name, because you are the redeemer, etc.
For Abraham did not know us, since he did not strive for us, as he strived for Ishmael, who said, "May Ishmael live before you," because Ishmael is circumcised but has not revealed his evil inclination, that he does not continue with the good inclination of wisdom, which is called HaShem, and his circumcision is in emptiness, that is, in the emptiness of wisdom.
And because it is necessary for wisdom, because he is from the part of appearance and below, and does not have, therefore he is considered as waste from the right hand.
However, Abraham is mercy from the right hand, who understands that he does not need wisdom, and therefore he is hidden from wisdom, secretly, because he is an object of mercy, and therefore he prayed more for the mercies that are hidden from wisdom , because towards them is all his desire and longing.
And this explains why he said, "May Ishmael live before you," and he did not say this way about Isaac.
And it is found that for this reason, Abraham did not know us.
Because the understanding of him is not revealed to us. And Israel does not know him, because Israel is the middle line that appears and is above Zeir Anpin, where is the secret of the world that is hidden from the illumination of wisdom, and therefore all the blessings that are needed to bless his children, are directed to this level, that is, to the Point, so that he blesses them, because his children are from the part of appearance and below, which is the world that is revealed in the illumination of wisdom.
And since he is only from the part of the hidden mercies, he could not bless them, and therefore he left the blessing of them to the Point, which is the world that is revealed, and which will bless them.
For Israel does not know our needs to fill them. Therefore, they said to the Point: "You, HaShem, are our father," because you are our redeemer from the world, your name, because you are the redeemer, etc., because redemption can only be achieved through the illumination of wisdom .
And therefore, the Point is called "the redeeming angel" in relation to the children of Israel, and also the foundation of Zeir Anpin, called Joseph, is called redeemer in relation to the Point, because he transmits the illumination of wisdom to the Point .
And this explains why there is no interruption between redemption and prayer, that is, between the foundation and the Point, because we need to unite them. And it also explains why there is no interruption between the prayer of the hand, which is the Point, and the prayer of the head, which is Zeir Anpin.
And with this, the explanation of the verse “And Judah came near to him” is opened to us, because Judah is the Point, meaning the prayer, and Joseph is the redemption, as mentioned above. And the verse tells us that they came close to each other to unite, until Joseph could not contain himself any longer and revealed his identity. And he revealed the illumination of wisdom to his brothers.

Paragraph 10

Rabbi Yitzchak and Rabbi Yehudah, etc.: Rabbi Yitzchak and Rabbi Yehudah were sitting one night and studying the Torah. Rabbi Yitzchak said to Rabbi Yehudah: "We have already learned that when the Holy One, Blessed Be He, created the world, He made the lower world similar to the upper world, and made everything correspond, so that every part and detail in the lower world has its corresponding root in the upper world, and it is His honor above and below".

Paragraph 11

Rabbi Yehudah said, etc.: Rabbi Yitzchak, this is certainly so, and He created man above all, because he includes and completes all the details of creation, and this is what is said: "I made the earth and the man upon it I created", "I made the earth", this is certain and does not need to be said. But He tells us, what is the reason I made the earth? Because I created man upon it, because he is the sustainer of the world, and that everything should be a single perfection. In other words, that the purpose of the entire world and its perfection is man.

Paragraph 12

He began and said: "Thus said God, etc.": I have already explained this verse. But "Thus said God, HaShem, Creator of the heavens and who stretches them out". This is the Holy One, Blessed Be He, above and above, that is, the understanding, which is the Creator of the heavens, which is Zeir Anpin, which the understanding always corrects and improves. In other words, that it inspires him and transmits intelligence to him. "The one who makes the earth and its offspring tremble", this is the Holy Land, the treasure of life, that is, the Point. "The one who gives soul to the people upon it", the earth, which is the Point, gives soul.

Paragraph 13

Rabbi Yitzchak said, etc.: Rabbi Yitzchak, all of this is above, that is, in the understanding, and he disagrees with Rabbi Yehudah, who said that "the one who gives soul to the people" refers to the Point, because from there, from the understanding, the living soul comes out to this land, which is the Point. And this land receives the soul in order to give to each one, because the river that flows and comes out, which is Zeir Anpin, receives from the understanding and gives and introduces souls into this land, which is the Point, and it receives and gives to each person who merits it.

Vayechi



Shemot



Paragraph 1

Y estos son los nombres de los hijos de Israel, etc.: Le fue difícil, que la escritura comienza con Israel y termina con Jacob, y también, ¿cuál es el asunto del exilio en Egipto en la interioridad? Y sobre esto trae la escritura, "Y los que entienden, entenderán", etc., que con la explicación de esta escritura, se aclararán las preguntas mencionadas anteriormente.
Y los que entienden, entenderán como el resplandor del firmamento, etc.: Y los que entienden, son aquellos que se ocupan del secreto de la sabiduría, es decir, aquellos que han alcanzado el secreto de la sabiduría, porque la sabiduría se llama la luz de los ojos, y su comprensión se llama la contemplación. Entenderán, se le dificultó, ¿por qué no está escrito "iluminarán"? Y dice, que su significado es que brillan y resplandecen con el resplandor de la sabiduría superior. Porque ellos no pueden alcanzar la esencia de la sabiduría superior, sino solo desde la Biná que ha vuelto a ser sabiduría, mediante su retorno a la cabeza de Arich Anpin, que se considera solo como el resplandor de la sabiduría superior, que se examina solo como Zohar, y no como la esencia de la luz de la sabiduría. Y por lo tanto, se dice "entenderán", y no se dice "iluminarán". Como el resplandor, su significado es la iluminación y el resplandor del río que sale del Edén, que es la Biná mencionada anteriormente, que salió de la cabeza de Arich Anpin, que es la sabiduría llamada Edén (como se menciona en la Hakdamat HaZohar, folio 15, y el asunto es así), que en su retorno a la cabeza de Arich Anpin se convirtió en sabiduría (como se menciona allí, en el folio 16, y todo el resto), y esta sabiduría que en ella se examina solo como el resplandor de la sabiduría, como se mencionó anteriormente, y por lo tanto, se dice sobre ella "como el resplandor", que es un término de resplandor, como se mencionó anteriormente.
Y ciertamente, esto es un secreto, etc.: Y esto es el secreto del velo llamado firmamento, que es el velo del tzimtzum que saca a Biná afuera de la cabeza de Arich Anpin, mediante su ascenso a su lugar, y también la devuelve a la cabeza de Arich Anpin mediante su retorno abajo al lugar del Malkut de la cabeza de Arich Anpin (como se menciona en la Hakdamat HaZohar, folio 16, y todo el resto). Y así, como el resplandor del firmamento, es decir, las vasijas y las inteligencias que se revelan mediante el firmamento, porque en él se encuentran los planetas, que son las tres líneas de las inteligencias, y los signos del zodíaco, que son las seis direcciones de las inteligencias, el sol, que es Zeir Ainpin, y la luna, que es la Nukva, y todos estos son las luces que iluminan, que son todas las luces en el Bei'a, porque todas las luces en los cuatro mundos de ABiYA salen del velo del tzimtzum llamado firmamento. (Ver arriba, en Bereshit, folio 7, y todo el resto).

Paragraph 2

Zohar de este firmamento, etc.: El resplandor de este firmamento ilumina con su luz sobre el jardín, que es Malkut, y el árbol de la vida, que es Tiferet, se encuentra en el centro del jardín, es decir, en la línea media, y sus ramas, es decir, sus sefirot, cubren todas las formas que son las almas, y los árboles, que son los espíritus, y en los cielos, que son las neshamot, que están en el jardín, en vasijas rectas, es decir, que están rectificadas en las tres líneas, derecha, izquierda y media. Y bajo su sombra se reúnen todos los animales del campo, que son los ángeles externos. Y todos los pájaros del cielo, es decir, los ángeles internos, se sientan bajo sus ramas.

Paragraph 3

Zohar Iba de Ilana, etc.: El resplandor de los frutos del árbol, que son las almas que nacen de él, da vida a todos. Su existencia es para siempre y para siempre jamás. El lado opuesto de la impureza no gobierna en él, es decir, que no hay absolutamente ninguna influencia de la impureza en el árbol de la vida, que es Zeir Ainpin en Gadlut, sino solo el lado de la santidad. Felices son su porción los que prueban de él, que viven para siempre y para siempre jamás. Como se dice, "y tomó también del árbol de la vida y comió y vivió para siempre". Ellos se llaman "mishakilim" (los que entienden), y merecen la vida en este mundo y en el mundo venidero.

Paragraph 4

Zohar Ilana about this, etc.: The radiance of this tree, which is Zeir Ainpin, rises upward to YESHUT and upward to ABA ve IMA. When it rises to YESHUT, which is Bina, its five hundred measures of height are because it receives HGT NH"Y from Bina, whose sefirot are in the secret of the hundred. But it has no foundation, because IMA expands to Hod. And when it rises to ABA ve IMA, which shines with the ancient light, it expands by sixty myriads, because the foundation expands in it and it receives HGT NH"Y from the ancient light, whose sefirot each is one hundred thousand. And therefore, in this tree, there is a light that is Malkut in its body, in which are all the colors, white, red, and green, which are the lights of HGT. These colors rise in direct light and fall in reflected light and are not set anywhere else except on this tree. Because it is the middle line.

Paragraph 5

When they come out of it, etc.: When the lights come out of it, from the tree, to appear in the non-illuminating radiance, which is Malkut which includes, that from the aspect of Mahazeh and below Zeir Ainpin, in which itself there are ZON, which are the small ZON called Yaacov and Rachel. The lights sometimes settle and sometimes do not settle in it, they are found and they are not found, because they are not established anywhere else except in this tree, which is from the aspect of Mahazeh and above Zeir Ainpin, called Israel. From this tree come out the twelve tribes whose boundaries are in it, which are the twelve lights called twelve diagonal boundaries, which are clearly explained above (see folio 8, and in Parashat Vayechi, folio 46, and all the rest). And they descended in this non-illuminating radiance, to the exile in Egypt in various upper camps. This is what is said, “And these are the names,” etc.
For now it is well understood, that the scripture begins with Israel, that is, "And these are the names of the sons of Israel," because it is that the root of the lights of the twelve tribes come from the tree called Israel, that is, from Mahazeh and above Zeir Ainpin. And so also that which ends with Yaacov, which says, "Those who came from Egypt with Yaacov," because they passed from the aspect of Israel to the aspect of Yaacov, which is from Mahazeh and below Zeir Ainpin, where the twelve lights of the tribes cannot be established, as was said above. And this is "Those who came from Egypt," which is a language of narrowness, and therefore the Egyptians dominated over them. (And see further on, folio 148, and all the rest), where the very reason for the necessity of the exile in Egypt is explained.

Vaera



Paragraph 1



Paragraph 2



Paragraph 3



Paragraph 4



Paragraph 5



Paragraph 6



Paragraph 7



Paragraph 8

What is the reason for “because,” etc.: It is asked, what is the reason? The answer is, because the world stands in His Holy Name. This is what is written, “For in Him was the rock of the worlds created.” Meaning, the Creator of the worlds, for with two letters the worlds were created, this world and the world to come. This world was created with judgment, and it stands, that is, it is sustained, with judgment. As it is written, “In the beginning Elokim created,” where this name refers to judgment. What is the reason? It is so that the sons of men may behave according to judgment, and not stray from the path.

Paragraph 9

Come and see, it is written, etc.: Come and see, it is written, “And Elokim spoke to Moses.” The name Elokim refers to the severity of judgment that is sustained in Him. What is written above?, “And Moses approached HaShem and said, Adonai.” With the name Adonai, which is the name of royalty. Look at the strength of Moses, who from the beginning of his prophecy did not calm down in this place, which is royalty, and said, “Adonai, why have you done evil to this people? Why have you sent me?” and since I came to speak in your name, evil has not ceased, and you have not saved your people. Who can say such a thing, but Moses, who knew that there was a higher level than royalty, which was for him, because he was the vehicle of Zeir Ainpin, who is the husband of the Matronite?

Paragraph 10

Rabbi Yitzchak said, etc.: In the beginning, when he was given the house, which is Malchut, since he was the vehicle of Zeir Ainpin, who is the husband of Malchut, it turned out that he merited the level of Malchut to be his house, as is the house of Zeir Ainpin. Therefore, he took care of it, as a man takes care of his house, and says whatever he wants without fear. Moses also did the same; to his house, which is Malchut, he was not afraid.

Paragraph 11

Another explanation, “And Elokim spoke”: It is the severity of judgment, because the name Elokim is judgment, meaning Malchut, and she said to him, “I am HaShem,” which is another level, meaning Zeir Ainpin, which is mercy, and here all things are united, judgment and mercy together, which is great perfection. This is what is written, “And he said to him, I am HaShem,” which is the measure of mercy. Rabbi Shimon said, if it were written, “And Elokim spoke to Moses, I am HaShem,” it would have said that judgment and mercy are united together for him. But it is not written like that, but rather, “And Elokim spoke to Moses” at the beginning, and then, “And he said to him, I am HaShem,” meaning that they are of a different level than the other, and they are not judgment and mercy united together.

Paragraph 12

And Rabbi Yosi said, etc.: And the Ari, Moses, had he not been the master of the house, as it is written about him, “Prayer of Moses, man of Elokim,” would have been punished for what he said to ADNI, “Why have you done wrong to this people?” etc. But because he was the master of the house, he was not punished. Similar to a man who had a dispute with his wife, who was a king’s daughter, and said things to her that were not appropriate, she began to get angry, and when she began to speak, the king intervened and she became silent and stopped speaking. The king said to her husband, “Did you not know that I am a king and that you should not have spoken like that before?” Something similar happened with Moses, as it is written, “And Moses approached HaShem and said, ADNI, why have you done wrong?” etc. Immediately, "And Elokim spoke to Moses," which is the measure of judgment, because the king's daughter began to get angry, immediately the king intervened and said, "I am HaShem," did you not know that I am a king and that you should not have spoken like that before?

Paragraph 13

And I appeared to Abraham, etc., in El Shadai: It is asked, why did the name change here, from the upper names which are ADNI, HaShem, Elokim, and here it said El Shadai? And it is answered, it is similar to a king who had an unmarried daughter and a friend. When the king wanted to speak to his friend, he would send his daughter to speak to him, and the king would speak to him through his daughter. The time came when his daughter got married. On the day of her wedding, the king said, "Call her METAT honorable." And he said to her, "Until now I have spoken through you to those with whom I have spoken, but from now on, I will tell your husband, and he will tell whomever it may concern." Afterward, her husband spoke controversial words to her before the king, until she began to speak, and the king spoke up, and said to her, "Am I not the king, that to this day no man has spoken to me except through my daughter, and I gave you my daughter, and spoke to you openly, which I have not done with any other man?"

Paragraph 14

Thus, “And I appeared to,” etc., in El Shadai: which is the name of Malchut, before she joined with Zeir Ainpin face to face. And its explanation is, “And I appeared to the patriarchs in El Shadai, which is Malchut, when I was in my house and I was not married, and I did not speak to you face to face as I did with you, and you at the beginning of your speech, you said to my daughter things like that in my presence.” That is why it is written, “And I appeared to Abraham, to Yitzchak, and to Yaakov in El Shadai, and my name HaShem was not known to them,” meaning to speak to them on this level that I spoke to you.

Paragraph 15

Rabbi Yosi opened, etc.: Rabbi Yosi, “A Psalm of David, HaShem is the owner of the earth and its fullness, the world and its inhabitants.” This land is the Holy Land of Israel, which is destined to be watered by Him, by HaShem, and to be blessed by Him from the beginning, and after that, the entire world will be watered by it. “The world and its inhabitants,” this is the rest of the lands, which drink from Him. Where do we get this from? For it is written, “And He will judge the world in righteousness.”

Bo



Beshalach



Yitro



Mishpatim



Terumah



Paragraph 1

And he spoke, etc., and they took for me an offering, etc.: Rabbi Chaya began, for Jacob chose for Himself, HaShem, the jewel of Israel. How beloved are the children of Israel before the Holy One, Blessed be He! Who desired in them and desired to unite with them and connect with them, and made them a unique people in the world, as it is written: "And who is like your people, Israel, a unique nation on earth?" And they desired in Him and connected with Him. This is what is said: "For Jacob chose for Himself HaShem," and it is written: "For HaShem has a portion with them." And He gave to the other nations princes to rule over them, and He took for His portion Israel.

Paragraph 2

Rabbi Shimon began: “Who is this who appears like the dawn, beautiful?” Who is this? It is the secret of the two worlds that unite together, and this is the world and the world. That is, this is what is written: “From the world to the world,” which are Bina and Malchut. “Who is it?” behold, we have established that it is a higher degree, the beginning that remains in the question, and it is called “Who is it?” which is Bina, as it is mentioned: “Lift up your eyes on high and see who created this.” (As mentioned above in the Hakdamat HaZohar, folio 8, in the part of “Leila”) “This” is a lower degree, it is the lower world, which is Malchut. And both are two worlds in one union, in one bond, together. And this is through the elevation of Malchut to Bina, because by this she attained the intelligence of Bina. As it is mentioned there.

Paragraph 3

She who appears, when they unite, etc.: She who appears, meaning when both of them unite as one, Malchut appears like the dawn, meaning when the dawn wants to shine, and then she is beautiful like the moon, Malchut shines like the moon, because the light of the sun, which is Zeir Anpin, shines in her. And then, she shines like the sun, like the light of the sun, when the moon is full, meaning when Malchut is face to face with Zeir Anpin, called the sun. Her beauty is like that of a cloud, because she is strong to protect everything, because then she has perfection and strength to do exploits.

Paragraph 4

And Malchut receives strength from the upper world, etc.: And Malchut receives strength, meaning Mochin, from the upper world, which is Bina, through Yaacov, a perfect man, who united both, because through the elevation of MAN, Malchut rose to Bina, and they united with each other. He united both above, because Bina received the form of Malchut, and this is Leah. And he united both below, because Malchut acquired the form of Bina, and this is Rachel. And from there came the 12 holy tribes, similar to those above. That is, like the 12 perspectives that are in Malchut above. Yaacov, who was perfect, brought love to both worlds, as We have established, because he married the two sisters, Leah and Rachel, who are Bina and Malchut, two worlds. The other sons of Adam who do this, reveal nakedness above and below, and cause hatred in the two worlds, and cause separation between Zeir Anpin and Leah, and between Zeir Anpin and Rachel, because the union above is with Leah, and the union below is with Rachel. This is what is said: "You shall not take a wife together with her sister for rivalry." They became rivals and filled with hatred towards each other.

Paragraph 5

Y si dijeras, ¿y se enojó Raquel con su hermana?: Y si dijeras, ¿cuál es el significado de "y se enojó Raquel con su hermana"? Si la escritura habla de los dos mundos, Leá y Raquel, que son la perspectiva de Biná y Maljut, que están incluidas juntas, ¿qué tipo de celos hay aquí? Y responde, así es ciertamente, porque el mundo inferior, Raquel, todo su deseo no es más que ser como el mundo superior, Leá, que es Biná, y heredar su lugar. En otro lugar, hay celos de los sabios, "aquel que aumenta la sabiduría, aumenta el dolor" (Bava Batra 21a), y aquí también hay celos de los sabios, porque hay un libro y otro libro, que son ABA y IMA, de los cuales se extrae la sabiduría, y por lo tanto, a través de los celos de estos sabios, aumentan la extracción de la sabiduría en ellos.

Paragraph 6

And so it is, even Yaacov, etc.: And despite everything, even Yaacov did not complete them properly, the other children of the world cause hatred and separation, and they reveal the nakedness above and below. For in this secret there is a secret of nakedness, meaning the nakedness of the mother and the daughter, who are Bina and Malchut, and everything, they are two sisters and also mother and daughter, it is one secret, because they are called sisters because they are in sisterhood, love, and union of desire. And they are also called mother and daughter, because Bina is called mother and Malchut her daughter. Whoever reveals their nakedness, meaning the judgments that are in them, has no part in the next world, which is Bina, and has no part in faith, which is Malchut.

Paragraph 7



Paragraph 8

Rabbi Shimon said: Behold, we have learned that when the Holy One, Blessed be He, created the world, which is Malchut, He engraved in its engravings the secret of faith, which is Malchut, within the lights that are the secret of the upper ones, meaning that the Holy One, Blessed be He, which is Bina, elevated to Himself the faith, which is Malchut, and engraved with the engravings of faith within the lights of His own upper essence, from which Bina and the TuM of Bina came out and descended to the level below her, and there remained in Bina only the crown and the wisdom of the vessels in the lights of the wind nefesh, that this is examined as an engraving in the lights of Him. And He engraved above, in Bina, and He engraved below, in Malchut, meaning that afterwards Malchut also received that mentioned engraving that was made in Bina. And everything is one secret, because the recording of Malchut was in a single form with the recording of Bina, in the secret of the recordings of the Holy Name, which governs with His letters above and below, meaning in Bina and Malchut, which are HaShem the first and HaShem the last of the Name, which are both one single form, which is HaShem. And in this secret, the worlds were perfected, the upper world, which is Bina, and the lower world, which is Malchut.

Paragraph 9



Paragraph 10

And this light, which is very subtle, closed due to lack of mercy, was maintained and perfected in him by the middle line, the six extensions, which are the six letters of wisdom, which are not known, that is, they are not revealed to illuminate, except when the thin light of ABA and IMA is hidden, because then the very subtle light illuminates with its illumination. Explanation: Because the illumination of wisdom does not illuminate except at the point of the Shuruk at the time of the elevation of the three points, Holam, Shuruk and Hirik, one after the other, (as explained in Shlach, 39, "VeG") and at the moment when it illuminates the point of the Shuruk, the light of mercy of ABA and IMA is closed, (as explained above in Bereshit, 13, "UveTeda", and see in the introduction to the Book of Zohar, folio 17, "Kayema") it is found that the very subtle light illuminates only at the time of the concealment of the thin light.

Paragraph 11



Paragraph 12



Paragraph 13

Los demás hijos del mundo, etc.: Los demás hijos del mundo, excepto Yaacov, no se les dio permiso para ascender así a la comprensión para unirse con YH como Yaacov, sino solo a su característica, que es el lugar que recibe y reúne todo, y esta es la categoría de abajo, es decir, Malchut, y de dentro de Malchut reciben la iluminación de la misericordia de arriba en la comprensión, que es la categoría de Lea, en el cierre de la voluntad. Pero no abiertamente como toma Yaacov, como está escrito "y tomarán para mí una ofrenda". Explicación: porque Yaacov ascendió y se unió con YH mismo y recibe de allí la iluminación de la misericordia que está en la comprensión, que es la unión de Yaacov y Lea. Y por lo tanto, los demás hijos del mundo están prohibidos de tener relaciones con las dos hermanas, porque en ellas hay algo de revelar la desnudez, para ser conductores de la iluminación de la comprensión, que es Lea, en lugar de Malchut que es Raquel. Pero Yaacov, que ascendió a lo alto en el lugar de la comprensión misma, se le permitió esto, incluso en vida de su hermana Raquel. Y como está escrito "y tomarán para mí una ofrenda". Es decir, que todos los demás hijos del mundo tomarán y elevarán a Malchut, y no se casarán con las dos hermanas, porque entonces las profanarían, revelando la desnudez, es decir, los juicios, y es porque ellos mismos son del lugar de Malchut, que es el lugar de los juicios.


Paragraph 14

And they shall take for Me an offering: Rabbi Yehuda began, "What is Your great goodness that You have concealed from those who fear You, and have done for those who take refuge in You?" (Psalms 31:20). This verse they established and learned, but this secret was established by the Holy Light within the secrets of the upper ones.

Sifra DiTzniuta



Tetzaveh



Paragraph 1



Paragraph 2



Paragraph 3



Paragraph 4



Paragraph 5



Paragraph 6



Paragraph 7

<b>But the name of Isaiah, etc.:</b> But Isaiah, the name, which are the letters [of] <b><i>yesha Yahu</i> [the Lord will save]</b>, causes salvation and the bringing back of the supernal light to its place, to Kingship [<i>Malkhut</i>], and the building of the Temple, and that all of the lights will return as at the beginning. And therefore, the names of these two prophets stood one against the other; the name of one being<b><i>yarum Yahu</i></b> [the Lord will go away], and the name of the other being the opposite <b><i>yesha Yahu</i></b>. And the combination of these letters and those letters cause an event according to their meaning, whether for the good or for the bad. And based on this secret — being the combination of the letters of holy names, and also the letters on their own — they cause the occurrence of supernal secrets according to the meaning of the name. For the letters themselves cause supernal holy secrets to occur though them.

Paragraph 8



Paragraph 9



Paragraph 10



Paragraph 11



Paragraph 12



Paragraph 13



Paragraph 14



Paragraph 15



Paragraph 16



Paragraph 17



Paragraph 18



Paragraph 19



Paragraph 20



Paragraph 21



Paragraph 22



Paragraph 23



Paragraph 24



Paragraph 25



Paragraph 26



Paragraph 27



Paragraph 28



Paragraph 29



Paragraph 30



Paragraph 31



Paragraph 32



Paragraph 33



Paragraph 34



Paragraph 35



Paragraph 36



Paragraph 37



Paragraph 38



Paragraph 39



Paragraph 40



Paragraph 41



Paragraph 42



Paragraph 43



Paragraph 44



Paragraph 45



Paragraph 46



Paragraph 47



Paragraph 48



Paragraph 49

<b>It is written (Exodus 34:17), "You must not make molten gods for yourselves":</b> And it is written after it (Exodus 34:18), "You shall observe the Feast of Matzot." [The Zohar] asks, "Why is this next to this?" And it answers, "Rather, this is why He positioned it [so] - one who eats chametz is like one who worships idolatry.

Ki Tisa



Vayakhel



Pekudei



Vayikra



Tzav



Shmini



Tazria



Metzora



Achrei Mot



Kedoshim



Emor



Behar



Bechukotai



Bamidbar



Nasso



Idra Rabba



Beha'alotcha



Sh'lach



Korach



Chukat



Balak



Paragraph 1



Paragraph 2



Paragraph 3



Paragraph 4



Paragraph 5



Paragraph 6



Paragraph 7



Paragraph 8



Paragraph 9



Paragraph 10



Paragraph 11



Paragraph 12



Paragraph 13



Paragraph 14



Paragraph 15



Paragraph 16



Paragraph 17



Paragraph 18



Paragraph 19



Paragraph 20



Paragraph 21



Paragraph 22



Paragraph 23



Paragraph 24



Paragraph 25



Paragraph 26



Paragraph 27



Paragraph 28



Paragraph 29



Paragraph 30



Paragraph 31



Paragraph 32



Paragraph 33



Paragraph 34



Paragraph 35



Paragraph 36



Paragraph 37



Paragraph 38



Paragraph 39



Paragraph 40



Paragraph 41



Paragraph 42



Paragraph 43



Paragraph 44



Paragraph 45



Paragraph 46



Paragraph 47



Paragraph 48



Paragraph 49



Paragraph 50



Paragraph 51



Paragraph 52



Paragraph 53



Paragraph 54



Paragraph 55



Paragraph 56



Paragraph 57



Paragraph 58



Paragraph 59



Paragraph 60



Paragraph 61



Paragraph 62



Paragraph 63



Paragraph 64



Paragraph 65



Paragraph 66



Paragraph 67



Paragraph 68



Paragraph 69



Paragraph 70



Paragraph 71



Paragraph 72



Paragraph 73



Paragraph 74



Paragraph 75



Paragraph 76



Paragraph 77



Paragraph 78



Paragraph 79



Paragraph 80



Paragraph 81



Paragraph 82



Paragraph 83



Paragraph 84



Paragraph 85



Paragraph 86



Paragraph 87



Paragraph 88



Paragraph 89



Paragraph 90



Paragraph 91



Paragraph 92



Paragraph 93



Paragraph 94



Paragraph 95



Paragraph 96



Paragraph 97



Paragraph 98



Paragraph 99



Paragraph 100



Paragraph 101



Paragraph 102



Paragraph 103



Paragraph 104



Paragraph 105



Paragraph 106



Paragraph 107



Paragraph 108



Paragraph 109



Paragraph 110



Paragraph 111



Paragraph 112



Paragraph 113



Paragraph 114



Paragraph 115



Paragraph 116



Paragraph 117



Paragraph 118



Paragraph 119



Paragraph 120



Paragraph 121



Paragraph 122



Paragraph 123



Paragraph 124



Paragraph 125



Paragraph 126



Paragraph 127



Paragraph 128



Paragraph 129



Paragraph 130



Paragraph 131



Paragraph 132



Paragraph 133



Paragraph 134



Paragraph 135



Paragraph 136



Paragraph 137



Paragraph 138



Paragraph 139



Paragraph 140



Paragraph 141



Paragraph 142



Paragraph 143



Paragraph 144



Paragraph 145



Paragraph 146



Paragraph 147



Paragraph 148



Paragraph 149



Paragraph 150



Paragraph 151



Paragraph 152



Paragraph 153



Paragraph 154



Paragraph 155



Paragraph 156



Paragraph 157



Paragraph 158



Paragraph 159



Paragraph 160



Paragraph 161



Paragraph 162



Paragraph 163



Paragraph 164



Paragraph 165



Paragraph 166



Paragraph 167



Paragraph 168



Paragraph 169



Paragraph 170



Paragraph 171



Paragraph 172



Paragraph 173



Paragraph 174



Paragraph 175



Paragraph 176



Paragraph 177



Paragraph 178



Paragraph 179



Paragraph 180



Paragraph 181



Paragraph 182



Paragraph 183



Paragraph 184



Paragraph 185



Paragraph 186



Paragraph 187



Paragraph 188



Paragraph 189



Paragraph 190



Paragraph 191



Paragraph 192



Paragraph 193



Paragraph 194



Paragraph 195



Paragraph 196



Paragraph 197



Paragraph 198



Paragraph 199



Paragraph 200



Paragraph 201



Paragraph 202



Paragraph 203



Paragraph 204



Paragraph 205



Paragraph 206



Paragraph 207



Paragraph 208



Paragraph 209



Paragraph 210



Paragraph 211



Paragraph 212



Paragraph 213



Paragraph 214



Paragraph 215



Paragraph 216



Paragraph 217



Paragraph 218



Paragraph 219



Paragraph 220



Paragraph 221



Paragraph 222



Paragraph 223



Paragraph 224



Paragraph 225



Paragraph 226



Paragraph 227



Paragraph 228



Paragraph 229



Paragraph 230



Paragraph 231



Paragraph 232



Paragraph 233



Paragraph 234



Paragraph 235



Paragraph 236



Paragraph 237



Paragraph 238



Paragraph 239



Paragraph 240



Paragraph 241



Paragraph 242



Paragraph 243



Paragraph 244



Paragraph 245



Paragraph 246



Paragraph 247



Paragraph 248



Paragraph 249



Paragraph 250



Paragraph 251



Paragraph 252



Paragraph 253



Paragraph 254



Paragraph 255



Paragraph 256



Paragraph 257



Paragraph 258



Paragraph 259



Paragraph 260



Paragraph 261



Paragraph 262



Paragraph 263



Paragraph 264



Paragraph 265



Paragraph 266



Paragraph 267



Paragraph 268



Paragraph 269



Paragraph 270



Paragraph 271



Paragraph 272



Paragraph 273



Paragraph 274



Paragraph 275



Paragraph 276



Paragraph 277



Paragraph 278



Paragraph 279



Paragraph 280



Paragraph 281



Paragraph 282



Paragraph 283



Paragraph 284



Paragraph 285



Paragraph 286



Paragraph 287



Paragraph 288



Paragraph 289



Paragraph 290



Paragraph 291



Paragraph 292



Paragraph 293



Paragraph 294



Paragraph 295



Paragraph 296



Paragraph 297



Paragraph 298



Paragraph 299



Paragraph 300



Paragraph 301



Paragraph 302



Paragraph 303



Paragraph 304



Paragraph 305



Paragraph 306



Paragraph 307



Paragraph 308



Paragraph 309



Paragraph 310



Paragraph 311



Paragraph 312



Paragraph 313



Paragraph 314



Paragraph 315



Paragraph 316



Paragraph 317



Paragraph 318



Paragraph 319



Paragraph 320



Paragraph 321



Paragraph 322



Paragraph 323



Paragraph 324



Paragraph 325



Paragraph 326



Paragraph 327



Paragraph 328



Paragraph 329



Paragraph 330



Paragraph 331



Paragraph 332



Paragraph 333



Paragraph 334



Paragraph 335



Paragraph 336



Paragraph 337



Paragraph 338



Paragraph 339



Paragraph 340



Paragraph 341



Paragraph 342



Paragraph 343



Paragraph 344



Paragraph 345



Paragraph 346



Paragraph 347



Paragraph 348



Paragraph 349



Paragraph 350



Paragraph 351



Paragraph 352



Paragraph 353



Paragraph 354



Paragraph 355



Paragraph 356



Paragraph 357



Paragraph 358



Paragraph 359



Paragraph 360



Paragraph 361



Paragraph 362



Paragraph 363



Paragraph 364



Paragraph 365



Paragraph 366



Paragraph 367



Paragraph 368



Paragraph 369



Paragraph 370



Paragraph 371



Paragraph 372



Paragraph 373



Paragraph 374



Paragraph 375



Paragraph 376



Paragraph 377



Paragraph 378



Paragraph 379



Paragraph 380



Paragraph 381



Paragraph 382



Paragraph 383



Paragraph 384



Paragraph 385



Paragraph 386



Paragraph 387



Paragraph 388



Paragraph 389



Paragraph 390



Paragraph 391



Paragraph 392



Paragraph 393



Paragraph 394



Paragraph 395



Paragraph 396



Paragraph 397



Paragraph 398



Paragraph 399



Paragraph 400



Paragraph 401



Paragraph 402



Paragraph 403



Paragraph 404



Paragraph 405



Paragraph 406



Paragraph 407



Paragraph 408



Paragraph 409



Paragraph 410



Paragraph 411



Paragraph 412



Paragraph 413



Paragraph 414



Paragraph 415



Paragraph 416



Paragraph 417



Paragraph 418



Paragraph 419



Paragraph 420



Paragraph 421



Paragraph 422



Paragraph 423



Paragraph 424



Paragraph 425



Paragraph 426



Paragraph 427



Paragraph 428



Paragraph 429



Paragraph 430



Paragraph 431



Paragraph 432



Paragraph 433



Paragraph 434



Paragraph 435

<b>They hang below Your crown, etc.</b> Below the crown, golden bells hang all around, a golden bell on this side, and a golden bell on that side, and one pomegranate in the middle. That pomegranate has a thousand bells, and each of those bells blazes in red and in white. That pomegranate is divided into four sections and stays open, so that the bells in it are visible. There are 325 bells on this side, and likewise with all of the sides, such that they light up the four sides of the world from the vision of each and every sections. And they are called the pomegranate split open, as it is written (Song of Songs 4:3), "your brow behind your veil [gleams] like a pomegranate split open."
The explanation: Now the aspect of the end of the crown of Kingship (<i>Malkhut</i>) is understood, meaning the aspect of the vessels of its back. And you already know that when Wisdom (<i>Chokhmah</i>) is face to face with the Small Face (<i>Zeir Anpin</i>) it is only revealed by the vessels of its back (as mentioned earlier in the Introduction to the Book of the Zohar, p. 6, s.v. VeIlmaleh). And the aggregate of the vessels of the back is called pomegranate, by way of the secret of what they said about the verse, "your brow (<i>rakatekh</i>) is like a pomegranate split open": That even the empty ones (<i>rekanim</i>) among you - meaning the vessels of the back that are judged to be empty in comparison with the vessels of the front - are filled with commandments like a pomegranate, which is full of lights. And this is at the time that they connect with the vessels of the front and hang from them. For they then also receive the enlightenment of the three columns from the vessels of the front; and then the enlightenment divides into right and left and to the secret of the twelve, called bells. And the aggregate of the bells is called pomegranate, since its enlightenment ascends from the bottom to the top.  

Pinchas



Matot



Vaetchanan



Eikev



Shoftim



Ki Teitzei



Vayeilech



Ha'Azinu



Idra Zuta

