Exodus
שמות
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Exodus



Chapter 1

These are Israel's sons' names, the travelers to Egypt, with Jacob a man and his family came.

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8


vit

Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19








All the people answered as one, "Everything that the Lord has spoken we will do."

Chapter 20








Sei eingedenk des Schabbat, um ihm zu heiligen. 

Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26

And the tabernacle (the mishkan) shall you make with ten curtains [to serve it as a roof and as partitions outside the boards, the curtains being hung behind them to cover them]: twisted linen (shesh) and blue (wool) and purple and scarlet, [four varieties in each thread, one of linen and three of wool and each thread twisted six (shesh) times, giving a twenty-four-fold thread], cherubs of artistic work [(figures interwoven on both sides)] shall you make them.
	The length of one curtain, twenty-eight cubits; and the width, four cubits for one curtain — one measure for all the curtains.
	Five curtains shall be attached [by sewing] one to the other, and five curtains, one to the other.
	And you shall make loops of purple wool at the edge of the end curtain of one (five-curtain) joining, and, likewise, at the edge of the end curtain of the other joining.
	Fifty loops shall you make in the one (end) curtain, and fifty loops shall you make at the edge of the (end) curtain in the second joining, the loops [on the respective joinings] directly aligned one with the other.
	And you shall make fifty golden hooks, and you shall join the curtains one to the other by the hooks, [inserting one end of the hook into one loop, and the other end, into its corresponding loop], and the tabernacle shall be one.
	And you shall make curtains of goats' hair to tent over the [lower curtains of the] tabernacle; eleven curtains shall you make them.
	The length of one curtain, thirty cubits; and the width, four cubits for one curtain — one measure for the eleven curtains.
	And you shall join five curtains separately and six curtains separately, and you shall double [two cubits of] the sixth curtain [the "surplus" vis-à-vis the lower curtains] over the face of the tent [the screen on the east (as a bride's face is veiled in modesty)].
	And you shall make fifty loops at the edge of the end curtain in (one) joining, and fifty loops at the edge of the curtain in the second joining.
	And you shall make fifty copper hooks, and you shall insert the hooks into the loops, and you shall join the tent [the goats' hair covering], and it shall be one.
	And the additional draping in the curtains of the tent, half of the additional curtain [i.e., two cubits], you shall hang over the back [the west] of the tabernacle [to cover the two cubits of exposed beams.]
	And the cubit on one side and the cubit on the other side in excess [of the length of the lower curtains] in the length of the curtains of the tent, shall be spread over both sides [north and south] of the tabernacle [curtains] to cover it [(for purposes of adornment)].
	And you shall make a cover for the tent [(the goats' hair roof)] of rams' skins dyed red, and a cover of tachash skins above.
	And you shall make the beams of the tabernacle [those that have been designated for the purpose (Jacob, prophetically, having planted acacia trees to this end)] of standing acacia wood. [The beams of the tabernacle walls are to be stood up vertically, and not placed horizontally one atop the other.]
	Ten cubits the length of the beam [(so that the height of the tabernacle was ten cubits)], and a cubit and a half the breadth of each beam [(so that the length of the tabernacle was thirty cubits)].
	Two prongs (wooden projections) for each beam [(the beam being hollowed out at the bottom to form these prongs)], rung-like, one near the other [like the rungs of a ladder]. So shall you do for all the beams of the tabernacle.
	And you shall make the beams for the tabernacle, twenty beams for the southern side.
	And forty silver sockets shall you make under the twenty beams; two sockets under one beam for its two prongs, and two sockets under the next beam for its two prongs.
	And for the second side of the tabernacle, the northern side, twenty beams.
	And their forty silver sockets, two sockets under one beam and two sockets under the next beam.
	And for the ends [i.e., the back] of the tabernacle on the west, you shall make six beams, [accounting for nine cubits of width.]
	And two beams shall you make for the corners of the tabernacle at the ends, [(so that the interior width is ten cubits)].
	And they (the beams) shall be fitted against each other at the bottom, and together shall they be fitted at its top into one ring. [Two adjacent beams were fixed together by a ring placed in grooves along their breadth.] So shall it be for the two of them [for the two beams at the end, the beam at the northern end and the western beam, and so,] for the two corners shall they be.
	And [on the western side] there shall be eight beams and their silver sockets, sixteen sockets; two sockets under one beam and two sockets under the next beam.
	And you shall make bars of acacia wood, five for the beams of one side of the tabernacle [These "five" are three, the upper and lower bars, respectively, consisting of two equal (fifteen cubit segments) running along the side wall, and one bar running the entire length through a hole bored in each beam.]
	And five bars for the beams of the second side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the beams of the side of the tabernacle at the western ends.
	And the middle bar in the midst of the beams shall extend from end to end.
	And the beams shall you cover with gold, and their rings shall you make of gold [to serve as] housings for the bars, and you shall cover the bars with gold [i.e., They will be "covered" with gold when they are inserted into the golden rings flanked by the golden half-reeds on either side.]
	And you shall set up the tabernacle after the manner which will have been shown to you [by the L rd] in the mountain.
	And you shall make a parocheth (partition) of blue wool and purple wool and scarlet wool and twisted linen. Artistic work shall he make it, cherubs. [See Rashi on verse 1].
	And you shall place it on four pillars of acacia wood covered with gold, their hooks of gold [(Hooks bent upwards were set in the pillars on which to place the pole on which the top of the parocheth was wrapped)] (the pillars standing) upon four sockets of silver.
	And you shall put the parocheth under the hooks, and you shall bring there, inside the parocheth, the ark of testimony; and the parocheth shall separate for you between the holy and the holy of holies.
	And you shall put the kaporeth (the lid) upon the ark of testimony in the holy of holies.
	And you shall place the table outside the parocheth, and the menorah opposite the table on the southern side of the tabernacle; and the table shall you place on the northern side.
And you shall make a screen [a curtain] for the entrance of the tent, of blue wool, purple wool, scarlet wool, and twisted linen, the work of an embroiderer [needlework, the figures on one side being the same as those on the other.]
	And you shall make for the screen five pillars of acacia wood, and you shall cover them with gold, and their hooks (shall be) of gold; and you shall cast for them five copper sockets.


Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29



Chapter 30



Chapter 31



Chapter 32


...

Chapter 33



Chapter 34



Chapter 35

Y Moshe reunió a toda la congregación de los hijos de Yisra᾽el, y les dijo: Estas son las palabras que el Señor ha mandado, que las hagáis.
Seis días se trabajará, pero el séptimo día será para vosotros un día santo, un sábado de reposo para el Señor: cualquiera que trabaje en él, morirá.
No encenderéis fuego en vuestras habitaciones en día de reposo.
Y Moshe habló a toda la congregación de los hijos de Yisra᾽el, diciendo: Esto es lo que mandó el Señor, diciendo:
Tomad de entre vosotros una ofrenda para el Señor; el que tenga un corazón dispuesto, que la traiga, una ofrenda para el Señor; oro, plata y bronce,
azul, púrpura, escarlata, lino fino y pelo de cabra,
y pieles de carnero teñidas de rojo, y pieles de taĥash, y madera de acacia,
y aceite para el alumbrado, y especias aromáticas para el aceite de la unción, y para el incienso aromático,
y piedras de shoham, y piedras para engastar para el efod, y para el pectoral.
Y todo hombre sabio de corazón de entre vosotros vendrá, y hará todo lo que el Eterno ha mandado;
el tabernáculo, su tienda, su cubierta, sus cerraduras, sus tablas, sus barras, sus columnas y sus basas,
el arca y sus varas, con la cubierta y el velo de la pantalla,
la mesa y sus varas, y todos sus utensilios, y el pan de la proposición,
también el candelero para el alumbrado, sus vasos y sus lámparas, con el aceite para el alumbrado,
y el altar del incienso, y sus varas, y el aceite de la unción, y el incienso de especias aromáticas, y la cortina para la puerta a la entrada del tabernáculo,
el altar del holocausto, con su rejilla de bronce, sus varas y todos sus utensilios, la fuente y su pedestal,
las cortinas del atrio, sus columnas y sus basas, y la cortina para la puerta del atrio,
las estacas del tabernáculo, y las estacas del atrio, y sus cuerdas,
las ropas para ministrar en el lugar santo, las vestiduras sagradas para el sacerdote Aarón, y las vestiduras de sus hijos para ministrar en el sacerdocio.
Y toda la congregación de los hijos de Yisra᾽el se apartó de la presencia de Moshé.
Y vino todo aquel cuyo corazón lo motivó, y todo aquel a quien su espíritu dio voluntad, y trajeron la ofrenda del Señor para la obra de la Tienda de Reunión, y para todo su servicio, y para las vestiduras sagradas.
Y vinieron, tanto hombres como mujeres, todos los de corazón dispuesto, y trajeron brazaletes y zarcillos y anillos y brazaletes, todas las joyas de oro, y todos los hombres que habían ofrecido una ofrenda de oro al Señor.
Y todos los hombres que tenían azul, púrpura, escarlata, lino fino, pelo de cabra, pieles rojas de carnero y pieles de tahash, las trajeron.
Todo el que hacía ofrenda de plata y de bronce traía la ofrenda del Eterno; y todo aquel que tenía madera de acacia para cualquier obra del servicio, la traía.
Y todas las mujeres sabias de corazón hilaron con sus manos, y trajeron lo que habían hilado, azul, púrpura, escarlata y lino fino.
Y todas las mujeres cuyo corazón las impulsó a la sabiduría, hilaron pelo de cabra.
Y los príncipes trajeron piedras de shoham, y piedras de engaste, para el efod, y para el pectoral;
y especias aromáticas y aceite: para el alumbrado, y para el aceite de la unción, y para el incienso de especias aromáticas.
Los hijos de Yisra᾽el trajeron una ofrenda voluntaria al Señor, todo hombre y mujer, cuyo corazón los hizo dispuestos a traer para toda clase de trabajo, que el Señor había mandado por mano de Moshé que se hiciera.
Y Moshe dijo a los hijos de Yisra᾽el: Mirad, el Señor ha llamado por nombre a Beżal᾽el hijo de Uri, hijo de Ḥur, de la tribu de Yehuda;
y lo ha llenado del espíritu de Dios, en sabiduría, en inteligencia, en ciencia y en todo arte;
y para idear obras de arte, para trabajar en oro, en plata y en bronce,
y en el tallado de piedras, para engastarlas, y en el tallado de madera, para hacer toda obra de arte.
Y ha puesto en su corazón que puede enseñar, tanto él como Oholi᾽av, el hijo de Aĥisamakh, de la tribu de Dan.
Los ha llenado de sabiduría de corazón, para hacer toda obra, de grabador, de artífice y de bordador, en azul, en púrpura, en escarlata, en lino fino, y en tejedor, aun de los que hacen cualquier obra, y de los que idean obra artística.