Shaarei Kedusha
שערי קדושה
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Shaarei_Kedusha
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Shaarei Kedusha

Introduction

Thus said the young Chayyim son of the honorable Rabbi Yoseph Vital ZLH"H (may his memory be for life in the world to come).
I saw ascenders (mystical students), and they were few, craving to ascend, and the ladder was hidden from their eyes, and they contemplated the primordial books, to seek and find ways of life, the path they would go and the work that they would do, to raise their souls to its lofty root, and to cleave to the Blessed One, for he is the permanent wholeness in the same way as the prophets (OR that is the fulfillment of Netzach - one of the qabbalistic pillars of prophecy - in the way of the prophets), for all their days they were cleaved to their creator, and by this cleaving she, the Holy Spirit, ministered to them, to teach them what is the way they would bring down (lit. seat) light, to light up their eyes with the secrets of Torah, as David the King, peace be upon him, prayed, "uncover my eyes and I will behold wonder from your Torah," and to teach them the right path, to go to the city dwelling prepared from them with the ascenders, and after them came the first Hasidim, called "Pharisees," and they sought to follow on the heels of prophets and their circles, and to imitate them, in the rocky caves and wildernesses, and they expounded the ways of human beings (common ethics), and from them, Pharisees in their houses (cloistered?), after the example of those that walk in the wilderness, and all day and all night continually and unceasing, to praise their creator with immersion in Torah, and with songs of David the King peace be upon him, which are gladdening to the heart, until it [the heart] would cleave their contemplations with strength and vigorous zeal to the supernal lights. They continued like this all their days, until the ascended to the rung of the Holy Spirit, and they prophesied and did not cease, as Targum Onqelos says, "and they did not break." ...




Its partition is four parts:
The First Part, instruction on the path of Hassidut and Pirshut (Interpretation), which is brought about by the agency of the Holy Spirit, and it is further divided into six gates. The Second Part, rebukes, and elucidation of the punishment and the reward for positive and negative mitzvot (commandments), and it is divided into seven gates. The Third Part, instruction on attainment to the Holy Spirit itself, and it is divided into eight gates. The Fourth Part, the operations of yichudim (unifications) themselves, whereby one will attain to the Holy Spirit, which I have examined, tried and perfected on my own.

The First Part is divided into six gates. The first, to make known the enormity  of the defect caused by human sin relative to the mitzvot. The second, how the defect is perpetuated by various middot (emotional characteristics or intelligences). The third, explanation of a righteous or beloved name. The fourth, explanation of the level of the tzaddiq (righteous person, saint) in detail. The fifth, explanation of the level of the hasid (beloved or loyal person) in detail. The sixth, a very brief explanation of the meditation of hasids, summarizing each of the gates which are in this part.
The Second Part...

Part 1





Shaar 1









It is found that the human body is fashioned from four mundane foundations (or elements), and they include both good and bad, and the human body is frashioned from the good that is within four foundations - fire, wind (air), water, dust (earth), their fashioning from the bad that is in them is fashioned from four biles which are - the white (phlegm), the black (black bile), the red (choler), and the yellow (yellow bile). Whenever any one of them is overpowered by the bad that is in them, according to the corresponding good that is within them, then sicknesses and plagues afflict the human being, and if it is overpowered too much, the human body will die.


Part 2





Part 3





Part 4



