Ohr Zarua LaTzadik
אור זרוע לצדיק
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Ohr_Zarua_LaTzadik
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Ohr Zarua LaTzadik

Introduction



Thirteen Principles of Conduct



The Egyptian Exile



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6
















Therefore, Amram's and Yocheved's names were not make known at this time because their intention was not specifically this birth. And there is the possibility that Amram's intention really was like we said "what you have been commanded, perform; why do you involve yourself with the secrets of the Compassionate One" (see Berakhot 10a). And this is what is intended from Moshe Our Teacher Peace Be Upon Him: the written Torah. And sometimes it is a "time to act for Hashem, they interrupted Your Torah". And this is the divorces of Amram, and they were not made explicit in the Torah because this is "interrupted Your Torah", and this is "cancelling Torah" and the birth of Moshe OTPBUH. But we find that "cancelling Torah is its foundation" and therefore this came through those divorces, and so "her beauty returned to her", as explained. And this means that through the longing, and lust, and through this Moshe OTPBUH was born, and this is "its foundation".
And at the beginning of the building of Torah, this idea, that "the cancelling of Torah is its foundation" - one needs to know that sometimes "cancelling is its foundation", and specifically not the order as it is ordered. And Miriam was the awakening of Torah, since from her came King David PBUH, and in her was found the strength of the totality of Torah. And [the idea of] "the end of the act was in the beginning of thought" always applies, and her end was attached to his beginning, and therefore it was in her the stirring of the birth of the beginning of Torah, and she prophesied regarding him. Just that his birth came from the side of the enslavement of Israel, and their desire and hope for salvation, and from the side of the evil of the Egyptians - since his birth is close to the verse "every son etc and every daughter you shall keep alive". The intention behind the expression "keep alive" is in line with what is written in Yevamot 60b regarding the verse "every young woman keep alive for you" (Numbers 31:18) , that means they wanted to have them for themselves. And it is known, and explained elsewhere, that two basic evil traits are "do not murder" and "do not commit adultery" and they have two opposites. And regarding the Egyptians, those two were combined in one, "every boy... every girl..." And from the two opposites Moshe OTPBUH was born, since the basics of the Torah is to maintain opposites as one, cruelty (to evil people) and compassion, and so on, as I wrote somewhere else.
Nevertheless, from the side "and every daughter you keep alive", from that the meaning is that from that they were able to make live, they merited that from them came one daughter, and this is Batya, who enabled people to live, and not kill them, and she saved Moshe OTPBUH as explained above, that from the Egyptians themselves, through their hands, the light of Torah come out (?). And [even] through the decree "the daughter you will let live", which was also from the side of their "wisdom" to do evil and do sexual transgressions. Nevertheless, in every place there is a point of goodness, without which it would not exist. And the point of goodness in this, that "the daughter you will let live, even though this was their thought of evil there was a side of little goodness, that from there came Batyah. And she brought to light the name of Moshe. She wanted to say that the intention and root of the Torah is to be taken as a burden from the river of Egypt and this is why they are called "words of Torah the impediment", as explained. This is the root of the name Torah, because if it weren't so, behold, they would really be angels, there is the impulse to evil and jealousy only among people, specifically, as our sages say. And through the fact that wickedness is inserted in the water, and the essence is taken from what is useless, this is the standing with words of Torah.

Large Aleph; Small Aleph



Large Beth; Small Beth



Formative Letters



On the Sacred Language



Novellae

On Mitzvot





Rambam

Kriat Shema



Sanhedrin



Mamrim



Melachim



Rif

Berachot



Shabbat



Mordechai

Shabbat

