Mishneh Torah, Kings and Wars
משנה תורה, הלכות מלכים ומלחמות
Maimonides' Mishneh Torah, edited by Philip Birnbaum, New York, 1967
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH002108864

Mishneh Torah, Kings and Wars



Chapter 1





No woman is appointed head of the government, as it is written: "I will set a king over you" (Deuteronomy 17:15), and not a queen. So too, only a man is appointed to whatever office that is established over the people of Israel.

When a king is inaugurated, he is anointed with anointing oil, as it is written: "Samuel took a flask of oil and poured it over his head and kissed him" (I Samuel 10:1). Once the king is anointed, he wins the office for himself and his children forever. Kingship is inheritable, as it is written: "In order that he and his descendants may reign long in the midst of Israel" (Deuteronomy 17:20). If he left a little son, the kingship is kept for him until he grows up, as Jehoiada did for Joash. Whoever has priority in what concerns inheritance has priority in what concerns the inheritance of royalty. The elder son has precedence over the younger one. Not only royalty, but all appointive offices over the people of Israel are inherited by son and grandson forever, provided that the son succeeds his parents in wisdom and piety. If, however, he succeeds them in piety only, he is nevertheless appointed in the place of his father, even though he does not succeed him in wisdom, and he is given instruction thereafter. One who has no reverence for God is not appointed to any office over the people of Israel, even if he possesses great knowledge.— —




The son of a king is not anointed unless there has been dissension or fighting [over the throne], in which case he is anointed to put an end to the dissension. Accordingly, Solomon was anointed because of Adonijah, Joash because of Athaliah, and Jehoahaz because of Jehoiakim his brother.

Chapter 2

The king is treated with great respect. The heart of everyone must be inspired with awe and reverence for him.— —

He must not be seen when he is naked, or when he is taking a haircut or a bath, or when he dries himself after a bath.— —


Even as Scripture has conferred great honor upon him and imposed on all the duty of respecting him, it likewise charged him to humble himself profoundly, as it is written: "My heart is pierced within me" (Psalm 109:22). He must not behave arrogantly toward Israel, as it is written: "He shall not act haughtily toward his brethren" (Deuteronomy 17:20). He should treat both small and great graciously and compassionately, directing them in their best interests, and respecting the honor of the lowliest. When addressing the public in general, he should speak gently, as it is written: "Hear me, my brothers, my people" (I Chronicles 28:2). It is written moreover: "If you will be a servant to this people today … if you speak favorable words to them, they will be your servants for all time" (I Kings 12:7). He should ever practise deep humility. We have none greater than Moses, our teacher; yet, he said: "What then are we? Your grumbling is not against us" (Exodus 16:8). He should bear the heavy burden of them along with their bickering and anger, as a nurse puts up with an infant. Scripture calls him <i>shepherd</i>, as it is written: "To be a shepherd over his people Jacob" (Psalm 78:71). The way of a shepherd is plainly stated in the prophetic text: "Like a shepherd he feeds his flock; in his arms he gathers the lambs, carrying them in his bosom…" (Isaiah 40:11).

Chapter 3

When the new king is seated on his royal throne, he must have a <i>Sefer Torah</i> written for himself, in addition to the one he has inherited from his parents. He must have the new copy proofread by the Supreme Court of seventy-one from the copy deposited in the Temple Court. If his parents left him no copy or it was lost, he must write two copies of the Torah: one he should place in his archives; he is ordered to write this one like any member of Israel; the second must not be removed from him except when — — he enters a place that is not suitable for reading. When he sets out to make war, it must be with him; when he comes back from war, it must be with him; when he sits in judgment, it must be with him ; when he sits down to eat, it must be in front of him, as it is written: "It shall remain with him, and he shall read it all the days of his life" (Deuteronomy 17:19).



The king must not drink to the point of intoxication, as it is written: "It is not for kings to be drinking wine" (Proverbs 31:4). He should rather be occupied day and night with Torah and the needs of his people Israel, as it is written: "It shall remain with him, and he shall read it all the days of his life."


The king has a right to execute anyone who rebels against him.— —
If a person disregards a royal decree because he happens to be busy with religious duties, even one light precept, he is not punished : where the words of the Master and the words of a servant are in conflict, those of the Master have precedence. It is needless to say that if the king decreed to abolish a religious precept, he should be disobeyed.

Chapter 4



Chapter 5

At first, the king may wage only a religious war. Which is called a war for religious purposes? The war against the seven nations [of Canaan], the battle against Amalek, in defense of Israel from attacking enemies. Thereafter he may wage an optional war, a war against other peoples, to extend Jewish territory and to augment his military prestige.
In the case of a religious war, the king does not have to obtain the sanction of the Supreme Court. He may at any time set out independently and compel the people to come out with him. But in case of an optional war, he can bring out the people only by a decision of the court of seventy-one.
The king may break through anyone's property to make a road for himself, and none may protest against him. No limit is prescribed for the king's road. He makes use of as much as he needs. He is not required to proceed by a detour because of somebody's vineyard or field. He takes the straight line and pursues his battles.





One must not leave Eretz Yisrael for any other country except when going to study Torah, or to get married, or to save something from heathen, while planning to return. One may leave Eretz Yisrael also for business purposes, but not to establish residence in the Diaspora, unless a famine has become so severe in Eretz Yisrael that a denar's worth of wheat is priced two denars. This applies only when money is available and farm products are high; but if farm products are cheap and money is not obtainable, if one cannot make wages and is penniless, he may go to any place where he can earn a living. Yet, even though it is permissible to leave, it is not an act of piety.— —
The great sages used to kiss the rocks within the area of Eretz Yisrael, rolling themselves in its dust, as it is written: "Thy servants hold her stones dear, and favor her dust" (Psalm 102:15).
The sages have declared: "Whoever resides in Eretz Yisrael, his sins are forgiven." — — So too, whoever is buried in Eretz Yisrael obtains atonement, as if the place wherein he is buried were an altar of atonement, as it is written: "The land makes expiation for his people" (Deuteronomy 32:43). But when Scripture speaks of punishment, it is written: "You shall die in an unclean land" (Amos 7:17). There is no comparison between one whom Eretz Yisrael absorbs while he is alive and one whom it absorbs after his death. Nevertheless, the great sages used to bring their dead to Eretz Yisrael. Think of Jacob our father and of the upright Joseph!
One should ever live in Eretz Yisrael, even in a town that is inhabited mostly by heathen ; one should not live in the Diaspora, even in a town that is mostly inhabited by Jews; whoever moves from Eretz Yisrael to the Diaspora is regarded as if he yielded to idolatry.— —

Chapter 6

No war is to be waged with anyone in the world before offering him terms of peace, whether it is an optional or a religious war, as it is written: "When you approach a town to attack it, you shall first offer it terms of peace" (Deuteronomy 20:10). If the inhabitants have responded peaceably and accepted the seven precepts imposed upon the descendants of Noah, none of them should be slain but taxed, as it is written: "They shall do forced labor for you and serve you" (11).— — The tax imposed upon them consists in being prepared to serve the king physically and financially, as in the case of building walls and fortifying strongholds, or constructing a palace for the king, and the like.— —

It is forbidden to prove false to the pact made with them, to deceive them when they have accepted the terms of peace and the seven precepts.



When a city is besieged in order to capture it, it must not be surrounded on all four sides but only on three sides, so as to leave room for a refugee, and anyone who wishes to escape.— —

Chapter 7

Whether in case of a religious or an optional war, a priest is appointed to address the troops ; he is anointed with the anointing oil, and is designated as the anointed-for-battle.
The anointed-for-battle addresses the troops on two occasions: once on the frontier, when they are about to set out, just before the battle is started; he says to the people: "Is there anyone who has planted a vineyard but has never enjoyed its fruits? Let him go back to his home…" (Deuteronomy 20:6). Hearing this, anyone belonging to this category within the ranks returns home. The second time, he addresses those joining the battle: "Do not be afraid; do not be alarmed" (3).
When the battle lines are drawn up, and they are drawing near the attack, the anointed-for-battle mounts a platform and, facing the armed forces, addresses them in Hebrew: "Hear, O Israel! You are about to join battle with your enemies. Do not lose courage, fear not, tremble not, be not afraid of them; for it is the Lord your God who goes with you, to fight for you against your enemies, to bring you victory" (3-4). Thus far the anointed-for-battle speaks; another priest loudly repeats this to all the people. The anointed-for-battle then continues: "Is there anyone who has built a new house but has not dedicated it? Let him go back to his home… Is there anyone who has planted a vineyard but has never yet enjoyed its fruits? Let him go back to his home… Is there anyone who has betrothed a woman and has not yet taken her as his wife? Let him go back home…" (5-7). Thus far the anointed-for-battle speaks; and an officer loudly repeats this to all the people. Then the officer continues on his own: "Is there anyone who is afraid and weakhearted? Let him go back home" (8) ; and another officer loudly repeats this to all the people.
When all those entitled to return home have gone back from among the troops, the battle lines are set in order; military officers are appointed to head the troops; strong and brave guards are stationed behind each line; they hold iron axes in their hands. If anyone desires to retreat from the battle field, they have a right to cut off his leg, since flight is the beginning of defeat.— —




All those who went back home from among the troops, after hearing the priest's proclamation, return now and provide water and food for their fellow soldiers and fix the roads.





"Anyone who is afraid and weakhearted" is to be understood literally; that is, his heart is not strong enough to join the battle ranks. But after joining the battle ranks, he must rely on God who is the hope of Israel, its savior in time of need. He should know that he is fighting for the Oneness of God; he should take his life in his hand, and fear nothing; he should not think of his wife nor of his children but blot out their memory from his mind and concentrate on the battle. Anyone who starts thinking and reflecting in the midst of battle, and gets himself alarmed, transgresses a prohibitive command, as it is written: "Be not weakhearted or afraid; be neither alarmed nor frightened by them" (3). Furthermore, he is answerable for all the blood of Israel. If he has not fought with all his heart and soul, it is as if he had shed the blood of all, as it is written: "Lest his comrades lose heart like himself" (8).— —

Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11

King Messiah will arise and restore David's realm to its former status, its original sovereignty.— —

Do not suppose that King Messiah will have to perform signs and wonders, create new things in the world, revive the dead, or similar acts. It is not so. Rabbi Akiva was a great sage, one of the authors of the Mishnah, yet he was the right-hand man of Ben Koziva, the ruler, whom he thought to be King Messiah. He and all the sages of his generation imagined Bar Kohkba to be King Messiah until he was slain unfortunately. Once he was slain, it dawned on them that he was not [Messiah]. Yet the sages had not asked him for an omen or a wonder. Basically, things are as follows: This Torah of ours, its statutes and laws, will never be subject to change. Nothing is to be added to or taken away from them. Whoever has added or taken away anything, or has misinterpreted the Torah and rendered the commands in opposition to their literal sense, is an impostor, a sinful man, a heretic.
If a king will arise from the house of David, a student of Torah, performing good deeds like his ancestor David, in the spirit of both the Written and the Oral Torah, and prevail upon all Israel to reinstate the Torah and to follow its direction, and will fight the battles of the Lord, he will presumably be the Messiah. If he has done these things and succeeded, having overcome the surrounding enemy nations and rebuilt the sanctuary on its site and gathered the dispersed of Israel, he will certainly be the Messiah. If he has not succeeded to such an extent, or has been slain, it is certain that he is not the one concerning whom the Torah has assured us.— —

Chapter 12

It must not be supposed that in the messianic days any of the laws of nature will cease to exist, or that some new creation will then come into being within the created universe. Indeed, the world will continue in its normal course [without change]. What is written in Isaiah: "The wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid" (11:6) should be understood figuratively. It signifies that the Israelite people will dwell securely among the world's evil men who are likened to wolves and leopards, as it is written : "Wolves of the desert ravage them, leopards keep watch round their cities" (Jeremiah 5:6). They will all turn to the true religion, and will neither plunder nor destroy; they will indeed eat what is permissible, gently, along with Israel, as it is written: "The lion shall eat straw like any ox" (7). So too, all similar biblical passages referring to the Messiah are metaphorical. During the messianic era, their precise metaphorical significance will become known to all.
The sages have declared : "The only difference between the present world and the messianic era is our present subjection to foreign powers" (Berakhoth 34b). From a literal interpretation of the Prophets it appears that at the beginning of the messianic age the war of Gog and Magog will be launched, and that prior to that war a prophet will arise among the people of Israel to keep their heart steadfast, as it is written: "Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet" (Malachi 3:23).— — He will come only to establish peace in the world, as it is written: "He will turn the hearts of the fathers to their children, and the hearts of the children to their fathers" (24). Some of the sages declare that Elijah will appear before the advent of King Messiah. No person is in a position to know how all these things and their like will happen until they will eventually take place. They are mentioned by the prophets vaguely, not explicitly. Nor have the sages any traditional knowledge concerning these matters, except what they gather from the implication of the biblical verses. Hence, there is disagreement among them on this subject. At any rate, neither the sequence of these events nor their minute details are of basic importance in religion. One should never deal with legendary topics, nor stretch midrashic statements on these and similar subjects. He should not consider them essential, since they do not lead to love and reverence [for God]. Nor should one reckon the end of days [from biblical indications]. The sages have said: "Let despair come to those who make calculations" (Sanhedrin 97b). One should rather hopefully wait, and believe in the principles of things, as we have explained.

The prophets and the sages longed for the messianic days not in order to dominate the nations of the world, nor to rule over them, nor to be exalted by them, nor to eat and drink and rejoice, but to be free to study Torah, with no one to oppress or disturb them, so as to deserve life in the world to come, as we have explained in the section on repentance.
In that era there will be no famine, no war, no envy, no strife. Prosperity will be plentiful, and all kinds of luxuries will be available like dust. The universal preoccupation will be primarily to know the Lord. Consequently, the people of Israel will be very wise; the things that are now vague and deeply hidden will be revealed to all; they will attain a knowledge of their Creator to the utmost human capacity, as it is written: "The land shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea" (Isaiah 11:9).