Mishneh Torah, Kings and Wars
משנה תורה, הלכות מלכים ומלחמות
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Mishneh Torah, Kings and Wars



Chapter 1



Chapter 2

They behave towards the king with great respect. And they place for him great fear and awe in the heart of every person. As it says, "you shall surely place," i.e., that his fear be on you. They do not ride on his horse. And they do not sit on his throne. And they do not use his scepter, his crown, or any of his instruments. And when he dies, all of them are burnt before him. And similarly one may not use his slaves or slave-women and servants, unless one is another king. Thus Avishag was permitted to Solomon and forbidden to Adonijah. 
But no one may ever have sexual intercourse with the wife of the king. Even the king may not marry the widow or divorcee of another king. 



Just as Scripture has granted [the king] great honor and obligated all in honoring him, so has it enjoined [the king] to be humble and empty (of self-pride), as it is written, "and my heart is empty within me" (Psalms 109:22).  He should not act more proudly than necessary toward [the people] Israel, as it is written, "Thus he will not act haughtily toward his fellows" (Deuteronomy 17:20).  He should be gracious and merciful toward the lowly and the great.  He should show concern for their property and welfare.  He should show regard for the dignity of the lowliest.   When he addresses the public, he should speak gently, as it is written, "Hear me, my brothers, my people!" (I Chronicles 28:2).  It is also written, "If you will be a servant to these people today, etc." (I Kings 12:7).  He should always behave with great modesty.  None was greater than our Teacher Moses of whom it is written, "What are we?  Your complaints are not with us..." (Exodus 16:8).  He should bear with their troublesomeness, burdensomeness, complaining, and irritation as a governor bears with an infant.  Scripture dubs him a shepherd:  "to tend His people Jacob" (Psalms 78:71).  The way of the shepherd is stated in Tradition [that is, the Prophets], "as a shepherd He pastures his flock: He gathers the lambs in His arms and carries them in His bosom..." (Isaiah 40:11). 

Chapter 3




He should not amass silver and gold for the sake of depositing in his treasuries and boasting of them or of adorning himself with them.  Rather [he may amass silver and gold] in order to pay his soldiers, courtiers, and servants.  As for any silver and gold that he amasses for the treasury of the house of the Name or to prepare for public needs and wars, it is the fulfillment of a precept to do so.  It is only forbidden [for him] to amass for himself in his own treasuries, as it is written "He shall not amass for himself" (Deuteronomy 17:17).  If he does so amass, he is lashed.

Similarly, he should not be licentious with women.  Even if he has only one wife, he may not consort with her at all times as fools do, as it is written, "Do not give your strength to women" (Proverbs 31:3).  The Torah shows concern to avoid his becoming distracted, as it is written, "He shall not turn aside his mind [lit. heart]" (Deuteronomy 17:17).  For his mind is the mind of the entire congregation of Israel.  Therefore, Scripture bids him cleave to the Torah more than [it does] the rest of the people, as it is written, "all the days of his life" (Deuteronomy 17:19).

Chapter 4



Chapter 5

At first, a king should fight only obligatory wars. Which wars are obligatory? The wars of the seven nations, and the war of Amalek, and saving Israel from an enemy who comes against them. And after that, he may fight a discretionary war, which means a war fought against any other nation in order to widen Israel's boundaries and increase its greatness and reputation. 
An obligatory war does not require that he seek permission from the court, rather he may go forth on his own at any time and compel the people to go out, but for a discretionary war he may not bring forth the people except in accordance with the court of seventy one.
And he may break through [property] to make a road and no one can oppose it. And there is no limit to the size of a king's road. Rather, it is according to what he needs. He does not curve the roads because of the vineyard of this [one] or because of the field of that [one], but rather he goes straight and fights his war.
It is a positive commandment to destroy the seven nations, as it is stated (Deuteronomy 20:17), "you shall surely destroy them." And anyone who chances upon one of them and does not kill him transgresses a negative commandment, as it is stated (Deuteronomy 20:16), "do not let any soul live." And their memory has already vanished.
And so [too] is it a positive commandment to destroy the memory of Amalek, as it is stated (Deuteronomy 25:19), "erase the memory of Amalek." And it is a positive commandment to always remember his evil deeds and his ambush in order to arouse enmity, as it is stated (Deuteronomy 25:17), "Remember what Amalek did to you."  From the tradition, they learned, "'remember' - with your mouth - 'do not forget' - with your heart, as it is forbidden to forget his enmity and his hatred.  
All lands that Israel conquers with a king in accordance with the court, behold this is [considered] a conquest of the community, and behold, it is like the conquest of Yehoshua in every regard. And that is if they conquered it after the conquest  of the entire land of Israel that is stated in the Torah. 
And it is permissible to dwell in the whole world except fo the land of Egypt; from the Great Sea to the West it is four hundred parasangs by four hundred parasangs, across from the land of Kush and across from the desert. All [Jews] are forbidden to settle there. In three places did the Torah prohibit [us] from not returning to Egypt, as it is stated: "you shall not return upon this path again" (Deuteronomy 17:16); "you shall not continue to see it any more" (Deuteronomy 28:68); "you shall not continue to see them any more, forever" (Exodus 14:13). And Alexandria is within the category of the prohibition. 
It is permissible to return to the land of Egypt for merchandise or for business or to conquer other lands [adjacent to it]. It is only prohibited to tarry there. And we do not give lashes for this prohibition. As at the time of his entering, it was permissible; and if he thinks to settle and to tarry there, there is no act (as lashes are only administered if there is a forbidden act). And it appears to me that if a king of Israel conquers the land of Egypt in accordance with the court, that it is permissible; and [the Torah] only prohibited individuals from returning or dwelling there when it is in the hands of the gentiles, since their deeds are more corrupted than all of the lands, as it is stated (Leviticus 18:3), "Like the doings of the land of Egypt." 
It is always prohibited to go from the land of Israel to outside of the land, except to study Torah or to marry a woman or to save (possessions) from non-Jews, and [then] to return to the land. And so [too] may he go out for merchandise. But to dwell outside the Land is prohibited unless there is intense famine, where the amount of wheat purchasable for one dinar becomes two dinars. To what does these words refer? When money is ample and produce is expensive. However, if produce is inexpensive and money is not ample, and there is not from what to earn [it] and coinage is gone from the pocket, he may go out to any place where he can find relief. And even though it is permissible to go out [in these circumstances], it is not the measure of piety; as behold, Machlon and Khilion were two leaders of the generation and they left because of great anguish, and [nonetheless] they became liable for destruction from the Omnipresent. 
The great sages would kiss the borders of the land of Israel and kiss its stones and roll in its dirt. And so [too], it states (Psalms 102:15), "For Your servants wanted its stones and its dirt they favored."
The sages said, "Anyone who dwells in the land of Israel has his iniquities forgiven, as it is stated (Isaiah 33:24), 'And that the neighbor not say, "He has become sick"; the nation that dwells in it is forgiven of iniquity.'" Even if [one] walks four ells in it, he merits life in the world to come. And so [too], one who is buried there is absolved, as if it were an altar of absolution, as it is stated (Deuteronomy 32:43), "and His land will absolve its people." And as a punishment, it stated (Amos 7:17), "upon impure ground you will die." And one's reception [by the land] while alive is not the same as one'reception after one's death (the latter being less significant). And nonetheless, the great sages would bring their dead there. Go and lean [this] from our father, Yakov and from Yosef  the righteous.
Truly a person should dwell in the land of Israel, even in a city the majority of which are gentiles, and not dwell outside of the land, and even in a city the majority of which are Jews. As any one who goes out of the land is as if he worships idols, as it is stated (I Samuel 26:19), "as they have driven me away from clinging to the inheritance of God, saying 'Go worship other gods.'" And as a punishment, it stated (Ezekiel 13:9), "and to the ground of Israel they will not come." The same way that it is forbidden to go from the land to outside of the land, so [too] is it forbidden to go out from Babylonia to the other lands, as it is stated (Jeremiah 27:22), "To Babylonia will they be brought and there will they be."

Chapter 6

A war is never waged against anyone before peace is offered. This applies both to an obligatory war and to a permitted war, as it is written “when you get near a city to wage war against it, you must offer peace” (Deut. 20:10). If they agree and accept upon themselves the seven mitzvot given to the children of Noah, not a single soul is to be harmed, and they are to pay taxes , as it is written “they will pay taxes and serve you” (Deut. 20:11). If they accepted taxes but not servitude, or servitude and not taxes, we don’t listen to them, until they accepted both. … 


And if they did not make peace or they did make peace but did not accept the seven commandments, we make war with them and kill all of the adult males and loot all of their money and children. But we do not kill women and not children, as it is stated (Deuteronomy 20:14), "[and] the women and children" - this is [referring to] the male children. What are these words referring to? To an optional war, which is with the other nations. But if the seven nations or Amalek did not make peace, we do not leave one soul [alive], as it states (Deuteronomy 20:15-16), "Do this to all, etc. However, from the cities of [these] nations, [...] do not leave a soul alive." And so [too], regarding Amalek, it states (Deuteronomy 25:19), "obliterate the memory of Amalek." And from where [do we know] that it is only speaking about those that did not make peace? Since it states (Joshua 11:19-20), "There was no city that made peace with the Children of Israel, except for the Hivite, that dwelled in Giveon; everything they took in war. As it was from the Lord to strengthen their hearts to meet Israel in war, in order that they be destroyed." It is implied that they sent them [terms of] peace and they did not accept. 

When a city is sieged to be conquered, we do not surround the four sides of it , rather, only three, and a place is selected as a place where whoever wants to flee and save their lives can, as it is written: And they warred against Midian, as Hashem commanded Moshe (Num. 31:7) from the wording we understand that he was commanded.
We do not cut fruit-bearing trees that are outside the place, and we do not withdraw water so they will shrivel and die, as it is written: you must not destroy its trees (Deut. 20:19) and whoever cuts them receives lashes. And this does not apply just to the siege, but in every place whoever cuts down a fruit-bearing tree just to destroy receives lashes. But we do cut a tree if it is damaging other trees, or others’ field, or if its value is great – the Torah only forbids in the case of destruction.
Any fruitless tree can be cut, even if it unnecessary – and this applies to a fruit-bearing tree that was damaged and cannot bear fruit anymore, or if it bears only such a small quantity that we don’t bother harvesting it. And how much is necessary for it not to be cut? A olive tree – a quarter kav; a date tree – a full kav.Any fruitless tree can be cut, even if it unnecessary – and this applies to a fruit-bearing tree that was damaged and cannot bear fruit anymore, or if it bears only such a small quantity that we don’t bother harvesting it. And how much is necessary for it not to be cut? A olive tree – a quarter kav; a date tree – a full kav.

Chapter 7



Chapter 8











Anyone who accepts upon himself and carefully observes the Seven Commandments is of the Righteous of the Nations of the World and has a portion in the World to Come. This is as long as he accepts and performs them because (he truly believes that) it was the Holy One, Blessed Be He, Who commanded them in the Torah, and that is was through Moses our Teacher we were informed that the Sons of Noah had already been commanded to observe them. But if he observes them because he convinced himself logically, then he is not considered a Resident Convert and is not of the Righteous of the Nations of the World, and not even one of their wise.

Chapter 9

Regarding six things Adam the First was commanded: regarding foreign worship, and cursing [lit. blessing] God, and spilling blood, and forbidden sexual relations, and theft, and [a justice system]. Even though they are all received traditions in our hands from our teacher Moses, and reason is inclined to them from the principles of the Torah, it appears that regarding these he was commanded. He added for Noah [the prohibition on eating] the limb of a live animal, as it is said "but flesh in its life its blood you shall not eat." We find seven commandments. And so was the matter in the whole world until Abraham. Abraham came and he was commanded, in addition to these, with circumcision. And he prayed shaharit. And Isaac separated a tithe and added another prayer as the day wanes. And Jacob added the [fobidden] sinew and prayed arvit. And in Egypt Amram was commanded with additional commandments, until Moses our teacher came and the Torah was completed by himmatters was Adam the first commanded.
A Ben Noach (Son of Noah – a non-Jew that upholds the Seven Noahide Laws) that worshiped a foreign G-d (other than the G-d of Israel) is liable [for the Death Penalty]. And that is [specifically] if he worshiped it in it's normal manner. And for all foreign worship that the Jewish court of law puts [a Jewish person] to death, the Ben-Noach is put to death. And for all foreign worship that the Jewish court of law does not put [a Jewish person] to death, the Ben-Noach is not put to death. And although he is not put to death, it is all forbidden And we do not allow him to erect an altar, or plant an asheira tree (a tree that is used for idolatrous purposes), or to make images or the like for the sake of beautification.
A Ben Noach that blasphemed – whether he blasphemed the principal Name [of H-shem], or a blasphemed a contemporary name (of the G-d of Israel) he is liable [for the Death penalty] – in any language. This is not the case for a Jew.
A Ben Noach that killed a person – including an embryo in its mother's womb - is put to death for it. Even if he killed a wounded person, or tied up a person and placed him before a lion or he left him to starve until he died – since he caused him to die in any case, he is killed for this. Also, if he [the Ben Noach] killed a person that was pursuing him [the Ben Noach] to kill him and he [the Ben Noach] killed him when he could have saved his life by just maiming him – he is put to death for this. This is not the case for a Jew.
There are six forbidden [marital] relations that are forbidden to a Ben Noach – [these are marital relations with : the mother. the wife of the father. the wife of a man. his sister from his mother.a male and an animal. As it states [in the Torah – Bereshit / Genesis 2:24] "Therefor a man shall abandon his father" - this is the wife of his father.and his mother" (Ibid) [this refers to his mother] as what it refers to, "And he shall cling to his wife" (ibid) and not to the wife of his fellow; "And he shall cling to his wife" (ibid) and not to a male. "And they shall be one flesh" (ibid) - to exclude a beast, a wild animal, or a bird for him and they are not one flesh. And it states "my sister, the daughter of my father is she" - and not of my mother - "and she will be for me a wife" (Bereshit / Genesis 20:12)
A Ben Noach is liable for [the Death penalty for relations with] the woman his father seduced or that his father violated. Behold she is his mother in any case. And he is liable for [the Death penalty for relations with] the wife of his father - even after his father's death. And he is liable for [the Death penalty for relations with] a male whether a minor or an adult. And he is liable [the Death penalty for relations with] for an animal whether it is small or big. And only he [the person who committed the act] is killed himself – but not the animal – for they [Bnai Noach] are not commanded on killing the animal – only if it was a Yisrael (who committed the transgression do we kill the animal)....
A Ben Noach is not liable (for the Death penalty) (for adultery) on the wife of his fellow unless he goes (with her) in the normal manner after she has cohabited with her husband. However if she was betrothed or went under the marriage canopy and did not yet cohabit he is not liable as it states "and she is the cohabited of her husband" (Bereshit 20:3) What are these matters stated about, about a Ben Noach (a male that follows the 7 commandments) that cohabits with a Bat Noach (a female that follows the 7 commandments). However a non-Jew that cohabits with a Jewish woman – whether in the normal way or not in the way – he is liable [for the death penalty]. And if she was a betrothed maiden – he will be stoned for her – like the laws pertaining to the Jews. If he went with her after she entered the wedding canopy but before she cohabited with her husband he is strangled – like the laws for the Jews. However if he cohabited with a Jewish woman after she cohabited with her husband – he is like one that went with a wife of non-Jew – and is killed by the sword.
A Ben Noach that designated [for marriage] a maidservant for his male servant – he is killed for [his adultery with] her – because of [the law prohibiting adultery with] the wife of his fellow. And he is not liable [for the death penalty] upon her until the matter [that she was the wife of a servant] becomes widespread [knowledge] and the people say upon her – this [woman] is the wife of servant ploni (ploni is a name). And when will she become return to be permitted – when she separates from his servant and she uncovers her hair in the marketplace. And when will the wife of his fellow be considered as a gerusha (divorced) of ours – when he (her husband) removes her from his house and she will be sent on her own - or when she goes out from under his dominion and goes out herself – for she has no written divorce (requirement) – and the matter is not totally dependent upon him – rather as long as she or he wishes to separate from him or her – they may separate.
A Ben Noach is liable (for the death penalty) on theft whether it the theft of a non-jew or a Jew. And whether he stole money, or burgled money or he kidnapped or he withheld the wages of a daily laborer – and thing alike – even if a worker ate from food not at the time of work – on all he is liable and is in the category of a thief. Which is not the case for a Jew. And also he is liable for less than (stealing) the equivalent of a peruta (a monetary value - about 20 American cents). And if a ben noach stole less that the equivalent of a peruta and another ben noach stole it from him – both of them are put to death for it.
And also one is liable (for the death) for (eating) a limb (taken) from a live animal or from flesh (taken) from a live animal even in a minute amount. For amounts where not specified – only for Jews. However he is is permitted to (eat) blood (taken) from a live animal.
Whether a limb or flesh, one who separates it from a beast or a wild animal (he is executed); however – fowl it appears to me that a ben noach is not killed on eating from a live animal from it.
One who slaughters a beast – even if he slaughtered with two signs – as long as it is still moving - to a limb or flesh is forbidden to a ben noach because of (the law of eating from) a limb from a live animal.
Whatever is forbidden to a Jewish person because of (the law of eating) a limb (taken) from a living being it is forbidden to a Bnai Noach. And there are (instances) where a Ben Noach will liable (for punishment for eating), but not a Jew. For (with respect to) a ben noach whether a beast or a wild animal, whether a kosher or non-kosher animal a ben noach will liable for (punishment transgressing the law of eating) a limb of a live animal and/or the flesh of a living creature, However, a limb or flesh that is separated from a live animal that is still fidgeting – even though a benai Yisrael (Jew) slaughtered it with two signs (of proper kosher slaughtering – the trachea and the esophagus) – behold it is still forbidden to a benai noach (to eat from it) because of (the law of eating) a limb from a living creature.
And how are they commanded in [a justice system]? They are obligated to set up judges and justices in every single town to adjudicate about these six commandments and to warn the people [about them]. And a Noachide that transgresses one of these seven commandments is killed with the sword (decapitation). And because of this, all of the people of Shekhem were liable for the death penalty (Genesis 34) - as behold, Shekhem stole (kidnapped) and they saw and knew [it] and they did not try him. And a Noachide can be executed [based on the testimony of] one witness and with one judge, without [prior] warning], and according to the [testimony] of his relatives. And a woman may not [be a] judge [for] them.

Chapter 10

A Ben Noach that transgressed unintentionally is exempt (from punishment) from all of them (the transgressions) – except for an unintentional killer (for instance, if he was chopping down a tree and the ax head flew off the handle and killed someone nearby). That if the redeemer of blood (a blood relative that has the right to kill an unintentional killer) killed him (the unintentional killer) – he (the redeemer of blood) is not killed for (killing) him (the unintentional killer). And he (the unintentional killer) has no refuge cities (to escape to where an unintentional killer may not be killed by a redeemer of blood) -  however the courts of justice cannot have him executed. What case are we talking about – [about ] unintentionally [transgressing] one of the commandments without intention, for instance he had relations with the wife of his fellow, and he [actually] thought that she was his wife or single. However if he knew that she was his fellow's wife yet he did not know that she was forbidden to  him, rather it entered into his mind that this matter was permitted to him. And also if he killed and did not that it was forbidden to kill – behold this is close to being done intentionally – and he is executed. And this is not considered unintentional because he should have learned and he did not.
A Ben Noach that they forced a forced act to transgress on one of their commandments – it is permitted for him to transgress. Even if he is forced to transgress idol worship, for he is not commanded upon [giving his life] for the sanctification of Hashem. And we do not punish a child and not a deaf-mute and not a mentally incompetent person – for they are not obligated for mitzvot.
A ben noach that converted [to Judaism] and was circumcised and he immersed [in a mikve - ritual pool] and afterwards he wants to return from before Hashem – to be only a resident convert [who is only obligated for the 7 noahide laws] like he was previously – we do not listen to him. Rather he is treated like a Jew for all matters or he is executed. And if he was a minor when he was immersed [in a ritual bath] by the [Jewish] court of law – he can retract at the time he becomes an adult and he will be only a resident convert – and if he did not retract at the appropriate time – afterwards he cannot retract – behold he is a righteous convert [obligated for 613 commandments]. Therefor if a Jew had relations with a minor girl that performed [a ritual] immersion by the Beit Din [Jewish court of law], the money of her ketuva [marital contract] or of her penalty [payment she receives for] being violated or seduced [unlawfully] – will all be in the hands of the Beit Din until she reaches adulthood and she did not reject her conversion. Perhaps she wil take and become older and will reject [her conversion] and it will be found that the consumes money that she has no right to - only unless she was a lawfully Jewish.
A Ben Noach that blessed the Name [of G-d – ie, blasphemed] or that worshiped idols or went with the wife of his fellow or killed his fellow and then converted [to Judaism] – is exempt [from execution]. If he killed a Jew or he went with the wife of a Jew and he converted to Judaism is liable [for execution]. And we execute him with a sword for killing a Jew and strangle him for having relations with a wife of a Jew – for behold his law changes.
We already explained that all executions of Benei Noach are with the sword. Unless one had relations with a wife of a Jewish man that was betrothed by him – he will be stoned. And if he had relations after she entered the wedding canopy before she had relations [with her husband] – he will be strangled.
According to the tradition Benei Noach are forbidden to breed cattle and to graft trees only they are not executed for this. And a non-Jew that struck a Jew – even if he wounded him – even though he is liable for death – he is not executed.
The circumcision – was only commanded to Avraham and his descendants as it states "You and your descendants after you, for generations" (Bereshit / Genesis 17, 9). This excludes the descendants of Yishmael, as it states "Because with Yitshak will be called your descendants." (Bereshit / Genesis 21, 12) – This excludes Esav for behold Yitzhak (Isaac) said to Yaakov (Jacob) "And the blessing of Avraham will be given to you, you and your descendants." (Bereshit / Genesis 28, 4) – It comes to teach us that he (Yaakov / Jacob) only is the descendant of Avraham that upholds his religion and his righteous way and they (the descendants of Jacob) are obligated for circumcision.
Our sages of blessed memory said that the children of Keturah (Abraham's concubine) who are the descendants of Avraham that came after Yishmael and Yitzhak – are obligated on circumcision. They are all obligated of [completing]circumcision by the eighth day. And they are not executed for this.
A non-Jew that learned Torah is liable for death. They shall only deal with the their seven commandments. And also a non-Jew that rested – even during a weekday (of the Jews) – if they made the day for themselves like a Sabbath – they are liable for death. And it is understood – also if they made it into a holiday for themselves (the same applies). The general rule is : we do not let them establish a new religion and to do commandments for themselves according to their understanding – rather they shall become a righteous convert and accept upon themselves all of the  (613 Jewish) commandments or stand with their own book of laws (the seven commandments according to the Torah) and they shall not add or subtract. And if they did delve into the Torah or rested as per a Sabbath or created a new religion – we give them lashes and we punish them – and let them know that they are liable for death because of this. But we do not execute them.
A Ben Noach that wanted to do a mitzvah from the other mitzvahs of the Torah in order to receive a reward – we do not prevent them to do it according to the Jewish law. And if they brought an Olah (elevation) sacrifice (to the Temple – when it stood) we accept it from them. If they give charity we accept it from them. And it appears to me that we give it to the poor of Yisrael since he feeds a Jew and it is a Mitzvah upon them to sustain his life. However a non-Jew that gave charity – we accept it from them and give it to non-Jewish needy.
The Jewish court of law is obligated to appoint Judges for the sojourning converts (ie, benai noach) to Judge them according to their laws in order that the world not be destroyed. If the court of law saw it fit to appoint judges from them (the benei noach) they may be appointed. And if they saw it fit to appoint (Judges) for them from the Jews – they may be appointed.
Two non-Jews that came before a Jewish court of law to be Judged according to the Jewish laws – and both of them agreed – we make a judgement from the Torah. If one wants and the other does not – we do not force him to be judged – unless it is for their own laws. If their was a Jew and a non-Jew if there is a merit for the Jew to be judged according to their laws we judge them with their laws and say to them this is [the verdict of] your law. And if there is a merit for the Jew in our laws – we judge them according to the Torah and say to them this is [the verdict of] our law. And thus it appears to me that we deal with the sojourning converts with proper conduct and acts of loving kindness like a Jew – for we are commanded to sustain them as it states "To the sojourner in your gates give it to them and let them eat" (Devarim / Deut. 14:21) and this as what our sages said – how do we double for them peace among the nations – not for a sojourning convert. And even for non-Jews – our sages commanded us to visit the sick and to bury their dead with the dead of the Jews and to give sustenance to their needy among the needy of the Jews – because of promoting peaceful ways. Behold there is the verse - "Hashem is good with all and he is merciful upon all of his works" (Tehilim / Psalms 145, 9) and it is said "And its ways are ways of pleasantness and all its paths are peace." (Mishle – Proverbs 3, 17) 

Chapter 11

The King the Messiah (lit. the annointed) will stand up and return the Kingdom of the house of David to its old [glory], to the first rule, and build the Temple (lit. holy), and gather the scattered ones of the Israel, and return all of the laws in his days as they were before; bringing sacrifices, and making shmitahs (leaving the land fallow in the seventh year) and jubilees like all of the commandments that it says in the Torah.  And anyone who does not believe in him, or does not anticipate his arrival, it is not only in the other prophets that he is denying but in the Torah and in Moses our teacher; because the Torah testifies on him [the Messiah] as it says "and Hashem your Lord will return your captives and your pitied ones, and return and gather . . . if you scattered ones are at the end of the heavens . . . and Hashem will bring them to you. (Deuteronomy 30:5)"  And these express words in the Torah they include all of the things that were said by the hand of all of the prophets.  Even in the piece about Bilam it is said, and there he prophesied about the two messiahs--about the first messiah who is David who saved Israel from their enemies and from the last messiah who will arise from his children who will save Israel [in the end].  And there it says, "I will see him, but not now,(Number 24:17)"--that's David.  "I will behold him, but not nearby,"--that's the King Messiah.  "A star will come from Jacob"--that's David.  "And a scepter-bearer will arise out of Israel"--that's the King Messiah.  "He will strike the corners of Moab"--that's David."  And so it says "And he defeated Moab and measured them with a cord (2 Samuel 8:2)."  "..and destroy all the sons of Seth (Numbers 24:17)"--that's the King Messiah, as it is said about him "And his reign will be from sea to sea (Zachariah 9:10).  "And Edom will be an inheritance (Numbers 24:18)"--that's David, as it is said, "And Edom were slaves to David (2 Samuel 8:14)", etc.  "And it will be an inheritance, etc. (Numbers 24:18)" --that's the King Messiah, as it is said, "Saviors will ascend Mount Zion (Ovadiah 1:21)", etc. 
And as regarding the cities of refuge it states: "If the Lord your God expands your border" (Deuteronomy 19:8) "and you will add three cities" (Deuteronomy 19:9). And never in the world has this thing happened. And God did not command for naught But in the words of the prophets this matter does not need seeking out, because all the books are filled with this matter.
And don't think that the King Messiah needs to do wonders and signs and create a new reality in the world or resurrect the dead, or similar things. This is not the point (of The Messianic redemptive process). For Rebbe Akiva, the wisest of the Mishnaic sages, was the "weapons bearer" of The King Ben Kuziba (aka Bar Kochba). And he said concerning him (Ben Kuziba), that he was The King Messiah. And all the sages of the generation  were in agreement until he was killed due to his sins. Since he was killed they (then) knew that he was not (the Messiah). The sages did not request from him, neither a sign nor a wonder (i.e. miraculous actions) .The main thing is that the Torah and its laws and statutes are everlasting forever and ever, and we do not add or subtract from them....
And if a King arises from the House of David who is fitting in (observance) of the  Torah and fulfilling its commandments, and he compels all of Israel to follow it, and he strengthens it diligently, and he fights the was of God. Then, he is assumed to be the Messiah. If he fights and is victorious and defeats all of the surrounding nations, and builds The Temple in its place, and gathers all the scattered remnants of Israel, then he is definitely the Messiah. And he will repair the entire world to worship God together, as it is said, "For then I will change all of the peoples to [having] a clear language so they can all call God by name and worship Him as one." (Zephaniah 3:9) 
And if he's not successful with this, or if he is killed, it's known that he is not the one that was promised by the Torah. And thus, he is like all of the kosher kings from the House of David who died.  And The Holy One blessed be, only established him to test the masses, as it is said, 
Even Jesus the Christian who it seemed that he would be the Messiah and was killed in court, Daniel had already prophesied about him, as it is said, "And the violent men of your people will be lifted up to fulfill the vision, and they will be failed (Daniel 11:14)."  And is there a greater failure than this?  All of the prophets spoke of the Messiah, the redeemer of Israel and their savior, and the gatherer of the captives, and the strengthener of their mitzvot--but this one cause Jews to be lost by the sword, and for their remnants to be scattered and humbled, and to change the Torah, and for the majority of the world to do wrong by worshiping a god other than God.  
But, the plans of the creator of the world--no person can understand them for our ways are not the same as His ways and our plans are not His plans.  And all of these things about Jesus of Nazareth, and about that Ishmaelite who rose after him--they are only to make the path for the King Messiah straight, and to fix the whole world for worshipping God together, as it is said, "For I will give the peoples clear speech, for them all to call out the name of God, and to worship Him with one purpose (Zephaniah 3:9)
How?  The whole world is already filled with the words of the Messiah, and the words of the Torah, and the words of the Mitzvot, and these words have been spread on distant islands, and to many peoples of uncircumcised hearts, and they deal with these words, and with the mitzvot of the Torah--they say 'These mitzvot were true but they are already nullified in this time, they aren't applicable forever.'  And they say, 'There are things hidden in them, and they're not just a simple meaning, and the Messiah already came and revealed their secrets.'
And when the King Messiah rises for real, and he succeeds, and he is lifted up and exalted, they will immediately return and will know that their ancestors passed down lies to them and that their prophets and their ancestors made them do wrong.

Chapter 12

Don't think that in the days of the Messiah anything will be changed in the order of the world or that there will be some innovation in the works of creation.  Rather, the world will behave according to its custom.  And what is written in Isaiah, "And the wolf will live with the lamb and the tiger will lie down with the kid (Isaiah 11:6)"  is a metaphor and a riddle.  The ideas is that Israel will dwell safely with the evil idol worshipers who are compared to a wolf and to a tiger, as it is said, "A desert wolf will slaughter them and a tiger will keep watch over their cities (Jeremiah 5:6)."  And everybody will return to the religion of truth and they will not steal and they will not destroy.  Rather, they will eat the permitted things together with Israel, as it is said, "And the lion, like the herd, will eat straw (Isaiah 11:7)."  And so too all of things like this on the topic of the Messiah are metaphors.  And in the days of the King Messiah, it will be known to all what the metaphor is about and what is hinted at by them. 
The sages said 'There is no difference between this world and the days of the Messiah, except for subjugation to [foregin] kings.'  It seems from the simple meaning of the words of the prophets that in the beginning of the days of the Messiah, there will be a war between Gog and Magog, and that before the war between Gog and Magog, a prophet will rise to straighten Israel out and to prepare their hearts, as it is written, "Behold, I am sending to you Eliyah (Malachi 2:23)."  And he is not come to make the pure impure or to make the impure pure, and not to disqualify people who have been considered 'kosher', and not to certify those of have been disqualified, rather to bring peace to the world, as it says, "He will return the hearts of the fathers to their children (Malachi 3:24)"  And there are those among the sages who say that before the Messiah will come, Elijah will come.  And all of these things and things like them, people wont' really know how it we be until it happens.  Because these things are not explicit in the prophets' words.  And the sages also don't have a received tradition about these things, just and interpretation of the verses.  Therefore, they argue about these things.  And in any case, there is no order to these things happening and the details of them is not necessary to the religion.  And a person should never study the tales or spend a long time on the Midrash told about these issues and things like them, and they shouldn't be made to be essential, since they bring about neither awe nor love. 
In the days of the King Messiah, when he is established in hi reign and all of Israel is gathered to him, the descent of everybody will be decided by his mouth through the holy spirit that will rest upon him, as it is said, "He shall sit and refine and purify (Malachi 3:3), etc."  And he will purify the children of Levi first and say, 'this one is descended from a Cohen and this one is descended from a Levi.  And he will push those who are not descendants down to [the status of] Israel, which is why it says, "The Governor said to them...until a Cohen arises with Urim and Tumim (Ezra 2:63)....  ...
The sages and the prophets didn't desire the days of the Messiah so that they could rule over the whole world and not so that they would dominate over the idol worshippers and not to be lifted up by the nations and not to eat, to drink, and to be merry.  Rather it was so that they would be free for [study of Torah] and its wisdom without disturbances or distractions, so that they can merit living in the world to come, as we explained in the laws of T'shuvah. ...
.And at that time there won't be any famine or war there, and there won't be jealousy or competitions, for good will be flowing freely, and all delights will be as common as dust, and the only business will be to know God.  Therefore, Israel will be great sages and they will know the hidden things and they will attain knowledge of their creator as much as people can, as it is said, "For the earth will be filled with knowledge of God like water covers the oceans.  ...