Pele Yoetz
פלא יועץ
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Pele Yoetz

Introduction







Chapter 1

Love of The Holy one, blessed be He: There is no better trait than the Love of The Holy one, blessed by He, for the entire service of G-d and Judaism draws from it. To serve (G-d) from love is not comparable to serving from fear, as the author of the "Sefer HaBris" delved and expounded to explain the root of love and fear very well. "The words of the mouth of the wise is grace" (Ecclesiastes 10:12). Praiseworthy is the man who is diligent with his words. To make habit the work which is before me I will come in short, and I will write some notes for myself and for others in my condition, according to that which I learned from the book quoted earlier ("Sefer HaBris") and other books which I have seen to be a reminder between my eyes, and may G-d the Almighty assist me in the matter of honoring His name. 



All of those benefits are trivial compared to the good for the soul, which is truly a great benefit, without measure. Therefore, <i>let Israel rejoice in its Maker</i> (Psalms 149:2), who chose us out of all the nations, and gave us a Torah of truth, and implanted within us eternal life, and sanctified us with His commandments, and chose us <i>to serve Him and to bless in His name</i> (Deuteronomy 10:8), that through these things, we will merit to live and inherit goodness and blessing for the life of the world to come, which is a great good, so much so that it was said: "A single hour of tranquility in the world to come is preferable to all of life in this world" (Pirkei Avot 4:17). And this is what one should think when one labors for the sake of reward. But when one reaches the level of being like slaves who serve the master not for the sake of reward (see Pirkei Avot 1:3), then one should rejoice more and more at the privilege of being a slave to a Sovereign lofty and exalted, majestic and awesome, whose grandeur is beyond understanding, and who selected us out of all of the nations and out of all of the heavenly hosts, who desires us and who loves us. And God wanted to credit Israel, therefore He proliferated Torah and commandments for them, and He is eager in His love, despite our being <i>mortals like vain vapors</i> (Psalms 144:4). This is a great and peerless good, to those who contemplate the grandeur of the Creator and contrast it with the lowliness of man. And through this, one will recognize and know, that it is a great benefit that He chose us and drew us to His service, so that they said in truth: "A single hour of Torah [sic] and good deeds in this world is preferable to all of the world to come" (Pirkei Avot 4:17). And one should consider <i>what has been honor and greatness</i> (Esther 6:3) for the lowliest of people?—<i>That the king was eager for his honor</i> (Esther 6:6-11), and chose him to stand before him and to serve him, even though he is flesh and blood, a fetid droplet, just like him—how much more so the degree of separation of the Omnipresent above us, up to a place that the power of our minds cannot divine, so great is the good that our Creator, our Deviser, our Maker, has granted us.

Chapter 2



Chapter 3

The love of sons and daughters: The love of sons and daughters is necessitated by nature, for they are the bone from his bone and flesh from his flesh, and even ???. But one must take care that his love does not overturn boundaries, that he does not make his son suffer and longs for him greatly and gives him extra love. Shlomo has already said in his wisdom (Proverbs 13:24) "One who spares his rod hates his son, but one who loves him rebukes him." And the essence of love is love of the soul, and included in this is love of oneself, for ??? gives merit to the father. As it is written (ibid 29:17): "Punish your son and he will give delicacies to your soul." Therefore, a person should be careful to behave with his son with open rebuke and hidden love, according to what he understands in his youth. "Foolishness is bound up in the heart of a youth, a rod of rebuke will distance him from it" (ibid 22:15). But the father should take care not to be cruel to his child and not to hit him and give him a bruise out of anger. Rather he should lead him with gentleness and with mercy he should hit his legs, not on a place where he will sustain a wound like between the eyes. And when he is older, "a rebuke enters deeper into a man of understanding" (ibid 17:10). And it is known (Moed Katan 17a): that he who hits his adult son transgresses because of the sin of putting a stumbling block before a blind person, etc. This does not refer to an actual adult, rather according to the son's understanding and character traits" when he is older and does not accept rebuke, "a soft tongue breaks the bone" (Proverbs 25:15) and he will not be lenient in his own honor so that his reputation will not be ruined. And he [the father] needs to be even more careful with that which our rabbi cautioned (Shabbat 10b): One should not teach his son when he is among other boys, for "jealousy is as difficult as the grave" (Song of Songs 5:6). The principle is: according to the mental ability and character traits of the son is how a father needs to behave with him in a way that he will not sin. If he does sin against him, he should be quick to forgive him so his son will not be punished on account of him, and he should not be exacting with them, and sometimes he should make himself like a deaf person who does not hear and as if he does not see, and sometimes he should submit his will to their will. And this is a major principle for one who wants to  bring merit to his soul and the souls of his sons after him.

Chapter 4






A woman who falls into a relationship with a man who is rough in his manners and his opinions, and who is a wretched, worthless person who lacks all good attributes, should not for this reason diminish his honor in her eyes and hate him in her heart, God forbid. Rather, she should nevertheless be cautious regarding his honor, a good man just as a sinner, a contemptible man just as an honorable man, because the word of the king and ruler of the world is upon her, and "What have you to do with the secrets of God?" (Berachot 10a), for God is the settler of the single ones and the joiner of couples, thus all that is imposed upon her to do, she shall do. What is this similar to? To a man whom the king wishes to honor and makes him the second to the king, and all the nation is required to act with honor towards him even if he is a leper or a zav, and so is this matter. And just as a woman should be cautious with regard to the commandments of niddah, challah, and lighting candles, so should she be cautious with regard to her husband's honor, because such was commanded to her by the king, and her reward will be increased as her actions prove that they are done for their own sake, and she fulfills the decree of the king of the world.

Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22













One must be very careful with the blessing of God, not to recite a blessing in vain or an unnecessary blessing. For [if he does so], he transgresses, "You shall not take [the Lord, your God's name in vain" (Exodus 20:7). And you find this with an ignoramus who wants to be pious and recites a blessing over every single thing; and they sometimes stumble and fall with the prohibition of a blessing in vain or an unnecessary blessing. 'So the one who walks with the Sages will become wise.' And likewise concerning blessing (greeting) one's friend, it is written (Proverbs 27:14), "He who greets his fellow loudly early in the morning shall have it reckoned to him as a curse." And there are two ways this [happens]. The first is that there is a prohibition to say hello to one's fellow or to greet him before prayer [in the morning] since it is considered as if he is making him into an altar. And the second way is if he greets his friend in front of others and causes evil to [his friend], as the others will jump on him, since they will think that it would be fitting and good that he benefits them much more than he benefits this one. But [his fellow] does not imagine it so, and his heart does not think so for various reasons known to him. So it comes out that he caused for there to be arguments and grudges against him. Hence, 'every clever man should act knowledgeably.' So in any place where there is a concern that some damage will be caused to his fellow in any aspect or way - if he knows the thing, 'a trustworthy soul keeps a confidence.'

Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27




And it is hence an obligation incumbent upon a man to have mercy on his soul and on the soul of his daughter, to make efforts with all of his power to seek quietude for her which will be good for her and for him in this world and in the world to come. So, from time to time, he should pour out his soul in front of God for his sons and daughters, that God should arrange a proper match for them. (And I have already written a prayer for this, and have attached it to my house of prayer.) And also if the daughter herself knows to write or to read from what is written — her father should go to a rabbi, that he arrange a prayer [for her]. (And, with God's help, I will lift my hand for this [task] as well.) Or she herself should privately cry out from her soul in front of God, with words that come from her heart according to everything that comes out of her mouth, and pray to God that he should arrange a proper match for her. [She should pray that he be] a Torah scholar and that she be given into the lap of one who fears God, and that her match work out well. And prayer is a big [thing] in this matter. Go out and learn from Leah, who was Esau's portion. Yet by way of crying greatly, to the point that Leah's eyes became soft, she landed in Jacob's lot (Bava Batra 123a) and merited to bring out six tribes from which the splendor of Israel came out, houses of priesthood, of the Leviteship, and houses of monarchy.

Chapter 28



Chapter 29



Chapter 30



Chapter 31



Chapter 32



Chapter 33

YOUNG MAN- It is written- (Ecclesiastes 12:1) "Remember your creator in the days of your youth" For then is the ideal to serve your creator, for it is when a man has [ideal] might and strength to [give for] the Torah, to labor with all his strength on the deliberation [of the Torah] and to make ones nights like days, [maintaining only] minimal sleep. Then (i.e. his youth) he will be free, with no burdens. His consciousness will be clear and settled, able to understand, discern, listen, learn, and teach.  Since he has no preoccupations, especially if he is relying on his "father's table"- [meaning] a  complete lack of preoccupations, whatever he learns will be "indented" in his brain. As the saying of the sages (Ethics of the Fathers 4: 20) "One who learns in his childhood to what is he comparable? To ink written on fresh parchment, clear and sustaining". This is the Torah that remains (lit. stands) with Torah Scholars in their old age when their consciousness is settled. For Torah [learned] in youth is the "yeast in the dough", the foundation stone.
Behold it is so (i.e. the proper approach) for a desirable Young Man who is involved in Torah, to value this precious length of time (i.e. Youth), and not sway (lit. lose) from it even for a mere moment. He should "gird his loins" to engage in the Torah with all his might. For on this time [of youth], it is said (Tractate Megillah 6b) "[one who says] I worked hard but didn't find [success]- don't believe him". While all periods of man's life are precious, and every moment lost is a great loss with no reconciliation, still this period is most exemplary of all of them. As per the statement of the Rabbis, ( Tractate Shabbos 152a) "Youth is a crown of roses". [In conclusion] It is proper to be scrupulous on its value and that of his master's honor.

Chapter 34



Chapter 35



Chapter 36



Chapter 37



Chapter 38



Chapter 39



Chapter 40



Chapter 41



Chapter 42



Chapter 43



Chapter 44







And there is stealing that is not considered stealing by the laws of people, but is considered stealing by the laws of heaven, such as one who decides in one's mind to enter in judgment with one's friend in order to collect money from the friend without doing violence, just because one's eyes deceived him, and one brings monetary damage to the friend, even without a fight or misuse, just by the simple emotion, having clean hands, and even if from the decision the friend would be forced to pay all, the spirit of the Place does not abide with him, and does this as a tax owed by the friend, one transgresses "love your neighbor as yourself" which is a general rule in the Torah, and it is in instances like this that they said "a person is known by their pocket" (Eruvin 65b). And according to the basic material, stealing is forbidden and the teshuvah is difficult, behold it says "one who steals even a cent from one's friend is likened to one who stole the soul from the friend, and the soul from the friend's sons and daughters" (Bava Kamma 119a) and while the stolen money is in one's hands there is no possible atonement, and it is very difficult to return food that was stolen (Chulin 99a). And behold a person who fears Hashem will be cautious and will guard oneself very much from anything that is forbidden in any aspect it can exist, and will deal all one's business faithfully, and even when a good opportunity appears, and those who sell are being stricken with harsh punishments, one will never extend one's hands towards stealing God forbid, because it is better for a person to die of starvation than to become an evildoer even for an hour in the Place's eyes, and "those who seek Hashem do not lack what is good" (Ps. 34:11) because God does not withhold good to those who walk in simple ways.

Chapter 45



Chapter 46

Might: Might is a large topic in the Torah. "Who is mighty? The one who conquers his [evil] impulse" (Avot 4:1). And happy is the one who overcomes his impulse like a man, to run after every commandment and flee from sin (Avot 4:2) and from all bad traits and to practice every good thing and matters of piety in all of their details, enhancements, and particulars in thought, speech, and action, with all of his heart, all of his soul, and all of his ability [alluding to Deuteronomy 6:5], and to be resilient-spirited, which is better than being a mighty man [alluding to Proverbs 16:32]. He also needs to practice the ways of repentance, afflicting his body, and many other things like this. Anyone who is attacked by his impulse and conquers it is called a mighty man. And even though the evil impulse is fire and it makes war with [its] tricks, and there is no day and no hour that it does not renew itself and overpower a person, any man or woman whose heart dedicates them to fight with it with the assistance of the Omnipotent can certainly [overcome] it. And it is only the beginnings that are difficult, and then it becomes easy for him and pleasant for him, and he will feel enchanted.

Chapter 47

Exile: Our rabbis, may their memory be blessed, said (Avot 4:14), "Exile yourself to a place of Torah." Although it is true that our rabbis, may their memory be blessed, [also] said it is a proper thing for a person to live in the place of his ancestors and that a man who migrates from his place is like a bird migrating from its nest, so it is impossible for a person to uproot his home from his dwelling place, nevertheless, if it occurs that there is a need to uproot his home from his place — in the way of their statement, may their memory be blessed (Bava Metzia 75b), "One for whom it is bad in this place, let him move to another place" — he should choose to exile himself to a place of Torah. As he will then make sure that his sons will be Torah scholars; and he will also learn the laws and the statutes and go in the path of the good. And Rabbi Yose ben Kisma spoke well (Avot 6:9): "Even if you were to give me all the silver and gold, precious stones and pearls that are in the world, I would not dwell anywhere except in a place of Torah." As if he will learn one good thing [there], it is enough for him. And included in this is one who wants to merit the crown of Torah but does not find from whom to learn in his place. His father should send him, or he should go himself, to a city of sages and scribes to study Torah. And he should not be concerned about the strain or the separation, or about the expense. That is since everything [else] is like nothing compared to the good of meriting the crown of Torah. And even if there is a sage in his city, he can sometimes learn better in another city. And it is as the Tosafot wrote (Tosafot on Shabbat 9b:7, s.v. Ha lan) that the custom of the early scholars was like this, that those from the land of Israel would go to Babylonia to be focused without a disturbance. 

Chapter 48



Chapter 49






And included in the commandment of loving the convert (literally, stranger) is to help  and assist a person who is wandering from his place and lives in a foreign land. And it is not specifically [dealing with] a convert. For is 'the resident on the ground and the stranger in the highest heavens' [such that there is no reason to assist the stranger]? And go after the reason - as it is written (Exodus 23:9), "for you know the feelings of the stranger, having yourselves been strangers in the land of Egypt." Behold it is explicit that the verse is referring to someone who lives in a foreign land without a companion or brother, and who has no acquaintances, such that his spirit is lowly and his heart is broken and depressed. It is fitting to have mercy upon [such a person] and to bring him close and to be his friend and companion, and to help him and support him regarding everything that comes his way. And with this, one fulfills this great commandment. 

Chapter 50



Chapter 51



Chapter 52



Chapter 53



Chapter 54



Chapter 55



Chapter 56



Chapter 57



Chapter 58



Chapter 59



Chapter 60

Civility [Derekh Eretz]: The branches and details of civility are many, the teaching of civility being broader than the heavens and the earth. Is it not written about in the words of our Rabbis, may their memory be blessed, in Tractate Derekh Eretz; and further explained in the books of the masters of ethics [mussar], such as the holy book, Reishit Chochmah at the end, the book Shnei Luchot HaBrit, and the book, Shevet Mussar (Chapter 16) in the [ethical] will attributed to R. Eliezer the Great? Whoever is someone who desires life (alluding to Psalms 34:13) should study the refined search to guard the path to the tree of life (alluding to Genesis 3:24). For they truly said (Vayikra Rabbah 9:3), "Civility preceded the Torah." And especially someone who is in the category of a Torah scholar — if he does not have civility, behold, he desecrates God and the Torah. And we have learned (Avot 3:10), "Anyone from whom the spirit of creations find pleasure, from him the spirit of God finds pleasure." And this is the great principle about civility: One should do what is good and straight in the eyes of God and man, negate his will before the will of others, and have an awareness of other people. And one has not fulfilled his obligation with all that a person learns about the laws of civility until he becomes wise and understands [what to do] on his own. For these are things that have no measure. Rather, everything is according to the place and the time, and according to who he is as a person, to interact with each person according to their traits and to get to what the other is really thinking and to do his will if it is not against the will of the Creator.

Chapter 61



Chapter 62






































Evil speech is the head root sprouting poison (alluding to Deuteronomy 29:17), for its severity corresponds to that of idolatry, sexual immorality, and murder [put together] (Arkahin 15b). And King David, peace be upon him, has already expunged it, as it is written: <i>May the Lord expunge all flattering lips, every tongue that speaks arrogance</i> (Psalms 12:4). And evil speech is when one speaks disparagingly about his fellow. If it is something that has nothing to it, it is also called putting out a bad name. But if it is true, it is called evil speech – anything that was not known and this one reveals it. A talebearer reveals secrets (alluding to Proverbs 11:13), as he carries things to and fro and says, “X did this to you,” or “said this and that about you.” Their tongue is a sharpened arrow (alluding to Jeremiah 9:7); their throat is an open grave (alluding to Psalms 5:10). However, if he sees that damage will come to his fellow, he is obligated to reveal it to him so that he can be on guard. About this is it stated: <i>You are not to traffic in slander among your kinspeople, you are not to stand by the blood of your neighbor; I am the Lord</i> (Leviticus 19:16).

Chapter 63



Chapter 64



Chapter 65



Chapter 66



Chapter 67



Chapter 68



Chapter 69



Chapter 70



Chapter 71



Chapter 72



Chapter 73



Chapter 74



Chapter 75



Chapter 76



Chapter 77



Chapter 78



Chapter 79



Chapter 80



Chapter 81



Chapter 82



Chapter 83



Chapter 84



Chapter 85



Chapter 86



Chapter 87



Chapter 88



And it is [good to add ethical teachings] especially when reading the Haggadah on the night of Passover, which is a commandment from the Torah - as it is written (Exodus 13:8), "And you shall tell your son." 'And anyone who adds [and spends extra time] in telling the story of the exodus from Egypt, behold he is praiseworthy.' And the main part of the commandment is to tell over in fine detail, to his children and his wife, the deeds of the Lord and to add in the telling over of the Omnipresent's praise and the magnitude of His ability and providence over the individual; and of His great love, affection and compassion - 'and how many goodly aspects did the Omnipresent bestow upon us!' And hence an obligation rests upon us to fear and love God, and to serve Him with complete service. These are all outgrowths (lit., fruits) of the Haggadah. 

Chapter 89



Chapter 90



Chapter 91



Chapter 92



Chapter 93



Chapter 94



Chapter 95



Chapter 96



Chapter 97



Chapter 98



Chapter 99



Chapter 100



Chapter 101



Chapter 102



Chapter 103



Chapter 104



Chapter 105



Chapter 106



Chapter 107



Chapter 108



Chapter 109



Chapter 110



Chapter 111



Chapter 112



Chapter 113



Chapter 114



Chapter 115



Chapter 116



Chapter 117



Chapter 118



Chapter 119



Chapter 120



Chapter 121



Chapter 122



Chapter 123



Chapter 124



Chapter 125



Chapter 126



Chapter 127



Chapter 128



Chapter 129



Chapter 130



Chapter 131



Chapter 132



Chapter 133



Chapter 134



Chapter 135



Chapter 136



Chapter 137



Chapter 138



Chapter 139



Chapter 140



Chapter 141



Chapter 142



Chapter 143



Chapter 144



Chapter 145



Chapter 146



Chapter 147



Chapter 148



Chapter 149



Chapter 150



Chapter 151



Chapter 152



Chapter 153



Chapter 154



Chapter 155



Chapter 156



Chapter 157



Chapter 158



Chapter 159

The letter "Yud": REVERENCE - with reverence you cannot go wrong because it to guards against all evil. It is known that there is an external reverence, which fears punishment in this world and the next, for many pains afflict the wicked and reproofs for sin, to the extent that no one can fathom the great evil that the soul of the wicked endures in the world to come. They say that if a person were to suffer in his life as Job suffered, it would not be as a drop in the sea against the anguish of the day of death. And all the anguish of the day of death is not as a drop in the sea against the sufferings of the world to come, which empower the wicked to endure their suffering. Those who pass through the valley of weeping shall turn it into a spring (Psalm 84:7). Our sages, may their memory be a blessing, interpreted (Eruvin 19a) that we cause rivers of tears to flow. Indeed, a person must, while in this world, protection for his soul and consider the benefit for a transgression relative to its loss. He should have complete faith and believe that the Holy One, blessed be He, doesn’t become permissive even for  the smallest moment. 
And so it was that a single soul was developed to the Holy Rabbi Reishit Chochma, Hashem diligently scrutinizes humanity from the realm above far more than one could fathom, and it is the divine decree to mete out justice upon all. Therefore, the man who possesses reverence and a tender heart shall be cautious and guard against every transgression as if evading a sword. And if by chance he stumbles and falls into sin, let him hasten to find refuge until the days of adversity and remorse shall no longer avail. As long as there remains strength within him, whatever he can accomplish, he shall indeed do. However, observe that this fear is referred to as "evil fear" in the Holy Zohar, for it is found that one does not fear the Lord Himself, but rather fears for his own soul. Nevertheless, even this type of fear is considered good, for through acting ‘not for the sake of Heaven’ turns into ‘acting for the sake of Heaven,’ one attains righteousnes. But truly pure is the fear of the Lord, which is the awe of His supernal majesty, for He is great, mighty, and beyond comprehension. His attributes and knowledge are immeasurable and incalculable. Yet not all individuals merit to attain such fear; rather, it depends on their awakening and deeds. It is contingent upon their diligent study of spiritual books on the Wisdom and on the reverence of the Lord.
The essence beheld in all matters of sanctity lies within one's utmost diligence and vigilance. It is known that the commandment to fear the revered and awe-inspiring Lord is one of the 613 commandments, and abundant it is. This is a constant commandment, for at any given moment when one remembers to fear the Lord, they fulfill a direct biblical commandment. A person cannot claim that they wished to fulfill a commandment but were unable to do so, for there are commandments that are dependent on thought and remembrance, which are within one's capacity to fulfill every moment. Whether at home on the Sabbath, while traveling on the road, amidst the company of others, or engrossed in one's business affairs while seated in a shop or the like, one should not incline their heart towards idleness, but rather cultivate pure thoughts, thereby fulfilling a commandment. The Holy One, blessed be He, rewards such endeavors. 
What a pleasure it is to utter, again and again, the timeless verse "I have set the Lord always before me" (Psalms 16:8). It is truly exceptional how the Divine Name can be inscribed within one's consciousness, in a manner that fosters a sense of reverence. Indeed, the holy Ari, may his memory be a blessing, taught that it is possible to cultivate such awe-inspiring awareness. (I have witnessed individuals who would write these three sacred words – YHVH, ahava (love), and yir'ah (fear) – on a piece of parchment or paper, binding it beneath their fingers in a way that it remains concealed, serving as a constant reminder in their midst during Shabbat in their homes and journeys as well.) This commandment of reverence leads to further benefits, as it safeguards one from all evil. Fortunate is the person who harbors perpetual fear, for it is within this state that they prevent any anguish or wrath from affecting the exalted and awesome King. They tremble and repent from wrongdoing, choosing to do good and bring solace to their Creator. 

Chapter 160



Chapter 161



Chapter 162



Chapter 163



Chapter 164



Chapter 165



Chapter 166



Chapter 167



Chapter 168



Chapter 169



Chapter 170



Chapter 171



Chapter 172



Chapter 173



Chapter 174



Chapter 175



Chapter 176



Chapter 177



Chapter 178



Chapter 179



Chapter 180



Chapter 181



Chapter 182



Chapter 183



Chapter 184



Chapter 185



Chapter 186



Chapter 187



Chapter 188



Chapter 189



Chapter 190



Chapter 191



Chapter 192

Money/silver - it is written "The tongue of the just is like choice silver" (Prov. 10:20) and it is also written "under the shadow of wisdom, under the shadow of silver" (Eccl. 7:12). Look and see the analogy of silver to speech and of silver to wisdom. There is a hint there, that they said "life and death are in the hands of the tongue, one who wants who live can do so because of the tongue, one who wants to die can do so because of the tongue" (Arakhin 15b). And they also said that the Torah is similar to a simple drug one who wants life [can get it through Torah] one who wants death [can get it through Torah] (Kidushin 30b). So too this we can say about the question of money: one who wants who live can do so because of the money, one who wants to die can do so because of the money - this is because most of the transgressions are caused due to a person being eager after money: robbing, stealing, exploitation, cheating, swearing falsely, swearing a lie, lies, unrighteousness in character traits [NT: could be 'in judgment' as עול במשפט makes more sense in the context of Torah list], moving boundaries, disputes, jealousy, hatred, rivalry, forbidden foods, desecration of Shabbat and holy days, and most of the transgressions that a person does is over gaining money, and the sin of desecrating God's Name is on top of them all. And so too, someone who loves their money cancels most of the mitzvot and the prayers and the blessings, and study of Torah corresponds to them all. And when such a person does them, they are unfit due to the doing them as fast as possible, and with miserliness, and the fact that one's heart is not into it, since that person's heart is only preoccupied with their own gain all the time, and they avert their eyes from [the needy by not giving] tzedakah, and when this person wants to do it, they really don't, and likewise many evils are done this way "riches kept for their owner to the owner's pwn hurt" (Eccl. 5:12) and at its hands one inherits Gehenna and goes down to the pit of destruction. 
And in truth they said "a person is known through his pocket" (Eruvin 65b). Truly, the desire for money is a formidable adversary, especially in this generation, which is a generation focused on money, in which a person can be more eager for money than for any other transgression and any other pleasure, and the money of a person can be more dear to some than their bodies and even their souls. But this is the Torah for people in this world, that one should conquer their desires (Avot 4:1) and open their eyes and see that silver collects souls, gold grieves souls, and they will understand that this is truthful truth, because it is better for a person to die of hunger and not be evil in the presence of the Place and not anger their Creator, God forbid.
And were it possible to conquer one's impulse by force and that money should be seen in one's eyes as nothing in comparison to doing the Creator's will! Therefore, one should look at money as stones to do our Heavenly Parent's will. And should should believe with perfect faith, and set it in one's heart with immovable nails that the amount of one's food is defined by Heaven. Even if they went to heaven or went down to the deepest depths, no one could add or subtract even a cent [to this quantity] with the exception of the outlays of mitzvot and good deeds which are not defined, rather on this case if a person adds, they add to that person. And therefore one who acquires their world through their money by doing lots of tzedakah, mitzvot and good deeds, and  acquires a good name for themselves, and acquires words of Torah, and acquires for oneself life of the world to come. And the mnemonic: 'word of Torah, coins acquired' (Eruvin 81b, Bava Kamma 46b, Bava Kamma 47b and other places) that for all words of Torah and for all good things one needs coins, and money will answer all. One who is wise will guard these words and won't go to sleep. End of all words, all was heard, fear God and guard God's mitzvot, since this is all that there is to being human (Eccl. 12:13)

Chapter 193



Chapter 194



Chapter 195



Chapter 196



Chapter 197



Chapter 198


















 Love for a perfect king who abundantly does good, who chooses His people Israel with love. Through His love and compassion, He bestows upon us countless blessings that cannot be comprehended. And above all, He chose us from among all the nations and sanctified us with His commandments. It is stated in the Zohar that any commandment that is not performed with awe and love is not a true commandment and does not ascend on high. Specifically, in the study of Torah and its hidden aspects, if one does not hear its voice with awe and love, as it is written (Numbers 11:1), 'And the Lord heard, and His anger was kindled,' Heaven forbid.

Chapter 199



Chapter 200



Chapter 201



Chapter 202



Chapter 203



Chapter 204



Chapter 205



Chapter 206



Chapter 207



Chapter 208



Chapter 209



Chapter 210



Chapter 211



Chapter 212



Chapter 213



Chapter 214



Chapter 215



Chapter 216



It is appropriate to study all the books of ethics, one after the other and constantly review them. This is 'a statute not to be transgressed,' day after day, night after night. And even when one reviews books that he already read, they will be like new in his eyes and bring new inspiration according to the time and the state of his soul. For not all times are the same, as 'the righteous one will distinguish.' And since they said 'things that came out from the heart, which will penetrate the heart,' how fine is it to study Pirkei Avot, all the ethics in the Talmud and Midrash, the holy book, Reishit Chochmah, the book of the pious rabbi, Shnei Luchot HaBrit and the many similar holy books, they are all holy! (And if God will be with me, I will collect the words of ethics in short form from all of the holy books, words that pierce the heart, a word in its time, and translate them. May God make it complete for me and help me for the matter of the glory of His name.) And those who read in foreign languages should seek and pursue books in foreign languages, such as Tikkun HaNefesh, Shevet Mussar, and that which is similar to them, like 'one who pursues a partridge in the hills,' and seek to listen to their teachings. 

Chapter 217



Chapter 218



Chapter 219



Chapter 220



Chapter 221



Chapter 222



Chapter 223



Chapter 224



Chapter 225



Chapter 226



Chapter 227



Chapter 228



Chapter 229



Chapter 230



Chapter 231



Chapter 232



Chapter 233



Chapter 234



Chapter 235



Chapter 236



Chapter 237



Chapter 238



Chapter 239



Chapter 240



Chapter 241



Chapter 242



Chapter 243



Chapter 244



Chapter 245



Chapter 246



Chapter 247



Chapter 248



Chapter 249



Chapter 250



Chapter 251



Chapter 252



Chapter 253



Chapter 254



Chapter 255



Chapter 256



Chapter 257



Chapter 258



Chapter 259



Chapter 260



Chapter 261



Chapter 262



Chapter 263



Chapter 264



Chapter 265



Chapter 266



Chapter 267



Chapter 268



Chapter 269



Chapter 270



Chapter 271



Chapter 272



Chapter 273



Chapter 274



Chapter 275



Chapter 276



Chapter 277



Chapter 278



Chapter 279



Chapter 280



Chapter 281



Chapter 282



Chapter 283



Chapter 284



Chapter 285



Chapter 286



Chapter 287



Chapter 288



Chapter 289



Chapter 290



Chapter 291



Chapter 292



Chapter 293



Chapter 294



Chapter 295



Chapter 296



Chapter 297



Chapter 298



Chapter 299



Chapter 300



Chapter 301



Chapter 302



Chapter 303



Chapter 304



Chapter 305



Chapter 306



Chapter 307



Chapter 308



Chapter 309



Chapter 310



Chapter 311



Chapter 312



Chapter 313



Chapter 314




However, there is [also] good jealousy, like the statement of our rabbis, may their memory be blessed (Bava Batra 21a), "The jealousy of scribes [towards each other] increases wisdom." [As one] will desire and put their efforts into moving up in levels of wisdom and of serving God, may His name be blessed, like the holy ones that are in the land (alluding to Psalms 16:3). So a person is obligated to say, "When will my deeds reach the deeds of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob" (Tanna DeBei Eliyahu Rabbah 25). And when he sees that his fellow is successful in his actions, this should be his jealousy — that he says, "Everything is certainly according to the deeds of a person, he shall eat the fruits of his deeds." So his heart should be jealous with the fear of God, in the way that it is written (Genesis 30:1): <i>and Rachel was jealous of her sister</i>. And our rabbis, may their memory be blessed, explained (Bereishit Rabbah 71:6) that she was jealous of her good deeds. As she said, "If she were not better than I, she would not have merited to be built up [by bearing children]." And through this, one will improve his deeds to please the spirit of his Maker, since that is all of man (alluding to Ecclesiastes 12:13).

Chapter 315



Chapter 316



Chapter 317

Constancy: The designation of set times for Torah [study] is one of the things that they ask a man on the day of judgment — did you set fixed times for Torah (Shabbat 31b). Accordingly, the book Chok LeYisrael has now become well-known in all of the diaspora of Israel. And it is one of the things wherein the little holds much, and is very important. For in a little time, one engages in many types of study, and his hand is in everything (alluding to Genesis 16:12). And it was set up according to the esoteric understanding by the cubs of the Ari, may his memory be blessed. He builds his rafters in the Heavens (alluding to Psalms 104:2-3) and learns wisdom, ethics, and laws from it. And how good and how pleasant (alluding to Psalms 133:1) is the custom of some cities, such that they gather as a group of those that fear God and esteem His name, to study the order of Chok LeYisrael. And the sage among them reads out loud and explains the law to them, and sometimes the holy Zohar, and the [book] Yosef LeChok. In this way, everyone — even the most ignorant — can merit to learn this study after the verses. Additionally, there is the virtue of this study being in a group and the saying of Kaddish. And this study is so very important. 

Chapter 318



Chapter 319



Chapter 320



Chapter 321



Chapter 322



Chapter 323



Chapter 324



Chapter 325



Chapter 326



Chapter 327



Chapter 328



Chapter 329



Chapter 330



Chapter 331



Chapter 332



Chapter 333



Chapter 334



Chapter 335

Healing - Our sages of blessed memory said on the verse "And heal he will be healed" [shemot 21;19] - from here the Torah gave the permission to doctors to heal. [berakhot 60a] And it is also said [with respect to illnesses] - that they are bad and trustworthy [Deut / devarim 28;59] - that they are "trustworthy" as an emissary / delegate [of heaven] [rashi there] for at the time that they are appointed / delegated [to fall upon a person] - it is decreed upon them that they should only leave on a determined day by the appointed doctor using the prescribed medicine. Our sages have also said "A person should not live in a place where there is no doctor" [sanhedrin 17b]
	And thus we find that an [interesting] inquiry arises. Since it is Hashem who determines death and life - what what will the doctor add [by aiding to heal the patient]? Is it not so that if it was decreed [in Heaven] that one will die, even if all the doctors in the world arose to heal him, they would not be able to save him from death?And thus [we can better understand] our sages statement "the error / malpractice of the doctor is the will of the Creator" and it is not in his power to save. And if it was decreed upon the person that he should live, even without a doctor, the Holy One Blessed Be He, will turn over [worlds] and cure him. For Hashem has many ways and with Him there is much deliverance and He will stretch out his word [other version "hand"] and heal him. However, the answer to this inquiry and to many others like it is that there are three different types of decrees - 1) If he is one that holds a special merit and his merit is strong and his fate is salutary - even if he doesn't have a doctor and he does things that will worsen his condition, he will not die and "live he will live". 2) And there are those, upon whom death is decreed - that is to say, even if he guarded himself with all protection in the world, his persistence of protecting himself is all in vain, and doctors will be of no help and he will not be saved. 3) However, there are those who, due to their sins, place themselves under the influence of "nature": - if they protect themselves and act with the proper cures according to nature - "live he will live" - he will surely live.  - and if not they will die and on this type of person it is said "and there is death without judgment."
	Behold, thus each person needs to seek the proper cure when he needs them. For if he will not do this and will cause "death without judgment", he will be held accountable for his life. And he is at fault [his death is worthwhile] for he transgressed on that that is written [in the Torah], "and you shall protect very well your life." [deut / devarim 4;15]  And the person who does not preserve his health, and does not act in the according to nature, to seek the proper medical treatment of his illness, to the best of his ability - will surely be punished since he transgressed that which is written in the Torah. It also comes out that he depended on a miracle and if a miracle was done for him, a part of his merits will be taken away.
One needs to be very careful to guard one's health so that he will not become ill. And if he did become sick, he needs to seek cures and consult expert physicians. And he should not be concerned about his money [he will spend for the cure], for a person should give all his money to save his life. As it says in the Zohar HaKadosh "that one who is apt to suffer monetary loss, he will fall into house of illness, and will not be cured until the amount that it was decreed for him to lose, is spent." That is why it is good advice to spend the money as quickly as possible. And how good is it for a person to increase his giving of charity - for he gains a mitzvah and it is a segulah (an ability) to nullify the decree [of suffering]. Really, before a person should seek cures - he should always believe with complete conviction - that his healing is in the hands of the Holy One Blessed be He - the Merciful and Trustworthy Physician - Healer of Israel, His people. Thus, he should preface [his acts], with prayer before Him. (And I already composed a prayer for an ill person and placed it in my place of prayer)
A person who has a sick person in his household, is obligated not to slumber, and not to remain silent, and not to rest until he seeks all types of doctors and all sorts of remedies according to his means / until he achieves his objective. And if he is a needy person, and he cannot afford [proper diagnosis and treatment], the obligation falls on the citizens of his city and/or on the Bikur Holim Organization (lit - visitation of the ill society - ie, the illness relief fund). - to assign for him doctors and cures - and they should not be concerned about the great expenses, for they should consider how great is the mitzvah. Go and learn till where the obligation to heal applies, for behold they permitted our holy / strict Shabbat to be desecrated and to transgress upon the entire Torah in order to treat a person who was in mortal danger. As our the Talmud says "It is better for one to desecrate one Shabbat so that one may observe many other Shabbats." [shabbat 151a] And how much more so that it is proper to spend all the money in the world in order to save one Jewish soul - for it is as if one saved the entire world. And even if with all this effort the person still passed away, G-d forbid, this should not serve to make them regret and balk (at the money spent). Rather they should rejoice in their hearts knowing they did did what was required of them to do. To Hashem - they are doing the best that they can do - and Hashem will pay them seven times over in their laps with wealth and riches in their home. 

Chapter 336



Chapter 337



Chapter 338



Chapter 339



Chapter 340



Chapter 341



Chapter 342

Pele Yoetz – on Sinah - Hatred - Hatred [of others] is hated [by Hash-m] for upon it the Tanna said Rabbi Yehoshua says a bad eye &amp; the evil inclination &amp; hatred of the creatures [of Hash-m], expel a person from the world. (Pirkei Avot 2:11 on Self-Destruction And it causes many sins for hatred awakens quarrels &amp; one falls into the grips of controversy &amp; evil speech &amp; causes one to become happy for the misfortune [of others] &amp; to damage &amp; cause pain &amp; to take vengeance &amp; to spite like a snake [against the other] &amp; many similar evils. And it is written in the holy books – that there is no sin of all the sins like hatred – because every moment one transgresses upon that that is written in the Torah “Do not hate your brother in your heart.” and that that is written “You shall love your fellow as yourself.” &amp; this is the reason why gratuitous hatred destroyed the Holy Temple. And any kind of of hatred is considered 'gratuitous hatred', for any kind of claims that he has [against the other party] to express, are vanity, acts of delusion, like we explained above in the section of 'love of [our] fellows' - see there. 

Chapter 343



Chapter 344



Chapter 345



Chapter 346



Chapter 347



Chapter 348



Chapter 349



Chapter 350






"Especially how much more so should a person rejoice over the many rational mitzvot and human pleasures, such as the one who opens a shop and blesses his Creator for his enjoyments and kindnesses. And the one who prays and asks for his needs and the like, it is considered a mitzvah and brings satisfaction to his Creator and sets a reward for him. Is there a taste more delightful than this? Similarly, eating and drinking on Shabbat and Yom Tov and the mitzvah of marital relations and the like, it is considered a mitzvah and brings satisfaction to his Creator and sets a reward for him. Is there a taste sweeter than this? Even in worldly matters, such as eating, drinking, sleeping, and conducting business, if done for the sake of Heaven, it is considered a mitzvah and one receives a reward. For this, Israel should rejoice greatly in their Maker, it is impossible not to rejoice. However, one must pay attention and strengthen oneself in pure thoughts in the manner that we say, 'Blessed is the person who listens to Your commandments and sets Your Torah and Your word upon his heart.'And regarding what is before us, look and see that as much as a person rejoices over the great goodness that God has done for Israel and sanctified us with His commandments, it is considered a mitzvah and brings satisfaction to his Creator and sets a reward for him. Is there a taste sweeter than this? Fortunate are we, how good is our portion and how pleasant is our lot. Our sages of blessed memory said (Kiddushin 39b) that the reward for a mitzvah does not exist in this world. But for the joy, a person eats in this world. And the greatest reward for joy is that one merits to attain wisdom and achieve perfection, as revealed by our teacher, the holy Ari, of blessed memory, that what he attained of wonderful wisdom and the Holy Spirit was all because he rejoiced greatly in his engagement in Torah and fulfilling any mitzvah more than finding great spoils. Thus, the reward for the joy of a mitzvah is itself a mitzvah."

Chapter 351



Chapter 352



Chapter 353



Chapter 354



Chapter 355



Chapter 356



Chapter 357



Chapter 358



Chapter 359



Chapter 360



Chapter 361



Chapter 362



Chapter 363



Chapter 364



Chapter 365



Chapter 366



Chapter 367



Chapter 368



Chapter 369



Chapter 370



Chapter 371



Chapter 372



Chapter 373



Chapter 374



Chapter 375



Chapter 376



Chapter 377



Chapter 378



Chapter 379



Chapter 380



Chapter 381



Chapter 382



Chapter 383



Chapter 384



Chapter 385



Chapter 386



Chapter 387



Chapter 388



Chapter 389



Chapter 390



Chapter 391



Supplement

