Bereishit Rabbah
בראשית רבה
merged
http://www.sefaria.org/Bereishit_Rabbah
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-http://www.sefaria.org
-Bereshit Rabbah 58:2
-Midrash Rabbah (Soncino Press)
-JTS
-http://www.jtsa.edu/Conservative_Judaism/JTS_Torah_Commentary/Va-yishlah_Between_5772.xml?ss=print
-Genesis Rabbah 11:8
-Soncino, via Scribd
-Soncino Midrash
-http://https://archive.org/stream/RabbaGenesis/midrashrabbahgen027557mbp_djvu.txt
-Soncino Midrash Rabbah
-https://archive.org/stream/RabbaGenesis/midrashrabbahgen027557mbp_djvu.txt
-Genesis Rabbah 75:5
-http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vayishlach#cite_ref-77



Bereishit Rabbah

Chapter 1

The Great Rabbi Hoshaya opened with the following: "I was faithful to Him and I was a plaything to Him every day..." (Proverbs 8:30). Faithful, meaning: nanny. Faithful, meaning: covered. Faithful, meaning: hidden. And there is one who says: Faithful, meaning: great.  Faithful meaning nanny, as it is used (in Bamidbar 11:12), "as a nanny (omen) carries the suckling child."  Faithful meaning covered, as it is used (in Lamentations 4:5), "they that were brought up (emunim) in scarlet.  Faithful meaning hidden, as it is used (in Esther 2:7), "And he hid away (omen) Hadassah, that is, Esther." Faithful meaning great, as it is used (in Nahum 3:8), "Are you better than No-amon, which dwells among the rivers," and they translate it, "Are you better than Alexandria the Great, which dwells between the rivers."  Another interpretation: faithful meaning artisan.  The Torah says: 'I was the artisan's tool of the Holy One, blessed be He'.  Similarly, as concerns a king of flesh and blood who builds a castle.  He does not build it from his own knowledge, rather from the knowledge of an architect, and the architect does not build it from his own knowledge, rather he has plans and descriptions so that he knows how he will make rooms or marbled halls.  Thus did the Holy One, blessed be He,  consult the Torah and create the world.  And the Torah said "In the beginning God created" and there is no beginning (reishit) except for Torah, as it is written: "God made me the beginning of His way" (Proverbs 8:22).
Rabbi Joshua of Sichnin in the name of Rabbi Levi opened with: "The power of his works he told to his people..." (Psalms 111:6).  What is referred to here that God revealed to Israel?  That which God created on the first day, and that which God created on the second day, due to idolaters and star-worshipers - so that they will not classify Israel and say to them: 'Surely you are a nation of thieves.'   And Israel would reply, saying: 'Surely she [Torah] was wasted in your hands, behold: "The Caphtorim dwelling in Caphtor were destroyed, and they dwelt in their stead" (Deuteronomy 2:23).  The world and all that is in it belongs to God, and when God wanted to God gave it to you [the nations of the world], and when God wanted to God took it from you and gave it to us [Israel].  As it is written: "To give them a portion of the nations" (Psalms 111:6), thus God told them [Israel] all of the generations.
"In the beginning God created..." Rabbi Tanchuma opened (with a verse from Psalms 86:10): "For You are great, and you perform wonders...." Rabbi Tanchum said: with a pouch, if you puncture a hole in its side with a pin, all its air comes out of it.  Whereas the person is made with all kinds of hollows and holes, and his air does not leave his body.  Who could make such a thing? "....You, God, alone."[the second half of the verse] When were the angels created?  Rabbi Yochanan said: the angels were created on the second day. Just as it says (in Psalms 104:4), "He sets the rafters of the upper chambers in the water..." [creating the sky in the upper waters which God does on the second day] and then it is written, "He makes the winds his messengers (or, 'his angels')."  Rabbi Chanina said: the angels were created on the fifth day, where it is written "and let the bird fly (ye-ofef) across the earth," and (in Isaiah 6:2) it is written, "and with two [wings] he (the Seraphic angel) would fly (ye-ofef)."  Rabbi Luliana bar Tavrin said in the name of Rabbi Yitzchak: whether according to the opinion of Rabbi Chanina, or whether according to the opinion of Rabbi Yochanan, all agree that they were not created on the first day - so that they could not say that the angl Michael stretched out the south end of the sky and Gabriel the north end, and the Holy One, Blessed be He, measured out the middle.  Rather, (as it says in Isaiah 44:24), "I am God who makes all, and who alone stretches out the heavens...with only Myself (me-iti)"  'Mi iti' (who, with me) is written, meaning, "WHO partnered WITH ME in the creation of the world?!?"  Another interpretation: "For You are great and You do wonders..." It is the way of the world that a king of flesh and blood is praised in the land, and the great men of the land are praised with him, for they carry his burden with him.  But the Holy One, Blessed be He, is not like this.  Rather, He alone created the world.  He alone is praised in the world. He alone is glorified in his world.  Rabbi Tanchuma said: "For you are great and You do wonders..." Why? Because, "...You, God, alone."  You, alone, created the world.
"In the beginning of God's creating..." - Six things preceded the creation of the world; some of them were created and some of them were decided to be created. The Torah and the Throne of Glory were created. How do we know the Torah was? As it says (Proverbs 8:22): "God made me at the beginning of his way." How do we know the Throne of Glory was? As it says (Psalms 93:2): "Your throne is established as of old etc." The Patriarchs, Israel, the Temple, and the name of the Messiah were decided to be created. How do we know the Patriarchs were? As it says (Hosea 9:10): "Like grapes in the wilderness etc." How do we know Israel was? As it says (Psalms 74:2): "Remember your congregation, whom you purchased from old." How do we know the Temple was? As it says (Jeremiah 17:12): "Your throne of glory, on high from the beginning etc." How do we know the name of the Messiah was? As it says (Psalms 72:17): "May his name exist forever etc. [his name shall be Yinnon as long as the sun]." Rabbi Ahavah said in the name of Rabbi Ze'ira: Even repentance was, as it says (Psalms 90:2): "Before the mountains were birthed," and at the same time (Psalms 90:3), "You turned man to contrition etc." However, I do not know which was first--if the Torah preceded the Throne of Glory or the Throne of Glory preceded the Torah. Rabbi Abba Bar Cahana said: The Torah preceded the Throne of Glory, as it says (Proverbs 8:22): "God made me at the beginning of his way, the first of his works of old." This is before that of which it is written (Psalms 93:2): "Your throne is established as of old." Rabbi Hunna and Rabbi Yirmiyah in the name of Rabbi Shmuel the son of Rabbi Yitzchak said: The thought of Israel was before everything. This is like a king who was married to a woman and did not have a son. One time the king was in the market and said: "Take this ink and pen for my son." They said: "He does not have a son." He replied: "Take them; the king must expect a son, because otherwise he would not command that the ink and pen be taken." Similarly, if there was no expectation of Israel receiving it after 26 generations, God would not have written in the Torah: "Command the children of Israel" or "Speak to the children of Israel." Rabbi Bannai said: The world and its contents were only created in the merit of the Torah, as it says (Proverbs 3:19): "God founded the world with wisdom etc." Rabbi Berachiyah said: In the merit of Moses, as it says (Deuteronomy 33:21): "He saw a first part for himself." Rabbi Hunna said in the name of Rabbi Matanah: The world was created in the merit of three things--challah, tithes, and first fruits. The verse "In the beginning God created" refers to challah, as it says (Numbers 15:20): "The beginning of your doughs." It also refers to tithes, as it says (Deuteronomy 18:4): "The beginning of your grains." It also refers to first fruits, as it says (Exodus 23:19): "The beginning of the fruits of the land."
Rabbi Hunna in the name of Bar Kafra opened with (Psalms 31:19): "Let the lying lips be dumb, that speak against the righteous arrogantly with pride and contepmpt." Let them be bound, made dumb, and silenced. "Let them be bound and made dumb"--as it says (Exodus 4:11): "Or who made one mute, or deaf, or seeing, or blind? Was it not I, God?" and it says (Genesis 37:7): "We were binding sheaves in the field, and my sheaf rose." (The word for 'sheaf' is similar to 'mute'.) "Let them be silenced"--as it sounds. "Which speak against the righteous"--the life of all worlds (God). "Arrogantly"--[on matters] he has hidden from his creatures (The word for 'arrogant' is similar to 'hidden'). "In pride"--to boast and say: "I can explain creation." "And contempt"--to hold My glory in contempt. As Rabbi Yossi Bar Chanina said: One who honor's oneself at the expense of one's friend has no share in the World to Come. How much more so with the honor of God! And it says afterward (Psalms 31:20): "How abundant is Your goodness that you have laid up for those who fear You." Those who fear You and not for those who hold Your awe in contempt. When a king builds a palace in a place of sewers, dunghills, and garbage, everyone who says: "This palace is built on sewers, dunghills, and garbage" discredits it. So too, everyone who says the universe was created from nothingness discredits it. Rabbi Hunna in the name of Bar Kafra said: If it were not written, it would be impossible to say it. "In the beginning God created" from what? "And the earth was empty."
Rabbi Yehudah Bar Simon opened with (Daniel 2:22): "He reveals the deep and secret. He knows what is in the darkness, and the light dwells with Him." "He reveals the deep"--this is Hell, as it says (Proverbs 9:18): "He does not know there are spirits there," and it says (Isaiah 30:33): "deep and large". "And secret"--this is Paradise, as it says (Isaiah 4:6): "for a cover and refuge from storm and rain," and it says (Psalms 31:21): "You hide them in the cover of Your presence." Alternatively, "he reveals the deep and secret"--these are the acts of the wicked, as it says (Isaiah 29:15): "Woe to the ones who seek deep from God to make their counsel secret." "And secret"--these are the acts of the wicked, as the verse states. "He knows what is in the dark"--these are the acts of the wicked, as it says in Isaiah: "Their acts are in the dark." "The light dwells with Him"--these are the acts of the righteous, as it is written (Proverbs 4:18): "The path of the righteous is like the light at dawn," and it says (Psalms 97:11): "Light is sown for the righteous." Rabbi Abba Srungia said: "The light dwells with Him"--this is the Messiah, as it says (Isaiah 60:1): "Arise, shine, for your light has come." Rabbi Yehudah Bar Simon said: From the beginning of the creation of the world, "he revealed the dark and secret". "In the beginning God created the heavens," but it is not explained. Where is it explained? Here (Isaiah 40:22): "He stretches out the heavens like a curtain." "And the land," but it is not explained. Where is it explained? Here (Job 37:6): "For He says to the snow: 'Fall on the earth.'" and (Job 38:38) "When the dust runs into a mass, and the clods cleave together." "And God said: 'Let there be light,'" and it is not explained. Where is it explained? (Psalms 104:2) "You cover Yourself with light like a garment."
Rabbi Yitzchak opened with (Psalms 119:160): "The beginning of Your word is truth, and Your righteous law is forever." Rabbi Yitzchak said: From the beginning of the creation of the world "the beginning of Your word is truth." "In the beginning God created"--(Jeremiah 10:10) "Your God is true." "And Your righteous law is forever"--that for every restriction that you place on your creations, they affirm the righteousness of your judgement and accept it with faith. No creation can say that two powers created the world. It is not written: "the gods spoke", but rather: "God spoke". It is not written: "the gods said", but rather: "God said". It is not written: "in the beginning the gods created", but rather: "God created".
Rabbi Yehoshua Ben Levi said in the name of Rabbi Levi: Six things are required for building--water, dirt, wood, stone, rods, and iron. If you say he is rich, and does not need rods, he still needs measuring rods, as it says (Ezekiel 40:3): "with a line of flax in his hand, and a measuring rod". The Torah preceded these with six--"the first", "of old", "forever", "from the start", and "from the first" which is two, in the portion (Proverbs 8:22-23): "God made me as the beginning of His way, the first of His works of old. I was set up forever, from the start, from the first of the Earth."
A philosopher once asked Rabbah Gamliel and said to him: ''Your God is a great artist, except that he found great dyes that helped him - tohu and vohu, darkness, spirit, water, and the depths." Rabbi Gamliel responded to him:
Rabbi Yonah said in the name of Rabbi Levi: Why was the world created with a "bet"? Just as a bet is closed on all sides and open in the front, so you are not permitted to say, "What is beneath? What is above? What came before? What will come after?" Rather from the day the world was created and after. Bar Kappara said: "You have but to inquire about bygone ages that came before you [ever since G-d created humanity on earth]" (Deuteronomy 4:32). "Ever since G-d created them" you may speculate, however you may not speculate on what was before that. ["From one end of Heaven to the other"] on this you may speculate and investigate, but you may not speculate and investigate  0n what was before. Rabbi Yehudah ben Pazzi explained the Creation story according to Bar Kappara. Why was the world created with a "bet"? To teach you there are two worlds: this world and the world-to-come. D'var Acher: Why with a "bet"? Because it is the language of "blessing." And why not with an "aleph"? Because it is the language of "cursing."
R. Simon said in the name of R. Joshua b. Levi: Manzapak [מנצפ"ך] is a Mosaic halahhah from Sinai. R, Jeremiah said in the name of R. Hiyya b. Abba: They are what the zofim [i.e. prophets] instituted.  It once happened on a stormy day that the Sages did not attend the House of Assembly [i.e. the Academy]. Some children were there and they said, 'Come and let us make a House of Assembly. Why are there written [two different forms when the following letters come in the middle or end of a word respectively] mem [מ] mem [ם], nun [נ] nun [ן], tzadi [צ], tzadi [ץ], pai [פ] pai [ף]? It teaches [that the Torah was transmitted] from utterance [מאמר] to utterance, from Faithful [נאמן] to faithful, from Righteous [צדיק] to righteous, from mouth [פה] to mouth, and from hand [כף] to hand. From utterance to utterance — from the utterance of the Holy One, blessed be He, to the utterance of Moses. From Faithful to faithful— from theAlmighty, who is designated, "God, faithful King," to Moses, who is designated faithful, as it is written, "He [Moses] is faithful in all My house" (Numbers 13:7). From Righteous to righteous— from God, who is designated righteous, as it is written, "The Lord is righteous in all His ways" (Psalms 145:17), to Moses who is designated righteous, as it is written, "He executed the righteousness of the Lord" (Deuteronomy 33:21). From mouth to mouth — from the mouth of the Holy One, blessed be He, to the mouth of Moses. From hand to hand: from the hand of the Holy One, blessed be He, to the hand of Moses. They completed them and they grew to be great sages in Israel; some say that they were R. Eliezer, R. Joshua and R. Akiba. They applied to them the verse, "Even a child is known by his doings, etc." (Proverbs 20:11).

Chapter 2





R’ Abahu and R’ Chiya Raba. R’ Abahu said - from the beginning of the creation of the world the Holy One saw the actions of the righteous and the actions of the wicked. This is what is written “For the Lord knows the way of the righteous…” (Tehillim 1:6) “Now the earth was astonishingly empty…” (Bereshit 1:2) these are the actions of the wicked, “And God said, Let there be light…” (Bereshit 1:3) these are the actions of the righteous. But I don’t know which one of them He desired, the actions of these or the actions of those. Since it is written “And God saw the light that it was good…” (Bereshit 1:4). He desires the actions of the rieghteous and not the actions of  the wicked. R’ Chiya Raba said – from the beginning of the creation of the world the Holy Oe saw the Holy Temple built, destroyed and built. “In the beginning of God's creation…” (Bereshit 1:1) refers to it built, this is what it says “…to plant the heavens and to found the earth…” (Yeshayahu 51:16) “Now the earth was astonishingly empty…” refers to it destroyed, this is what it says “I saw the earth, and behold, it was void and unformed…” (Yirmiyahu 4:23) , “And God said, Let there be light…” refers to it built and complete in the future to come, this is what it says “Arise, shine, for your light has come, and the glory of the Lord has shone upon you. For behold, darkness shall cover the earth, and a gross darkness the kingdoms, and the Lord shall shine upon you, and His glory shall appear over you.” (Yeshayahu 60:1-2)

Chapter 3


Berchia said in the name of Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon. "The Heavens were made at the word of the Lord..." (Psalm 33:6), means G-d didn't work hard, but only spoke. "And G-d said and there was light".

Chapter 4

And God said, "Let there be a firmament" - It is written (Psalms 104:3), "Who layest the beams of Thine upper chambers in the waters." It is the custom of the world that a king of flesh and blood constructs a palace and makes a roof for it out of stones and wood and dirt. But the Holy One Blessed Be He made a roof for his world out of water, as it says "Who layest the beams of Thine upper chambers in the waters."

Chapter 5





R' Yochanan says: God stipulated with the sea that it should split before Israel; thus it is written (Shemos 14:27), "And the sea returned... to its strength (l'eisano)" - to the stipulation (l'tano) that [God] made with it. R' Yirmiyah ben Elazar says: not only with the sea did God stipulate, but with all that He created during the six days of Creation; thus it is written, "From my hand I [God] have stretched the heavens, and all their legions I have commanded" - I commanded the sea to split before Israel; I commanded the heavens and the earth to be silent before Moshe, as it is stated, "Give ear, O heavens etc."; I commanded the sun and the moon to stand still before Yehoshua, as it is stated, "Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon"; I commanded the ravens to sustain Eliyahu, as it is stated, "And the ravens were bringing him etc."; I commanded the fire not to harm Chanania, Mishael, and Azarya; I commanded the lions not to harm Daniel; I commanded the heavens to open to the voice of Yechezkel, as it is stated, "The heavens opened etc."; [and] I commanded the fish to spit out Yonah, as it is states, "Hashem spoke to the fish and it spat out Yonah."
R' Eliezer says, from the beginning of the world's creation, Hashem decreed and said, 'Let the waters be gathered" (Genesis 1:8). Why [does Scripture state] 'That calleth for the waters of the sea' 'That calleth for the waters of the sea' two times? Once for the generation of the deluge, and once for the generation of Enosh, so that 'The Lord does and they shall fear before him' (Kohelet 3). This is comparable to a country that rebels against its king; the king sends a fierce legion and surrounds it so that the countrymen should see him and fear before him. Similarly, why does 'He gathereth the waters of the sea together as a heap?' (Tehilim 33:7). So that 'All the earth fear the Lord' (ibid v. 8)
......

"And God said: let the earth put forth grass"(Gen. 1:11). It was taught in the name of Rabbi Natan: three entered for judgment, and four emerged guilty, and these are they: Adam and Eve and the serpent entered for judgment, and the Earth was cursed with them, as it says: "The earth will be cursed because of you" (Gen. 3:17),[which means] it will bring up cursed things for you, like flies and mosquitos and fleas. Rabbi Yitzchak from Gedela'ah said: Even they are the source of some benefit. Why was the Earth cursed? Rabbi Yehuda bar Rabbi Shimon [Shalom] and Rabbi Pinchas [disagreed], Rabbi Yehuda bar Rabbi Shimon [Shalom] said: because the Earth transgressed a commandment; The Holy Blessed One said to her [Earth] "let the earth put forth grass etc." just as the fruit is eaten, so too the tree is eaten and she did not do so, but rather "the earth put forth grass" - the fruit was edible, but the tree was not edible. Rabbi Pinchas said: she added to the commandment - she strengthened the will of her Creator "a fruit-bearing tree" - even barren trees produced fruit. According to the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda bar Rabbi Shimon [Shalom] it makes sense, but according to the opinion of Rabbi Pinchas why was the Earth cursed? Rather, it's like a person who says: 'they were cursed due to their disgraceful nursemaid.'

Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8





Rabbi Simon said: At the time when the Holy Blessed One came to create the first man, the ministering angels formed themselves into groups, some saying 'man should not be created' and some saying 'man should be created.' As it says: "Kindness and Truth met; Justice and Peace kissed" (Psalms 85:11). Kindness said: man should be created because he does acts of kindness, and Truth said: man should not be created, because he is all lies. Justice said: man should be created because he does just acts, and Peace said: man should not be created because he is all quarrels. What did the Holy Blessed One do? God took Truth and threw him to the ground, as it says: "And Truth was thrown to the ground" (Daniel 8:12). The ministering angels said before the Blessed Holy One: Master of the Universe: why are You disgracing the chief of your court ceremonies - bring Truth back from the ground! As it says: "Truth will grow from the ground" (Psalms 85:12). The Rabbis said [the following] in the name of Rabbi Hanna bar Idi, and Rabbi Pinchas and Rabbi Hilkiyah in the name of Rabbi Simon said: "Very" refers to man, as it says: "And God saw all that God had done, and behold it was very good" (Genesis 1:31), behold man is good. Rabbi Huna Rabbah of Tzippori said: while the ministering angels were reasoning one with the other and engaging one with the other, the Holy Blessed One created man. God said to them: what are you reasoning about - I already created man.

Chapter 9


Another explanation: "And God saw every thing that He had made, and, behold, it was very good." Rabbi Tanhuma began: "He hath made every thing beautiful in its time" (Ecclesiastes 3:11). Rabbi Tanhuma said, "In its time the world was created. The world was not fit to be created before then." Rabbi Abahu said, "From this we know that the Holy One Blessed Be He would create worlds and destroy them, create worlds and destroy them, until He created this world. He said: 'This one is good in My eyes; those others were not good in my eyes." Rabbi Pinhas provided the explanation for Rabbi Abahu: "'And God saw every thing that He had made, and, behold, it was very good.' This one is good in My eyes; those others were not good in my eyes."




Rabbi Nahman said in Rabbi Samuel's name: 'Behold, it was good' refers to the Good Desire; 'And behold, it was very good' refers to the Evil Desire. (It only says 'very good' after man was created with both the good and bad inclinations, in all other cases it only says 'and God saw that it was good') Can then the Evil Desire be very good? That would be extraordinary! But without the Evil Desire, however, no man would build a house, take a wife, beget children or conduct business; and thus said Solomon: 'Again, I considered all labour and all excelling in work, that it is a man's rivalry with his neighbour.' (Ecclesiastes 4:4).

Chapter 10



Chapter 11


"And Elokim blessed the seventh day and sanctified it"- Rabbi Yishmael says: "He blessed it" with manna "and sanctified it" with manna, He blessed it with manna-for all the days of the week one omer [portion] fell [per person], on Friday two omer [portions] fell [per person]. He sanctified it with manna [on Shabbat] it didn't fall at all. Rabbi Nosson says: He blessed it with manna and sanctified it with blessing. Rabbi Yitzhak says: He blessed it with manna, and sanctified it with the gatherer [of sticks]. "And He blessed it" with robing. Rav Huna says:  [one] must change [one's clothes]. R' Chiyya in the name of Rav Yochanon says: [one] must mingle [a garment along with his weekday clothes  for the honor of Shabbat]. Avin son of Chasdai says [one] must [let one's cloak] hang.  Rabbi Yermiah and R' Zeirah were walking together, and R' Yermiah's cloak was tucked up and Rabbi Zeirah let it hang. This [reflects] what was said [that] one must lower [one's cloak]. R' Elazar says: "He blessed it" with a candle and this occurred to me, one time I lit a candle on the eve of Shabbat and I came and I found it [still] lit at the end of Shabbat and it wasn't diminished at all. "He blessed it" with the light of the face of man, "He sanctified it" with the light of of the face of man. The light of man's face throughout the week isn't comparable to [his face] on Shabbat. "He blessed it" with luminaries, R' Shimon son of Yehuda the man of Acco says in the name of R' Shimon: even though the luminaries were cursed  from the Shabbat eve

Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14









9. The breath of (nishmath) life. It has five names: nefesh, neshamah, hayyah, ruah, yehidah. Nefesh is the blood: For the blood is the nefesh — E.V. 'life' (Deut. xii, 23). Ruah: this is so called because it ascends and descends: thus it is written, Who knoweth the ruah (E.V. 'spirit') of man whether it goeth upwards, and the ruah of the beast whether it goeth downward to the earth (Eccl. in, 21) ? Neshamah is the breath; as people say, His breathing is good. Hayyah (lit. 'living'): because all the limbs are mortal, whereas this is immortal in the body. Yehidah (unique): because all the limbs are duplicated, whereas this is unique in the body. Thus it is written, If He set His heart upon man, if He gather unto Himself mho {his spirit) and nishmatho {his soul), all flesh shall perish together, and man shall return unto the dust (Job xxxiv, 14 f). R. Joshua b. R. Nehemiah and the Rabbis discussed this. R. Joshua b. R. Nehemiah interpreted it: 'If God set His heart upon any man,' his spirit {ruho) is already in His hand; 'And if He gather his soul (nishmatho) unto him' [sc. man], which means, into his body, then all men had already perished; but when man is sleeping the soul {neshamah) warms the body so that it should not waste and die. The Rabbis interpret: If God set His heart upon him,' i.e. upon any man, his spirit {ruho) is already in His hand, 'And if He gather his soul (nishmatho) unto Himself above, then all men had already perished, but that when man sleeps the soul {neshamah) warms man that he should not grow cold and die. R. Bisni, R. Aha, and R. Johanan in R. Meir's name said: The neshamah (soul) fills the body, and when man sleeps it ascends and draws life for him from above. R. Levi said in R. Jianina's name: It repeatedly ascends. For every breath which a man takes he must give praise to the Holy One, blessed be He. What is the reason? Let every neshamah {breathy praise the Lord (Ps. cl, 6), which means, for every breath [let one praise Him],
... 

Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



"I will make him a helper corresponding to him."  If he merits it - a helper; if not - an enemy.  Rabbi Joshua the son of Nechemia said: If he merits it, [his helper] will be like the wife of Rabbi Hanina the son of Hachinai; if not, like the wife of Rabbi Yossi the Galilean.  Rabbi Yossi had a wife - who was his niece - whom he disparaged in front of his students.  They said to him: Why don't you divorce her, she does you no honor!  He said to them: she has a large dowry, and I cannot divorce her.  One time he was sitting and teaching with Rabbi Eleazar the son of Azariyah, and when they finished, Rabbi Eleazar suggested that they go to Rabbi Yossi's house.  Rabbi Yossi agreed, and so they went.  When they got there, Rabbi Yossi's wife was scornful, and when she had left [the room] Rabbi Yossi looked in the pot.  He said to her: there is nothing in the pot.  She said to him: there is bread crumbs and vegetables.  He went and found chickens.  Rabbi Eleazar the son of Azariyah knew what he heard [understood that the marriage was an unhappy one].  They sat and ate [in silence].  Rabbi Eleazar said to Rabbi Yossi: Rabbi!  You said that there was only bread and vegetables, and there was chicken!  He replied: it was a miracle.  When the meal was over, he said: Rabbi, you should leave this woman, she does not bring value to your life.  He replied: her dowry is large, and I cannot divorce her.  He said: we will cover the dowry, and you can divorce her.  They did this, and he divorced her, and he found another woman to marry, who was better than the first.  When he was finished financially supporting his first wife, she found and married a guardsmen of the town.  After some time, an injury befell him [the guardsmen] and he was blinded, and she would go out with him around the streets to beg.  When they approached the street of Rabbi Yossi, she turned around.  He [due to his job] was a knowledgeable man when it came to the layout of the town, and he said to her: why do you not lead me down the street of Rabbi Yossi, I have heard it is a very generous man?  She said: I was divorced from him, and I cannot face him now.  Another time they called upon the neighborhood of Rabbi Yossi.  He became angry with her on the first and second day, and eventually he started hitting her.  The noise traveled, and they were shamed in the city.  Rabbi Yossi examined the sound, and discovered that they were disgraced.  He asked him [the former guardsmen]: why do you hit her?  He replied: every day she deprives me of [potential] income from begging.  When Rabbi Yossi heard this, he immediately brought them into his house, and supported them for the rest of his life, according to the verse: "And from your flesh do not turn away" (Isaiah 58:7).
"And the Lord God created [animals] from the earth."  It asked of Rabbi Yochanan ben Zakkai: It is written: "And the Lord said, let the earth bring forth living beings by kind" (Genesis 1:24) - what is being taught by saying "And the Lord God created all animals of the field"?  He answered them: the earlier was about creation, and the later was about gathering [to be named], like the verse says: "when you besiege a city for many days..." (Deuteronomy 20:19).  Rabbi Aha said: when the Holy One, Blessed be He, came to create the world, he consulted the angels of the heavenly court.  He said to them: "Let us make Adam" (Genesis 1:26).  They said to him: this Adam, what is his nature?  He said to them: his wisdom exceeds yours.  He brought before them the domesticated beasts, the wild beasts, and the birds.  He said to them: what are their names?  They did not know.  He brought them before Adam.  He said to him: what are their names?  Adam said: this is a ox, this is a donkey, this is a cow, this is a camel.  And you, what is your name?  Adam said to him: it is fitting that I should be called 'Adam' as I was created from the earth [adamah].  And Me, what is My name?  Adam said to Him: it is fitting to call You Adonai, as You are the master [adon] of all your creations.  Rabbi Hiyyah said: "I am God, that is my name" (Isaiah 42:8).  "That is my name" - that Adam, the first person, called me.  God returned and brought before Adam pairs [of animals].  Adam said: to each and every one there is a pair, but I have no pair!  "And for Adam no help-mate was found" (Genesis 2:20).  And why did God not create her first?  Rather, The Holy One, Blessed be He, foresaw that Adam would be charges against her, and so he did not create her until Adam expressly requested it.  Once he requested it, immediately: "And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall..." (Genesis 2:21)
"And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall."  Rabbi Joshua of Sichnin in the name of Rabbi Levi said: the beginning of a man's downfall is sleep.  When asleep, he does not engage in study or work.  Rav said: there are three types of deep sleep: the deep sleep of sleep; the deep sleep of prophecy; and the deep sleep of a trance.  The deep sleep of sleep: "And the Lord God caused a deep sleep [tardemah] to fall on Adam, and he slept" (Genesis 2:21).  The deep sleep of prophecy: "And the sun went down and a deep sleep [tardemah] fell over Avram" (Genesis 15:12).  The deep sleep of a trance: "And no one saw, and no one knew and no one awoke because all were sleeping, because the deep sleep [tardemah] of God has fallen on them" (Samuel I 26:12).  The Rabbis said: [there is a fourth type] even the deep sleep of folly, as it is written: "Because God poured upon you the spirit of deep sleep [tardemah]" (Isaiah 29:9).  Rabbi Hanina bar Yitzchak said: there are three varieties of analogy: A taste of death - is sleep; a taste of prophecy - is dreaming; a taste of the world to come - is Shabbat.  Rabbi Avin added two more: a taste of the light of heaven - is the sun; a taste of the wisdom of heaven - is Torah.
"And He took one of his ribs."  Rabbi Shmuel bar Nachman said: from one of his sides, as it says: "And for the side of the tabernacle" (Exodus 26:20).  Shmuel said: He took one rib from between two other ribs.  'From under it' was not written, rather "from under them."  Rabbi Hanina the son of Rav Idi: from the beginning of the book until now there has not been a samech, once Eve was created, Satan was created with her.  And if you want to argue that man is the one that circles, the reply is that the text is talking about the rivers [that encircle Eden].  Rabbi Hanina bar Yitzchak said: The Holy one, Blessed be He, decorated his bottom so that he would not be disgraceful like an animal.  Rabbi Ami and Rabbi Yannai; one said: He made his buttocks a cover so that he would not be pained when he sat down, and one said: He made him covers.  Rabbi Levi and Rabbi Ami; one said: he made him bury, and one said: he made him burial garments.
A certain matron asked Rabbi Yosi, saying: why did God steal [Adam's rib]?  He replied in a parable: if a person gave you a deposit of an ounce of silver in secret, and returned to you a pound of gold publicly, would that be stealing?  She said to him: so why was it done in secret?  He replied: at first, He created her, and Adam saw her full of secretions and blood.  He kept her away from him, and went back and created her a second time.  She said to him: I will add further, I was meant to marry my mother's brother, but because I grew up in the same house as him, I was unattractive in his eyes, and he went and married a different woman, who is less attractive than I am.  A story [is told] of a pious man and his wife who could not have kids.  They said: we are of no benefit to the Holy of of Blessing, so they divorced.  He went and married a wicked woman, and she made him wicked; and she went and married a wicked man, and she made him righteous.  Thus: everything is from the woman.
They asked Rabbi Yehoshua: Why does a man come out [of the womb] with his face pointing down, and a woman with her face pointing up?  He said to them: the man looks to the place he was created, and the woman looks to the place she was created.  And why does a woman need to perfume herself, and the man does not need to perfume himself?  He said to them: man is created from the earth, and the earth is never smelly.  Woman was created from bone.  It is similar to placing meat out for three days without salting it, it would become smelly immediately.  And why does a woman's voice carry, while a man's does not?  He said to them: it is similar to filling a pot with meat, no sound comes forth.  Once you put a bone into it, immediately a sound comes forth.  Why is man easily appeased, and woman is not easily appeased?  He said to them: man is created from the earth, and when you put one drop of water on the earth, it dissolves.  Woman was created from a bone, and even if you soak a bone in water for days it does not dissolve.  Why does man search for woman, and woman does not search for man?  He said to them: to what is the matter similar?  To one who lost an object - he searches for the object, while the object does not search for him.  Why does man entrust his seed to the woman [by impregnating her], and woman does not entrust seed to the man?  He said to them: it is similar to one who has a surety, and wants to find a trustworthy person to guard it.  Why does man leave [the house] with an uncovered head, while woman leaves the house with a covered head?  He said to them: [it is similar to] one who committed a sin and is embarrassed from people, and therefore leaves with a covered head.  And why do women accompany the dead first?  He said to them: because they caused death to enter the world, therefore they escort the dead first, as it says: "and after him each person will draw" (Job 21:33).  And why was woman given the commandment of niddah?  Because she spilled the blood of the first man, therefore she was given the commandment of niddah.  And why was she given the commandment of challah?  Because she disgraced the first man, who was the sanctification (challah) of creation, therefore she was given the commandment of challah.  And why was woman given the commandment of lighting Shabbat candles?  He said to them: because she put out the soul of the first man, therefore she was given the commandment of Shabbat candles.

Chapter 18

"And God built [out of] the rib" - Rabbi Eliezer said in the name of Rabbi Yossi the son of Zimra: woman was endowed with more understanding than man.  As it is taught: at eleven years and one day, her vows stick; at twelve years and one day her vows apply; and all twelve-year-olds are checked.  But for males, at twelve years and one day his vows stick; at thirteen years they apply, and all thirteen-year-olds are checked.  Rabbi Yirmiya said in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Yitzchak: there are those that say the opposite, as the way of a woman is to sit in her home, and the way of a many is to go out to the marketplace and learn understanding from others.  Rabbi Aybu said, and some attribute it to the name of Rabbi Benaya, and it is [also] taught in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yochai: [God] adorned her [Eve] like a bride, and afterwards brought her to him [Adam].  In some places they call 'kil'ata' [braids] 'bin'yata' [net-works].  Rabbi Hamma bar Chanina said: you think that she was brought to him under a carob or sycamore tree, rather she was adorned with twenty four kinds of finery, and then brought to him, as it says: "In Eden, the garden of God you were, and all precious stones were your covering: the carnelian, the topaz..." (Ezekiel 28:13).  The Rabbis and Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish; the Rabbis said: ten, and Rabbi Shimon said: eleven.  Rabbi Hamma bar Chanina and Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish both said: a general rule followed by a specific; follow the general rule by adding the specific, and it is all in the general rule - "every precious stone is your covering" is a general rule.  "Carnelian, topaz, emerald, beryl..." are the specifics.  Follow the general rule - "every precious stone is your covering."  Rabbi Levi and Rabbi Simon: one said nine, and one said ten.  The one who said ten is like the Rabbis, and the one who said nine argues that the "gold" mentioned in the verse surely does not refer to a canopy.  Rabbi Acha bar Chanina said: he made walls of gold and coverings of precious stones and pearls.  Rabbi Eleazar bar Bisna said in the name of Rabbi Aha: He even made him hooks of gold.
Rabbi Yehoshua of Sichnin said in the name of Rabbi Levi: "And He built" is written; He contemplated from where to create her.  He said: I will not create her from the head, lest she be haughty; I will not create her from the eye, lest she be coquettish; I will not create her from the ear, lest she be an eavesdropper; I will not create her from the mouth, lest she be a chatter-box; I will not create her from the heart, lest she be jealous; I will not create her from the hand, lest she be a thief; I will not create her from the leg, lest she be a run-about; rather, I will create create her from the most modest place on a person, as even when a person stands naked this place is covered.  And as He created each and every limb of the woman, He would say to her: be a modest woman, be a modest woman!  Nevertheless, "And they have disregarded all of my counsel" (Proverbs 1:25).  I did not create her from the head, and yet she is haughty, as it says: "And they walk with stretched-forth necks" (Isaiah 3:16).  And not from the eye, yet she is coquettish, as it says: "and with wanton eyes" (ibid.).  And not from the ear, and yet she is an eavesdropper, as it says: "And Sarah listened from the entrance of the tent" (Genesis 18:10).  And not from the heart, and yet she is jealous, as it says: "And Rachel was jealous of her sister" (Genesis 30:1).  And not from the hand, and yet she is a thief, as it says: "And Rachel stole the idols" (Genesis 31:19).  And not from the leg, and yet she is a run-about, as it says: "And Dinah went out..." (Genesis 34:1).
Rav Hisda said: He built her an extra store-room [womb] more than the man, wider at the bottom and narrower at the top, so that it could receive fetuses.  "And He brought her to the man" - Rabbi Avin said: happy is the townsperson, who has the King as a friend.
"And Adam said: this is now..."  Rabbi Yehuda bar Rebbi said: In the beginning He created her, and [Adam] saw that she was full of secretions and blood and separated her from him, and He returned and created her a second time.  As it says: "this is now" this is the woman this time.  This is now for me the one who will be my partner in the future.  As it says: "A golden bell (pa'amon) and a pomegranate" (Exodus 28:34).  "This is now" - this is she that perturbed me all night.  It was asked before Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish: why was Adam not tired from all his dreams, but was tired from this one [Eve]?  He said to them: because at the beginning of her creation she was just a dream, as it says: "bone of my bones, flesh of my flesh."  Rabbi Tanhuma said: if a man marries a relative, of him it is written: "bone of my bones."  "This one shall be called 'woman' because she was taken from man."  From here we learn that Torah was given in Hebrew.  Rabbi Pinchas and Rabbi Hilkiya in the name of Rabbi Simon said: just as the Torah was given in Hebrew, so too the world was created in Hebrew.  You have heard it said: 'man' and 'woman' [in other languages as distinct words, unrelated to each other], so why ish and isha [the words for 'man' and 'woman' in Hebrew, which are related to each other]?  Because this word falls from this word [and, hence, the grammatical inconsistency is explained if the Torah was given in Hebrew].
"Therefore a man will abandon."  It was taught: a convert that converted and was married to his sister, whether from the mother or the father - it is acceptable, according to Rabbi Meir.  The Sages say: from the mother it is acceptable, from the father, it must be established that he does not worship idols.  A refutation arose: does it not say: "And moreover, she is my sister, the daughter of my father..." (Genesis 20:12)!  He said to them: reply to them by their own reasoning.  Rabbi Meir refuted: "Therefore a man will abandon his father and his mother" (Genesis 2:24).  Rabbi Yochanan said: they explained this verse "therefore a man will abandon his father and his mother" the one who supports his father, the one who supports his mother.  Rabbi Abahu refuted: does it not say: "And Amram took Yocheved his cousin" (Exodus 6:20)!  Rabbi Shimon the son of Rabbi Abahu said: from here would we learn that  at the time of the children of Noah, Israel acted differently, before the giving of the Torah!?  Rabbi Levi said: we explain the verse "therefore a man will abandon..." the one who is supported by his father, or by his mother.  Rabbi Abahu in the name of Rabbi Yochanan said: the children of Noah, in matters of marriage are obligated, in matters of engagement are not.  Rabbi Yonah in the name of Rabbi Shmuel said: if a whore is in the marketplace, and two men come to her, the first is exempt and the second is liable, because he was sleeping with a married woman.  Did the first one intend to acquire her [as a wife]?!  It is said: intercourse at the time of the children of Noah acquires, even not in the way of [later] Judaism.  And how do we know that they did not divorce?  Rabbi Yehuda in the name of Rabbi Simon and Rabbi Chanin in the name of Rabbi Yochanan said: they did not divorce, or they both divorced each other.  Rabbi Yochanan said: his wife divorced him and gave him a bill of divorce.  Rabbi Hiyya taught: an idol-worshipper that divorced his wife, and she went and married someone else, and then they both went and converted to Judaism, I do not apply to them the verse "The first husband that sent her away cannot..." (Deuteronomy 24:4).  Rabbi Aha in the name of Rabbi Hanina bar Pappa said: in the whole book of Malachi it is written 'Hashem, Lord of Hosts' but here it is written 'the God of Israel' as it says: "For I hate sending away, said Hashem, God of Israel" (Malachi 2:16) - as if to say, God's name only rests on Israel.  Rabbi Haggai said: When Israel was exiled, the women's faces were blackened from the sun, and they were left and the men went and married Amonite women.  They went and circled the altar, crying, as Malachi says: "And this do a second time" (Malachi 2:13) - a second time in relation to Shittim.  "Cover with tears the altar of Hashem with wailing and sighing" (ibid.), the Holy One Blessed be He said: who will accept these tears and wailing, since you stole and did violence to and took it's beauty from her, now you will send her away?  And how do we know that they were fastidious about sexual impropriety like Israel?  As it says: "And he cleaved to his wife" (Genesis 2:24) and not the wife of his friend, or another man, or an animal.  Rabbi Shmuel and Rabbi Abahu and Rabbi Eleazar in the name of Rabbi Hanina said: a child of Noah who comes to his wife unnaturally is liable for the death penalty.  Rabbi Assi said: every crime written about the children of Noah is not judged on the metric of positive and negative commandments; rather, they all require the death penalty.  How do we know this?  "And he cleaved to his wife and they became as one flesh" (ibid.).
"And they were both naked."  Rabbi Eleazar said: there were three who did not wait for their contentment even six hours, and these are they: Adam, and Israel, and Sisra.  Adam, as it says: "and they were not embarrassed" (Genesis 2:25) - six hours had not passed, and he was content.  Israel, as it says: "And the nation saw that Moses delayed" (Exodus 32:1), when six hours had passed and Moses had not appeared.  Sisra, as it says: "Why does his chariot delay in coming?" (Judges 5:28) - every day he would come in three or four hours, and today six hours have past and he is not here - these are all cases related to "and they were not embarrassed."  "And the snake was crafty" (Genesis 3:1) - the text only needed to continue with "And Hashem God made for Adam and his wife..." (Genesis 3:21).  Rabbi Yehoshua ben Karchah said: to teach you which temptation the snake sprung on them - he saw them engaged in the way of the world, and desired here.  Rabbi Yaakov of the village of Hannin said: to not pause the story of the snake.

Chapter 19

"And the snake was crafty."  It is written: "With great wisdom is great vexation" (Ecclesiastes 1:18)...
"And he said to the woman: God has also said"  Rabbi Hanina ben Sinsan: Four were they that opened with 'af' [also], and they were: the snake, the chief baker, the congregation of Korach, and Haman.  The snake: "And he said to the woman also" (Genesis 3:1).  The chief baker: "Also me in my dream" (Genesis 40:16).  The congregation of Korach: "Also, not to the land" (Numbers 16:14).  Haman: "Also Esther didn't bring" (Esther 5:12).






And the Lord God called  to man - how did it happen/ where were you? Yesterday you went in my ways, and now in the opinion/ways of the serpent. Yesterday [your vision] was from one end of the world to the other , and now its limited to within the garden. R. Abbahu said the name of R. Hanina: it is written (Hosea 6) and they like Adam transgressed on the covenant. they [Israel],like Adam. Just as Adam - I brought him into the Garden of Eden, I commanded him, and he transgressed my commandments. And so I judged him with banishment and divorce, and I lamented him, "Eicha." I brought him into Gan Eden, as it says: and I placed him in Gan Eden. I commanded, as it states: and God the Lord commanded man. He transgressed the commandment, as it says: did you eat from the tree which I commanded not to eat from. I judged him with banishment, as stated: God the Lord sent him from the garden. I judged him with divorce, it is written: He drove [garesh] out the man. I Lamented over him "Eicha", as stated: And he called the God to man, And said unto him, where are you [Ayeka, Eicha in text]. So too, his sons I brought into Palestine and commanded and they transgressed on my orders, I judged them with banishment and divorce, and I lamented on them Eicha. I brought into Palestine, as written (Jeremiah): and I will bring you into the land of Carmel. I commanded , as it says (Exodus Z): and they thou shalt command the children of Israel. they transgressed on my commandments, as is said (Daniel T.), and all Israel transgressed on your Torah. I judged them with banishment, as written (Jeremiah XVI): Send them from my face and they left. I judged them divorce, as is said (Hosea H): from my house I will divorce them. I lamented on them Eicha, as written (Eicha 1) How did she sit.

Chapter 20

"And the Lord, God said to the snake..." "A slanderer will not be established in the land..." (Psalms 140:12).  Rabbi Levi said: in the future, the Holy One, Blessed be He will take the idol worshipers and lower them to Hell, and say to them: why did you confiscate the property of my children?  And they will say: they were slandering each other, and the Holy One of Blessing will take both groups and lower them to Hell.  Another reading: "A slanderer" - this is the snake, who slandered his Creator.  "Will not be established in the land" "On your belly" (Genesis 3:14).  'A violent and wicked man will be hunted and pushed' is not said, but rather "pushed repeatedly" (Psalms 140:12) - Adam was cursed, Even was cursed, and the snake was cursed.
"And the Lord, God said to the snake, because you did this..."  "A difficult man will bring strife and a whisperer will separate close friends" (Proverbs 16:28).  "A difficult man" - this is the snake, who overturned the words of his Creator.  "And a whisperer" - because he whispered words against his Creator, and said 'you will not die.'  "Separate close friends" - because he separated the friend of the world, and was immediately cursed.  "And the Lord, God said to the snake..."  With Adam He conversed, with Eve He conversed, and with the snake he did not converse - why?  Rather, the Holy One of Blessing said: this snake is wicked, and a master of responses, and if I say to him [anything], he will reply: 'you commanded them, and I commanded them, why should they have disobeyed you and listened to me?  Rather, God jumped in and decreed his punishment.
"And the Lord, God said to the snake, because you did this."  Rabbi Hiyya taught: In commendation, start from the greatest, and in cursing, start from the smallest.  In commendation start from the greatest, as it says: "And Moses said to Aaron and Eleazar and Itamar" (Leviticus 10:6).  In cursing, because with the smallest, as it says: "And the Lord, God said to the snake...And to the woman He said: I will surely increase your suffering in childbirth...And to the Man He said: because you listened to your wife" (Genesis 3:14-17).  This teaches that first He cursed the snake, then Eve, and then Adam.  Every creature has sexual relations face-to-neck, except for two that have relations backside-to-backside: the camel and the dog, and except for three that have relations face-to-face, because the Shechina [God's presence] spoke to them, and these are them: humans, snakes, and fish.  Humans, as it says: "And to Adam He said: because you listened to your wife."  Snakes, "And the Lord, God spoke to the snake."  Fish, "And God spoke to the fish, and it spit up Jonah" (Jonah 2:11).
"Because you did this."  Rabbi Hoshaya said: because of this [other thing], all your activities were for this [other thing].  Rabbi Yehuda the son of Simon said in the name of Rabbi Hoshaya: from the beginning of the book until now there have been seventy-one utterances of God's name, teaching that he [the snake] was judged by the Great Sanhedrin.  Rabbi Hoshaya of Sicnin said in the name of Rabbi Levi: he was cursed with leprosy, and this became the pattern on his back, as it was originally leprosy.  Rabbi Eleazar said: you have seen in your day that after a man hits his fellow with a stick, he will hit him with a strap.  Similarly: "you will be accursed among all animals" - all the more so "from all the beasts of the field" (Genesis 3:14).  It was taught: a fat pure domesticated animal gives birth in nine months; a fat impure domesticated animal gives birth in twelve months; a skinny pure domesticated animal gives birth in five months; the dog in fifty days; the cat in fifty-two; the pig in sixty; the marten in seventy; the deer and the fox in six months; the rest of the insects in six months; the lion, bear, panther, elephant, monkey, and porcupine in three years; and the snake in seven years; and the viper in seventy years!  A philosopher wanted to know how long it took for a snake to give birth - when he saw them copulating, he took them, put them in a box and gave them enough food to live on until they gave birth.  When the elders arrived in Rome, they asked Rabban Gamliel: how long does it take a snake to give birth?  He could not answer them, and he blanched.  Rabbi Yehoshua encountered him, and his face was sickly.  He said to him: why is your face sickly?  He said to him: I was asked a question that I could not answer.  He said to him: what is the question?  He said: 'how long does it take for a snake to give birth?'  He said to him: seven years.  He said to him: how do you know that?  He said to him: the dog, a wild, impure animal, gives birth in fifty days; and a pure domesticated animal gives birth in twelve months.  It is written: "You will be accursed among all the animals and all the beasts of the field" - just as the wild animal is cursed seven times more than the domesticated animal, so too the snake is cursed seven times more than the wild animal.  That very night, Rabban Gamliel went to see the philosopher, and told him.  He began hitting his head against the wall, and said: all the toil I put in over seven years, and this one comes and tells me the answer effortlessly.

Chapter 21



Chapter 22


"And the man knew etc." - Rabbi Huna and Rabbi Ya'akov both said in the name of Rabbi Avin, who in turn said in the name of Rabbi Abba bar Kahana as follows: No creature ever had relations previous to the first man, Adam. "Knew (<i>yada</i>)" means that Adam informed (<i>hodia</i>) everyone of the natural way of life [for relations.] Another explanation: He "knew" how his tranquility was expelled, i.e. what Chava had done to him [by giving him the fruit.] Rabbi Acha said: The serpent (<i>cheyava</i>) was your [, Chava's,] temtptress (<i>chiyava</i>) and you were Adam's temptress. "And she conceived and bore Cain"- Said Rabbi Elazar son of Aazaryah: Three wonders [, things never seen/done before] occurred on the selfsame day: On that day, they were created, on that day, they had relations, and on that day, they had children. Rabbi Yehoshua replied to him, two went up to the marital bed, but seven came down: Cain and his twin, and Hevel and his two twins [, in addition to Adam and Chava.] "And she said, 'Behold, I have bought a man with God.'" When a woman sees that she has wrought children, she says "My husband is now in my possession [as she has just rendered him a service.]" Rabbi Yishmael asked Rabbi Akiva: Since you ministered to Nachum of Gimzo for twenty two years, who taught that <i>"Ach"</i> [but] and <i>"Rak"</i> [only] are words of exclusion, whereas <i>"Et"</i> [auxiliary noun] and <i>"Gam"</i> [also] are words of inclusion, what is the meaning of the "<b>Et</b> Hashem" [<b>with</b> God] written here? He said [in reply:] Had the text have read "Kaniti Ish Hashem", "I have bought a man the God" it would have made no sense, which is why an "Et" is brought here [, as a division between the two nouns of 'man' and 'God'.] Rabbi Yishmael replied: (Devarim 32) "For there is no empty [simple, shallow] thing from you" - And if there is [as R' Akiva said - that the "et" here is just extra], you just do not know <b>how</b> to interpret it. So, what is the interpretation of "Et Hashem"-"of <u>God</u>?" That in the past, Adam was created with earth, and Chava was created from Adam. From know on, we are created "in his [<u>God's</u>] likeness"-not a man without woman and not a woman without man, and not either of them without the Divine Presence.



"And Cain spoke to Abel his brother. And it came to pass when they were in the field... " (Gen 2:8) What were they fighting about? They said, "Let's divide up the world." One took the earth and one took the moveable objects. One said "That land that you are standing on is mine!" and the other said "What you are wearing is mine!" One said "Take it off!" and the other said "Fly!" Because of this, "Cain rose up against Abel his brother and slew him. Rabbi Joshua of Sikhnin in the name of Rabbi Levi said: they each took earth and each took moveable objects. And what were they fighting about? One said, "The Temple will be built in my territory!" and the other said "The Temple will be built in my territory!" as it is written "when they were in the field"-- and "field" can refer only to the Temple, hence what is written: "Zion shall be threshed as a field" (Micah 3). And because of this, "Cain rose up against Abel his brother." Judah bar Ami said: they were fighting about Primordial Eve. Rabbi Eivo said: Primordial Eve had already died. And what were they fighting about? Rabbi Huna said: A twin girl was born along with Abel.  One said, "I will take her, because I am the firstborn." And the other said, "I will  take her because she was born with me."

Chapter 23

"And Cain knew his wife ..." "Their inward thought is that their houses shall continue forever" (Psalms 39:12), Rabbi Yudan and Rabbi Pinchas, Rabbi Yudan said: why did the wicked believe that "their houses would continue forever" (ibid.)? "they called their lands after their own names" (ibid.) - Tiberias after the name Tiberius; Alexandira after the name Alexander; Antochia after the name Antiochus.  Rabbi Pinchas said: "their inward thought is that their houses shall continue forever," tomorrow their houses will become their graves "their dwelling places for all generations" (ibid.), because their are not living and not judged - and not only that, but they called their lands after their own names.  "And he built a city, and he called the name of the city, like the name of his son, Enoch" (Genesis 4:17)
"And Enoch begat Erad..." Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: They all refer to rebellion.  Erad - I will drive him out from the world.  Mechuya'el - I will erase him from the world.  Metusha'el - I will weaken him from the world.  Lemech - What do I need with Lemech and his descendents?  "And Lemech took for himself two wives, one was named Adah and the second was named Tzilah" (Genesis 4:19).  Rabbi Azariah said in the name of Rabbi Yehudah bar Simon: this is what the men of the generation of the Flood would do: each of them would take two wives, one for procreation and one for pleasure.  The one who was for procreation would sit as if she was a widow in her own lifetime (in the lifetime of her husband), and the one that was for pleasure would drink a cup for sterility so that she did not bear [children], and would sit by him adorned like a prostitute.  As it is written: "He devours the barren that do not conceive, and does not do good to the widow" (Job 24:21).  Know that among them the best was Lemech, and he took two wives, as it says "And Lemech took for himself two wives, one was named Adah" - because she became pregnant [adah] "and the second was named Tzilah" - because she sat in his shade [tzel].

Chapter 24







Rabbi Tanchuma said in the name of Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Menachem in the name of Rav said... Ben Azzai said: “These are the generations of Adam" is a great principle in the Torah. Rabbi Akiva said: This is a great principle of the Torah: "You shall love your neighbor as yourself" (Lev. 19:18). Thus, one should not say, “Since I am scorned, I should scorn my fellow as well; since I have been cursed, I will curse my fellow as well.” Rabbi Tanchumah said, if you act thus, realize who it is that you are willing to have humiliated - "the one who was made in the likeness of God."  
Rabbi Tanchuma says, “If you do so, you should know who are you scorning — ‘in the likeness of God He created him.’”

Chapter 25



Chapter 26

"And Noach was 500 years old." - It is written (Psalms 1:1) "Fortunate is the man who does not walk in the counsel of the wicked." "Fortunate is the man", that's Noach. "who in the counsel of the wicked he does not walk, and in the ways of sinners he does not stand [and in the company of mockers he does not sit]." Rabbi Yehudah and Rabbi Nechemia [disagreed]. Rabbi Yehudah said: [the three parts of the verse] refer to three generations - the generation of Enosh, the generation of the Flood, and the generation of the Division [i.e., of the Tower of Babel]; Rabbi Nechemia said: [They refer to] the generation of the Flood and the generation of the Division, but the generation of Enosh was small. According to Rabbi Yehudah's opinion: "Fortunate is the man who does not walk in the counsel of the wicked", that's the generation of Enosh. "and in the ways of the sinner he does not stand," that's the generation of the Flood. "and the company of mockers he does not sit," that's the generation of the Division. "Rather, in God's Torah is his desire" (Psalms 1:2), that is [i.e., refers to] the seven commandments he was commanded. "and in his Torah he meditates day and night"  - he comprehended one matter implied by [lit. "from within"] another matter: he [Noach] said [to himself], "What is the reason the Torah increased [the number of] ritually pure [beasts], more than the [number of] ritually impure [beasts]? Was it not because He wants [me] to sacrifice from them?" Immediately, "and he took from all the ritually pure beasts..." (Genesis 8:20). "and he shall be like a tree planted by water brooks" (Psalms 1:3) = G-d planted him in the ark. "which gives its fruit at the proper time" - that is [i.e., refers to] Shem, "its leaves shall not wither" = that is Ham, "and all that it does shall prosper" - that is Yefet.


that means males and beasts.




Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29



Chapter 30



Chapter 31



Chapter 32



Chapter 33



Chapter 34














"One who sheds the blood of a human, by a human shall his blood be shed (Genesis 9:6)."  Rabbi Hanina says, "All of these [instances] are as the Noachide laws: By [the testimony of] one witness, by [the ruling of] one judge, without witnesses and without warning, by means of an agent, by means of [the death of] an embryo.  By one witness and one judge, it says, "One sheds the blood of a human", by one human shall his blood be shed.  Without witnesses and without warning,it says, "One who sheds the blood of a human, by a human shall his blood be shed."  By means of an agent, it says, "One who sheds the blood of a human" by means of a person, "shall his blood be shed." By means of [the death of] an embryo, it says, "One who sheds the blood of a human."  Rabbi Yehudah ben Rabbi Simon says, "Even one [who murders] by strangulation, it says, "One who sheds the blood of a human..."  Rabbi Levi says, "Behold that one kills, but was not killed.  When will he be killed?  When a person comes [for divine judgment], it says, "One who sheds the blood of a human, by a human who comes shall his blood be shed."  Rabbi Akiva expounded, "Every person who sheds blood, it is as if he has diminished the divine image.  What is the reason? "One who shed the blood of a human, shall his blood be shed."  Why? Because in the image of God, [God] made man.  Rabbi Eliezer ben Azariah expounded, "Every person who refrains from procreation, Scripture regards him as having diminished the divine image.  What is the reason? 'Because in the divine image [God] made humans.' And it is written after that, 'You shall be fruitful and multiply...' that they spread over the earth and multiply."  Ben Azzai expounded, " Everyone who refrains from procreation, Scripture regards it as though he has shed blood and diminished the divine image."  What's the reason?  "One who spills the blood of a human." Why? 'Because in God's image.'  And what's written after it?  And you will be fruitful and multiply." Rabbi Eliezer ben Azariah said, "Pleasant are the words that issue from the mouth of one who does them.  Ben Azzai speaks well, but does not practice well."  He [Ben Azzai] responded to him, " For me, the desire of my soul is for Torah, but sustaining the world is by means of others.

Chapter 35



Chapter 36



Chapter 37



Chapter 38

And all of the land was one language: Elazar son of Yose bar Zimra began: (Psalms 59): Do not kill them lest my people be unmindful: with your power make wanderers of them: The rabbis interpret this verse as referring to Doeg and Ahitophel. David said: Do not kill Doeg and Ahitophel, "lest they forget my people"--lest the generations that follow forget. "With your power make well for them" -- carry them away. And bring them down--bring them down from their greatness. And what will He do for us? "O our shield, the Lord." "Because of their sinful mouths, the words on their lips." 





"And it came to pass, as they journeyed east" (Genesis 11:2). [Is it possible that] They journeyed from the east to go to the east? Rabbi Eleazar bar Rabbi Shimon said: they journeyed from the Ancient One [kadmon] of the world. They said: we cannot persist with Him and with His Godliness. "The found a plain" (ibid.) Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Nehemia [disagreed], Rabbi Yehuda said: all of the idol worshipers gathered to see which plain would contain them all, and eventually they found it. And Rabbi Nehemia said: "they found" "If it concerns the scorners, He scorns them" (Proverbs 3:34). "And they dwelt there" (Gen. 11:2) Rabbi Yitzchak said: every place where you find [the word] "dwelt" [yeshiva], Satan jumps. Rabbi Helbo said: in every place where you find satisfaction [nachat ruach] Satan accuses. Rabbi Levi said: in every place where you find eating and drinking Satan accuses.





"And Haran died in the presence of his father Terah" (Gen. 11:28). Rabbi Hiyya the grandson of Rabbi Adda of Yaffo [said]: Terah was a worshipper of idols. One time he had to travel to a place, and he left Abraham in charge of his store. When a man would come in to buy [idols], Abraham would ask: How old are you? They would reply: fifty or sixty. Abraham would then respond: Woe to him who is sixty years old and worships something made today - the customer would be embarrassed, and would leave. A woman entered carrying a dish full of flour. She said to him: this is for you, offer it before them. Abraham took a club in his hands and broke all of the idols, and placed the club in the hands of the biggest idol. When his father returned, he asked: who did all of this? Abraham replied: I can't hide it from you - a woman came carrying a dish of flour and told me to offer it before them. I did, and one of them said 'I will eat it first,' and another said 'I will eat it first.' The biggest one rose, took a club, and smashed the rest of them. Terah said: what, do you think you can trick me? They don't have cognition! Abraham said: Do your ears hear what your mouth is saying? Terah took Abraham and passed him off to [King] Nimrod. They said [to the king]: let us worship the fire. Abraham said to them: [rather] let us worship water, for it extinguishes fire. Nimrod agreed: let us worship water. Abraham continued: if so, let us worship the clouds, which provide water. Nimrod agreed: let us worship the clouds. Abraham continued: if so, let us worship the winds that scatter the clouds. Nimrod agreed: let us worship the winds. Abraham continued: if so, let us worship humans who are filled with wind [air]. Nimrod replied: You're just speaking words - I only worship fire. I will throw you into it, and the God you worship can save you from it. Haran was hidden and was of two minds, saying [to himself]: if Abraham is victorious, I will say I am with Abraham, and if Nimrod is victorious, I will say I am with Nimrod. When Abraham was through into the fiery furnace and saved, they asked him [Haran]: who are you with? He replied: I am with Abraham. They took him and threw him into the fire, and his insides burned up and he died before his father Terah, as it says: "And Haran died in the [lit.] on the face of his father Terah" (Gen. 11:28).

Chapter 39

YHVH said to Abram, "Go you forth from your land…" … Rabbi Yitzchak said: this may be compared to a man who was traveling from place to place when he saw a bira doleket/castle aglow/lit up (full of light/in flames). He said, "Is it possible that this castle lacks a person to look after it? The owner of the building looked out and said, “I am the owner of the castle.” Similarly, because Abraham our father said, “Is it possible that this castle has no guide, no one to look after it?," the Holy Blessed One looked out and said to him, “I am the Master of the Universe.” … Hence, God said to Avraham, Lech Lecha.






Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Nehemia [disagreed]. Rabbi Yehuda said: "Get yourself out" (Gen. 12:1) ['lech' is written] twice, once from Aram Naharayim and once from Aram Nachor. Rabbi Nehemia said: "Get yourself out" ['lech' is written twice, once from Aram Naharayim and from Aram Nachor and once because God flew him [Abraham] from the between the Pieces and brought him to Haran, as it is written: "Your people offer themselves willingly in the day of your warfare" (Psalms 110:3), I was with you when you were in my service going down to the fiery furnace. "In the day of your warfare" at the time when you gathered for me all of the soldiers and the inhabitants. "In adornments of holiness" (ibid.) from the adornments of the world I sanctified You. "From the womb of the dawn" (ibid.) from the womb of the world You free me to [serve] You. "Yours is the dew of your youth" (ibid.) since Abraham our Father was afraid, and said: 'Suppose that there is sin in me, since I worshiped idols all those years.' The Holy Blessed One replied: "Yours is the dew of your youth," just as the dew evaporates, so do your sins; just as the dew is a symbol of blessing forever, so are you a symbol of blessing forever, as it is written: "And I said: 'Oh that I had wings like a dove! Then would I fly away, and be at rest." (Psalms 55:7) Why "like a dove"? Rabbi Azariah in the name of Rabbi Yudan said: Because all of the flyers, when they tire they rest on rocks or on trees, but this dove, when it flies and tires, it jumps with one of its wings and flies with the other. "Lo, then would I wander far off" (Psalms 55:8), wanderings, movement after movement. "I would lodge in the wilderness Selah" (ibid.), it is better to lodge in the wilderness of the Land of Israel and not to lodge in the castles of outside Israel, and if you wish to say that Abraham was not glad about the word of God [and therefore did not leave for Israel immediately], but why did he not leave? Because he had not yet inherited. Once he had inherited "And Abraham went just as God has spoken to him, and Lot went with him" (Gen. 12:4). Rabbi Levi said: at the time that Abraham was walking about Aram Naharayim and Aram Nahor, he saw [people] eating and drinking and lazing about. He said: if only I have no portion of this land. Once he arrived at the promontory of Tyre, he saw [people] engaged in hoeing at hoeing time and weeding at weeding time. He said: if only I have a portion in this land. The Blessed Holy One said to him: "To your offspring I will give this land." (Gen. 12:7)

Chapter 40



Chapter 41

HAD FLOCKS, AND HERDS, AND TENTS. R. Tobiah b. R. Yitzchak said: He had two tents, viz. Ruth the Moabitess and Naamah the Ammonitess. Similarly it is written, Arise, take thy wife, and thy two daughters that are found (Gen. XIX, 15)3: R. Tobiah said: That means two ‘finds’, viz. Ruth and Naamah. R. Yitzchak commented: I have found David My servant (Ps. LXXXIX, 21): where did I find him? In Sodom.

Chapter 42

“Avram the Hebrew was told.” Rabbi Yehudah, Rabbi Nechemyah, and the sages [disagree]. Rabbi Yehudah says: the entire world is on one side and he is on the other side [the word for “side” in Hebrew is מעבר , which stems from the same root עבר ]. Rabbi Nechemyah says: Because he is of the descendants of Ever [the son of Shem, the son of Noah]. The sages say: he is from the other side of the river and that he speaks in the Hebrew tongue.

Chapter 43



Chapter 44

After these things the word of Hashem came to Abram in a vision, saying, etc. (Psalms 18:31) "As for God — His ways are perfect; the Word of Hashem is tried; a shield is He for all who take refuge in Him." If His way is perfect, how much more is He Himself! Rav said: Were not the mitzvot given so that man might be refined by them? . Do you really think that The Holy One of Blessing cares if an animal is slaughtered by front or by the back of the neck? Therefore, mitzvot were only given to make humans better.

Chapter 45



Chapter 46



Chapter 47



Chapter 48



Chapter 49



Chapter 50



Chapter 51



Chapter 52



Chapter 53



Chapter 54



Chapter 55



Chapter 56







“There is no generation that does not have a man like Abraham, like Isaac, like Jacob… and like Moses.” But this refers only to isolated individuals. And the Torah was given to all; it “speaks of the majority.” So how can we say that to every Jew it is open to act like Moses or like the Fathers, and that in this respect they should follow the Fathers?


And Abraham called the name of the place "Hashem Yireh- God will see". Rabbi Yochanan said "he said to Him: Master of Worlds, at the hour that you said to me 'Take please your son, your only son', I had what to respond yesterday. You said "For with Yitzchak etc. (will I make your line great) but then "Take please your son"! God forbid that I don't do as you've asked me; instead, I conquered my mercy to do Your will.  May it be your will, GOD our god, that in the hour when the sons of Isaac come (before You) because of transgressions and bad deeds, that the Akiedah be remembered (for their benefit), and may You be filled with Mercy on them!  Abraham called it "Yireh", as it says "And Abraham called the name of the place Hashem Yireh. Shem called it Shalem, as it says "And Malchitzedek, the king of Shalem..."(Genesis 17) The Holy One, Blessed be He, said "If I call it Yireh, as Abraham called it, then Shem, who was a righteous man, will be hurt-- but if I call it Shalem, then Abraham, who was a righteous man, will be hurt. Instead, I call it Yerushalayim (Jerusalem), as they called it together: Yireh Shalem. Jerusalem.......

Chapter 57



Chapter 58



Chapter 59




......

"And Abraham was old" - "Old," this [means] he deserved both worlds. Three [people] were crowned with age and with days, and the three of them were great in experience: Abraham, Joshua, and David. Abraham was the greatest of the Fathers. Joshua was the greatest of the Kings from the tribe of Efraim, as it says [in Judges 5:14]: "From Efraim they came whose roots are in Amalek," this is Joshua. David was the greatest of the Kings of Judah. Rabbi Acha says: Is it possible to have a person who is "old" but not "with days," or a person who is "with days", but not "old"‽ [With regard to] "coming with days", Rabbi Judah says, "coming into his double age (or 140 years)." Rabbi Abba says: the person is doubly open, i.e. to the World to Come. Rabbi Isaac says: In the same days, as it says [in Ecclesiastes 12:1]: "before those days of sorrow come."

Chapter 60
















"And Isaac brought her into the tent of Sarah, his mother-" All the days that Sarah was alive, a cloud was connected (lit. tied) to the entrance of her tent. When she died, the cloud stopped [resting at her tent.] And when Rebecca came, the cloud returned. All the days that Sarah was alive, the doors were open wide. When she died, the wideness stopped. And when Rebecca came, the wideness returned. And all the days that Sarah was alive, there was a blessing in her dough, and when Sarah died, that blessing ended. When Rebecca came, [the blessing] returned. All the days that Sarah was alive, there was a candle that would burn from Sabbath Eve to [the next] Sabbath Eve, and when she died, the candle stopped [burning for so long]. And when Rebecca came, [the week-long flame of the candle] returned. And as soon as [Isaac] saw her, that she did the deeds of his mother, separating her <em>challah</em> in purity and separating her dough in purity, he brought her into the tent. Rabbi Yudan said, "The Torah teaches you, that if a man has grown-up sons, he should marry them off first and then he should marry. Who do you learn [this teaching] from? From Abraham: first, "And Isaac brought her into the tent of Sarah his mother," and afterwards, "And Abraham took another wife, and her name was Keturah."

Chapter 61



Chapter 62



Chapter 63










Rabbi Levi offered a parable: They [Jacob and Esau] were like a myrtle and a wild rosebush growing side by side; when they matured and blossomed, one yielded its fragrance and the other its thorns. For thirteen years both went to school and came home from school, [but] after this age, one went to the house of study and the other to idolatrous shrines. Rabbi Eleazar said: A parent is responsible for his/her child until the age of thirteen, at which point the parent must say: Baruch sheptarani mei’ansho shel zeh, “Blessed is the One who has now freed me from the responsibility of this child.”

Chapter 64



Chapter 65



Chapter 66



Chapter 67

And Itzhak feared a great fear. It is written (Proverbs 29:25) "Man's fear will be a trap but the one who trusts G-d will be raised". Fear, the one that Ruth frightened Boaz, at it is said (Ruth 3:8) "the man was startled, and turned himself". "Will be a trap": In truth, he should have cursed her, but "the one who trusts G-d will be raised". He gave in his heart and blessed her, and said: "Blessed are you to G-d, my daughter". Fear, the one that Yaakov frightened Itzhak, as it is said: "And Itzhak feared a very great fear. "Will be a trap": he should have cursed him, but "the one who trusts G-d will be raised". And he said: "He will also be blessed".
And Itzhak feared a great fear etc. - Rabbi Hama bar Hanina: very, more than the fear he feared on the altar. Said: Who is this done broker between me and the place, so that Yaacov will take the blessings, to Rivka they said. Rabbi Yochanan said: When one has two sons, one went out and one came in, will he fear?! But, when Esav entered to his father, hell entered with him. Rabbi Acha said: The walls of the house started to shake/boil. this what he said: "Who, where", who is it that will be baked here, me, or my son, Yaakov? Said God: Not you, nor your son, but is the one hunting game. Hunting game: Said Rabbi Elazar Bar Shimon: Hunter, how were you hunted, door-builder, how is your own door broken ?! This is what it said (Proverbs 12): "The slothful man shall not hunt his prey" The rabbis said: G-d will not be late and will not prolong for the liar and his pray. Rabbi Eliezer the son of R. Jose says: What is not scorch? Will not extend God a liar and a side ?! As R. Yehoshua ben Levi whole day was made a party to deer and languages, and an angel came and permissiveness, and poultry and troublemaker, and an angel came and Mfrihn. And why? (Proverbs L): human capital expensive and laborious, to Sheba Jacob it happen in heaven, and will take the world's main blessings diligent him. Rabbi Hanina ben Pappa Ask the Rabbi Acha, said to him: What is written, utterly precious human capital? He said, the hand of the righteous is a hard-working, not taking from Vikram's time to come in this world. And food from Rabbi Judah and Rabbi Nehemiah, Rabbi Yehuda says: all that was created during the six days of creation. Rabbi Nehemiah says: all good, he revised in the future. Said: Essentially what Hacillach? Said: I do not know, but I was tasting bread taste, flavor meat, fish flavor, taste grasshoppers, taste all the delicacies in the world. Rabbi knees: because flesh mentioned, immediately cried. Said: I am one bowl of lentil fed them dainty and took his birthright, you Shacillach meat more so! Rabbi Levi said: According to our father was Isaac not be afraid to say: I did not say well, I did not broken the reactor ?! Because he said his birthright taken, said my good health:
Said R. Eleazar: divorce but can not exist stamp, she would not say Elul cheated his father Jacob, did not take the blessings ?! TL: Well, blessed be: Rabbi Yitzchak said: come curses. God said to him: Be careful! If the curses, the curse your soul, Damar: Orrich Damn! Rabbi Levi said: Six things Mshmshin man, three-possession and three are in possession. Eye and ear and nose, not possession, what real Hemi in kind, heard what real Ai, Ai smell what real. Mouth and hand and foot possession, there is above the Torah, in kind, will bear no hate Ai, Ai no cursing hand, there mainly is workable together, no Ai is cool, and Ai is for killing. Habit, mainly island is consumable for Trtseot and to Krkseot, and there mainly is consumable for synagogues and study. And when he wins, God makes them available, not possession. Hand, (Kings M): and dries him who sent him. Mouth, also blessed will. Habit, (Proverbs k): Members do not go the way you are,:...
When the date did the words of his father - said Rabbi Hanina: all those who say that God and the mast is, Itootron people Mohi! But, extending baking and on Delia. Scream called Jacob and Esau, it is written: When the date did the words of his father and cried cry. And where was repaid him ? Shushan, written (Esther d); and cried a bitter cry greatly. Your brother came deceitfully Rabbi Yochanan said, comes wisdom teachings. and he said, as his name called Jacob and Iakveni Lakish said he began rubbing his throat, Mann Dmheich and throw a rock from him. and he said, best and Iakveni, his birthright took, and I said nothing to him, and is now taken my blessing and I said nothing to him ?! non his? Now my blessing, the capacity utilization:

Chapter 68











...And he took stones of the place - R. Judah and R. Nehemiah , and the Rabbis. Rabbi Yehuda said he took 12 Stones. God decreed that he establish twelve tribes. Jacob said; Abraham did not establish them , Isaac did not establish them, if the twelve stones join together, I know that I will merit twelve tribes. Once they did he knew he was going to merit establishing the twelve tribes . Rabbi Nehemiah said he took 3 stones. Jacob took three stones and said : God placed  his name on Abraham, and on Isaac.  I, if the stones join together, I know that God is the unifying name for me.  And since joined, he knew that God would unify his names with Jacob. The Rabbis said that the minimum of the plural of stones is 2. Abraham produced negative attributes/waste- Ishmael and the sons of Keturah . And Isaac produced Esau and his generals. I, if you join these 2 stones together, I know that I will not produce any negative attributes in my descendants.
...And he dreamed and behold there was a ladder -- Rabbi Abuhu said: The words of dreams do not ascend and do not descend. Once a man went before Rabbi Yossi bar Halafta. He said: I saw in my dream, they said to me, "?????" He [Rabbi Yossi] said: "????". He said to him: "No! He said to him: "..." He said to him: "I don't have 20!" He said to him: "And if you don't have 20, count from their heads to their tails, and from...".... Bar Kapra taught: There is no dream that does not have an interpretation. Behold a ladder, this is a sheep. Placed on the earth, that is the altar (Exodus 20), Make me an altar of earth. And it's head reaches the heavens, those are the offerings, whose scent rises to the heavens. And behold the angels of God, those are the high priests. Rising and descending on it, that rise and descend with a sheep. And behold God is standing on it, (Amos 9): I have seen God standing on the altar. The rabbis interpret it as Sinai: He dreamed and behold there was a ladder, that is Sinai. Resting on the ground, (Exodus 19) and they stood at the bottom of the mountain. And its head reached the heavens, (Deuteronomy 4) And the mountain burned with fire unto the heart of heavens.....

Chapter 69



Chapter 70



Chapter 71


Another answer: (op. cit. 145) "God supports all those who have fallen" - these are the barren, whose [status] have "fallen" within their households.  And "straightens the bent" - when the Holy One, Blessed be He rewards them with children, they straighten up [in joy.] Similarly, Leah was hated by her household, and when the Holy One, Blessed be He visited her [and gave her pregnancy], she was straightened. That is the same concept by "And God saw that Leah was hated" - "that Leah was hated" - that she behaved in the manner of the "hated", since she was supposed to marry "the hater" [, Esav] (other mss. read "Assessed by the hater") since that was the custom, the the firstborn [Esav] marry the firstborn [Esav] and the younger one [Ya'akov] marry the younger one [Rachel]. Therefore Leah cried and said: "May it be your will, God, that I do not become the possession of an evildoer." R' Huna said: Davening is a strong force, that it annulled the decree, and not only that, but that it made her come before her sister [for marriage. Because of this] everyone would mock her: The unemployed people mocked her, the travelers mocked her, and even the ladies behind their backs mocked her, saying, "This Leah, her inside is not like her outside; she appears righteous but is not really righteous. For if she were righteous she would not have cheated her sister [and would have let her marry first.] Rabbi Chanin in the name of Rabbi Shmuel son of Rabbi Yitzchak said: When Yaakov our Forefather saw matters, that Leah had "cheated" her sister, he made up his mind to divorce her, but when she was blessed with children, he said: "To the mother of <i> these </i> I am divorcing?" And in the end he admitted he was wrong, and that is the meaning of the verse: (Genesis 47) "And Yisrael [Yaakov] bowed low at the head of the bed," [and head of the bed is a euphemism for Leah, as she was the first one of his conjugal bed.] "And Rachel was barren," said Rabbi Yitzchak, Rachel was the main part of the household, as it says, "And Rachel was barren  <i>(akarah)</i>" - It's main part <i>(ikrah)</i> was Rachel. Said Rabbi Abba son of Cahana, since most of the diners [at Ya'akov's table] were Leah's [progeny, as a courtesy] they named Rachel as the main part, as it says, "And Rachel was barren  <i>(akarah)</i>" - It's main part <i>(ikrah)</i> was Rachel. Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai said: Since all these matters [i.e. helping Leah cheat the system] were done by Rachel, therefore the Children of Israel were called by her name, (Jeremiah 31): "Rachel cries for her children," and there was no end to her name, as her children's names lived on, as it says in (Amos 5): "Perhaps the Lord of Hosts will have compassion on the remnant of Joseph [a son of Rachel]" - now her son's name was recalled. And her son's name did not die out either, as it says (Jeremiah 31) "How precious is my son Ephraim [, Joseph's son and Rachel's grandson."
"

Chapter 72



Chapter 73



Chapter 74







God came to Laban the Aramean in a dream that night – What is the difference between the prophets of idol worshippers and the prophets of Israel? Rabbi Chema Bar Chanina and Rabbi Yissachar of Kfar Megdi answered: Rabbi Chema Bar Chanina said, "The Holy One Blessed Be He appears to the prophets of idol worshippers only in half-speech, as it says, 'God chanced upon Bilaam' (Bamidbar 23)." Rabbi Yissachar of Kfar Megdi said, "This language of 'chanced upon (vayiKaR)'  connotes impurity, as it is used, 'If there will be amongst you a man who is not clean [because of a] nocturnal emission (miK'Reh lilah)' (Devarim 23)." But to the prophets of Israel, God speaks in full-speech, in language of affection, in holy language, in language that the ministering angels praise, calling to one another and saying, "Holy". Rabbi Yossi Bar Chanina said, "The Holy One Blessed Be He only appears to the prophets of idol worshippers at times when it is typical for people to be alone, as it is written (Iyov 4), 'In the thoughts of visions at night, when sleep falls on people ... a word was secretly conveyed to me etc.'" Rabbi Elazar said in the name of Rabbi Menachem, "(Mishlei 15) 'God is far from the wicked' – these are the prophets of idol worshippers. 'And the prayer of the righteous He will hear' – these are the prophets of Israel. What is the difference between the prophets of idol worshippers and the prophets of Israel? Rabbi Chanina Bar Papa and Rabbi Si'mon answered: Rabbi Chanina Bar Papa said, "Like a king and his beloved that are in a parlor. Each time the [King] requests, he speaks with his beloved. (Alternative version: Like a king and his beloved that are in a parlor, with a curtain between them. Each time he requests to speak with his beloved, he folds the curtain and speaks with his beloved.)" Rabbi Si'mon said, "Like a king that has a wife and a concubine. When he wants to visit his wife, he comes in public. When he wants to visit his concubine, he comes in secret. Similarly, The Holy One Blessed be He only reveals himself to idol worshippers at night: 'God came to Bilaam at night.'; 'God came to Avimelech in a dream at night'; 'God came to Laban in a dream at night. He said to him, "Watch yourself"-even if you say things for [Yaakov's] benefit, he will think they are bad'. 'Watch yourself, speaking to Yaakov good or bad.'"

Chapter 75











When Jacob called Esau 'my lord,' the Holy One, blessed be He, said to him: 'You have abased yourself and called Esau "my lord" eight times. I will raise up eight kings of his descendants before your descendants,' as it says, And these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom, before there reigned any king over the children of Israel (Gen. 36:31).

Chapter 76



Chapter 77



Chapter 78



Chapter 79



Chapter 80



Chapter 81



Chapter 82



Chapter 83



Chapter 84








Israel loved Yosef...R Y'hudah and R Nechemiah. R Y'hudah said: the brightness of features was his, similar to him. (i.e. זקנים is to be seen as a combination of זיו and איקונין) R Nechemiah said: all the halachot Shem and Ever had passed to Ya'akov, he passed to him. And he made for him a k'tonet passim. Resh Lakish, in the name of R Elazar benAzaria said: One should not treat one of his sons differently, for because of the k'tonet passim his father Ya'akov made for Yosef, they hated him. . .. פסים passim, for it reached the palm פס of his hand. Another explanation: for it was exceedingly thin and light and could be hidden in the palm of a hand. פסים, for they cast lots (פיס, post biblical Hebrew) over it for which of them would take it to his father, and selected Y'hudah. פסים on account of the troubles that overtook him: פ Potifar, ס sochrim, "traders," י Yishm'elim, מ Midyanim. Another explanation: פסים, Resh Lakish in the name of R Elazar benAzariah: "Go see the acts of God."(Psalms 66:5) And in the next verse: "He turned sea to dry land."  Why did they hate him? Because the sea would be torn before them.      פסים= "strip of sea" פס ים.

Chapter 85

To tell you that just as that one [the incident of Tamar] was meant for the sake of heaven, so too this one [the incident of Potiphar’s wife] was meant for the sake of heaven. For she saw through her astrology that she was destined to raise children from him (Joseph), but she did not know whether [they would be] from her or from her daughter.







'And he said what is the guarantee that I shall give etc.' - Rabbi Hunya said: The Ruach HaKodesh [prophetic spirit] glimmered within her, your seal is Royalty, as it is said (Song of Songs 8, 6): "Set me as a seal upon thy heart". (Jeremiah 22, 24) "As I live, saith the LORD, though Coniah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah were the signet upon My right hand". "And thy cord", that is the Sanhedrin, who are found in the cord, as it is said (Exodus 39) "A cord of blue". "And thy staff", that is the Messiah, as it is said (Isaiah 11, 1): "And there shall come forth a shoot out of the stock of Jesse". (Psalms 110, 2) "The rod of Thy strength the LORD will send out of Zion". "And he gave them to her etc". "And she conceived by him", Heroes like so, and Righteous ones like so. "And Judah sent etc." Yehuda Bar Nachman said in the name of Reish Lakish (Proverbs 8, 31): "Playing in His habitable earth" (Proverbs 8, 30) "Playing always before Him", the Torah, that delights his creations. The Holy One Blessed be He said to Judah: You lied to your father, with a goat kid, so too, Tamar lies to you with a goat kid.

Chapter 86



Chapter 87



Chapter 88



Chapter 89

(Genesis 41:1) "And it was the end of 2 years..." - (Job 28:3) "He sets an end to darkness..." He gave a set time of how many years the world would be in darkness. And what does it mean "he set an end to the darkness"? For so long as the evil inclination is in the world, the world is in (Job 28:3) "darkness and the shadow of death." When the evil inclination is uprooted from the world, no longer will there be "darkness and the shadow of death" in the world. Alternatively: "He sets an end to darkness..." He gave a set time for Joseph of how many years he would be in darkness in prison. Once the end [of that time] arrived, "Pharaoh dreamt a dream..."

Chapter 90



Chapter 91



Chapter 92



Chapter 93



Chapter 94



Chapter 95



Chapter 96



Chapter 97



Chapter 98

1. (Psalms 57:3) "I will call to God on High" - I will call to God on high, on Rosh Hashana, "to the God who completes for me" on Yom Kippur, to know which is for Hashem, and which is for (a harsh) decree. Another explanation: "I will call to God" this is our father Jacob. "to the God who completes for me" because the Holy One, blessed is He, agreed with him, to give to each and every one according to what he is.
2. "And Jacob called to his sons" (Mishlei 16)

Chapter 99



Chapter 100








“…and he made for his father a mourning of seven days.” (Bereshit 50:10) Why do we mourn for seven days in parallel to the seven days of feasting? The Holy One said to them: in this world you shared the pain of this righteous one and mourned for him seven days,  in the coming world I will transform that mourning to joy, as it says “…and I will turn their mourning into joy and will comfort them and make them rejoice from their sorrow.” (Yirmiyahu 31:12) And just as I console you, so I will console Zion and all her waste places in the manner that it says,” For the Lord shall console Zion, He shall console all its ruins, and He shall make its desert like a paradise and its wasteland like the garden of the Lord; joy and happiness shall be found therein, thanksgiving and a voice of song.” (Yeshayahu 51:3)




“…and he made for his father a mourning of seven days.” (Bereshit 50:10) Why do we mourn for seven days in parallel to the seven days of feasting? The Holy One said to them: in this world you shared the pain of this righteous one and mourned for him seven days,  in the coming world I will transform that mourning to joy, as it says “…and I will turn their mourning into joy and will comfort them and make them rejoice from their sorrow.” (Yirmiyahu 31:12) And just as I console you, so I will console Zion and all her waste places in the manner that it says,” For the Lord shall console Zion, He shall console all its ruins, and He shall make its desert like a paradise and its wasteland like the garden of the Lord; joy and happiness shall be found therein, thanksgiving and a voice of song.” (Yeshayahu 51:3)