Bereishit Rabbah
בראשית רבה
Rabbi Mike Feuer, Jerusalem Anthology
http://www.sefaria.org



Bereishit Rabbah

Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15

“And the Lord God planted a garden in Eden from the east…” (Bereshit 2:8) They said in the house of R’ Yannai ‘why does the verse use the full name of Gd in reference to planting the garden? Because from the beginning of its creation it required proper alignment. Before man is given form in the womb of his mother, he must align himself with her directions. This is what is written “The Lord's trees are sated, the cedars of Lebanon, which He planted.”’ (Tehillim 104:16) R’ Chanina said ‘They were like the horns of grasshoppers, and the Holy One uprooted them and transplanted into the garden, ‘The Lord's trees are sated…’ R’ Chanina said – they lives were sated, their waters sated, their grove sated.’ R’ Yochanan said ‘the world was not fit to make us of cedars, because they were created only for the needs of the Holy Temple. This is what is written “The Lord's trees are sated, the cedars of Lebanon…” Lebanon only refers to the Holy Temple, as it says “…this good mountain and the Lebanon.”’ (Devarim 3:25) R’ Shmuel bat Nachman said in the name of R’ Yonatan ‘there are twenty-four types of cedar, and only seven of them are praiseworthy. This is what it says “I will give in the desert cedars…”’ (Yeshayahu 41:19) R’ Acha said ‘three: b’rosh is cypress, tidhar is juniper, ta’ashur is box-wood. And why do they call box-wood ta’ashur? Because it is the happiest (m’ushar) among them.’ They added three more to the count – alonim, armonim, almogim. Alonim are oaks, armonim are plane-trees, almogim are aloe-woods. 

Chapter 16


“The name of one is Pishon…” (Bereshit 2:11) This is Migdal Pishtan and its waters flow massively. “…that is the one that encompasses all the land of Havilah…” (ibid.) There was not yet a place called Havilah, and it says that the river encompasses it? That is strange! Rather, “tell the end from the beginning…” (Yeshayahu 46:10) “…where there is gold,” (Bereshit 2:11) gold there certainly was. “And the gold of that land is good…” (Bereshit 2:12) R’ Yitzchak said ‘happy is he in whose house it is, happy is he in whose company it is.’ R’ Abahu said ‘the Holy One gave a great good to His world – a man breaks a gold piece into smaller pieces, and he can buy many things with it.’ Resh Lakish said ‘the world was not fit to use gold, why was it created? For the Holy Temple, as it says “And the gold of that land is good…” like that which it says “…this good mountain and the Lebanon.” (Devarim 3:25) “…there is the crystal and the onyx stone.” (Bereshit 2:12) R’ Ibo said ‘you think this is referring to the crystal of apothecaries? Let another verse clarify it for you “…and its appearance was like the appearance of crystal.” (Bamidbar 11:7) Just as this refers to a precious stone, so too that refers to a precious stone.’

Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29



Chapter 30



Chapter 31



Chapter 32



Chapter 33



Chapter 34



Chapter 35



Chapter 36



Chapter 37



Chapter 38



Chapter 39



Chapter 40



Chapter 41



Chapter 42



Chapter 43






And Malchitzedek king of Shalem – This is what is written “And the daughter of Tyre shall seek your presence with tribute, those who are the richest of the people.” (Tehillim 45:13) ‘Malchitzedek the king of Shalem’, this place makes its inhabitants righteous (matzdik) – Malchitzedek, Adonitzedek (Yehoshua 10:1). Jerusalem is called righteousness as it says, “…in which righteousness would lodge…” (Isaiah 1:21) ‘king of Shalem’ R’ Yitzchak the Bavli says (he is called this) because he was born circumcised. ‘brought out bread and wine, and he was a priest to the Most High God’ R’ Shmuel bar Nachmani and the Rabbanan argues, R’ Shmuel said that the laws if the High Priesthood were revealed to him – ‘bread’ is the show bread, ‘wine’ are the libations. The Rabbanan say that Torah was revealed to him as it says, “"Come, partake of my bread and drink of the wine I have mingled.” (Mishle 9:5) ‘and he was a priest to the Most High God’ R’ Aba bar Kahana said every mention of wine written in the Torah makes an impact except for this, R’ Levi said that even this we did not escape, because from there He called upon him “…and they will enslave them and oppress them, for four hundred years.” (Bereshit 15:13)

Chapter 44



Chapter 45



Chapter 46



Chapter 47



Chapter 48



Chapter 49



Chapter 50



Chapter 51



Chapter 52



Chapter 53



Chapter 54



Chapter 55







... And go to the land of Moriah R’ Chiya Raba and R’Yanai – one says to the place from which  instruction (hora’ah) goes out to the world, and the other says to the place from which awe (yirah) goes out to the world. Similarly regarding the holy of holies (devir), R’ Chiya and R’ Yanai – one says from the place from which the commandments (dibra’ot) go out to the world, and one says from the place from which speech (dibur) goes out to the world. Similarly regarding the ark (aron), R’ Chiya and R’ Yanai – one says to the place from which the light (ha’orah) goes out to the world, and one says to the place where awe (yirah) goes out to the world. R’ Yehoshua ben Levi said that from there the Holy One teaches the nations of the world and brings them down to gehennom. R’ Shimon bar Yochai said, to the place which is aligned with the Holy Temple above. R’ Yudan said, to the place where there will be an appearance to you. R’ Pinchas said, to the place of the Master of the World. The Rabbis said, to the place where the incense is offered – this is what it says “…I will go to the mountain of myrrh and to the hill of frankincense.” (Shir HaShirim 4:6) 

Chapter 56










“And Abraham named that place, The Lord will see…” (Bereshit 22:14) R’ Yochanan said: he said before Him ‘Master of the World! At the moment when You said to me ‘take your son, your only one’ I had a response for You. Yesterday You said to me “for in Isaac will be called your seed” (Bereshit 21:12) and now to take my son? But, heaven forfend I did not do so, rather I overcame my mercy in order to do Your will. May it be Your will oh Lord our Gd that in the moment when the children of Yitzchak sin and do wrong that You recall for their sakes this binding and be filled with mercy toward them. Avraham called it yireh, as it says ““And Abraham named that place, The Lord will see (yireh) …” Shem called it Shalem, as it says “And Malchizedek the king of Shalem…” (Bereshit 14:18) The Holy One said, if I call it yireh as Avraham called  it, Shem the righteous man will be angered. If I call it shalem, Avraham the righteous man will be angered. Rather, I will call it Yerushalayim, as they both called it – yireh-shalem Yerushalayim. R’ Berachia said in the name of R’ Chelbo before it was Shalem, the Holy One made there a sukkah and prayed in it as it says “His Tabernacle was in Salem, and His dwelling place in Zion.” (Tehillim 76:3) What would He say? ‘May it be willed that I see the building of My house.’ Another explanation: this teaches that the Holy One showed him the Temple destroyed and built, destroyed and built, as it says “And Abraham named that place, The Lord will see…” that means built as it says “Three times in the year, every one of your males shall appear (yireh) before the Lord…” (Devarim 16:16)  “…as it is said to this day: On the mountain...” (Bereshit 22:14) that means destroyed, as it says “For Mount Zion, which has become desolate…” (Eicha 5:18) “…the Lord will be seen.” (Bereshit 22:14) built and perfected for the time to come, as it says “For the Lord has built up Zion; He has appeared in His glory.” (Tehillim 102:17)

Chapter 57



Chapter 58



Chapter 59





... David is the shepherd of Israel, as it says “You shall shepherd My people Israel…” (Divre HaYamim I 11:2) And who shepherded David? The Holy One, as it says “The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want.” (Tehillim 23:1) Jerusalem is the light of the world, as it says “And nations shall go by your light…” (Yeshayahu 60:3) And who is the light of Jerusalem? The Holy One, as it is written “…but the Lord shall be to you for an everlasting light…” (Yeshayahu 60:19)

Chapter 60



Chapter 61



Chapter 62



Chapter 63



Chapter 64




“Because Abraham hearkened to My voice…” (Bereshit 26:5) R’ Yochanan and R’ Chanina both said - Avraham came to consciousness of his Creator at age forty-eight. Resh Lakish said - Avraham came to consciousness of his Creator at age three. From where did they learn this? ‘Because (ekev, also meaning heel) Abraham hearkened to the voice of his Creator, “and kept My charge, My commandments, My statutes, and My instructions." (Bereshit 26:5) R’ Yochanan from there, R’ Yochanan said – even the laws of mixing courtyards were known to Avraham, ‘My instructions (torati)’, Avraham kept two torahs, even the simple commandments of the oral law. R’ Simon said – even the new name which the Holy One would call Jerusalem in the future was known to Avraham, as it is written “And Abraham named that place, The Lord will see…” (Bereshit 22:14), and it is written “…and the name of the city from that day will be ‘The Lord is There.’” (Yechezkiel 48:35), and it is written “At that time, they will call Jerusalem ‘The Throne of the Lord’…” (Yermiyahu 3:17) R’ Berachia said in the name if R’ Yehudah there is no day on which the Holy One does not innovate law in the heavenly court. What is his reason? “Hear attentively the noise of His voice and the sound (hegeh) that emanates from His mouth.” (Iyov 37:2) Hegeh only refers to Torah, as it says “…you shall meditate (hegita) therein day and night..” (Yehoshua 1:8)

Chapter 65



Chapter 66



Chapter 67



Chapter 68



Chapter 69



Chapter 70



Chapter 71



Chapter 72



Chapter 73



Chapter 74



Chapter 75



Chapter 76



Chapter 77



Chapter 78



Chapter 79







“And he bought the part of the field where he had pitched his tent from the sons of Hamor, the father of Shechem, for a hundred kesitas.” (Bereshit 33:19) R’ Yudan bar Simon said: this is one of the three places about which the nations of the world cannot defraud Israel and say ‘this is stolen property in your hands.’ They are – the cave of the Machpela, the Holy Temple and the grave of Yosef. The cave of the Machpela, as it is written “And Abraham listened to Ephron, and Abraham weighed out to Ephron the silver…” (Bereshit 23:16) The Holy Temple, as it is written “And David gave to Ornan for the place shekels of gold weighing six hundred.” (Divre HaYamim I 21:25) The grave of Yosef, as it is written ““And he bought the part of the field where he had pitched his tent…” (Bereshit 33:19)

Chapter 80



Chapter 81



Chapter 82



Chapter 83



Chapter 84



Chapter 85



Chapter 86



Chapter 87



Chapter 88



Chapter 89



Chapter 90



Chapter 91



Chapter 92



Chapter 93



Chapter 94



Chapter 95



Chapter 96



Chapter 97



Chapter 98



Chapter 99

[“Benjamin is a wolf, he will prey…” (Bereshit 49:27)] “Why do you lurk, you lofty mountains, for the mountain that God desired for His dwelling?” (Tehillim 68:17) R’ Yosi haGalili and R’ Akiva: R’ Yosi haGalili explained the verse as referring to the mountains. At the moment when the Holy One came to give the Torah on Sinai the mountains came running and arguing with each other. This one said ‘the Torah will be given on me!’ and this one said ‘the Torah will be given on me!’ Mount Tabor came from Bet Elim and  Mount Carmel from Espamia, this is what is written “As long as I live, says the King, Whose name is the Lord of Hosts, that as sure as Tabor is among the mountains, and Carmel is by the sea, it shall come about.” (Yimiyahu 46:18) This one said ‘I was called!’ and this one said ‘I was called!’ The Holy One said ‘Why do you lurk, you lofty mountains?’ You are all high mountains, but what does lofty (gavnunim) mean? As it says “…or one with long eyebrows (gibein), or a cataract…” (Vayikra 21:20) Idolatry was done on all of you, but Sinai upon which idolatry was never done “…the mountain that God desired for His dwelling,” (Tehillim 68:17) “The Lord descended upon Mount Sinai…” (Shemot 19:20) Nevertheless, “…Even the Lord will dwell [there] forever,” (Tehillim 68:17) refers to the eternal House. R’ Akiva explained the verse as referring to the tribes. At the moment when Shlomo said to build the Holy Temple, the tribes came running and arguing with each other. This one said ‘in my portion it will be built!’ This one said ‘in my portion it will be built!’ The Holy One said to them ‘tribes, why are you lurking? All of you are tribes, all of you are righteous – but lofty (gavnunim). What is gavnunim? Ganavim (thieves). You were all partners in the sale of Yosef; but Benyamin, who did not participate in the sale of Yosef, “…he mountain that God desired for His dwelling.” (Tehillim 68:17) So we find that four hundred and eighty years before hand the children of Koarch prophesied on this, that in the future it would be in the portion of Benyamin as it says “My soul yearns, yea, it pines for the courts of the Lord…” (Tehillim 84:3) So too it says “Behold we heard it in Ephrath…” (Tehillim 132:6) R’ Yehudah says ‘the Holy Temple was built in the portion of Yehudah, as it is written “…Ephrathite man from Bethlehem of Judah…”’ (Shmuel I 17:12) R’ Shimon says ‘in the portion of the son of she who died in Ephrathah. And who died in Ephrathah? Rachel. Perhaps it was in the portion of Yosef who is also among her sons? The verse says “…we found it in the fields of the forest.” (Tehillim 132:6) In the portion of the one who is compared to a beast of the forest, and who is so compared? Benyamin, as it is written “Benjamin is a wolf, he will prey…” (Bereshit 49:27)